BACKGROUND
predicted world population growth will require more food, feed, and fiber production. intermittent drought and shortages of water supply negatively impact crop productivity and are predicted to occur more frequently in future agricultural systems  <cit> . in future agricultural systems, an increase in crop productivity must also be accompanied by a reduced environmental impact of production on natural resources  <cit> . therefore, to increase productivity while maintaining adequate water resources, it is necessary to understand the mechanisms plants use to cope with water deficit stress  <cit> . there have been two general efforts towards more sustainable and water use efficient agricultural production. one effort is represented by breeding and genetic engineering  <cit> . another effort is focused on the improvement of agricultural practices such as tillage and irrigation systems  <cit> . to successfully pursue the breeding and genetic engineering approach, it is fundamental to understand plant responses to drought stress at the molecular, cellular, and genetics levels. this understanding is critical, because drought tolerance is a quantitative trait influenced by a combination of regulatory pathways  <cit> .

drought stress impacts a network of plant gene expression mechanisms that lead to the reprogramming of a variety of physiological and metabolic processes in accordance with stress response. early studies primarily used model plant species to identify a wide spectrum of genes that are involved in different levels of metabolism, signal transduction, osmotic regulation, stress response, and gene regulation  <cit> . more recently, many plant gene expression profiling experiments, using a range of technical approaches, have been conducted on economically important crop plants to determine stress related expression signatures. for example, next generation sequencing technology  has been applied to provide global gene expression profiles of whole transcriptomes  <cit> . ngs expression studies are greatly facilitated by the availability of annotated genome sequence .

as an alternative to ngs, the cdna-aflp technique is a widely adopted gene expression profiling method. this is especially true for crop plants, such as cotton, that are awaiting whole genome- or whole transcriptome- sequence data. cdna-aflp profiling has proven to be a robust method to discover differentially expressed genes in a number of plant species  <cit> . with the advantage of no prerequisite reference genome sequence requirement, cdna-aflp has been used to understand regulation mechanisms under various biotic and abiotic stress conditions that influence patterns of global gene expression in diverse crop species  <cit> .

cotton, a warm climate crop of tremendous global economic importance, is known to contain intrinsic mechanisms that allow it to partially withstand water deficit- and heat-stresses by its deep and extensive root system and adaptive osmoregulation mechanisms  <cit> . however, as water deficit stress progressively continues, development and reproduction of cotton is severely affected, and the quality and yield of cotton fiber production is significantly reduced  <cit> . therefore, for successful cotton fiber production, it is essential to understand proper management strategies between water demand, irrigation, and plant responses that are seasonally variable  <cit> .

in cotton, there are several reports on the molecular regulatory mechanisms that orchestrate drought resistance using quantitative trait loci  mapping or by developing drought stress induced cdna libraries  <cit> . in addition, microarray gene expression profiling has been used in cotton tissues exposed to variable water deficit stress in a controlled environment growth condition  <cit> . however, microarray gene expression profiling is limited to ests or genes present on the microarray chip and may not provide a complete representation of differentially expressed genes.

although genome sequencing data of many economically important crop species are widely available as full or high quality draft formats  <cit> , the progress of cotton genome sequencing has been slow. genome sequencing of an ancestral diploid genome  is near completion  <cit> . once complete, the d-genome sequence will be useful as a platform for more comprehensive information on cultivated cotton’s tetraploid genome  <cit> .

in this study, our objective was to gain comprehensive insight into the water deficit stress-related gene expression profile in cotton grown under field conditions. to accomplish this, we used cdna-aflp to identify differentially expressed genes in the roots and leaves of a single cotton cultivar grown in a rain-fed, drought-prone field environment. from this large comparative analysis, fundamental experimental data illustrate complex mechanisms of gene expression in response to water deficit stress. this study should facilitate future efforts to improve the agricultural productivity of cotton and other crops under soil water deficit conditions.

RESULTS
collection of cdna-aflp data sets
since the cdna-aflp procedure uses a two selective nucleotide extension at the 3’ terminus of each primer , there are  <dig> available primer combinations. in total,  <dig> primer combination covers one-quarter of the transcriptome of interest in tissues tested. although the total gene number of the cotton transcriptome is not clear, it is estimated that the tetraploid cotton genome contains over  <dig>  genes  <cit> . therefore, we estimate that our expression data represents approximately  <dig>  genes.

sequence analysis and functional annotations
of the  <dig> differentially expressed fragments,  <dig> bands were excised, recovered, cloned, and sequenced. three or four colonies from each excised band were bi-directionally sequenced, and a total of  <dig>  clones were analyzed for sequence identity. finally,  <dig> independent tdfs were verified by sequence analysis after evaluating the sequence products with expected size, the existence of two selective nucleotide extension, and clone reproducibility . sizes of the fragments ranged from  <dig> to 680 bp with the average length of 307 bp. using criteria in the gene ontology annotation tool   <cit> , the functional annotation of tdfs was listed in ten categories . the majority of tdfs  grouped into four categories; 1) metabolism, 2) stress/defense mechanism, 3) gene regulation , and 4) unclassified. twenty-five tdfs functioning in signal transduction  and transport  were also detected. twenty-one tdfs  were assigned across four additional categories that included photosynthesis , cell growth/cellular structure , protein fate , and energy  . among  <dig> unclassified tdfs,  <dig> belonged to conserved protein-coding genes, eight had sequence similarity to proteins of unknown function, and  <dig> did not show any sequence similarity to known protein sequences. one tdf  did not match any known protein or est sequences in the ncbi database . a cdna library constructed from drought stressed g. arboreum,  indicated that  <dig> % of clones had blast homology search similarity to unknown genes  <cit> . similarly, our data showed  <dig> % of tdfs with similarity to unknown genes.

differentially expressed genes under water deficit stress
tissue specificity of annotated proteins is described in additional file  <dig>  annotated proteins in the stress/defense category covered  <dig> %  of the total tdfs. ten of these  <dig> tdfs coded for proteins related to the production of reactive oxygen species . examples of ros-related proteins included glutathione s-transferase , manganase superoxide dismutase -like protein, glutathione peroxidase, mono-dehydroascorbate reductase, phosphoadenosine phosphosulfate reductase , aldo/keto reductase, 5’-adenylylsulfate reductase , and superoxide dismutase  copper chaperone. six of the  <dig> tdfs were annotated as heat shock proteins . examples of annotated hsp included chloroplast hsp <dig> -like proteins, hsp <dig>  dnaj hsp-like protein, and alpha-crystalline hsp. also, of the  <dig> tdfs, two were annotated as alcohol dehydrogenase  enzymes, two as drought-induced proteins, and seven tdfs with relationships to other stress/defense responses.

fifteen tdfs in the metabolism category had similarity to predicted proteins participating in the biosynthesis pathways of fatty acids, amino acids, and sugars. this suggests active changes in the composition of biologically important macromolecules during water deficit stress. interestingly, in the metabolism category, the number of tdfs differentially expressed under water deficit stress was 3x higher in root tissue than in leaf tissue . this suggests more dynamic metabolomic changes in root than in leaf.

among the  <dig> gene-regulation categorized tdfs, eight coded for transcription factors and seven for translation-related factors. the signal transduction category  consisted of four kinase, four phosphatase, and four gtp binding factors. two tdfs coding for aquaporin proteins  were identified in leaf and root tissues. five cell-wall biosynthesis-related genes were also identified .

validation of expression pattern by rt-pcr
rt-pcr was performed using specific primers for tdfs proportionally representative of each functional category. since our primary focus was on stress response, more tdfs from the stress/defense category were included for rt-pcr analysis. table  <dig> summarizes tdfs selected for expression analysis. for each tdf, all rt-pcr reactions produced products of the expected size according to sequence information. sixty percent showed the same expression pattern as that collected from the cdna-aflp data. although amplified using gene-specific primers, it is possible that expression of duplicated tdf copies negatively affected rt-pcr amplification. given the relatively short average size of tdfs and the complexity of the tetraploid cotton genome, more sequence information is necessary to obtain enough sequence data for gene specific primer design and amplification. comparing tdf sequences and est sequences with adequate sequence coverage  would allow unique sequence regions to be determined for better primer design.

aall reactions were replicated at least twice and two separate gel electrophoresis were performed per reaction.

bup and dn represent up-regulation and down-regulation, respectively in root  and leaf  tissues.

cexpected size from pcr amplification.

drt-pcr results which correspond to cdna-aflp data  and do not .

*not available.

gene duplication and water deficit stress
the genomic and cytogenetic architecture of tetraploid cotton is a well-known example of gene duplication caused by whole genome duplication and polyploidization  <cit> . after collectively comparing analyzed tdf sequences, five pairs of duplicated tdfs were identified. as evidenced by different selective primer signatures, fragment sizes, and expression patterns, tdfs from each of five homologous pairs were shown to originate from highly similar but apparently distinct genes . since gene duplication  can contribute functional novelty in stress responses, we further analyzed homologous tdfs to have better insights into duplicated gene function under water deficit stress. these tdfs showed similarity to genes coding for proteins such as two hypothetical proteins , a mannose  <dig> phosphate isomerase  enzyme , a plasma membrane intrinsic protein  <dig>  , and a superoxide dismutase  copper chaperone .

amannose  <dig> phosphate isomerase; bplasma membrane intrinsic protein 1; csuperoxide dismutase copper chaperone.

*two nucleotide extensions at 3’-termini of each selective primer set.

%sizes of cdna-aflp bands.

†up and dn represent up-regulation and down-regulation, respectively in root  and leaf  tissues.

§genomes from gossypium arboreum , gossypium raimondii , gossypium hirsutum , and gossypium barbadense .

among them, pip1-related tdfs  belonged to a multi-gene aquaporin water channel membrane protein family in cotton  <cit> . these tdfs showed very high sequence similarity to ghpip1; <dig>  ghpip1; <dig>  ghpip1; <dig> and ghpip1; <dig> ). according to the prediction of functional residues among aquaporin water channel proteins  <cit> , two amino acid substitutions  between two tdfs do not affect functional properties. moreover, these two non-synonymous substitutions belonged to the 4th conserved transmembrane domain, gtf, that is found frequently in cotton est sequences encoding the aquaporin pip <dig> subgroup  <cit> . this points to the importance of either the val or ile at these two sites. our differential expression revealed that an aquaporin tdf, 06 c <dig> is up-regulated in root by water deficit stress while a homologous tdf, 06e <dig> is up-regulated in leaf tissue and down-regulated in root tissue. this finding indicates the possible functional, tissue-specific diversification of duplicated pip <dig> genes under water deficit stress. duplicated tdfs from three other homologous pairs also showed differential expression patterns upon water deficit stress, whereas duplicated tdfs of m6pi showed the same pattern of expression . these data indicate the possibility that products of duplicated genes might play roles in a tissue dependent manner and that regulatory elements controlling the expression of duplicated genes evolved along with polyploidization.

discussion
molecular framework under water deficit
considering that drought-resistant cultivars are not readily available for commercial cotton production, more effort is required to identify or generate traits to withstand soil water deficit stress. in cotton production systems, rain-free periods occurring during reproductive growth are especially damaging. in this study, our objective was to understand a molecular architecture of water deficit stress at the level of gene expression by analyzing differentially expressed transcripts in the field during reproductive growth. therefore, differentially expressed tdfs identified here can be considered genes functionally active  or inactive  at the stage of adaptation to naturally occurring water deficit stress. our study revealed more than  <dig> transcripts with altered gene expression levels. the number of down-regulated genes was  <dig> x higher than the number of up-regulated genes. down-regulated genes occurred more frequently in root tissues. the majority of tdfs with altered expression belonged to functional categories including metabolism, stress/defense, signal transduction, and gene regulation as well as the category unclassified. this result corresponds well with previous findings of other species demonstrating transcriptome alteration under water deficit stress  <cit> .

in terms of cotton, a recent microarray expression profiling experiment conducted with plants in a greenhouse reported a total of  <dig>  stress responsive-transcripts  <cit> . the majority of transcripts showed tissue specific expression and a higher number of stress responsive-transcripts were identified in leaf compared to root. in comparison, our study with field grown plants identified fewer stress responsive-transcripts , of which,  <dig> were leaf specific,  <dig> were root specific, and  <dig> were expressed in both leaf and root. the candidate gene targets identified in both studies require future work to determine their potential application to improve cotton water use.

our expression data suggests the involvement of the ros related defensive pathway since we identified  <dig> tdfs related to anti-oxidation mechanisms. the increased level of ros, driven by water deficit stress, can affect cellular components that are oxidized partially or severely  <cit> . therefore, it is critical that plants protect themselves from harmful oxidations with detoxifying mechanisms by using antioxidants and scavenging agents  <cit> . dst , a previously unknown zinc finger protein, was found as a negative regulator of drought and salt stress by repressing h2o <dig> accumulation and stomatal closure in an abscisic acid -independent manner  <cit> . in addition, recent studies on developmental and stress-induced cellular processes suggest that ros and callose deposition are co-regulated, thereby controlling the cell wall matrix adjacent to the plasmodesmata for intercellular redox signal transduction  <cit> . in our study, one tdf  encoding a callose synthase-like family protein was isolated as a down-regulated gene and many ros-related tdfs showed up regulation  or down-regulation . it is of interest to note that this plasmodesmata-related co-regulation of ros and callose represents a cellular mechanism in the cotton fiber elongation process leading to water uptake following decreased osmotic potential in elongating fiber cells  <cit> . these findings highlight a possible interconnection between ros and callose deposition in the areas adjacent to plasmodesmata that cotton employs in response to water deficit stress.

previous studies have shown that phosphoethanolamine n-methyltransferase, vacuolar invertase, and aldo/keto reductase  are involved in water deficit stress-related defense mechanisms  <cit> . when silenced, the decrease of phosphoethanolamine n-methyltransferase produced not only multiple growth defects but also temperature sensitive male sterility in arabidopsis <cit> . the vacuolar invertase was shown to be related to water deficit stress in maize  <cit> . aldo/keto reductase catalyzes the detoxification reaction of reactive aldehyde groups generated by abiotic stresses thereby providing plants with stress tolerance  <cit> .

it is well known in many plant species that aba acts as a key hormone in the abiotic plant stress response  <cit> . upon water deficit stress, stomata in leaves are closed and prevent water loss through transpiration. this process is believed to be regulated by aba  <cit> . interestingly, we did not identify any gene related to biosynthesis or action mechanisms of aba nor genes involved in the regulation of stomata  <cit> . however, besides the function of aba in stomatal closure, it was recently shown in arabidopsis and tobacco that interactions possibly occur between water deficit-responsive proteins and hsp chaperones  <cit> . under water deficit conditions, both hsp <dig> and hsp <dig> chaperones were recruited to control stomatal closure, thereby serving as machinery important for stomatal gating. the finding of hsp-coding tdfs also suggests the existence of the hsp related machinery in water deficit stress in cotton. in our study, five hsp-coding tdfs were up-regulated while only one showed down-regulation. previously, a drought-related alpha-crystalline hsp was identified by differential screening from 10-d drought-stressed g. arboreum cotton seedlings and was effective in providing tetraploid cotton plants with drought stress tolerance when over-expressed  <cit> . the potential involvement of hsp-related drought tolerance was also suggested recently in a microarray transcriptome analysis in drought-stressed cotton plants  <cit> .

in accordance with transpiration, molecular mechanisms underlying water uptake and transport are pivotal throughout the plant body. there is accumulating evidence that addresses the relationship between aquaporins and transport of water in various physiological conditions including water deficit stress  <cit> . aquaporins are frequently identified as water deficit stress responsive genes in diverse plant species  <cit> . in roots of drought stressed chickpea plants, members of the aquaporin gene family appeared up- and down-regulated suggesting that a complex regulation of water status governs plant growth and development through aquaporin activity under water deficit  <cit> . the identification of two homologous tdfs  with similarity to members of the aquaporin water-channel protein family in this study  indicate the possible involvement of cotton aquaporins under water deficit stressed leaf and root tissues. recently, the identification of the large cotton aquaporin family illustrated their diverse function  <cit> . in addition to their fundamental role in intercellular transport of water molecules across the plant body, reports have shown the significance of aquaporins in facilitating leaf co <dig> conductivity relevant to plant photosynthetic capacity  <cit> . however, the function of aquaporins in water deficit stress tolerance remains unclear as aquaporin genes have not been identified in water deficit stress qtl studies to date  <cit> . therefore, more supportive and quantitative data need to follow.

after sequencing  <dig> excised differentially expressed fragments, we functionally annotated  <dig> tdfs following sequence verification. of the  <dig>  we described a number of water deficit stress-responsive genes functionally relevant to metabolism, signal transduction, gene regulation, and stress/defense mechanisms in root and leaf tissues . in addition, homology searches using blastx did not classify  <dig> % of tdfs due to lack of sequence similarity to known proteins. among those, twenty-seven unclassified tdfs were differentially expressed in root tissue. the abundance of unclassified tdfs identified in this study provide additional transcriptome coverage not represented in est populations commonly used in microarray experiments. it was reported that unknown genes such as proteins with obscure functions  cover more than 20% of each new genome sequenced with many being species specific  <cit> .

in maize seedlings with water shortage,  <dig> – 11% of genes were differentially expressed across an array of genetically diverse inbred lines. also, while many of the genes were not repeatedly identified in different maize lines, more than 40% of the cellular pathways were shared across all the lines examined  <cit> . in our study, a similar percentage of genes  showed expression level changes upon water deficit stress. since the genotype in this study is believed to be drought tolerant, it would be interesting to determine if biological pathways highlighted in this study  would appear in common across an array of cotton genotypes. transcripts involving the hsp-containing functional group were also identified in a microarray based, water deficit stress response gene expression study using another cotton cultivar, fibermax  <dig>  <cit> . the few water deficit stress-related cotton genes identified in the current study could be used in candidate gene-focused association mapping approaches to identify qtl under drought stress. this approach was previously shown to identify snps associated with aba and sugar levels under water deficit  <cit> .

implications of gene duplication in cotton abiotic stress response
as evidenced by recent studies, it is becoming clearer that gene duplication has contributed to adaptive evolution and plant diversification that can lead to evolutionary novelty  <cit> . in our study, four pairs of duplicated genes including two pip <dig> homologues were regulated spatially under water deficit stress . the differential expression of two duplicated pip1s did not appear to result from differences of deduced amino acid sequences . hence, it is of interest to elucidate factors that lead to the differential response of duplicated genes against stress. these responses can be controlled genetically, epigenetically, or by gene specific cis- or trans-elements  <cit> . recent studies on genetic and epigenetic responses of plant genomes under environmental stimuli suggest that novel stress-induced genotypes such as methylation-sensitive polymorphisms can contribute to crop diversity that may lead to improvements in productivity  <cit> . in rice, drought stress-induced changes in genome-wide methylation patterns were evaluated using a methylation sensitive cdna-aflp method. this revealed a  <dig> % site-specific methylation difference between a drought tolerant line  and its sensitive progenitor line  when stressed and showed methylation status was regulated tissue specifically  <cit> . thus, water deficit responsive molecular changes presented in our study implicate important mechanisms of each gene or coordinated regulation of genes that should be targets of future study.

CONCLUSIONS
in response to field applied water deficit stress, we identified  <dig> differentially expressed tdfs. this global expression analysis generated sequence information for  <dig> tdfs and provided gene ontology, distribution of functional categories, and homologous genes. in accordance with data provided here, we highlight possible mechanisms by which cotton responds to water deficit stress. the combination of molecular changes in gene regulation and signal transduction results in increased activity of ros-related defense mechanisms and hsp-driven protection machinery to provide cellular redox homeostasis and stabilization of functionally/structurally important proteins. a readily available cotton genome sequence will enhance our ability to understand the relationship between gene duplication/polyploidy and the functional, molecular adjustments cotton makes in response to water deficit stress and other environmental stresses.

