BACKGROUND
the use of real-time quantitative pcr   <cit>  in medium –  to large-scale  profiling experiments is growing. while in a large number of experiments qpcr is still mainly used to confirm results obtained by microarray-based hybridization experiments, the number of high-throughput discovery experiments is growing steadily  <cit> , especially for the quantification of transcripts of low abundance , due to the low detection limit of the method  <cit> .

there are surprisingly few free software packages available to the academic research community suitable for the design of primer pairs for such high-throughput projects, for online use or download, including osprey  <cit> , primique  <cit>  and a few interfaces to primer <dig>  <cit>  such as primer3plus  <cit> , autoprime  <cit> , batchprimer <dig>  <cit> . additionally, some databases of pre-computed primers, rtprimerdb  <cit> , primerbank  <cit> , qprimerdepot  <cit> , atrtprimer  <cit>  and datfap  <cit> , have been established. there are numerous commercial and free software packages available for low-throughput design of primers, some of which are highly configurable and well suited for the design of primer pairs for qpcr.

however, none of the available packages combines all the important features  into a simple pipeline. instead, with currently available computational tools, users have to either manually move information  between software packages or perform some steps completely on their own, such as specificity checking using an alignment package like blast  <cit> . such manual steps make researchers loose valuable time, increase the risk of mistakes , and force them to take important decisions based on their personal interpretation of complex problems regarding large amounts of data , which either require expert knowledge or introduce bias into the results. with respect to the available primer pair databases, they are usually of limited scope. often, only few species are covered , few transcripts of the species are represented , or inappropriate primer design parameters for combined analysis were used, requiring time-consuming optimization of pcr amplification conditions.

here we developed quantprime, a program for design and specificity testing of primer pairs for qpcr, designed to meet the needs of the average or advanced user in low- to high-throughput transcript profiling experiments, while keeping the user interface very simple and yet providing important features missing in other available software packages and web services.

implementation
quantprime includes a relational database for information storage, scripts containing the procedures to perform primer pair design and specificity testing, scripts for sequence installation and maintenance, scripts for command line user interface used in high-throughput design, and a web interface as the main user interface for low- to medium-throughput primer design. for academic users we currently offer web access to the public quantprime server  or, on demand, compiled scripts for local installation. commercial users are requested to get in contact with the authors to develop a license agreement.

the public quantprime server is currently set up with publicly available transcriptome and genome annotations from  <dig> different eukaryotic species. table  <dig> gives examples of supported species with included features and references. the list can be easily extended according to user requests.

the latest versions of the annotations were added, and are updated regularly as updates become available.

* protein ids are searchable.

user interface
the web interface is designed for maximum simplicity and convenience for the user. users have to register at the first time they visit the website. the registration step allows users to return at a later time to check the results of longer runs. their gene lists and jobs are kept confidential, i.e. no information is relayed to other users. furthermore, registration eases the even distribution of computing resources among users and it is the main mechanism to verify academic affiliation. an account with access to limited computing resources is available for testing purposes.

the work flow starts with the generation of a 'project' that is associated with the annotation of a species and a certain quantification protocol. the quantification protocol implies certain parameters for primer design and specificity testing; four standard protocols for typical situations are provided:

 <dig>  sybr green-based real-time qpcr : typical parameters for real-time qpcr are used, such as 50– <dig> bp amplicon length, 60°c annealing temperature and strict primer criteria for g/c content and melting temperature . the specificity testing will allow amplicons present in splice variants of the transcript .

 <dig>  sybr green real-time qpcr : as  <dig>  but no amplicons in splice variants of the transcript are allowed.

 <dig>  end-point semi-quantitative pcr : similar to  <dig>  except that longer amplicons are preferred  for easier in-gel quantification.

 <dig>  end-point semi-quantitative pcr : as  <dig>  but no amplicons in splice variants of the transcript are allowed.

users are allowed to change any parameter and create custom protocols; see additional file  <dig> for a list of all possible parameters.

next, users should create a list of transcript identifiers in the project for which primer pair design is planned. this list can either be entered manually , or can be created from a similarity-based search using blast and a starting query sequence. additionally, for certain annotations, keywords describing the gene can be used in a text search for identifiers.

once the list of identifiers is ready, users may proceed to 'primer finding' , which when started will continue completely in the background; in the meantime users can continue to look at resulting primer pairs or add new transcripts to the list. larger primer finding projects may take longer time to process, therefore users may close the web browser and return at a later time to check the status of their jobs.

successful primer pairs are displayed in the 'results' page , where users can inspect primer pairs in detail  and do bulk export of the primer data  for ordering or local storage.

users may return at a later time to access their data, as lists of transcripts and primer pairs are automatically saved into their corresponding projects. on the public server, projects are kept for at least a month after the latest update, and may then be deleted by the administrator for space limitation reasons. thus, users are recommended to export primer data and store locally for reference purposes.

work flow
quantprime employs a fully automated work flow for design and specificity testing of primer pairs, a process that does not require any intermediate intervention by the user. once users have added the transcript identifiers to the project, selecting the 'start' button will initiate the whole primer selection process, and the identified primer pairs will automatically be displayed in the 'results' page when the process is completed.

the overall work flow of quantprime is sketched in figure  <dig>  it has two main algorithms, one for primer pair design and one for specificity testing, which are accessed by worker threads which check the output of each algorithm and decide upon the measures to be taken. the worker threads operate independent of the web server, processing submitted jobs according to defined load balancing principles . due to the loosely bound system architecture it is straightforward to attach additional computing nodes to the central database allowing for high user loads. for testing purposes, a developer machine was set up to work as a computing node for the public server. with rising demand on the public server, local computing resources can be quickly mobilized to avoid long waiting times for the end users.

the primer pair design algorithm uses the primer <dig> software to design primer pair candidates; a graphical representation can be found in figure  <dig> 

the primer <dig> design parameters can be specified by the user when setting up the project; default settings are as follows:

● primer length: 20– <dig> bases

● amplicon size: 60– <dig> bp

● primer melting temperatures :  <dig> +/- 3°c  , maximum 2°c tm difference between forward and reverse primers

● amplicon melting temperature: 75–95°c

● g/c content: 45–55%

● max. repetition of a nucleotide: 3

● g/c-clamp: last 3' base of each primer must be a g or a c

in addition to the primer <dig> selection criteria, the primer pair candidates are filtered through the following steps:

● extended g/c clamp options: to avoid mispriming, it is often appropriate to avoid too many g/c bases within the 3' region of the primer. this cannot be controlled by primer3; therefore we introduced a parameter that allows the user to define a maximum number of g/c bases to be present in the last 3' bases. the default setting is maximum three g/c bases in the last five bases of a primer.

● amplicon bias at 3' end of transcript: primers for amplicons at the 3' end of the transcript  are favored. for the common user this is often wanted as cdna preparations primed with oligo-dx generally exhibit 3' region bias. for those using random hexamers for cdna synthesis, this parameter can be switched off.

● skip 3' utr: in cases where multiple polyadenylation signals exist in the 3' utr it might be desirable to avoid priming in this region, as it could lead to biased quantification. this option can be switched on for custom design protocols.

● exon-exon junction in primers: as rna preparations may contain some genomic dna even after digestion with dnase i, such primers can successfully distinguish between cdna and genomic dna. when possible  is available), primers that span an exon-exon junction are favored, especially when the junction occurs at the 3' end of the primer, to further decrease the probability of extendable annealing to genomic dna.

● specificity pre-filtering: in order to save workload for the specificity testing algorithm, obvious unspecific primer pairs are removed at this step. this is achieved by finding transcripts that are similar to the target transcript using blast  and filtering out the primer pair candidates annealing perfectly to any of those sequences. three configurations of the filter are possible; one that forces the algorithm to find primer pairs amplifying all splice variants of the transcript , one that forces it to find only those specific to a certain splice variant, and one that allows  them to amplify other splice variants .

the successful primer pairs are saved to the database, and the algorithm reports the number of designed primer pairs back to the calling worker thread. if it was possible to find primer pairs, the next step is specificity testing, described below :

the primer pair specificity determination algorithm is based on the interpretation of blast results , using each primer as a query towards the transcriptome and, when available, against the genome. to identify unspecific amplicons in a transcriptome or a genome, the following  criteria are applied to the blast hits:

● last two bases of the 3' region of each primer must be identical to the blast hit.

● amplicons of up to  <dig> bp are considered for sybr green protocols, and  <dig> bp for end-point protocols.

even though the primer pairs cannot give rise to an unspecific amplicon, it is generally preferred that they should be as specific as possible to the target sequence. this is approximated by checking whether a single primer in the pair has a significant  identity to another cdna sequence, and where the last 3' base is identical .

the information from the above procedures is assembled and saved into the primer pair database. based on this specificity information, quantprime labels the tested primer pairs with one out of four specificity ranks: bad, acceptable, good or very good. they are defined as follows:

 <dig>  bad : might amplify a non-specific cdna fragment.

 <dig>  acceptable : amplifies only the specific sequence, but one primer has a high similarity with a non-target sequence and the primer pair might amplify genomic dna.

 <dig>  good : amplifies only the target sequence, but one primer has a high similarity with a non-target sequence or the pair might amplify genomic dna. this is the highest possible rank for primer pairs designed for species without a genome annotation.

 <dig>  very good : amplifies only the target sequence, both primers are highly specific to this sequence and will not amplify genomic dna.

the list of designed primers is worked through until enough  of at least acceptable  primer pairs are found. the worker thread then decides whether it is possible to find higher-ranking primer pairs ; if so it continues until it is successful or until a certain primer pair threshold is reached .

the work flow implemented on the web server only performs automated relaxation in amplicon 3' bias and exon-exon junction criteria; the primer <dig> parameters are not relaxed. thus, for certain transcripts, quantprime will fail to find specific primer pairs; with the default settings, we arrived at a failure rate of 2–9% . if the user wishes to relax the primer <dig> parameters to be able to find specific primers for such problematic transcripts, a new project has to be created with different primer design parameters. some users might find this procedure cumbersome, but we chose this design to prevent primer pairs with heterogeneous design parameters to be mixed within an assay. we are open for user suggestions to introduce certain configurable relaxations in future versions of quantprime.

primer pairs designed for hypothetical high-throughput experiments, for random transcripts of each species. the numbers of successfully designed primer pairs for the different specificity ranks and the search times are reported for each species .

 <dig> percentages indicate for how many of the transcripts primer pairs of at least the rank given were identified.  <dig> 'acceptable' amplifies only the specific sequence, but one primer has a high similarity with a non-target sequence and the primer pair might amplify genomic dna.  <dig> 'good' amplifies only the target sequence, but one primer has a high similarity with a non-target sequence or the pair might amplify genomic dna. this is the highest possible rank for primer pairs designed for species without a genome annotation.  <dig> 'very good' amplifies only the target sequence, both primers are highly specific to this sequence and will not amplify genomic dna.

RESULTS
experimental testing of primers designed through quantprime
to verify the experimental usefulness of the primer pairs designed with quantprime, we tested it to design primers for a medium-sized expression profiling experiment for arabidopsis thaliana , carried through by fellow researchers in our group. the default settings for design and specificity testing  were used and the highest ranking primer pairs were chosen. as can be seen in table  <dig>  we experienced a success rate of 96%, meaning unique amplicons of predicted size and amplification efficiencies  =  <dig>  . over 88% of the primers were predicted not to amplify genomic dna. for five out of  <dig> transcripts we obtained non-satisfying results. for those, good primer pairs could be obtained by testing one or two alternative primer pairs designed by quantprime, without having to perform any pcr optimization .

the primer pairs were designed for wet-lab quantification experiments. the number of primer pairs passing strict quality control checks  are reported in the table.

 <dig> melting curve analysis, gel analysis and efficiency check  passed.  <dig> undetectable transcripts  removed from the statistics.  <dig> tigr transcript assembly annotation used, no genomic sequences available.

we also designed primer pairs for  <dig> transcripts  from chlamydomonas reinhardtii and tested them in the same way as above. in this case transcripts of four genes could not be detected, and as the primer pairs for these transcripts spanned exon-exon junctions, we could not test them on genomic dna. however, only one of the primer pairs of the detectable transcripts did not pass the quality control , giving a success rate of 97%. seventy-three percent of the designed primer pairs were predicted not to amplify genomic dna.

additionally, primer pairs for  <dig> different barley  transcripts were tested. for two primer pairs, no product could be detected, but only one of the detectable transcripts did not pass the quality control , yielding a success rate of 96%. as no whole-genome sequence is available for barley, no predictions for genomic amplicons could be made.

in these three experiments, we thus observed a success rate > 96%. examples of primer pairs and pcr amplification products separated on agarose gels can be found in additional file  <dig> 

to assess quantprime's accuracy of prediction of genomic dna amplification,  <dig> primer pairs from an existing qpcr platform for tonoplast-related transcripts of a. thaliana were tested in silico with quantprime and experimentally with genomic dna in real-time pcr. quantprime predicted  <dig> of these as 'gdna-unsafe', while in real-time pcr measurable amplification was recorded for  <dig> of the primer pairs . twelve primer pairs  were falsely predicted as 'gdna-unsafe', and  <dig>  falsely as 'gdna-safe'.

in silico benchmarking of quantprime
in order to assess the success rate and speed of quantprime for larger expression profiling projects, hypothetical high-throughput assays were designed for six different species. five assays consisted of respectively  <dig> randomly selected transcripts from current genome annotations of five species , while the sixth assay consisted of the whole unigene collection of barley  transcripts. as seen in table  <dig>  the success rates  varied between  <dig> and 98%, which correlates relatively well with the status and complexity of the annotations. for the higher specificity ranks rather high variation between species was observed, ranging from 76–93% for the rank 'good', and 39–61% for the rank 'very good'. since the barley annotation lacks genomic information, 'good' is the highest possible rank. primer pair identification speed varied between  <dig>   and  <dig>  seconds per transcript, correlating roughly with the size of the sequence sets to be searched by blast.

we also did preliminary tests with data sets from larger transcriptomes/genomes , for which the design speed dropped . this is due to a higher memory demand of the blast runs that can be offered in the future, when requests for the service rise.

discussion
our experimental results show that the primer pairs designed by quantprime can be directly used with a high success rate  in qpcr applications, without a need for experimental optimization of individual reaction conditions. when running tests in parallel on a standard desktop computer, the speed is enough to design primers for high-throughput projects for small- to medium sized transcriptomes as shown by the in silico tests.

to our knowledge, there are no other web-based tools directly comparable to quantprime, although programs like osprey  <cit>  and primique  <cit>  offer possibilities for batch primer pair design. in those two other applications, however, the user has to supply the database against which primer pair specificity is tested, but the upload capacity is limited to  <dig> mb which does not suffice for most transcriptomes. quantprime always tests the primer pairs against the whole transcriptome of the annotation used, and additionally offers a richer user interface, exon-exon junction design of primers to avoid genomic dna amplification, and a high degree of customization of parameters, features not available in the other software packages. most annotations are already included in quantprime; in the case that users have special annotations not available on the public server, they can contact us for adding it there, or they can run quantprime locally. a more exhaustive comparison of quantprime with other available primer design software can be found in the additional file  <dig> 

for some species pre-computed databases of primers exist. an example is atrtprimer  <cit>  containing primer pairs for most genes of a. thaliana. when looking at the available primers in this resource one will find that the parameters for design, especially amplicon size, make the primer pairs unsuitable for real-time pcr, and due to the differences in tm between different primer pairs exhaustive pcr optimization would be necessary for using them in high-throughput. the authors report a success rate of 93%, however only  <dig> primer pairs offered by the database were experimentally validated. in comparison, quantprime offers complete customization of parameters for different quantification methods, and we see higher success rates . another example is the primerbank  <cit> , which covers primer pairs for human and mouse transcripts, which could be useful for high-throughput purposes , even though amplicon sizes vary. those two databases are limited to specific species; there are a couple of databases covering more species, notably rtprimerdb  <cit> , which however cover very few non-human genes. another database containing primer pairs for plant transcription factors is datfap  <cit> , which however is based on est sets, which is questionable for a. thaliana and o. sativa for which good genome annotations are available. it therefore lacks information about possible genomic sequences amplified by the primer pairs; additionally tm values vary widely between primer pairs, which might require exhaustive pcr optimization.

the parameter flexibility for design and specificity testing offered in quantprime makes it straightforward to employ it for the design of oligonucleotides for a number of other quantification applications, such as qpcr with hydrolyzation probes , quantitative in situ hybridization of mrna and others. such protocols will be added to quantprime as we gather experimental data and feedback from users.

CONCLUSIONS
the quantprime website offers a unique service to the scientific community, with ease-of-use, flexibility of parameters and a broad scope of transcript databases and genomic annotations, which should make it a very useful tool for primer design. no other publicly available tool offers the same services. overall, the speed of computation and the quality of the designed primer pairs as shown experimentally make quantprime  a suitable system for primer design in low- to high-throughput transcription profiling projects.

we are open for suggestions from the scientific community to further develop quantprime in the future. upon request we may for example include further transcript databases and genome annotations, sets of parameters for other quantification protocols and applications, or improve the applied specificity testing algorithms. institutions wanting to host mirrors of the quantprime public web server or supply additional computing power are encouraged to contact the authors.

