BACKGROUND
intravenous tissue plasminogen activator  remains the only acute stroke therapy that is approved by the fda and established to improve clinical outcome  <cit> . however, the use of this thrombolytic agent has been limited by the need to deliver treatment within a narrow therapeutic time window, presently  <dig> hours, and the excess risk of brain hemorrhage and edema  if treatment is started at delayed time points after stroke  <cit> . it is important to develop strategies that can safely extend the therapeutic time window for tpa and thereby increase the utilization of this effective treatment.

a key factor that increases the risks for brain edema and hemorrhage, and reduces the efficacy of tpa, is the development of substantial cellular necrosis prior to treatment. preventing early cell death may allow relatively delayed thrombolysis with tpa, without compromising safety. several animal  <cit>  and human  <cit>  studies have documented that normobaric oxygen therapy  therapy is neuroprotective in acute ischemic stroke. imaging studies indicate that nbo slows down and transiently arrests the process of ischemic cell death <cit> . since it is simple to administer, noninvasive, inexpensive, widely available, and can be started in the field within minutes after stroke symptom onset, nbo is being viewed as a potentially useful and feasible physiological strategy to extend the time window for stroke thrombolysis  <cit> .

in this study, we tested the hypothesis that nbo therapy can be safely combined with tpa in an experimental clot-based stroke model in rats. in order for combination nbo plus tpa clinical trials to be initiated, one must first demonstrate that nbo does not interfere with the efficacy or compromise the safety of tpa thrombolysis. the experimental design and results of this study are relevant to the clinical scenario where tpa and nbo are started simultaneously upon hospital arrival.

RESULTS
physiological parameters remained within normal range in all groups . before nbo, arterial po <dig> levels were approximately  <dig> mm hg in all rats. as expected, nbo rapidly and markedly elevated arterial po <dig> levels to above  <dig> mmhg . upon clot injection, cerebral perfusion in the mca territory dropped below 20% of pre-ischemic baselines . cerebral ischemia was stable throughout the  <dig> hour duration of the study in all animals . tpa treatment restored perfusion to almost 100%, but saline treatment did not have detectable effects on cerebral perfusion values . the addition of nbo did not affect the rate or the time course of tpa-mediated reperfusion .

values are mean ± sd. mabp indicates mean arterial blood pressure.

this embolic clot model yielded infarctions in the expected territory of the middle cerebral artery . treatment with nbo alone did not show a statistically significant decrease in infarction volume . as expected, thrombolysis with tpa significantly decreased infarction volumes , consistent with effective reperfusion. combining nbo plus tpa did not interfere with this beneficial action of tpa. in fact, the average infarction volume of rats treated with nbo plus tpa  was even smaller than that in tpa-alone rats , although this difference was not statistically significant . both tpa-treated groups showed small cortical infarcts with subcortical tissue salvage , suggesting thrombolysis-induced recanalization with distal clot migration or embolization, as expected for this experimental model <cit> .

in spontaneously hypertensive rats , this embolic clot model demonstrates the presence of hemorrhagic conversion if thrombolytic reperfusion occurs late, at 2– <dig> hours or beyond. in this study, tpa was given relatively early, at  <dig> hour, which is the time point where reperfusion occurs consistently in our experience. accordingly, there was no significant induction of hemorrhage. the calculated volumes of parenchymal blood were approximately 3– <dig> μl in all groups and neither nbo nor nbo plus tpa appeared to worsen hemorrhage . after correcting for infarct volumes , hemorrhage volume tended to be higher in both tpa treated groups as compared to saline controls .

besides hemorrhagic conversion, another potential complication of reperfusion injury is the induction of edema and brain swelling. in this study, about 10% of hemispheric swelling was observed in all animals. there were no detectable differences across groups, and nbo did not worsen brain swelling . there was no significant difference in mortality rates between groups , indicating that nbo did not affect mortality when administered alone or when combined with tpa .

discussion
over the past few years, multiple studies have documented nbo's neuroprotective effects in hyperacute focal ischemic stroke. early nbo therapy salvages acutely ischemic brain tissue, reduces pathological brain infarct volumes, improves neurobehavioural scores, attenuates diffusion-weighted brain mri abnormalities, and extends the reperfusion time window  <cit> . pilot human studies have shown similarly promising results  <cit> . other studies have shown that nbo does not induce post-ischemic brain hemorrhage, brain edema, blood-brain barrier damage, matrix metalloprotein levels, and various other markers of oxidative stress <cit> ; these results have helped to allay concerns about the potential risks of hyperoxia-induced oxygen free radical generation. finally, several studies have shed light on mechanisms: nbo raises brain tissue oxygen levels, reduces peri-infarct depolarizations that contribute to infarct growth, improves mr-spectrophotometric parameters of ischemia e.g. brain lactate levels, and favorably alters hemodynamic parameters such as cerebral blood volume <cit> .

on basis of these data, and the inherent advantages of nbo as an acute stroke therapy such as its wide availability, ease of delivery in the field, and penetration across the blood brain barrier to reach target ischemic brain tissue, clinical trials of nbo have been initiated to determine nbo's safety and therapeutic potential in the acute stroke setting <cit> . combining nbo with tpa is a natural next step; however, before such trials can be initiated it is important to investigate in pre-clinical studies whether nbo influences the thrombolytic potency or the safety of tpa. in that regard, the results of the present study are significant. we found that the combination of nbo plus tpa did not significantly alter the rate or the degree of tpa-induced reperfusion as measured by ldf, and had no significant effect on brain swelling or mortality. both tpa-treated groups showed significant reduction of infarct volumes as compared to saline controls, and the combination of nbo with tpa proved most effective. the benefit of combination therapy over tpa alone was marginal; however, this study was not powered to show benefit of combination therapy versus tpa. both tpa groups showed small residual cortical infarcts as expected for this embolic clot-reperfusion stroke model <cit> . nbo alone showed no significant benefit, presumably because of the small sample size, because it was delivered at a relatively delayed time frame , and because ldf monitoring suggested non-reperfusion in the nbo-only group . as with previous studies, it is important to note that nbo also did not worsen infarct volume, showing lack of toxicity from mechanisms such as increased oxygen free radical generation.

these data complement the results of prior studies showing efficacy of nbo in mechanical models of reperfusion <cit> . because of the inherent differences between mechanical and thrombolytic approaches to arterial recanalization, here we used a clinically relevant stroke model of embolic mca occlusion with tpa-induced thrombolysis within a narrow therapeutic time window. shr rats were used since our main objective was to determine safety; the incidence of tpa induced hemorrhage is higher in shr rats. moreover, shr rats develop more reproducible infarcts, which is an important consideration given that infarct size is more variable with the embolic clot model than with the filament model.

our results are most applicable to the clinical setting where patients receive intravenous tpa and nbo simultaneously after hospital arrival. a previous rodent study modeling the clinical scenario where nbo is started in the field, followed by delayed tpa administration, has shown similarly promising results <cit> . in that study, nbo was started at  <dig> minutes and tpa was administered at  <dig> hours after embolic mca occlusion. serial diffusion-perfusion magnetic resonance imaging  showed that the combination of nbo with tpa was effective  and also safe . if confirmed in clinical trials, these data may result in the widespread use of nbo as an adjunctive stroke treatment strategy that extends the time window for intravenous tpa. nbo may eventually also have a role in extending the therapeutic time window for other promising treatments including intra-arterial thrombolytics and neuroprotective drugs, which to date have failed clinical trials due to factors such as delayed time to treatment, among others  <cit> .

the strengths of our study include the blinded assessment of outcomes, careful monitoring of physiological parameters and cerebral perfusion, statistical rigor, and the clinically relevant study design. these factors are often overlooked in pre-clinical studies  <cit> . we acknowledge several shortcomings, for example the absence of neurobehavioural scores and investigation of mechanisms. these issues have been addressed in prior studies; our objective was to investigate the interaction between nbo and intravenous tpa. further studies are warranted to investigate issues such as the effect of varying durations, timings, and concentrations of inhaled oxygen, and intravenous tpa's therapeutic time window with nbo pre-treatment and co-treatment. nevertheless, we hope that our results will lend confidence to starting clinical investigations of nbo with tpa.

CONCLUSIONS
these experimental results suggest that nbo can be safely co-administered with intravenous tpa to treat acute ischemic stroke. the efficacy of tpa thrombolysis is not affected by nbo, and there is no induction of brain hemorrhage or brain edema.

