BACKGROUND
horizontal gene transfer  that can result in genome expansion and acquisition of new functions and gene loss leading to genome reduction are recognized as key processes in the evolution of bacterial and archaeal genomes . it has been quantitatively demonstrated that gene gain via hgt rather than intragenomic gene duplication is the principal factor of innovation in the evolution of prokaryotes  <cit> . reconstructions of gene gain and loss in groups of closely related bacteria and archaea reveal genomes that are in constant flux, with high rates of gain and loss . in many cases, several events of gene gain and loss have been estimated to occur over the time that it takes for a single nucleotide substitution to be fixed in an average gene  <cit> . according to these reconstructions, gene loss appears to be the most common process in microbial evolution that occurs in a roughly clock-like manner  <cit> . gene gain appears to be a more episodic process that occurs at rates that on average are two to three-fold lower than the gene loss rate which might be compensated for by bursts of gene gain  <cit> .

nearly all genes can be transferred and lost during the evolution of bacteria and archaea but the rates of these processes markedly differ between functional classes of genes  <cit> . the genes involved in key processes of information transmission, in particular translation, comprise the most stable group whereas genes that encode components of the mobilome, such as transposons or prophages, predictably are lost and gained more often. on the genome dynamics scale, the mobilome is closely followed by the genes that encode various defense systems. bacteria and archaea exist under constant pressure from parasites, such as viruses, transposons and plasmids, and have evolved elaborate, diverse, multilayer defense strategies . the defense systems include those that provide innate immunity, such as restriction-modification , toxin-antitoxin , and abortive infection  systems, and the crispr-cas  systems of adaptive immunity. the incessant arms race between the parasites and the defense systems results in rapid evolution on both sides which involves sequence change as well as intense gene flux .

over the last several decades, microbial defense mechanisms have been intensely exploited as source of tools for genome editing, engineering and regulation. in the early days of genetic engineering, the key tools were rm enzymes, and the need in endonucleases with different specificities has greatly stimulated the study of the diversity of rm systems . later, the new era of genome editing has been ushered by the characterization of the programmable, rna-guided endonuclease activity of crispr-cas systems, particular those of class  <dig> that possess a single-protein effector modules and therefore can be introduced into mammalian cells in a straightforward manner . notably, systematic screening of bacterial and archaeal genomes for new class  <dig> crispr-cas systems resulted in the discovery of several novel variants that have been immediately harnessed for applications . even more recently, bacterial and archaeal argonaute proteins have been shown to represent a distinct, rna- or dna-guided innate immunity machinery in bacteria and archaea  <cit>  that eventually might lead to yet another generation of genome editing tools notwithstanding the controversy around the early attempts on application  <cit> . the remarkable utility of microbial defense systems as tools for genome manipulation stems from their naturally evolved ability to recognize and cleave specific dna or rna sequence, which is a pre-requisite for self vs non-self discrimination. these features of defense systems undoubtedly enhance the incentive for detailed exploration of their diversity and evolution.

we undertook a detailed analysis of the gain and loss dynamics of defense systems in  <dig> clusters of closely related prokaryotic genome cluster  from an updated version of the atgc , a database of orthologous genes from closely related prokaryotic genomes and a research platform for microevolution of prokaryotes  <cit>  and compared the identified trends with those for the overall genome dynamics. the results support the previous observations on the highly dynamic character of the evolution of defense systems but also show that, despite the evolution in the arms race regime, the relative contributions of different types of evolutionary events are roughly the same for defense systems as they are for the rest of microbial genes.

RESULTS
distribution of defense systems among the atgcs
in extension of the previous observations  <cit> , the total number of defense systems  genes strongly correlates with the total number of cogs in an atgc such that about 75% of the variation is explained by the characteristic genome size . in contrast, the fraction of defense-related genes does not significantly depend on the genome size  although considerable variation is observed across the atgcs, from <1% in chlamydia-chlamydophila to >4% in sulfolobus . not surprisingly, atgcs with the lowest representation of defense systems include intracellular parasites chlamydia-chlamydophila , followed by another group of chlamydia , and mycoplasma , facultative, host-associated bacteria with heavily reduced genomes . rickettsia, intracellular parasites with average-size genomes, also encompass an average number of defense systems . thus, apparently, the number of defense systems is determined primarily by the size of the genome and is largely independent of the life style of the microbes.fig.  <dig> correlation of cogs and defense systems. a all cogs vs. number of defense systems. b all cogs vs. percentage of defense systems. each figure contains  <dig> dots each of which represents an atgc. the atgcs discussed in the text are indicated in panel b





the distribution of the different types of defense systems is largely consistent across the atgcs . statistically, the fractions of each class of defense systems did not differ from the respective means for any of the atgcs .fig.  <dig> distribution of defense systems across the species tree. a the tree was reconstructed using data from microbesonline  <cit> . length of bars is proportional to the number of defense systems. b distribution of the relative abundance of defense systems in the atgc




overall, ta comprise the most abundant class of defense systems , followed by rm  and crispr  . there is also, on average, about 30% of uncharacterized  defense systems, i.e. those that contain genes associated with defense but could not be classified into one of the defined categories. as shown in fig. 2b , in  <dig> of the  <dig> atgcs, ta are the most abundant defense systems. the rm systems are extremely abundant in helicobacter , representing 54% of the ds in this atgc, and also more abundant than other ds in listeria , francisella  and propionibacterium . the crispr-cas systems are the most abundant ds in sulfolobus , followed by corynebacterium  and mycoplasma .

rates of different types of genome dynamics events in defense systems
we reconstructed the evolution of the ds in large atgcs that include at least  <dig> and up to  <dig> genomes . in each atgc, the gene families involved in ds were identified, and the rates of gene dynamics events , including gene family gain, loss, expansion and reduction , were analyzed using count  <cit> .

count employs a phylogenetic birth-and-death model to infer three parameters: κ , λ  and μ  these parameters are used to estimate the posterior probabilities of the four types of transitions for each gene family and on all edges of the species tree, namely gain of a gene family , gene family expansion , gene family reduction  and loss of a gene family . the posterior probabilities can be used to calculate the actual rates  that can differ from the internal rates in the model. we chose to investigate the evolution of genomes in terms of such effective rates of the four classes of events rather than in terms of the underlying model rates because the former provide a more realistic account of the actual phyletic patterns observed by genome comparison.

the results were compared with the overall rates of the respective events within each atgc . the relative rates of gene family gain, loss, expansion and reduction among the ds are similar to those previously estimated for all genes in the atgc  <cit> . the rates of gain, loss, expansion and reduction were divided by the total number of gde and the resulting normalized relative rates were compared for ds genes vs all genes using the chi-square test. this test yielded a p-value of  <dig>  indicating that the ds genes do not significantly deviate from the overall pattern.

as in the case of the overall genome dynamics, gene loss is the dominant mode of evolution of defense systems, the loss rate being approximately 3-fold higher than gene gain rate and an order of magnitude higher than the gene family expansion and reduction rates . under the assumption that the genomes are at equilibrium, long term, it appears likely that the substantial excess of losses over gains is offset by sporadic gain of multiple genes  <cit> . the proportional differences in the rates of genome dynamics events are similar for all classes of defense systems  .fig.  <dig> number of genes assigned to defense systems  and genome dynamics by type of defense system. a number of defense genes  distributed by type of defense systems. b number of genome dynamic events , including gain, loss, expansion and reduction, by type of defense systems




as expected, the number of genome dynamics events depends on the size of the atgc. thus, atgc <dig> that consists of enterobacteria  encompasses the majority of the inferred events . in order to compare genome dynamics within and across atgcs, we normalized the estimated number of events by the number of cogs and the number of genomes in an atgc .table  <dig> genome dynamics in defense systems relative to the dynamics in all genes




the number of events per cog per genome ranged between approximately  <dig>  and  <dig>  . the median value is  <dig> , and only  <dig> atgcs show values greater than  <dig>  . there were no significant differences in genome dynamics rates between different microbial life styles  or across the major bacterial taxa .

high flux vs low flux in defense systems
rates of gain, loss, expansion and reduction per cog in defense systems strongly correlate with the rates among all genes . to identify genomes with high and low relative rates of genome dynamics in defense systems, the results were normalized by the overall rates of genome dynamics events in all genes. there are  <dig> atgcs with high flux ,  <dig> atgcs with low flux  and  <dig> atgcs with average flux of defense systems . helicobacter and listeria have the highest gene flux, whereas chlamydia and brucella show the lowest flux . the majority of the atgcs with a high ds gene flux are compressing, i.e. appear to be shedding defense systems  although two atgcs  show high rates of both gene gain and loss. moreover, helicobacter presents the highest rates of gain, loss, expansion and reduction . in contrast, atgcs with low flux rate tend to maintain a balanced gain/loss rate in  <dig> atgcs or to slowly expand their defense systems . the same trend is observed in atgcs with average flux:  <dig> atgcs have balanced gain-loss rates, two tend to gain ds genes  and two tend to lose ds genes .fig.  <dig> correlation of genome dynamics events normalized by number of cogs of all genes vs. defense systems. a gain. b loss. c expansion. d reduction




on average, the rates of ds gene dynamics per cog are about  <dig>  times higher than the rates for all genes  . the difference between the rates for ds and the means over all functional categories of genes are statistically significant for the total of all gde, loss and gain  as calculated from the differences in the log-likelihoods . these ratios vary within a broad range, from nearly absent gene gain in chlamydia-chlamydophila to a near threefold excess of the loss rate over the genomic average in helicobacter. nevertheless, the trend of higher than average genome dynamics rates for ds is consistent: it holds for  <dig> of the  <dig> atgcs for gene gain and  <dig> of the  <dig> atgcs for loss . the observed differences cannot be explained by taxonomy  or life style .fig.  <dig> density plots of rates of genome dynamics in defense systems normalized by the rates in all genes. a distribution in all atgcs. b distribution in actinobacteria, firmicutes and proteobacteria. c distribution in free living  and facultative host associated  bacteria




in the principal component analysis , the first principal component  explains 54% of the variance and separates atgcs with high and low gene flux in ds genes. the second principal component  explains 25% of the variance and separates the gainers of ds genes from the rest of the atgcs . predictably, the evolution of most of the atgcs is dominated by pc <dig> but several atgcs that are active gainers are primarily characterized by pc <dig> . helicobacter shows the highest flux among the atgcs whereas shewanella presents the highest gene gain rate.fig.  <dig> principal components analysis of the relative rates of gain, loss, expansion and reduction in defense systems normalized by the rates in all genes. a pca plot. each dot corresponds to an atgc. b loadings plot. c bar plot of the pca’s main principal components by atgc




case by case analysis of the evolution of defense systems
we examined in detail several specific cases of gain or loss of defense-related genes in different atgcs, in an attempt to illustrate various evolutionary trends. the atgcs for this case by case, namely atgc068: corynebacterium , atgc081: clostridium  and atgc159:propionibacterium , were selected based by the following criteria: 1) approximately  <dig> genomes in an atgc; 2) high genome synteny allowing for whole genome alignments and 3) moderate number of gde allowing for comprehensive analysis.

atgc068: corynebacterium
the atgc <dig> consists of  <dig> closely related corynebacterium diphtheriae strains. the count reconstruction indicates a strong ds gene loss trend in all branches of the tree . below we describe several examples of loss and gain of defense genes in this atgc. the count reconstruction indicates several losses of cas genes during the evolution of corynebacterium diphtheriae . all of these genes apparently have been lost from the genomic region between the genes for hydroxymethylpyrimidine/phosphomethylpyrimidine kinase thid and serine/threonine kinase pknb genes . a crispr-cas system is present in this locus in each genome but interestingly, these belong to two different subtypes  <cit> , namely ii-c  and i-e . the organisms that possess the i-e system are not monophyletic in the respective species tree . in the phylogenetic tree of cas <dig>  <cit> , the ii-c and i-e cas <dig> proteins from this locus form two clades within the ii-c and i-e branches, respectively. thus, the most parsimonious scenario is that type ii-c is ancestral in this locus but had been replaced with i-e systems from sources within the same bacterial lineage on several independent occasions. the reversal of such a replacement, i.e. restoration of type ii-c system in this locus might have occurred as well as suggested by the mapping of the cas <dig> gene tree onto the species tree  which shows that cas <dig> from c. diphtheriae va <dig> is more closely related to that of c. diphtheriae 31a than to the cas <dig> proteins from related strains on the species tree . transposases that are present in these loci might have facilitated recombination. this example shows that in situ replacements of crispr-cas systems by different types might be common among related microbial strains.

two rm genes, a ecorii-like restriction endonuclease and a diverged predicted helicase containing a z <dig> domain previously found to be associated with rm systems  <cit> , were inferred to have been gained on the terminal branch corresponding to c. diphtheriae bh <dig> . these two genes belong to an island of  <dig> singletons, i.e. genes restricted to a single genome within the analyzed data set,  inserted between galactokinase galk and rna helicase srmb genes. in addition to the two rm genes, the island encodes a dcm-like cytosine-c <dig> specific dna methylase fused to a xre family hth  domain, a duf <dig>  and three unclassified proteins . the best blastp matches for these proteins in the nr database are to homologs from other corynebacterium species  but the similarity is comparatively low, around 40% identity , suggesting acquisition of this region via hgt from a relatively distant bacterium. this island replaces two genes that are present in all other genomes from this atgc, namely a superfamily ii dna helicase fused to a phospholipase d family nuclease domain  and a mutt-like pyrophosphohydrolase . the latter pair of genes is missing in the genome of c. diphtheriae bh <dig> suggesting that it was lost in the process of the island integration. despite the presence of two genes that have been previously identified in the context of known rm systems, no full gene complement for any characterized type of rm systems could be identified in this region. thus, either these proteins are functionally unrelated and are encoded together in a defense island by chance or some subset of the genes in the island comprises a novel, multicomponent defense system.fig.  <dig> examples of defense gene gain. the trees for the atgc genomes, reconstructed from concatenated alignments of nucleotide sequences of common orthologs  <cit>  are shown in the left part of each panel. defense system loci are schematically depicted in the right part of each panel. homologous genes are highlighted in matching colors. genes that are rare or unique in these regions are shown as blank shapes. genes are labeled by the gene names or by ncbi cdd profile names. gained genes are shown by red outline. conserved flanking genes are shown by blue outline. a acquisition of rm-related genes in corynebacterium diphtheriae bh <dig>  b recombination in situ in the crispr-cas locus of clostridium botulinum strains. the cas genes and crispr-cas system subtypes are labeled according to the current crispr-cas system classification and nomenclature  <cit> . the cas <dig> gene not affected by recombination are is highlighted by yellow outline. the phylogenetic tree for the cas <dig> nucleotide sequences is schematically shown opposite the genome tree. c acquisition of abi genes in the propionibacterium acnes strains sk <dig> and hl096pa1




the count reconstruction predicts a gain of an abi <dig>  gene in c. diphtheriae va <dig>  this gene is absent from all other genomes of this atgc and shows the highest similarity to homologs from corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis suggesting acquisition of this gene from a more distant species of the same genus. the region upstream of the superoxide dismutase gene, where the abi <dig> gene apparently was inserted, shows variable gene content. in c. diphtheriae va <dig>  it contains several uncharacterized genes some of which encode predicted ds proteins such as three subunits of a type i rm system, a pd-xk nuclease and fic/doc, and hth domain-containing protein shared with several other species from this atgc . three genes in this region  including one for a pd-xk nuclease  are found next to each other in gram-positive bacterial prophages of the phi-apse family although no other phage-associated genes were identified in this region. nevertheless, the presence in this neighborhood of a gene encoding a para family atpase known to be involved in plasmid partitioning  <cit>  implies that this region is associated with a mobile element.

in a case of apparent loss of a ta gene pair  in corynebacterium diphtheria va <dig>  the two genes apparently were excised together with a mobile element , which had integrated next to the ta module in the ancestor of the three related c. diphtheriae strains . thus, this case is an example of mobilization of chromosomal genes. in the corresponding region in several other genomes that lack the mobile element, the toxin had been independently truncated, whereas the antitoxin remained intact, suggesting that toxin inactivation could be a general trend in evolution of toxin-antitoxin modules .

atgc081: clostridium botulinum
the atgc <dig> contains  <dig> closely related clostridium botulinum strains. this atgc also shows an overall tendency to lose ds genes according to the count prediction, from  <dig> at the root to 30– <dig> at the tips .

four ds genes predicted to have been gained in clostridium botulinum a <dig> str kyoto belong to a genomic island  between radical sam superfamily protein and udp-n-acetylglucosamine 4-epimerase genes . these four ds genes encode an aipr family abi gene and three subunits of a type i restriction modification system . in addition, the island encodes two proteins that are common in phages, namely a holin  and an n-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanine amidase , suggesting that this region is of a phage origin. this region shows considerable variability in other genomes from this atgc .

a replacement of a type iii-b crispr-cas locus with type iii-d is observed in clostridium botulinum b <dig> okra . the replacement apparently occurred in situ, without affecting the cas <dig> gene, which is present in this region in all clostridium botulinum species from this atgc. these cas <dig> sequences are highly similar on the nucleotide level, whereas even on the amino acid sequence level, there is only weak similarity between the cas <dig> proteins of subtypes iii-d and iii-b. the cas <dig> protein is an endoribonuclease that is required for pre-crrna transcript processing and is often encoded in the type iii loci, even those that lack a crispr array  <cit> . this particular iii-d locus is not found in any of the c. botulinum species and shows the closest similarity to the iii-d locus of clostridium lundense, suggesting horizontal transfer from a relatively distant species. furthermore, the phylogeny of the cas <dig> protein  <cit>  suggests that at least one additional in situ gene replacement occurred in this clade because cas <dig> and, as we show here, the respective gene set of type iii-b systems are distinct in the strains of c. botulinum strains atcc  <dig>  atcc  <dig> and hall, and in the branch that encompasses strains h <dig>  <dig>  f str.  <dig>  and f str. langeland. in contrast, cas <dig> genes can be confidently aligned at the nucleotide level and thus apparently were unaffected by these events .


atgc159: propionibacterium
the atgc <dig> consists of  <dig> closely related propionibacterium acnes strains and one strain of propionibacterium avidum. based on the count estimates, the p. acnes strains have lost ds genes  whereas p. avidum gained  <dig> additional ds genes .

the gain of several abi genes  most likely occurred due to the insertion of a large dna segment containing  <dig> genes  into the genome of the common ancestor of p. acnes sk <dig> and p. acnes hl096pa <dig> . this dna fragment was inserted into the hrpa-like rna helicase gene which was disrupted in the process. there are two para atpase genes encoded in this locus . the dna-binding atpase para, typically together with another dna-binding protein, parb, is essential for plasmid partitioning  <cit> . although the parb gene is missing in p. acnes, the presence of the para genes suggests that this genomic segment derives from a plasmid.

another example of ds gene gain also involves acquisition of a large genomic island  in p. acnes c <dig> . the island includes a toxin gene of the fic/doc family  that is located next to a gene encoding an antitoxin of the vbha family  <cit> . recently, an antitoxin of this family has been shown to repress growth arrest mediated by the fic domain-containing toxin vbht in the mammalian pathogen bartonella schoenbuchensis  <cit> . in p. acnes, the island is inserted into an alpha-beta family hydrolase gene and is flanked by transposases. it includes a number of genes unrelated to defense but implicated in stress response, particularly metal resistance . we were unable to identify an identical or substantially similar island in any other complete genome present in our data set but the presence of a para family atpase and the transposases again suggests that the island could be a mobile element.

distribution of defense systems and genome dynamic events on bacterial chromosomes
given the previous observations on defense islands in microbial genomes  <cit> , we examined possible clustering of defense genes in the atgc genomes. defense genes show a significant trend of co-localization in 57% of the genomes , for all classes of defense systems . however, when the analysis was repeated with “directons”, i.e. groups of co-directed genes that comprise putative operons  <cit> , random distribution of ds was observed in 83% of the genomes . additionally, we analyzed in detail the distribution of inferred ds gene gains and losses in the chromosomes of atgc <dig> , atgc <dig>  and atgc <dig> . in  <dig> of the  <dig> analyzed genomes , gains and losses were found to be randomly distributed across the chromosome .

CONCLUSIONS
the results of the present reconstruction of the evolution of defense systems in prokaryotes perhaps can be considered “disappointing” in that no distinct evolutionary regime was discovered for the defense genes. the evolution of the ds is consistently and significantly more dynamic than the genomic mean for the respective groups of microbes. however, the difference in the gde rates is moderate , perhaps surprisingly, given the common view of the evolution of defense systems in the regime of incessant arms race with parasites . the evolution of defense systems is shaped by several factors that seem to exert different, in some cases opposite effects on the gain and loss rates of defense genes. the arms race is only one of such factors. the others include the fitness cost of defense systems stemming from energetic burden, autoimmunity and barriers to horizontal gene transfer and potentially enhancing loss over gain  <cit> ; the selfish behavior of defense system, particularly rm and ta, which often become addictive to the host cells, such that loss is inhibited, and are frequently transferred on plasmids, enhancing gain  <cit> ; and additional, non-defense functions of some of these systems, e.g. crispr-cas  <cit> , which favor retention of the respective genes over loss. it appears that the net outcome of these distinct effects constrains the mobility of defense systems, resulting in the moderate excess of the gde rates over the genomic averages.

the relative contributions of gene family loss, gain, expansion and contraction are, on average, the same as they are for the rest of microbial genes. furthermore, with the exception of some parasitic bacteria that encode few ds and show low flux of defense genes, there is no obvious connection between the dynamics of the ds and the life style of the respective organisms. thus, apparently, the evolutionary dynamics of the ds follows the general trends of microbial genome evolution. these trends seem to stem from the inherent deletion bias of genome evolution combined with the neutral, largely clock-like mode of gene loss which contrasts the less uniform and partially adaptive mode of gene gain  <cit> . although the quantitative trends in the evolution of the ds seem to recapitulate the overall tendencies of microbial genome evolution, case by case analysis points to notable phenomena, such as frequent involvement of mobile elements and in situ replacement of the ds, particularly for different types of crispr-cas systems. these features appear to reflect the frequent localization of the ds in defense islands that are enriched also in mobile elements and are likely to be responsible for the enhanced dynamics of ds evolution.

