BACKGROUND
malaria is a devastating endemic parasitic disease in tropical and subtropical areas that causes approximately  <dig> million infection cases with  <dig>  deaths according to the world malaria report  <dig> published by the world health organization   <cit> . rapid detection of infected cells and classification of parasite species can facilitate treatment of the disease with appropriate drugs and help control the spread of the disease. routine methods for diagnosis of malaria parasites are by means of light microscopy and rapid diagnostic test kits  <cit> . using light microscope is a standard approach to detect parasites, which involves preparation and microscopic examination of giemsa-stained thick and thin films of blood from malaria patients. furthermore, microscopic examination can be used for classification of species and also determination of the number of parasites. however, this process requires a vigorously trained technician to efficiently and accurately detect parasite and classify its species. with other factors such as some technical limitations and possible human inconsistency, the detection and classification can be further degraded.

to address the above issues, considerable research efforts were made to develop automatic malaria detection systems on thin blood smears  <cit> . for example, tek et al.  <cit>  employed k-nearest neighbour classifier to classify parasite species. the combination of various features were used including histogram, hu moments, relative shape measurement, color auto-correlogram. ross et al.  <cit>  reported the use of feedforward backpropogation neural networks to detect malaria parasites on thin blood film; then classify the parasites into four species . seman et al.  <cit>  used multilayer perceptron  network to classify the malaria parasites into three species . they proposed six features  per size of normal rbc, shape of the parasite, numbers of the parasite's chromatin, numbers of parasite per rbc, texture of rbc and location of the chromatin) to be used in their classification protocol. le et al.,  <cit>  proposed the detection system consisting of six stages: nucleated components detection, components detection, image decomposition, erythrocyte size estimation, leukocytes and malaria gametocytes classification, and parasitemia estimation. this system was tested on  <dig> smear samples and the reported average error is less than 1% comparing to manual evaluation. diaz et al.,  <cit>  presented the method for both quantifying and classifying rbc on thin blood smears. during the classification process, this framework can also classify and differentiate the infection stages of p. falciparum. savkare and narote  <cit>  presented an automatic system to distinguish the normal and infected rbc with p. falciparum or protozoan parasites. nevertheless, thin blood film examination of malaria parasites is not practical especially with low level of parasitemia per detection area. thus, thick blood film examination where layers of rbc are approximately 6- <dig> times thicker than the thin film can have better chances to detect parasites under low parasitemia condition.

there are number of automatic systems developed for counting of infected rbc on a thick blood film. frean et al., described an automatic parasite counting system on thick blood film using image analysis techniques  <cit> . an extension of this work  <cit>  presents a semi-automatic malaria counting system in thick blood film using open-source software. to our knowledge, there is no automatic image analysis for malaria species classification on thick blood film, which is very challenging even for an experienced microscopist because the early blood stage  of all species appears identical and cannot be classified using merely the ring morphology. however, classification of species can be made possible based on the observation of several trophozoites and other parasite stages.

to make it possible for deploying an automatic system for detection and classification of malaria parasites in endemic areas, a thick blood film was chosen for our study. we implemented a prototype system for automatic detection and classification of malaria species on thick blood film. this system is composed of 1) image acquisition module and 2) malaria image analysis module specifically designed for handling thick blood film.

RESULTS
image acquisition module
evaluation of image acquisition unit
in order to collect images for analysis, a motorized unit controlling the precise movements of objective lens and microscope stage was designed . for objective lens movement test, the acquisition unit was set to move the objective lens up from a home position  <dig> steps, and then move back to the home position. the root mean square  of image contrast was used to appraise this unit for each movement . the results showed that the image acquisition unit could accurately return to the home position with average error of - <dig>  with standard deviation of  <dig>  . the captured images at home position before and after the experiments are compared in figure  <dig>  the average precision of stage  and objective lens  movements were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm, and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm respectively .

for z-axis, the  <dig> -step-forward movement was performed. the process was repeated  <dig> times. for x-axis and y-axis movements,  <dig> movements  of each direction were performed. the distance was measured by a micrometer. for z-axis, the  <dig> -step-forward movement allows micrometer to measure its average precision in nano-scale.

image enhancement
images from various depths of field were acquired using the z-movement control of the acquisition module. the acquired images were combined into one final image using extended depth of field technique so that the detail of each component can be accurately determined. figure  <dig> illustrates images of each depth of field which have different in-focus areas. the merging of in-focus information over various depths of field improves the quality of image, labeled as 'image final'.

image analysis module
classification model based on chromatin size
it is commonly known that pv parasites tend to have larger size of chromatin than that of pf parasites. however, it has never been quantified and hence, in this study, the chromatin size was quantified and used as the criteria to classify the species of malaria parasites. by acquiring the extended depth of field image, we measured the size of chromatin from  <dig>  parasites and constructed the classification model. as shown in figure  <dig>  the chromatin size of both pf and pv ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig> nm. in particular, the size of pf's chromatin mainly varies in the range of  <dig>  to  <dig> nm, while pv's chromatin size has wider range of  <dig>  to  <dig> nm. in addition, it was found that more than 20% of the pv samples have the size of chromatin >  <dig> nm.

detection and classification of malaria parasites
the prototype of automatic malaria identification system was evaluated by performing detection and classification of malaria parasites using  <dig> parasite-negative and  <dig> parasite-positive thick blood films. for detection test, the blood films containing either pf or pv parasites verified by trained microscopists were used. the results of identifying parasite-negative blood films from parasite-positive blood films  are shown in table  <dig>  the detection accuracy of parasite-positive blood films was 95% while the success rate of correctly detecting parasite-negative blood films was  <dig> %. for classification test, the thick blood films with pv parasite was correctly classified with the success rate of 75% while the accuracy of pf classification was 90% .

the prototype of automatic malaria identification system was evaluated by performing detection and classification of malaria parasites using  <dig> parasite-negative and  <dig> parasite-positive thick blood films. for detection test, the blood films containing either pf or pv parasites verified by trained microscopists were used.

discussion
the goal of this study is to develop an automatic system for detection and classification of malaria parasite species in giemsa-stained thick blood films. to date, a few automatic systems were developed to count numbers of parasites in thick blood films  <cit> . to our knowledge, however, there is no automatic system that could classify species of malaria parasites in thick blood films, especially for p. falciparum and p. vivax that are the two most prevalent species. one of the main reasons is that the morphology of both species are very similar when prepared as thick blood films and hence, it is very difficult to design an algorithm to distinguish one species from another. to overcome this difficulty, improvement of image acquisition method and finding of specific features -- that are unique in each parasite species, are needed.

the prototype of motorized image acquisition unit presented in this work accurately controls the movements of objective lens. the unit enabled us to fully automatically collect high quality images. in combination with the extended depth of field method, we could obtain in-focus images with all information of various depths of field for image analysis. however, this step is computationally time consuming. to control the computational time, the level of vertical movement was limited to  <dig> steps . the more we can minimize the computational time of this task, the more level of vertical movements can be performed; thus this leads to higher quality of in-focus images. the high image quality will directly improve the performance of detection and classification of malaria parasites.

chromatin is a combination of dna, rna and proteins that condense dna to fit within the nucleus of a cell. it exhibits solid color and its edge can be easily detected in giemsa-stained blood film. therefore, in this study, we use chromatin to detect and classify parasite species. on the other hand, cytoplasm edge is blended to the background and it is difficult to determine. based on the results, there was a difference in chromatin size of pf and pv parasites. if the chromatin size is in the range of  <dig>  -  <dig> nm, it will be classified as pf. when the chromatin size falls in the range of  <dig>  -  <dig> nm and the numbers of chromatin with the size greater than  <dig> nm is more than 20%, the parasite will be classified as pv. otherwise, the algorithm cannot conclusively classify the species and an intervention by a malaria technician performing standard microscopic observation is needed. the species classification performance could be improved by utilizing additional distinguishable features such as shape and color of the parasites.

based on table  <dig>  the performance of distinguishing the parasite-positive films from parasite-negative films was at 95% with only 5% of parasite-positive films was identified as unknown object. one of the reasons of the mis-detection could be because of the low level of parasitemia in these blood films. to enhance the system performance to detect parasite cells when the level of parasitemia is low, other features of parasite cells can be used to further investigate each possible parasite region. if the region represents those parasite characteristics, it will be assigned as parasite-positive blood films even the number of parasite is very low. it is necessary that the patient is properly treated with antimalarial drug even though the parasite load is low. this is to prevent spread of the disease and reduce adaptation of parasite for living in human host. it was reported that people living in the endemic areas can also have low level of parasitemia without symptoms due to their adaptive immune response  <cit> .

this prototype is designed to fully function automatically by using a motorized stage unit that controls the movements of objective lens for fine focus tuning and of microscope stage for facilitating acquisition of images in different regions. an operator only places a slide with giemsa-stained thick blood films on the microscope stage and performs initial focusing. by starting the analysis program, the detection and classification processes will proceed automatically and report the species classification results on the screen. this device is user-friendly and useful for deployment in endemic areas to help health personnel in examination of malaria-infected blood samples for quick and appropriate treatment of malaria patients.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have developed an automatic system for detection and classification of malaria parasites in thick blood films. the prototype is equipped with motorized units to control stage and objective lens positions at high precision. these motorized units are designed to be easily mounted on most microscopes. moreover, it employs image analysis unit which can accurately classify parasite into pf or pv species using distribution of chromatin size. the prototype can be deployed in endemic areas to assist local health personnel in malaria diagnosis.

