BACKGROUND
in most ecosystems, increased species richness tends to support ecosystem function  <cit> , but in ecosystems dominated by one or a few foundation species - such as seagrass meadows, seaweed belts, and stands of forest trees - species diversity may be less important while instead phenotypic diversity within the foundation species is likely to affect properties of the ecosystem as a whole, such as function and resilience  <cit> . for example, a population of a habitat-forming species in which the individuals are phenotypically different will create a more complex habitat than one in which phenotypes are all alike, and most likely the more complex habitat will attract more associated species  <cit> . many foundation species both in terrestrial and aquatic habitats form new individuals by either sexual or asexual reproduction, and populations formed by one or a few different clones will provide less phenotypic variation than multi-clonal populations, whenever phenotypic traits are largely explained by genetic variation.

experimental studies with plant species of mixed sexual and asexual recruitment have shown that, for example, primary production, carbon storage, nutritional load of surrounding soils and diversity of associated species increase whenever genotype diversity of populations increases  <cit> . indeed, effects are sometimes comparable in magnitude to effects of increased species diversity  <cit> . as for species biodiversity, the link between genotype diversity and ecosystem function is suggested to be either a sampling effect, or a complementarity effect, or a combination of both. a sampling effect is the consequence of adding more genotypes, and thereby increase the likelihood that more profitable traits are included in the population  <cit> . however, increased genotype diversity may also improve performance of a population through complementarities among genotypes, that is, individuals of different genotypes facilitate performance of each other  <cit> .

in marine ecosystems, studies that manipulate mlg diversity in experimental plots have been performed in seagrass  meadows. such experiments have shown that meadows of high mlg diversity  better resist periods of intense grazing, grazing from specific grazers, extreme weather conditions, and have higher productivity and biomass of associated invertebrate fauna than meadows of low mlg diversity   <cit> . the positive correlation between mlg diversity and ecosystem performance in zostera marina have been attributed to both sampling and complementarity effects  <cit> .

fucus species are important foundation species of coastal waters, providing shelter and food for various invertebrate and fish species  <cit> . in the northern parts of the semi-enclosed baltic sea, two species of fucus are present, f. vesiculosus l. and f. radicans bergström & kautsky  <cit>  and here, in addition to sexual reproduction, individuals of both species have the capacity to form new attached thalli from adventitious branches that come loose from the thallus, are swept away by water motions, and later re-attach to the substratum by formation of rhizoids  <cit> . asexual recruitment of attached thalli is hitherto not found outside the baltic sea, and the reason for this is not clear. a possible reason why it exists inside the baltic sea may be that zygote formation is partly impeded by the low ambient salinity in the northern part of the baltic   <cit> . however, asexual reproduction is overall much more common in f. radicans than in f. vesiculosus also in this area. in addition, populations of f. radicans living in similar salinities may differ a lot in the prevalence of asexual recruitment, ranging from populations strongly dominated by one clone to populations with only sexually recruited thalli  <cit> . a female clone, in particular, is exceptionally widespread and dominates many populations over much of the distribution of f. radicans.

the aim of the present study was to find out if phenotypic variation among thalli of f. radicans are to any substantial extent explained by genetic variation, or if most of observed trait variation in nature is non-genetic variation induced by variable environmental conditions. if there is substantial inherited phenotypic variation, we would expect that populations of low mlg diversity , for example, the nearly monoclonal populations found in some areas, will have lower capacity with respect to ecosystem function and resilience than populations of high mlg diversity , as has been shown in zostera marina and terrestrial plant species  <cit> .

in this study we used thalli of f. radicans sampled in two areas about  <dig> km apart in the northern part of the bothnian sea . the multilocus genotype of each thalli was determined by microsatellite analysis and thalli were thereafter arranged into four groups; three monoclonal groups made up of the three most common mlgs in the samples, and one group composed of singletons, that is, unique mlgs found in single copies and presumably of sexual origin. we measured phenotypic variation within and among groups in nine phenotypic traits and found phenotypic variation in three of them showing evidence of strong inherited variation.

RESULTS
using  <dig> microsatellite loci we genotyped  <dig> thalli of f. radicans that were picked from separate holdfasts widely distributed over two sampling areas  in the northernmost part of the species' distribution. among these thalli we found three clones that were represented by 14- <dig> thalli each and we selected  <dig> equally sized thalli per clone to make up our three monoclonal groups. in addition, we found  <dig> individuals of unique genotypes and selected  <dig> of these to represent a group of unique mlgs. in all individuals of all four groups we analysed phenotypic variation in thallus width and distance between dichotomies , the two most important morphological traits used to separate f. radicans and f. vesiculosus in the field  <cit> . we furthermore measured phlorotannin concentrations and palatability to grazing from isopods, traits suggested to be important to local adaptation and to the geographic distribution of f. radicans  <cit> . these four traits were measured a few days after sampling, or for grazing, a few months later , but on tissue grown before sampling, and hence likely included phenotypic variation that was already present in the field.

the total phenotypic variation we found in the traits measured without a common garden treatment were composed of two different parts  variation among thalli of the same mlg, and  variation among mlgs. variation among thalli and within mlgs must be environmentally induced and caused by thalli being grown in different microhabitats. under the assumption that thalli of the same mlg were randomly distributed over the sampling area, differences among mlgs indicated inherited variation. the assumption of random distribution of individuals of the same mlg is supported by our observation that all the three common clones were present in both sampling areas, and that we in a detailed study of another site  found separate clones of f. radicans to be randomly distributed in space . for the traits measured at this stage, we found highly significant differences among mlgs in phlorotannin content while differences were non-significant in palatability to grazers, thallus width and distance between dichotomies . this strongly suggests that variation in phlorotannin content is, to a large part, inherited.

variation of phenotypic trait values for nine different traits are compared among the  <dig> monoclonal groups and significant results further evaluated with snk posthoc test. trait values were used untransformed with low deviations from homogeneous variances. significant values are indicated in bold

the initial measurements were followed by all thalli being cultivated in a common garden environment  starting in late may  <dig>  in september four additional phenotypic traits were measured; growth during  <dig> days, photochemical yield under normal conditions, and photochemical yield and water content after desiccation, and in january  <dig> photochemical yield after freezing. these traits have physiological relevance and are likely to affect fitness of thalli under different environmental conditions. for these traits, all the measurements were performed on new tissue formed during the common garden treatment. as macroalgae do not possess a vascular system that connects different parts of the thallus, the metabolic status of old tissue is not easily transferred to new tissue  <cit> . hence, it is most likely that for these traits environmental variation induced in the field was largely eliminated in the new grown tissue used in the measurements. thus, in this case, differences among mlgs indicated genetic differences also if the assumption of random distribution of thallus of the same mlgs in the field would not hold. in this comparison we found a highly significant difference among mlgs in the photochemical yield after freezing, and mlgs were also nearly significantly different in photochemical yield after desiccation . these differences show that variation in recovery from freezing stress, and desiccation stress, has a genetic component.

we also examined the variation within the group of unique mlgs and found these to be significantly larger than within the monoclonal groups for the same three phenotypic traits, and this observation strongly support the conclusion of inherited variation in resistance to desiccation, resistance to freezing and content of phlorotannins . furthermore, none of these traits were significantly correlated with each other, which tentatively suggest that they are inherited as fully independent traits . a notable result was that only a few of the individuals contributed to the increased phenotypic variation in the group of unique mlgs . in addition, the mlgs that contributed the most to the deviation where different for the different traits with the exception of one mlg that were both highly resistant to freezing and to desiccation . the reason for the rather dramatic differences in trait values of individual mlgs is unclear but may perhaps be explained by relatively few quantitative trait loci  or genomic regions being involved in these specific traits. while the results for the remaining traits did not indicate strong inherited variation, it is important to underline that sample sizes were too small to identify modest or low levels of inherited phenotypic variation.

*significant at p <  <dig> , critical c =  <dig> . phenotypic trait variances are indicated for three monoclonal groups and one group of unique multilocus genotypes and compared with cochran's c. significant heterogeneity in variances are indicated with a c value in bold

correlation coefficients are shown for those phenotypic traits that showed marginally significant correlations . . all thalli from the group of unique multilocus genotypes were included in the analyses together with one randomly chosen thallus of each of the three monoclonal groups. p-values are not corrected for multiple testing

studies in the sister species f. vesiculosus have shown that the inherited part of the variation in growth rate is low while it is high in phlorotannin content  <cit> , and this is similar to what we found for f. radicans. phlorotannins provide a defence towards grazing, in particular by isopods, in f. vesiculosus  <cit> , and this seems most likely the case also in f. radicans. we found only a weak and non-significant negative correlation  between phlorotannin content and palatability to isopod grazers in the present study, but we did find an almost significant negative correlation with growth rate , suggesting phlorotannin production to be costly.

isopod abundance is low in the bothnian sea compared to in the baltic proper  <cit> , and grazing pressure from isopods seems mostly low or absent in most areas where f. radicans is present  <cit> . in addition, phlorotannin production is known to be costly  <cit> , this study], and, thus there is probably a trade-off favouring a low phlorotannin production in areas of low grazing pressure. indeed, in choice experiments, isopods graze substantially more on f. radicans than on f. vesiculosus  <cit> , which suggests that phlorotannin content is generally lower in f. radicans than in f. vesiculosus. as we now show, there is genetic variation present in this trait in f. radicans and hence selection may favour genotypes of high or low phlorotannin content depending on the local grazing pressure. a less likely alternative  is that the high phlorotannin production we found in some of the clones is a remnant from the more saline littorina sea period of the baltic sea a few thousand years ago, when isopods were likely more common in the bothnian sea than they are today. it has also been suggested that phlorotannins protect the thalli from uv radiation  <cit>  but this seems of less contemporary importance as f. radicans in the baltic lives permanently submerged.

perhaps still more intriguing is the finding that populations of f. radicans contain mlgs that fully recover from freezing dowo-15°c or desiccation during  <dig> h, while this species lives submerged and only very occasionally may be exposed to desiccation or freezing during periods of extreme low water in the bothnian bay. indeed, it seems unlikely that selection favouring such characters would be more than very occasional. however, the ancestral population of f. radicans, that is, the population of f. vesiculosus that entered the baltic sea about  <dig> years ago, and from which f. radicans evolved  <cit> , came from intertidal habitats in the north sea. here, resistance to freezing and desiccation is critical to survival as most individuals live emerged during periods of low water. in fact, populations of f. vesiculosus from the north sea show much higher tolerance to desiccation than baltic populations of this species  <cit> , and these differences seem largely inherited  <cit> . the high tolerance of single mlgs of f. radicans to desiccation and freezing may be what is left of a very common genotype in the ancestral gene pool entering the baltic sea. that this genotype is still present in low frequencies may be due to local and temporal positive selection during rare events of extreme low water level. alternatively or in addition, there may be epistatic or pleiotrophic effects in combination with weak negative selection, or simply that genetic drift only very slowly replace near neutral variation in large populations.

CONCLUSIONS
in the experimental populations of this study, phenotypic variation in monoclonal stands were significantly lower than in the multi-clonal group for three of nine phenotypic traits , and, as expected, these three traits were the ones that showed inherited phenotypic variation . in the seagrass, zostera marina, and in terrestrial plant species, reduction in trait variation in stands of low clonal diversity impedes ecosystem functions such as resilience to extreme stress, productivity, biomass of associated biodiversity, and resistance to grazing  <cit> . such a scenario seems likely also in f. radicans, that is, when trait variation is reduced, in stands of low clonal diversity, ecosystem function will decrease. in nature, we have not yet found any completely monoclonal population of f. radicans, but several populations have a composition with one clone  constituting 70-90% of the thalli  <cit> . consequently, these populations are likely to show decreased phenotypic variation in any trait with substantial inherited variation. if, more specifically, the loss of variation in the traits that showed inherited variation in the present study  affect ecosystem function or resilience of nearly monoclonal populations of f. radicans in their current situation, remains an open question. however, due to further reduces salinities in the northern baltic sea under a warmer climate  <cit>  the long term survival and sustainability of f. radicans may be challenged and redistribution of the species into the southern and western areas of the baltic sea a necessity. if so, grazing pressures and tidal conditions will change and inherited variation promoting tolerance to grazing, freezing and desiccation, may be highly favourable for long-term species survival.

