BACKGROUND
complex venoms and associated venom systems have independently evolved in a broad phylogenetic range of animals where they play a diversity of biological roles including defense, competition and predation . despite their similar usage, highly diverse venom systems with remarkable variation evolved not only between different venomous clades but also within single clades  <cit> . potent neurotoxins, which act as modulators on a variety of ion channels, are a conspicuous component of many venom cocktails with proven pharmacological and therapeutic potential  <cit> . one specific venom peptide, ω-conotoxin gvia, from marine snails of the genus conus, is a widely used pharmacological tool in neuroscience because of its ability to block cav <dig>   calcium channels  <cit> . another blocker of this channel, ω-conotoxin mviia, isolated from conus magus, was the first fda-approved drug for intractable chronic pain  <cit> . calcium channels regulate the permeability of cell membranes to calcium ions  in a voltage-controlled manner, and they function as key transducers for the intracellular flow of calcium  <cit> . ca2+ is in turn of critical importance for the regulation of many biological processes in eukaryotic cells. in neurons, ca2+ is instrumental for the transmission of nerve signals and synaptic activity  <cit>  as its entry leads to fusion of synaptic vesicles and subsequent neurotransmitter release into the synaptic cleft  <cit> . calcium channel blockers have been isolated from various animal venoms such as snakes, spiders and mollusks  <cit> . in contrast, there are very few accounts of calcium channel activators within animal venoms. a voltage-gated calcium channel  agonist has been described from centipede venom  in the genus scolopendra, although its mode of action and target specifity remain unknown  <cit> . agonists of cav sub-type  <dig>   are particularly rare  <cit> , with glycerotoxin, which was purified from a marine annelid of the genus glycera, being the best example  <cit> .

glycerotoxin-producing polychaetes belong to the taxon glyceridae grube,  <dig> , and are commonly known as bloodworms. these venomous annelids show a broad worldwide distribution and are easily recognizable by an eversible pharynx that possesses four cross-arranged teeth consisting of a hook-shaped jaw and an aileron , each of which is associated with a putative venom gland . the putative venom glands are each surrounded by massive layers of musculature  <cit>  whose contraction plays an essential role in the process of envenomation  <cit> . these glands are further connected by special ducts to the teeth that exhibit a series of pores through which the venom is delivered  <cit> . furthermore, biomineralization with the copper-based biomineral atacamite  enhances the stiffness and hardness of the jaws and makes them remarkably resistant to abrasion. beyond its mechanical function, it is speculated that copper may play a role in the activation of venom during injection  <cit> .

the existence of a venom apparatus strongly suggested the presence and utilization of venom in glyceridae. further insights were gained through proteomic studies on purified fractions of the venom gland cocktail of glycera tridactyla . michel, keil  <cit>  recovered low and high molecular weight toxins, and further demonstrated a paralytic function of the latter. subsequent studies revealed the ability of a high-molecular weight component to reversibly increase spontaneous neurotransmitter release  <cit> . this neurotoxic activity of g. tridactyla venom correlated with the presence of a 300–320 kda glycoprotein  <cit> , known as glycerotoxin . this neurotoxin was found to target cav <dig>  channels , which are expressed in the presynaptic plasma membrane, and causes an increased ca2+ influx at resting potential  <cit> . by its ability to specifically up-regulate the activity of cav <dig>  channels, gltx follows a so far unique mode of action. as a result, this neurotoxin dramatically increases neurotransmitter release in a variety of preparations  <cit> , which makes it a versatile tool to analyze the physiological mechanisms affecting neuroexocytosis. furthermore, gltx is able to up-regulate the process of presynaptic vesicle recycling at the frog neuromuscular junction and therefore has been pivotal to secure a detailed understanding of the mechanism of bulk endocytosis at nerve terminals  <cit> . however, whereas the functional properties of glycerotoxin are well-described, missing sequence data and poor anatomical characterization of the venom apparatus have hampered understanding of the mode of envenomation and actual mode of action on ca2+ channels.

in our study, we performed the first molecular characterization of glycerotoxin in the bloodworm species g. tridactyla. we followed a multidisciplinary approach combining transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, qpcr experiments, in situ hybridization, antibody staining and bioinformatic analyses. our studies elucidated three full-length transcripts of gltx, and provided new insights into its mechanisms of action and evolution. moreover, our integrated approach led to the discovery of previously unrecognized pharyngeal toxin-producing structures, demonstrating that the glycerid venom apparatus is anatomically and functionally more complex than previously thought. this unexpected complexity provides a step change in our understanding of the structure of the venom system in glycerid annelids, breaking a century old consensus in the field. furthermore, the first cloning and sequence analysis of gltx pave the way for more in-depth analyses of this unique neurotoxin capable of stimulating neuronal communication.

RESULTS
characterization of glycerotoxin 
edman sequencing of purified glycerotoxin  yielded a series of short amino acid sequences varying in length between 7– <dig> amino acids . using them as reference sequences in blast-searches against transcriptome data led to the identification of gltx in g. tridactyla. in the transcriptome library of the pharyngeal lobes , we were able to recover three full-length transcripts of gltx. in contrast, the putative venom glands  exhibited only a few fragments of the gltx full-length transcript, whilst in the body tissues  we were not able to identify any gltx transcripts.

cloning of the nearly full-length gltx gene  amplified from cdna  and subsequent primer walking revealed the nucleotide sequence of glycerotoxin . the cloned sequences are concordant in length to the recovered gltx full-length transcript from the transcriptome assembly . the highly similar clones 5a and  <dig> each harbor a 12 bp insertion which is missing in clone 6a. translations of obtained gltx sequences contain an unexpected stop codon at the 5’-end of clone 5a . two further gltx full-length transcripts  are similar to each other but remarkably different from contig  <dig>  they presumably represent a different gltx paralog .

without a signal peptide, the translated gltx full-length transcript  has a length of  <dig> amino acids, and the two full-length transcripts  have a length of  <dig> amino acids. according to a size estimation performed in clc main workbench, the molecular weight of the proteins deduced from the three gltx full-length transcripts is around 140 kda each. sds-page of g. tridactyla venom followed by in-gel digestion and identification by tandem mass spectrometry concordantly revealed a molecular weight of the complete gltx polypeptide chain of around 150 kda . the 320 kda band which correlates with the activity of gltx could not be recovered.

in all analyzed gltx transcripts, protein domain searches yielded a calcium-binding egf domain, two wsc domains , and a ccp domain , all of which are found at the n-terminal end of the protein . the computationally determined full-length transcripts  each have a signal peptide . however, no known protein domains could be identified within the c-terminal end of gltx. our data reveals that gltx is a unique neurotoxin with 80% of its sequence displaying a completely unknown domain organization. blast-searches of gltx clones and gltx full-length transcripts in ncbi genbank yielded hits to an uncharacterized protein in branchiostoma, and a collectin- <dig> sequence in exaiptasia pallida . moreover, sequence matches were found in expressed sequence tags  of the annelids myzostoma cirriferum  and pomatoceros lamarckii . a maximum likelihood phylogenetic analysis on  <dig> clones shows the presence of at least three paralogs, named gltx paralog  <dig>  paralog  <dig>  and paralog  <dig> .fig.  <dig> molecular characterization of the glycerotoxin gene analyzed in the bloodworm species g. tridactyla . a domains identified in three translated gltx full-length transcripts . a calcium-binding egf domain and two wsc domains were recovered by pfam-searches, and a ccp domain through smart. the full-length transcripts each harbor a signal peptide, but no known protein domains are present at the c-terminal end of the gltx gene. b maximum likelihood analysis performed on a dataset comprising a 746 bp gene fragment of  <dig> gltx clones and three gltx full-length transcripts  revealed at least three paralogs, namely gltx paralog  <dig>  gltx paralog  <dig>  and gltx paralog  <dig>  the ml phylogeny obtained with raxml v. <dig> . <dig> represents the best tree under a gtr + gamma + i substitution model. bootstrap support values  from  <dig>  pseudoreplicates are given at the nodes. scale bars indicate the number of substitutions per site




pcr experiments using genomic dna revealed at least four introns . we focused mainly on the intron-exon-structure at the 3’-end of the gene, especially regions adjacent to the exon  <dig> analyzed in the context of qpcr studies and in situ hybridization experiments. the intron-exon-structure at the 5’-end  remains unknown.

gltx localization within the glycerid venom apparatus
we next aimed to identify the site of toxin expression. we performed in situ hybridization experiments with digoxigenin-labeled rna probes on everted glycerid pharynges, which were dissected into two halves. prominent gltx expression is detected in lobate structures located near the base of the teeth, attached to the wall of the proboscis . expression signal is restricted to these clearly defined pharyngeal lobes , and to tissue located at the base of the teeth . no other distinct expression was visible in the putative venom glands or elsewhere in the pharynx . the basal parts of the lobes show strong gltx expression, whereas the distal parts exhibit a fainter signal .fig.  <dig> expression of gltx in bisected pharynges of adult g. tridactyla. stereomicrographs. arrows indicate in situ hybridization signal. a–b frontal and lateral view on a glycerid pharynx cut into two halves. gltx expression is restricted to lobate structures that are attached to the wall of the proboscis near the base of the teeth, and is absent from any other pharyngeal tissues. c–d gltx expression occurs in clearly defined pharyngeal lobes. ep, epithelium; ph, pharynx; vg, putative venom gland. scale bars: 100 μm 




to identify pharynx components presumably responsible for gltx storage, we performed further anti-gltx antibody staining on everted glycerid pharynx samples also equally dissected into two halves. distinct anti-gltx-immunoreactivity  is visible in the clearly defined pharyngeal lobes , and is most prominent at the base and appears fainter in distal parts of the lobe . moreover, fluorescence in situ hybridization  coupled with antibody staining against gltx reveals that neurotoxin expression and storage is restricted to the same set of cells within the lobe , indicating that these cells express and secrete gltx. the double-staining approach performed on an entire inverted pharynx revealed altogether four pharyngeal lobes, each one associated with a single tooth. additional gltx-ir staining outside the pharyngeal lobes was not detectable when analyzing pharynx samples that were not embedded . notably, analyses on paraffin embedded cross sections of the putative venom glands revealed a prominent gltx-ir signal inside the lumen . these results agree with previous work in which gltx was identified through activity tests in venom fractions extracted from putative venom glands  <cit> . in what extent the putative venom glands are involved in the storage of gltx as well as whether there are ducts connecting the pharyngeal lobes and putative venom glands remain to be further investigated. however, antibody staining against gltx unveils a network of duct-like structures  leading from the lobes to the associated tooth . it therefore seems that both pharyngeal lobes and putative venom glands are directly connected to the teeth. gltx-ir also showed that gltx is released through a series of pores on the teeth .fig.  <dig> confocal maximum projections of everted g. tridactyla pharynges cut into two halves. anti-gltx staining  and phalloidin–rhodamine counterstaining . arrows indicate gltx-ir staining. a distinct gltx-ir staining occurs in clearly defined pharyngeal lobes. note there is no additional staining inside other pharyngeal tissues. b anti-gltx staining revealed a radial color pattern that is most prominent at the base and appears faint in apical parts of the lobes. c–d a network of duct-like structures  connects and transports the gltx from the pharyngeal lobes to the teeth. through a series of pores the venom is delivered. scale bars: 100 μm 


fig.  <dig> confocal maximum projections of an inverted pharynx of g. tridactyla analyzed as total. fluorescence in situ hybridization  coupled with antibody staining against gltx, and to-pro®- <dig> iodide counterstaining. a overview of an inverted glycerid pharynx comprising four cross arranged putative venom glands each connected to a tooth, and four corresponding pharyngeal lobes . b fluorescence in situ hybridization  revealed a clear gltx signal in the lobes  and tissue at the base of the teeth. note that there is no distinct staining visible in the putative venom glands. c distinct gltx-ir staining  is solely restricted to the pharyngeal lobes. note that there is no staining signal inside the putative venom glands or additional pharynx tissues. vg, putative venom gland. scale bars: 100 μm 


fig.  <dig> immunolocalization of gltx in a bisected g. tridactyla pharynx. confocal maximum projection. arrows indicate gltx-ir staining. anti-gltx staining is restricted to clear defined lobate structures. from these pharyngeal lobes, the gltx is transported through a network of duct-like structures  directly to the teeth, and squeezed out through a series of pores. dl, duct-like structures; lb, part of the lobes; th, teeth. scale bar: 100 μm





additional file 8: immunolocalization of gltx in a pharynx of g. tridactyla which was cut into two halves. confocal maximum projection. anti-gltx staining occurs in clear defined pharyngeal lobes. gltx-ir staining revealed a canalized gltx transport from the lobes to the teeth, where it becomes delivered through a series of pores. 




to analyze whether the lobes of the glycerid pharynx could be part of the nervous system and innervated by prominent nerves and muscle fibers, we carried out antibody staining using the widespread neurotransmitter serotonin  and labeled the surrounding musculature  with phalloidin. whereas the 5-ht staining revealed a dense meshwork of nerves and somata within the entire pharynx region , the lobes themselves exhibit only faint 5-ht-ir. nevertheless, the anti-serotonin staining shows that the lobes are neural innervated, but that prominent somata clusters or neuropils are absent. phalloidin staining shows dense muscle bundles within the entire pharynx, whereas f-actin labelling is almost lacking within the lobe .

expression levels of gltx
transcriptome libraries were used to ascertain the gltx expression level in putative venom glands , pharyngeal lobes  and body . the highest relative number of mapped reads  was present in the lobes. substantially lower numbers  were identified in the putative venom glands . a comparison of the normalized number of mapped reads  between putative venom glands and pharyngeal lobes indicates that the gltx expression level, based on the full-length transcript , is around  <dig> times higher in the lobes. in contrast, the expression of gltx transcripts is only around  <dig> times higher in the lobes than in the putative venom glands for the other two gltx full-length transcripts . since the body samples yielded no gltx transcripts  in transcriptome libraries and gltx clones , this tissue was used as calibrator sample in quantitative real-time pcr  experiments.table  <dig> comparison of gltx expression in different tissues  of g. tridactyla based on rnaseq data. filtered illumina reads were mapped against three gltx full-length transcripts  and three full-length gltx clones . note that the fold change for each contig equals the relative number of mapped reads from the pharyngeal lobes library divided by the relative number of mapped reads from the library of the putative venom glands 


anumber of mapped reads per million reads of the respective rnaseq library




analyzing  <dig> specimens as biological samples with paralog-unspecific gltx primers spanning an intron-exon-border  revealed a higher gltx expression in both the lobes and the putative venom glands, compared to the body samples, with the highest expression occurring in the lobes . a more detailed pattern was found in qpcr experiments using paralog-specific gltx primers. we recovered gltx paralog  <dig> as the most highly expressed paralog, followed by gltx paralog  <dig> and paralog  <dig> in putative venom glands and lobes in comparison to the body samples . gltx expression levels in lobes and putative venom glands are significantly different from the body, as well as from each other . consistent with our rnaseq results , a direct comparison between lobes and putative venom glands  shows that the relative expression level of gltx is around 500– <dig> times higher in the lobes . furthermore, gltx expression within the pharyngeal lobes and putative venom glands seems to be coordinated, as the most highly expressed paralog in the lobes was also the most highly expressed paralog in the putative venom glands .fig.  <dig> quantitative real-time pcr  expression levels  between biological groups , pharyngeal lobes, and posterior body wall) of five analyzed gltx transcripts  in g. tridactyla . a relative gltx expression  in putative venom glands  and pharyngeal lobes  in comparison to the gltx expression signal exhibited by the body tissue . relative gltx expression in the pharyngeal lobes and putative venom glands is significantly different from the expression signal in the body tissue. b relative gltx expression  within the pharyngeal lobes in comparison to the putative venom glands . relative gltx expression is significantly different between both putative venom glands and pharyngeal lobes




discussion
gltx is an unusual neurotoxin with novel functional organization
in this study we revealed the full coding sequence of glycerotoxin for the first time. three computationally recovered gltx full-length transcripts each harbor a signal peptide at the 5’-end , which represents a typical feature for secreted toxins  <cit> . the identification of several paralogs  further indicates the existence of a gltx multigene family, which is another common feature of toxin genes  <cit> . gltx constitutes an uncharacterized protein family with 80% of the gltx gene displaying an unknown domain organization. however, sequence similarity observed in an uncharacterized protein in branchiostoma, a collectin- <dig> sequence in cnidaria, and two annelid ests outside glyceridae suggest that the gltx family may have evolved from an existing gene family. indeed, such a scenario has been proposed to be a general model for the evolution of venom toxins  <cit> , where gene duplication creates novel paralogs that can evolve new functions via sub- or neo-functionalization. however, further phylogenetic analyses and broader sampling of gltx within glyceridae is necessary to confirm this hypothesis, and to elucidate the details of the evolutionary origin of gltx. moreover, the gltx gene shows an intron-exon-structure , which makes it extremely unlikely that this neurotoxin is encoded and expressed by symbiotic bacteria. our mass spectrometry results further suggest that the molecular weight of the complete gltx polypeptide chain  is around half the weight previously reported in the literature   <cit> . crucially, only the large molecular weight form is active  <cit> , suggesting that gltx may function as a dimer. interestingly, the gltx polypeptide chain has a similar size as the monomer of α-latrotoxin , the vertebrate-specific pore-forming neurotoxin isolated from the black widow spider venom . ltx is also an excitatory neurotoxin that increases neurotransmitter release  <cit> . unlike gltx, the effects of ltx are irreversible and cause the complete depletion of pre-existent synaptic vesicles . another excitatory neurotoxin is trachynilysin isolated from the venom of the stonefish synanceia trachynis. this neurotoxin may as well form pores by insertion into the cell membrane, and leads to selective depletion of synaptic vesicles in an irreversible manner .

a unique feature of gltx is its ability to reversibly up-regulate the activity of presynaptic cav <dig>  channels  <cit> . although a detailed structural functional characterization of the glycoprotein and its mode of action are not yet available, the gltx sequence data presented in this manuscript  enable us to speculate about putative mechanisms. the calcium-binding egf domain of gltx  may allow the binding of the neurotoxin to extracellular recognition sites on the presynaptic plasma membrane as egf-like domains are supposed to favor protein-protein interactions  <cit> . the requirement of ca2+ for gltx activity is in agreement with the observation that gltx functions in a calcium-dependent manner  <cit> . the gltx transcript further encodes a ccp domain , also known as sushi domain or short consensus repeat . ccp modules are involved in specific protein–protein and protein–carbohydrate interactions and are found within regulators of complement activation   <cit> . one of the homologous protein classes that belong to the rca family is factor h  <cit> , which is a glycoprotein regulator entirely composed of ccp domains  <cit> . through its ability to recognize polyanionic markers on host cell surfaces, factor h can interact with host cell membranes or self-surfaces  <cit> . in venoms, ccp containing proteins have been reported from the venom cocktail of parasitic wasps of the genus leptopilina  <cit> , but functional assays are to our knowledge not yet available. the gltx transcripts further encode two wsc domains , which represent putative carbohydrate binding domains. the human plasma membrane protein polycystin  <dig>  which also contains a wsc domain, is suggested to function as a mechanosensor regulating proliferation, adhesion and differentiation  <cit> . in yeast, this domain is found in regulators of cell wall integrity and the stress response pathway  <cit> . a fungal β- <dig> -exoglucanase that hydrolyzes laminarin to glucose monomers also contains tandem wsc domains, like gltx  <cit> . the sequence information presented here constitutes an important step towards understanding the gltx mode of action and illuminates its value as a neurobiological tool.

the glycerid venom apparatus is a complex system
our study substantially changes our current understanding of the glycerid venom system. for over a century the glycerid venom apparatus was assumed to be constructed of four putative venom glands that are each connected through a duct to a tooth . however, our in situ and fluorescence in situ hybridization experiments revealed a clear gltx expression signal restricted to four pharyngeal lobes and an area at the base of the teeth . ehlers  <cit>   and gravier  <cit>   thought these lobate structures were part of the nervous system, a view that is not supported by our immunohistochemical studies . oppenheimer  <cit>  already doubted that the lobes are exclusively part of the nervous system as she already distinguished different cell types within the lobe. raphaël  <cit>  denied that the lobes were part of the nervous system and rather proposed that the lobes function in the fixation and excretion of hemoglobin. later studies of michel  <cit>   again accepted that the basal parts of the pharyngeal lobes are part of the nervous system, and suggested further the presence of glandular cells thought to secrete a proteolytic enzyme having a digestive function. however, the four pharyngeal lobes have never been recognized to be part of the glycerid venom system.

whereas the pharyngeal lobes show an obvious staining signal, we were not able to detect any gltx in situ signal inside the putative venom glands . moreover, comparative transcriptomics and qpcr experiments carried out on three tissue types of g. tridactyla, namely putative venom glands, pharyngeal lobes and posterior body wall, show that the relative gltx expression is 500– <dig>  times higher in the lobes than in the putative venom glands . furthermore, antibody staining against gltx highlighted a network of ducts that connects lobes and teeth . taken together, these results strongly support the conclusion that the lobes are the main site for neurotoxin expression, and that the neurotoxin might be transferred from the pharyngeal lobes directly to the teeth where it is injected into prey through a series of pores  <cit> . our milking of glycerid venom confirms that there is a direct link between putative venom glands and teeth, a connection that may be independent of the link between pharyngeal lobes and teeth. a network of canals between putative venom glands and pharyngeal lobes could not be identified even though both tissue types show a correlated gltx expression profile . this is especially interesting as gltx antibody staining on paraffin embedded pharynx clearly recovered the neurotoxin inside the lumen of the putative venom glands . yet, the gltx protein detected in the lumen of the putative venom glands may have been produced in the pharyngeal lobes, as there was no gltx in situ signal detectable inside the putative venom glands . furthermore, our investigation cannot exclude the possibility that the low gltx expression signal inside the putative venom glands  comes from the ducts connecting the lobes and teeth. however, a recent transcriptome study on venom gland tissue of g. tridactyla revealed a complex mixture of putative toxin transcripts  <cit> , which suggests a glandular function of the putative glands alongside its function as a venom storage site. whether or not the pharyngeal lobes and putative venom glands may be involved in the differential expression of different venom toxins needs further investigation. our results clearly show that the functional morphology of the glycerid venom system is more complex than hitherto thought.

compartmentalization of toxin production has been reported from different venomous taxa . within the large protostome clade lophotrochozoa, complex venom systems comprising several structural subunits have also been described. the cephalopod venom apparatus comprises two pairs of histologically different venom glands, named posterior and anterior venom glands  <cit> . whereas analyses on the posterior venom glands in cephalopods revealed toxins that convergently evolved in other venomous animals , the role of the anterior glands remains poorly investigated. these glands are considered as mucus secreting organs  <cit>  but their contribution to the cephalopod venom cocktail remains unclear, even though it was recently shown that they may also express some toxin transcripts  <cit> .

in glyceridae, we show distinct gltx expression patterns in pharyngeal lobes and putative venom glands . in this respect, the glycerid venom apparatus resembles to a degree the venom system of carnivorous cone snails. cone snails are able to produce two types of venom in distinct parts of the venom duct  <cit> . a defensive toxin cocktail containing paralytic peptides and neurotoxins from the proximal part of the duct, and a less complex predatory venom cocktail from the distal part of the duct  <cit> . the cone snails are able to secrete these venom types selectively depending on whether predatory or defensive stimuli are received. since the gltx expressing lobes are innervated by the nervous system , it is possible that bloodworms are capable of a rapid stimuli-evoked  secretion of gltx. it is also possible that neurotoxin-rich secretions are only selectively added to the venom mix synthesized and stored in the putative venom glands. concordantly, glycera alba is supposed to deplete venom glands incompletely during the first bite which evokes discoordination rather than death and paralysis of the prey, whereas quantitatively more venom seems to be delivered after a firm grip  <cit> . the remarkable variability in gltx expression levels revealed by the qpcr experiments of  <dig> studied specimens  may indicate that these specimens are in distinct phases of venom replenishment. these results highlight the possibility that glyceridae are able to meter their venom stocks.

further research is necessary to test if the neurotoxin gltx is unique in being differentially expressed in glycerid putative venom glands and pharyngeal lobes, or whether the expression of other toxins also corresponds to this anatomical differentiation of the venom apparatus. to address this question, comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of other venom toxins as well as detailed histological studies of the pharyngeal structures are required. the recent transcriptomic study of von reumont et al.  <cit>  focused exclusively on glycerid venom gland tissue, hence their results need to be reassessed in view of the role of the pharyngeal lobes in the synthesis of venom toxins reported here. our current results clearly demonstrate that multidisciplinary analyses are invaluable for understanding the glycerid venom apparatus in particular, and venom systems in general.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we report the full sequence of glycerotoxin , a neurotoxin known to act specifically as a cav <dig>  agonist. gltx represents a toxin family comprising at least three different paralogs with uncertain evolutionary origin. moreover, our data show that gltx likely functions as a dimer with the subunits being held together by non-covalent bonds. gltx transcripts are expressed in two locations in the glycerid venom apparatus, the putative venom glands and pharyngeal lobes, a previously unrecognized component of the venom system. gltx protein is restricted to the pharyngeal lobes and to the lumen of the putative venom glands. furthermore, gltx is expressed  <dig> to  <dig>  times higher in the pharyngeal lobes than in the putative venom glands. our results overturn more than a century of textbook consensus, suggesting that a fundamental revision of our understanding on the functional organization of the venom system in bloodworms is urgently needed.

