BACKGROUND
fishes have undergone remarkable adaptations to utilize various coastal environments, including sandy beaches, mud flats, rocky shores, coral reefs, and mangroves  <cit> . another, less exploited, coastal habitat is gravel beaches, where the shore sediment consists mainly of gravels  <cit> . gravel beaches harbor diverse interstitial invertebrates  <cit> , but the perpetual stirring of gravel by the waves usually make them unsuitable as habitat for vertebrates. however, gobies of the east asian genus luciogobius have elongated, flexible bodies and are adapted to inhabit the dynamic sediment of gravel beaches   <cit> . the genus is characterized by the loss of the first dorsal fin, an elongated, scale-less body, and a drastic increase in the number of vertebrae  <cit> , which are putative morphological adaptations to the interstitial lifestyle. so far,  <dig> luciogobius species have been described from the japanese arc, taiwan, hainan island, hong kong, and the southernmost seacoasts of the russian far east and korean peninsula . seven of these species are endemic to japan  <cit> . five of the  <dig> species are strongly associated with well-sorted gravel beach sediment and are strictly interstitial  <cit>  ; they reside within the gravel throughout their life after a pelagic larval stage and prey on interstitial invertebrates  <cit> .

genus
†taxa not sampled in this study.

among east asian seacoasts, those surrounding the japanese arc are particularly rich in gravel beaches  <cit> . this is because the japanese arc is located on compressional plate margins and has experienced active orogenesis since the middle miocene   <cit> . the resultant steep mountain ranges and abundant rainfall produced gravely riverbeds and gave rise to many gravel beaches along the seacoasts of japan. consequently, the diversity and endemicity of luciogobius gobies may have been shaped by the richness of gravel beach habitats along the coastline of the japanese arc. however, the actual diversity and patterns of morphological evolution associated with the interstitial habits of the genus remain largely unexplored. examination of the evolutionary history of these unique gobies could produce a model for understanding the processes and mechanisms of adaptation by vertebrates to dynamic interstitial habitats.

in this study, we conducted a molecular phylogenetic analysis based on extensive sampling of luciogobius gobies and allied genera from the seacoasts of japan , to clarify their diversity and the evolutionary history of their interstitial habits. we focused on the correlated evolution of interstitial habits and vertebra number, because, despite being among the smallest gobies, luciogobius species have vertebra numbers  that far exceed those typically found in other gobiidae   <cit> . the elongated body and highly segmented vertebral column likely enhance flexibility and increase the fishes' ability to burrow into the gravel sediment. the obtained phylogenetic tree was then used to estimate the timing of the evolution of interstitial habitat use, which is interpreted in light of the geological history of the japanese arc. we also compared the granulometric properties of gravels inhabited by different species of interstitial luciogobius to determine if there is niche partitioning among species, which may have contributed to the evolution and maintenance of the present diversity of luciogobius.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis
to determine whether luciogobius species contain any previously unrecognized taxa, we first sequenced the mitochondrial cytochrome b  gene for all sampled gobies . phylogenetic analysis of the cyt b data suggested that six of the seven sampled luciogobius species each contain genetically divergent clades that are separated by 5–12% uncorrected pairwise sequence difference . luciogobius elongatus had the highest number of clades , while l. guttatus was separated into three clades, and the others were each grouped into two clades. the divergent clades within each species formed a monophyletic group, except for l. guttatus, which was not recovered as monophyletic in the cyt b tree . although most of the intraspecific clades did not overlap in their distributions, those within l. guttatus, l. elongatus, and l. grandis co-occurred in some locations , suggesting that the observed genetic differentiation is not simply due to geographic isolation. while detailed morphological examinations are currently underway, at least some pairs of genetically differentiated clades have distinct morphological differences; the six clades within l. elongatus can be distinguished from each other by vertebra number and the morphology of the pelvic fin . therefore, we treat each of the well-defined clades as distinct species in the following analyses . in addition to the above previously unrecognized taxa, gobies that could not be assigned morphologically to presently described species were grouped into three well-supported clades .

because the cyt b gene evolves too rapidly and is therefore not sufficiently informative for examining species-level relationships, we also sequenced six protein-coding nuclear genes to recover phylogenetic relationships among luciogobius species and related gobies. one representative individual was chosen from each species arbitrarily, including the luciogobius taxa genetically revealed by the cyt b data, and sequenced for the following six genes: recombination activating genes  <dig> and  <dig> ; myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-lineage leukaemia ; protease iii ; ryanodine receptor  <dig> ; and myosin, heavy chain  <dig>  cardiac muscle, alpha . phylogenetic analysis based on the combined nuclear gene dataset produced a well-resolved phylogeny with high nodal support values . the genus luciogobius is monophyletic and does not include i. koma and i. saikaiensis, which are treated as species of luciogobius in most recent classifications  <cit> . the interstitial species  separated into two distinct clades within luciogobius. the three genetically divergent clades within l. guttatus, which were not recovered as monophyletic in the cyt b tree, grouped into a single, well-supported clade.

evolution of vertebra number
the vertebra numbers of luciogobius species are among the highest of all gobies known  <cit> . the increase in the number of vertebrae likely enhances body flexibility, and the transition to interstitial habitats may be associated with increases in vertebra number. to test this hypothesis, we counted the number of vertebrae for each taxa identified from the cyt b phylogeny . the number of vertebrae varied little within species, but greatly across the sampled goby species, ranging from  <dig> in astrabe flavimaculata to  <dig> in l. adapel. using the above species-level phylogeny, we reconstructed ancestral character states of vertebra number , which shows that clades of interstitial species have markedly higher numbers of vertebrae. regression using independent contrasts  <cit>  indicated that the probability of transition to interstitial habitats is strongly correlated with an increase in vertebra number .

estimation of divergence time
to determine the timing of the origin of interstitial habit in luciogobius, we estimated divergence times based on the combined nuclear gene phylogeny. fossil data are commonly used to calibrate divergence times, but fossils belonging to the gobiid group under study are not currently available. instead, we calibrated the tree using  the split between gymnogobius isaza and g. urotaenia, which was previously estimated at  <dig>  ma based on geological calibration  <cit>  and  the divergence rate of the cyt b gene . since a likelihood ratio test rejected a strict molecular clock for the combined nuclear gene dataset , we employed the penalized-likelihood relaxed clock approach using the program r8s  <cit> .

because a reliable maximum prior for the age of the root node is unavailable, we first obtained relative node ages by fixing the age of the root node at one arbitrary time unit without any internal constraints. the obtained ultrametric tree was then calibrated by fixing the g. isaza-g. urotaenia split at  <dig>  ma, which suggested that the most recent common ancestor  of interstitial luciogobius species dates back to  <dig>  ma  . we also estimated ages of all the internal nodes individually based on average pairwise ml distances across each node and the  <dig> % cyt b divergence rate. these estimates were then individually used as calibration points to infer the age of the mrca of interstitial luciogobius on the above ultrametric tree. results of this analysis converged on a similar range of estimates for the age of interstitial luciogobius, as nodes used to calibrate the tree became deeper on the phylogeny . although older estimates were obtained when calibrated with recent nodes, these outlying values are likely due to stochastic error associated with using shallowly placed nodes for deep extrapolations  <cit> .

in addition to these analyses, we also estimated divergence times by obtaining the age of the root node with an iterative approach  <cit> . this was done by adjusting the age of the root node until average rate of cyt b substitution  equalled the previously inferred rate of  <dig> , which is half the  <dig> % divergence rate  <cit> . this method resulted in estimates of  <dig>  ma for the root node  and  <dig>  ma  for the mrca of the interstitial luciogobius, which is comparable to the values obtained using the above two approaches.

habitat assessment
to determine whether different species of interstitial luciogobius prefer habitats with different gravel sizes, we quantified the median gravel size and sorting index of the sediment  <cit> ; these are granulometric measures used to describe the properties of sediments. the sorting index describes how well the gravels are sorted by size and ranges between  <dig> and  <dig>  with better-sorted gravels having lower sorting indices. using the median diameter and sorting index as descriptors of gravels, the five interstitial luciogobius species analyzed were largely grouped into three habitat types : l. grandis inhabiting relatively large, less sorted gravel sediments, l. platycephalus inhabiting intermediate-sized gravel sediments, and l. elongatus, l. adapel, and l. sp. inhabiting small, well-sorted gravel sediments. there were significant differences among l. grandis, l. platycephalus, and l. elongatus in both median gravel size  and sorting index , suggesting that they utilize gravel habitats with broadly different granulometric properties. data on l. adapel and l. sp. were not included in the test due to insufficient sample sizes.

although the six species within the l. elongatus group  inhabited sediments with similar granulometric parameters, their microhabitats differed from one another with respect to other aspects of the beach. species a inhabited intertidal gravel banks on turbulent coasts, whereas sp. b was found in the intertidal sediments of lava gravel on rocky shores, sp. c in intertidal gravel sediments on bedrock, sp. d in the upper intertidal zone of protected gravel beaches in inner bays, sp. e in infiltrations of fresh water running through gravel sediments on boulder beaches, and sp. f in the lower layer of intertidal gravel sediments on boulder beaches. although further, detailed habitat assessment is necessary, these species with their different vertebra numbers and pelvic fin morphologies, prefer specific interstitial microhabitats characterized by wave action, tidal level, and the presence or absence of boulders, rocks, bedrock, and inflow of infiltrated freshwater.

discussion
diversity and phylogeny of luciogobius
overall, our discovery of numerous previously unrecognized species within luciogobius greatly advanced our understanding of the diversity in the genus. different taxa within currently recognized species generally occur in allopatry , suggesting that geographic isolation is an important process during incipient divergence  <cit> . it is therefore possible that genetically distinct clades simply reflect geographic differentiation within single species. however, clades within each of l. guttatus, l. elongatus, and l. grandis are often found on a single beach yet remain distinct in the nuclear gene genealogy, which suggests the presence of a reproductive barrier. also, at least the six genetic clades within l. elongatus can be clearly distinguished based on vertebra number, degree of reduction of the pelvic fin sucker, and microhabitat, indicating that the level of cyt b differentiation found in l. elongatus  represents divergence at the species level. further genetic, morphological, and ecological studies are therefore likely to reveal additional evidence for the identity of species recovered in this study.

the species-level phylogeny based on combined analysis of six nuclear genes suggested that the genus luciogobius is monophyletic and does not include inu koma and i. saikaiensis. previous inclusion of the inu species in luciogobius is based on the shared absence of the first dorsal fin and scales  <cit> , which likely reflects parallel reduction associated with adaptation to narrow habitats . the genus luciogobius as treated here clearly differs osteologically from inu and other gobies: the pterygiophore of the first ray of the second dorsal fin is inserted into the caudal vertebra in luciogobius, whereas that of all other gobies is connected to the abdominal column. the two undescribed species of the unplaced genus  also share these characteristics with luciogobius, suggesting that they may be the direct sisters of luciogobius. alternatively, the presence of fleshy maxillary barbels in the two species suggests affinity to species of inu and clariger. due to lack of statistical support , however, the placement of gen. sp.  <dig> and  <dig> remain inconclusive. considering these circumstances, we tentatively treated these species as incertae sedis.

evolution of the interstitial habit
the nuclear gene phylogeny clearly suggested that the interstitial species belong to two separate clades . based on the obtained phylogenetic pattern, the interstitial habit evolved either twice independently in the common ancestors of these two clades, or once in the common ancestor of luciogobius and was lost twice independently in l. pallidus and l. guttatus. although there is no rationale for choosing between these alternative hypotheses, in either case, the analysis of independent contrasts indicates that transitions to interstitial habits are strongly correlated with increases in vertebra number. since an increase in vertebra number results in finer segmentation of the vertebral column and hence improved flexibility of the body, the evolution of an elongated body with a highly segmented vertebral column has likely been one of the key innovations during adaptation to the dynamic gravel environment. the ground vertebra number of gobiid fishes is  <dig>  which is fixed across more than 70% of all goby species occurring in japan  <cit>  . however, interstitial luciogobius species have far more vertebrae than this number, despite being among the smallest of gobiid fishes . gobies with the highest numbers of vertebrae  are medium sized fishes  of the genus gunnellichthys  <cit> ; therefore, the vertebral column of interstitial luciogobius are among the most finely segmented of all gobiid fishes.

diversification of luciogobius in the japanese arc
the japanese arc is located on compressional margins of four tectonic plates , and this has caused active orogenesis that started ca.  <dig> ma in the middle miocene  <cit> . the resultant steep mountain ranges and abundant rainfall provided by monsoons have brought a rich supply of terrigenous rocks to the sea via rivers. the steep, strongly indented nature of the japanese seacoasts and active stirring by waves have also facilitated the accumulation of well-sorted rocks and gravels along the coast  <cit> . these processes are the major cause of the present-day excessive abundance of gravel beaches in japan. importantly in the tropics, where gobies are most diverse, many seacoasts are fringed by coral reef, which diminishes strong wave action and prevents the development of well-sorted gravel beaches.

considering the uniqueness of japanese seacoasts, the high species diversity and largely restricted distribution of interstitial luciogobius in the japanese arc are mostly feasibly interpreted as the result of in situ diversification within the archipelago. in fact, our estimation of the origin of the interstitial species  is consistent with the initial formation of japanese mountain ranges being followed by colonization by luciogobius and subsequent diversification. furthermore, our results suggest that different species of interstitial luciogobius prefer gravel sediments with largely different gravel sizes . this indicates that the granulometric complexity of gravel beaches has provided an opportunity for niche partitioning among major clades of luciogobius, which was probably an important process during the initial stages of their diversification. although closely related luciogobius species are similar in morphology and may occupy interstitial habitats with similar granulometric parameters, their microhabitats differ with respect to wave action, tidal level, and the presence or absence of boulders, rocks, bedrock, and the inflow of infiltrated fresh water.

adaptive radiation of luciogobius
adaptive radiation is the evolution of ecological and phenotypic diversity within a rapidly diversifying lineage. schluter  <cit>  proposed four criteria for detecting an adaptive radiation:  recent common ancestry,  phenotype-environment correlation,  trait utility, and  rapid speciation. even the widely acknowledged examples of adaptive radiation rarely fulfil or explicitly test these criteria  <cit> ; thus, it is beyond the scope of the present study to fully substantiate the four criteria. however, available evidence suggests that the present organismal and phenotypic diversity of luciogobius is likely the result of an adaptive radiation in the interstitial habitats of gravel beaches.

recent common ancestry is clearly the case of interstitial luciogobius species. although the interstitial species are not monophyletic, they are all descended from a recent common ancestor, which colonized gravel beaches and evolved to utilize various interstitial environments. we found that gravel sediments with different granulometric properties are occupied by different species of interstitial luciogobius . this habitat preference is associated with differences in body size and vertebra number , because species having more finely-segmented body tend to inhabit small, well-sorted gravels. for example, l. elongatus, l. adapel, and l. sp., which have the smallest body sizes and highest vertebra numbers of all luciogobius species, inhabit sediments with the most finely sorted gravels, whereas l. grandis having larger body and fewer vertebrae prefer coarse gravels . whether body size and vertebra number affect fishes' performance in different interstitial habitats  is not straightforward to assess. nevertheless, it is likely that fine morphological match to the gravel environment promotes fishes' ability to burrow into the sediment, escape from predators, and/or capture prey in wave-disturbed gravel beaches. finally, recent ancestry  and a remarkable diversity of luciogobius species found within a small geographic area  are consistent with rapid speciation in luciogobius. indeed, the number of species in luciogobius far exceeds those found in any other related marine genera . although further study is clearly necessary, the above observations suggest that luciogobius provides a valuable, promising new example of adaptive radiation that took place in a habitat previously considered inaccessible to vertebrates.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, our findings illuminate the significance of gravel beaches as previously unappreciated theaters of marine fish radiation. luciogobius fishes have adapted to this dynamic environment with elongated bodies and finely segmented vertebral columns, which allowed them to access new niches and radiate into various microhabitats within the gravel beach. interstitial habitats of gravel beaches are not utilized by any other vertebrate, which has likely been important for these gobies to flourish in such a unique habitat. it is likely that adaptation to interstitial habitats has provided preconditions for the colonization of infiltrating underground water, anchialine caves, or estuarine mudshrimp burrows, which further fuelled the diversification of this unique fish clade. therefore, the genus luciogobius offers a valuable future model system for studying vertebrate adaptation to interstitial life and adaptive radiation by fishes in an extraordinary habitat.

