BACKGROUND
the gulf of guinea and the congo river basin biomes  collectively house ~20% of all plants and animals species, with a very high number of endemic taxa  <cit> . however, very little is known about the mechanisms that have created this region’s rich biodiversity. understanding how local factors contributed to generating patterns of genetic differentiation is important to better understand the evolutionary history of tropical taxa. these patterns of genetic differentiation in tropical taxa, and particularly in forest-dwelling primates, may have been shaped by forest history during the pleistocene, as well as by geographic barriers to dispersal, including rivers and pronounced environmental gradients  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
overview of the study area. important biogeographic features of the lanscape are shown along with the approximate distributions of p.t. ellioti  and p. t. troglodytes .



tropical africa is also noted for exhibiting a complex forest history that has undergone considerable change along with the earth’s climate, and the behavioral ecology of african primates often reflects a shared history with their habitats  <cit> . this relationship has been proposed to have influenced the diversification of rainforest taxa due to the fact that previously continuous populations were isolated from one another in forest “refuges” that persisted during periods of maximum glaciation  <cit> . one of the most widely cited examples to support the ‘pleistocene refuge hypothesis’ are the forests of western africa, which are divided into two regions located in upper guinea and the gulf of guinea. each forest region has its own species assemblages, which are often used to point to the existence of forest refuges in africa  <cit> . the dahomey gap currently separates these two forest regions and their associated taxa. the gap is a large, dry, open area that presently extends for about 700 km through benin, togo and eastern ghana  <cit> , but it may have been up to  <dig>  km wide during the cool, arid phases of the pleistocene  <cit> . consequently, the gap has been proposed to have been a barrier to dispersal for several species which resulted in the formation of new species. this process of separation and speciation across the gap has been proposed to account for the unique faunal assemblages of the upper and gulf of guinea forest blocks, which are both two of the world’s original global biodiversity hotspots  <cit> .

rivers have also been proposed to play an important role in delimiting the distribution of many species  <cit> . for example, the sanaga river in central cameroon  has been proposed to delimit the distributions of several pairs of primate species and subspecies: mandrillus leucophaeus/m. sphinx, cercopithecus erythrotis/c. cephus, c. nictitans martini/c. n. nictitans, c. pogonias pogonias/c. p. grayi, p. t. ellioti/p. t. troglodytes and possibly, gorilla gorilla diehli/g. g. gorilla  <cit> . the congo separates chimpanzees  from bonobos   <cit> , and the ubangi, niger and sanaga rivers in central africa may be important in delimiting chimpanzee subspecies from one another. however, the role of riverine barriers in shaping patterns of diversity across the landscape are poorly understood  <cit> . changes in river size and course over time may dramatically affect the significance of a given river to act as a barrier to dispersal, and habitat changes in the vicinities of rivers may confound distiguishing between the role of the river and changes in the environment  <cit> . the sanaga river, for instance, has also been proposed to act as an historical boundary that separates p. t. ellioti and p. t. troglodytes  <cit> , but its significance is questionable  <cit> . little is known about the history of the sanaga, but it is entirely possible that its course and size have changed over time, especially given this region’s sensitivity to climatic oscillations  <cit> . and although chimpanzee genetic populations are seemingly partitioned along the location of the sanaga, there is evidence of gene flow occurring between these populations  <cit> .

until very recently, the role of ecological gradients in driving the diversification of tropical taxa has been under-appreciated. ecological gradients are zones of transition between habitat types that display marked differences in ecological variables  across their range. these gradients have been linked with driving adaptive variation in several taxa in different parts of the world, for example, suture zones in australia  <cit>  and more recently in cameroon  <cit> . in this ecological gradient model, speciation across habitat gradients is driven by local adaptation, whereas the genetic differentiation of allopatric populations is driven by genetic drift resulting from historical isolation in refugia or separation by geographic barriers, including rivers and other features of the landscape, while the habitats remain generally the same  <cit> . a prominent gradient is present in central cameroon, which transitions from guinean forest in the west to congolian rainforest in the south and to sahelian habitats in the north and east  <cit>  . this forest-savanna mosaic was termed by smith et al.  <cit>  as an ‘ecotone’. a growing body of evidence suggests that this ecotone has been important in promoting the evolutionary diversification of insects  <cit> , reptiles  <cit>  and birds  <cit> . complementary genetic datasets for mammals occupying this region remain sparse, which makes it difficult to distinguish between the relative influence of environmental and topographic factors in governing diversification and population structuring of mammals, particularly primates where distributional data are generally the only information available.

recent analyses suggest that the two subspecies of chimpanzees present in cameroon may be divided into genetically distinct populations: p. t. troglodytes occurs south of the sanaga river, while p. t. ellioti occurs north. p. t. ellioti may be further subdivided into two additional populations: a population that occurs in forested regions of western cameroon, p. t. ellioti , and a second population that occupies central cameroon, p. t. ellioti   <cit> . while it appears that the sanaga river has played an important role in separating these subspecies, the estimated ranges of these populations coincide with the transition of the two rain forests types and the ecotone  <cit> , and all three populations occupy significantly different habitat types  <cit> . this suggests that a relationship exists between the environmental variation and the partitioning of genetic variation in chimpanzees found across the study area. taken together, these factors make it difficult to distinguish between the relative importance of the sanaga river or habitat variation in shaping the partitioning of chimpanzee population genetic variation given their close proximity to one another .

the available genetic data for wild chimpanzees sampled across this region consist of  <dig> autosomal microsatellite loci and the hvri region of the mtdna  <cit> . since these loci meet expectations of neutrality, the genetic data set cannot be used to directly examine the role of adaptation in shaping patterns of variation in chimpanzees across the study area  <cit> . however, it is still possible to use these neutrally-evolving genetic makers to infer whether environmental factors other than, or in addition to, the sanaga have contributed to shaping the patterning of genetic variation found in chimpanzees from the region, indicating that chimpanzees in cameroon and nigeria may follow a pattern of isolation-by-environment, a relationship driven by selective evolutionary processes  <cit> .

table  <dig> lists expected patterns of genetic variation depending upon whether isolation across the sanaga river or environmental variation occupies a dominant role in shaping patterns of genetic variation in chimpanzees across the study region. collectively, these predictions are related to:  the diversity and distribution of alleles;  the dates of divergence between populations;  the location of barriers to gene flow; and  the demographic characteristics of populations . this study is an extension of a complimentary paper  <cit>  which looked at the population genetic structure and demographic history  of chimpanzees in cameroon and nigeria. that study found evidence that positive selection likely plays a role in shaping patterns of chimpanzee genetic diversity, and that this may be the results of landscape variation. this study is the next step, and focuses on using a spatially explicit modeling technique, generalized dissimilarity modeling   <cit> , to quantify and visualize associations between landscape variation and genetic variation in chimpanzees. the results of the analyses presented here were used to support or reject predictions regarding spatial patterns of genetic diversity  and the location of barriers to gene flow .table  <dig> 
models to explain the partitioning of chimpanzee genetic variability across the study region, and associated predictions



predictions
riverine barriers
ecological variation

diversity of neutral alleles

population divergence 

barriers to gene flow are located

population history includes


RESULTS
regional patterns of isolation-by-environment
the data set used for analysis was used in a previous study on the population genetic structure of chimpanzees  <cit> . the genetic data consisted of autosomal microsatellite genotype profiles of  <dig> unrelated individuals sampled from  <dig> locations across eastern nigeria and cameroon and  <dig> mtdna sequences sampled from  <dig> locations across the study region . these data were subjected to rigorous quality control procedures when generated, including separate dna extractions and several independent calculations of allele sizes  <cit> . all loci met expectations of neutral evolution, as measured by the results of an outlier test  <cit>  and meeting expectations of hardy-weinberg equilibrium  <cit> . we ran gdm’s using microsatellite genotypes and mtdna sequencing data in order to assess the relative contribution of spatial variables to patterns of genetic differentiation. this method fits genetic distance matrices from both microsatellite  and mtdna data against straight-line geographic distance, topographic, climatic and vegetation variables assumed to contribute to chimpanzee habitat ecology and biogeographic boundaries. we ran models using:  geographic distance between sample locations only;  environmental variables only ;  environmental variables and geographic distance between sample locations, and  environmental variables, distance and riverine barrier layers . the percent of genetic variation accounted for by the microsatellite genotype data and the mtdna data for three different classes of predictor variables are shown in table  <dig> table  <dig> 
region wide gene-environment relations



genetic dataset
gdm model

distance only
a
environment only
b
environment + distance
c
environment + distance + rivers

amodel includes only geographic distance between sample locations as a predictor variable.


bmodel includes environmental data layers as well as resistance matrices, which incorporate river barriers and habitat suitability, as predictor variables. for all models, resistance matrices were not included, as they had no significant contribution.


centries are blank because geographic distance was not a significant contributor to the final model.



pairwise differences  between sample locations at autosomal microsatellites are shown in additional file  <dig>  the correlation between fst and predictor variables was then interpolated across the study area using the gdm method, which revealed that geographic distance alone accounted for 4% and environmental variation alone accounted for 10% of the observed genetic variation . a combination of geographic distance and environmental variation only increased the explanatory power of the model to 11% , even though distance was a significant contributor to the model. these findings are consistent with the results of from a previous study  <cit> , that revealed that genetic population structure in chimpanzees in the region can only be weakly explained by a pattern of isolation-by-distance. in the model including geographic distance and environmental variables jointly, genetic differentiation was predicted along a general west–east cline from guinean rainforest to ecotone to congolian rainforest . this model was mostly explained by minimum ndvi during the yearly period with the least amount of new vegetation  and climatic variables relating to precipitation, and to a lesser extent by slope and geographic distance .figure  <dig> 
sample locations of chimpanzees included in the study. locations spanned cameroon and eastern nigeria. approximate distributions of p. t. ellioti  and p. t. troglodytes  ranges are shown. white circles denote both mtdna and microsatellite data were available at the location. black circles denote only mtdna data was available.



when we included the sanaga and mbam river layers, both rivers significantly contributed to the partitioning of genetic variation but the total variation explained increased to only 13% in that particular model . the cost-resistance surface layer of riverine disperal barriers did not significantly contribute to the population structure of chimpanzees across the study region. the pattern of predicted genetic differentiation changed and featured a sharp divide at the sanaga, a less pronounced, but still obvious divide across the mbam, and a distinct gradient across elevations in the cameroon highlands . the relative contribution of the environment variables was similar to the previous model, with the sanaga and mbam rivers contributing only moderately .

pairwise differences between sample locations at the mtdna hvri locus are shown in additional file  <dig> and tamura and nei indices  <cit>  are shown in additional file  <dig>  the response between pairwise distance and the predictor variables was interpolated across the study area using the gdm method, which revealed that geographic distance alone accounted for 6% and environmental variation alone accounted for 22% of the observed genetic variation . the response between tamura and nei distance and the predictor variables was also calculated, which revealed that geographic distance alone accounted for 11% and environmental variation alone accounted for 32% of the observed genetic variation . geographic distance did not significantly contribute to the partitioning of genetic variation when either model was run combined with environmental variation. when this analysis was run with only environmental variables, genetic differentiation was predicted along two pronounced clines, one from coastal rainforest to montane forests and ecotone, and another from coastal rainforest and ecotone southward to congolian rainforest .figure  <dig> 
spatial predictions of, and contributing variables to, microsatellite differentiation using gdm. spatial predictions of genetic differentiation based on microsatellite diversity  using environmental variables and distance  and environmental variables, distance and rivers . colors between maps are not comparable. within maps, areas with similar colors along color gradients are predicted to be more similar genetically. panels c and d represent the relative importance of the selected variables that significantly contribute to the models. each panel explains the map directly above it.



when the sanaga and mbam river layers were included, the amount of genetic variation accounted for by the pairwise distance model increased to 56%, while the tamura and nei model increased to 72%, the highest percentage for all models across the entire study area included in this study . again, as with the microsatellite data, the cost-resistance surface layer of riverine disperal barriers did not significantly contribute to the model. genetic differentiation was predicted across a sharp divide at the sanaga river, with further differentiation occurring along elevational gradients in western cameroon and eastern nigeria . the sanaga river was by far the most important contributor, with variability in several environmental factors  moderately contributing to the overall partitioning of genetic diversity .

the sanaga river is the most important contributor to the partitioning of mtdna genetic diversity, and the model using both river layers accounted for the greatest amount of the genetic variation of all the region-wide models . this result is unsurprising, especially given the results of a previous study, showing a deep break of mtdna haplotypes across the sanaga  <cit> . the gdms for microsatellites suggest that rivers play an important, but incomplete, role in separating p. t. ellioti and p. t. troglodytes from one another. while the sanaga and mbam rivers contributed significantly to the analysis from microsatellite genotypes, these rivers were never the top contributors, and they only slightly increased the overall explanatory power of the models. these gdms showed the strongest associations with different habitat types . these results, taken together, show that the sanaga river is indeed a contributor to the partitioning of genetic diversity of chimpanzees in the region. however, given the importance of environmental variables in the microsatellite models, it is apparent that environmental variation also contributes to shaping patterns of genetic diversity in chimpanzees in the region.

intra-population patterns of isolation-by-environment
we completed additional gdms to assess the partitioning of genetic variation among populations within subspecies, by including a two-population grouping and a three-population grouping  <cit>  based on cluster analysis from a previous study  <cit> . we ran these models only using microsatellite genetic differentiation as estimated by fst. we completed the analysis for the p. t. ellioti group using environmental variables, geographic distance, and the mbam river layer. this model accounted for 20% of the observed genetic variation . neither geographic distance nor the mbam river significantly contributed to this model, although a model run with geographic distance alone could explain 6% of genetic variation . genetic differentiation was predicted along a gradual west–east cline from the guinean rainforest to the ecotone of central cameroon . a variety of environmental variables were important contributors, including ndvi of the least green season, precipitation variables, temperature seasonality and leaf area index .table  <dig> 
percent of genetic variation within chimpanzee populations explained by gdm
a



chimpanzee population
b
two-population model

distance only
c
environment only
d
environment + distance
e

p. t. ellioti
f

p. t. troglodytes
three-population model
distance only
environment only
environment + distance



p. t. troglodytes

ain order to examine genetic diversity within populations, only microsatellite data  was used.


bsub-groupings of chimpanzee populations correspond to distinct genetic populations as determined by mitchell et al.  <cit> . the p. t. troglodytes group was included in both the two- and three-population model, as only the p. t. ellioti group is sub-divided in the three-population model.


cmodel includes only geographic distance between sample locations as a predictor variable.


dmodel only includes environmental data layers as predictor variables.


eentries are blank because geographic distance was not a significant contributor to the final model.


fa least cost path layer for the mbam river was included when running the p. t. ellioti two-population model, but as it was not a significant contributor, was not included in this table.
spatial predictions of, and contributing variables to, mtdna differentiation using gdm. spatial predictions of genetic differentiation based on mtdna diversity  using environmental variables and distance  and environmental variables, distance and rivers . colors between maps are not comparable. within maps, areas with similar colors along color gradients are predicted to be more similar genetically. panels c and d represent the relative importance of the selected variables that significantly contribute to the models. each panel explains the map directly above it.



we completed the analysis for the p. t. troglodytes group using environmental variables and geographic distance as response variables. geographic distance alone accounted for 12% and environmental variation accounted for 42% of observed genetic variation. combining geographic distance and environmental variation as predictors increased the explanatory power of the model to 48% . geographic distance was a significant contributor to the overall partitioning of genetic variation found in p. t. troglodytes, although a pocket of differentiation occurred in southwest cameroon that did not appear to follow the clinal model found across the rest of this subpsecies’ range in southern cameroon . in addition to geographic distance, several environmental variables relating to precipitation, temperature and surface moisture , were also associated with genetic variation in p. t. troglodytes across the study area .

environmental variation is strongly correlated with the partitioning of genetic diversity in p. t. ellioti. the analysis of the rainforest population of p. t. ellioti revealed that environmental variables accounted for 91% of the observed genetic variation , particularly differences in vegetation, precipitation and slope . geographic distance was not a significant contributor to the model when combined with the environmental variables, and could only account for 2% of the genetic variation when included as the sole predictor. genetic differentiation was predicted along a gradient that spans coastal to montane forests , consistent with other analyses that included all of p. t. ellioti.figure  <dig> 
intra-population spatial predictions of, and contributing variables to, microsatellite differentiation using gdm for two populations. spatial predictions of genetic differentiation based on microsatellite diversity  using environmental variables, distance, and river layers for p. t. ellioti
 and p. t. troglodytes
. colors between maps are not comparable. within maps, areas with similar colors along color gradients are predicted to be more similar genetically. panels c and d represent the relative importance of the selected variables that significantly contribute to the models. each panel explains the map directly above it.



environmental variables accounted for 37% of the partitioning of genetic variation of the p. t. ellioti  population . geographic distance was not a significant contributor when combined with the environmental variables and could only account for 1% of the genetic variation when included as the sole predictor. in addition, genetic differentiation followed a west–east gradient, across a wide breadth of habitats that includes a forest-savanna mosaic that spans central cameroon . the most important contributors to influencing the partitioning of genetic variation among chimpanzees located in central cameroon include precipitation variables, surface moisture and vegetation density , which are all important variables that define forest and savanna habitats.

significant environmentally associated gradients were observed within all tested populations north of the sanaga river . in western cameroon and eastern nigeria elevational gradients were once again observed to account for the highest proportion of variation . in central cameroon, genetic differentiation was predicted across habitats with variability in vegetation density, moisture and precipitation . in addition, p. t. ellioti habitats in the forested regions of western cameroon are characterized by steep, densely forested areas with pronounced precipitation seasonality in northwest cameroon, and a wider breadth of habitats that include both forest and savanna that experience even more seasonal variability in temperature and precipitation  <cit> . in southern cameroon, geographic distance was a major predictor, and there was no apparent spatial association between genetic diversity and environmental clines . these patterns are unsurprising, especially given that ecological niche models show that p. t. troglodytes habitat are relatively homogeneous in terms of elevation, temperature and precipitation  <cit> . in contrast, habitat variability increases dramatically north of the sanaga river  <cit> .

hypothesis testing
using the geospatial modeling approaches presented here, we can provide preliminary assessments of the likely contributors that underlie the partitioning of chimpanzee population genetic diversity: riverine barriers and environmental variation. overall, predicted patterns of neutral allele diversity across the study region were found to be relatively consistent with each other in both of the region-wide models . without the river layers, the models both showed a pronounced association between allele diversity and habitat type, with a general west–east gradient that might be consistent with differentiation between guinean rainforest – ecotone – congolian rainforest habitat types.

how do rivers contribute to generating the pattern found in chimpanzees across the study area? results from previous work show a distinct division of population clusters precisely at the location of the sanaga river. however, the sanaga is an incomplete boundary, as there is evidence of migration across the river  <cit> . population genetic analysis shows that chimpanzees across the sanaga river exchange migrants at a rate of approximately  <dig> migrant per generation, lending even more support to the face that the sanaga river is not a complete boundary to gene flow  <cit> . including the river layers increased the explanatory power of both region-wide models presented in this study . the sanaga river is always an important contributor to patterns of region-wide genetic differentiation, but never the only one , and in some cases not even the most important . additionally, the mbam river was not found to be a significant contributor to genetic differentiation north of the sanaga river .

how does environmental variation contribute to chimpanzee genetic diversity? although variation in forest cover, preciptation, and slope are generally more important across the study area than previously appreciated, these variables impact p. t. troglodytes and p. t. ellioti differently. amongst p. t. troglodytes south of the sanaga, the distribution of allelic diversity does not appear to be associated with any environmental clines, and instead, appears to follow a pattern of isolation-by-distance . in contrast, the partitioning of genetic variation in p. t. ellioti appears to be substantially influenced by changes in the environment . finally, these associations between habitat and the partitioning of genetic variation are especially noticeable when the data for p. t. elloti are split into two subpopulations in the western rainforest and central ecotone regions , in which environmental varation accounts for 91% and 37%, respectively, of the variation explained by the gdm for this subspecies. these observations provide support for the hypothesis that habitats play an important role in structuring chimpanzee populations.

the analyses presented here show, for the first time, that an important relationship exists between the partitioning of genetic variation in chimpanzees and environmental variation in cameroon and eastern nigeria, particularly regarding changes in slope, climate and vegetation. characterizing these relationships is important because it might explain why the separation of chimpanzee subspecies across the sanaga only partially explains the distribution of genetic variation and that the role of adaptation to local environmental conditions may be substantially underappreciated in the evolution of chimpanzee subspecies. finally, these findings suggest that the role of environmental variation may be under-appreciated in other primates whose distributions may have been influenced by the sanaga river  <cit> . future studies that examine patterns of isolation-by-environment  <cit>  in primates and other mammals that occur sympatrically with chimpanzees may reveal that the differentiation across the ecotone is a more common feature of these species’ evolutionary history than previously believed.

CONCLUSIONS
although this study focused on quantifying a pattern of isolation-by-environment in chimpanzees using genetic data comprised of a relatively small number of neutral loci, several important conclusions have emerged from this analysis. the sanaga river is an important contributor to patterns of genetic diversity in chimpanzees in cameroon . however, it is not the only contributing factor . habitat and elevational gradients play a major role in partitioning genetic differentiation, especially in p. t. ellioti. this was especially evident when gdms were run for sub-groupings of chimpanzee populations , where both forest type across elevational and precipitation/moisture gradients played a major role, which is consistent with the ecological niches inhabited by each sub-population.

future studies that include data from loci that might be subject to selection are needed to better understand these complex associations, as this study is limited in its ability to detect environmentally diven natural selection in chimpanzees. genome-wide single nucleotide polymorpism  data, for example, will allow for quantifying these associations, and provide improved spatial and temporal resolution to disentangle the relative role of pleistocene refugia in generating genetic diversity. the evolutionary impacts of the environmental gradient in cameroon have been examined in a small number of taxa  <cit> , but for the most part, there are not enough studies examining the relative roles of ecotones versus other biogeographic barriers .

in addition to being an important region for chimpanzees, there are also a number of other primate species and subspecies that are presumably influenced by the sanaga river, including: mandrillus leucophaeus/m. sphinx, cercopithecus erythrotis/c. cephus, c. nictitans martini/c. n. nictitans, and c. pogonias pogonias/c. p. grayi  <cit> . because these pairs of primate taxa occupy vastly different niches  <cit> , it is important to also investigate the role that environmental variation might play in shaping their own patterns of genetic diversity. this study provides an important first step in this process by showing that chimpanzee population structure in eastern nigeria and cameroon is not solely driven by separation across riverine barriers, as previously thought.

