BACKGROUND
asaia is a genus of acetic acid bacteria belonging to the family acetobacteriaceae  <cit> , which resides in different environments, such as plants, flowers, herbs, fruits, and fermented foods and beverages. in recent years, bacteria of this genus have been observed infecting insects belonging to different orders, including diptera, hemiptera, hymenoptera and lepidoptera. several of the species known to be stably associated with asaia are important vectors of human interest  or vectors of plant disease. scaphoideus titanus ball is in this category. s. titanus is involved in the diffusion of a plant disease, as it transmits “candidatus phytoplasma vitis”, the agent of flavescence dorée  of grapevine. phytoplasmas are cell wall-less phloem-restricted bacteria of the phylum mollicutes which induce serious diseases in plants and are often major causes of production losses for several crops. in the case of european viticulture the yield reduction caused by fd phytoplasma infections entails a very high economic damage  <cit> .

a common trait of asaia’s hosts is the fact they feed on sugar-based diets, suggesting this bacterium could have a role in nutrient metabolism  <cit> . experiments with fluorescent asaia strains supplied to the mosquitoes anopheles spp. and aedes aegypti linnaeus, and the leafhopper s. titanus showed that this bacterium is able to colonize, re-colonize and cross-colonize the gut system, the gonads and the salivary glands  <cit> . the prevalence of asaia in several insect host populations has been shown to be both stable and very high, suggesting it is not only an occasional commensal  <cit> . however the absence of phylogenetic congruency between asaia isolates and their hosts indicates that these symbionts have been acquired by their hosts only recently, and can be transferred among different insect groups  <cit> . these features indicate that asaia, along with other acetic acid bacteria colonizing different insects, can be considered as secondary symbiont  <cit>  whose function in the hosts is not yet fully identified.

the ability of this bacterium to invade different organs of its insect host suggests that asaia can be transmitted by a variety of transmission routes, both vertical and/or horizontal. many symbiotic bacteria, like primary symbionts and several secondary symbionts, are vertically transmitted via the maternal route. facultative symbionts may be also horizontally transferred, with feeding representing one of the main routes. for phloem feeding insects, transmission can occur when several individuals feed on the same plant  <cit> , but transmission can also take place between host and parasitoid  <cit> , or between parasitoids sharing the same host species  <cit> . in termites, horizontal transmission of gut bacteria has also been thought to occur via trophallaxis  <cit> . another route of horizontal transmission is transfer during copulation, for example by the introduction of ejaculate components from male to female during copulation  <cit> . moreover, experimental transinfection by means of hemolymph microinjections demonstrated the possibility of horizontal transfer via hemolymph sharing  <cit> .

the vertical transmission of asaia in anopheles stephensi liston, ae. aegypti and s. titanus has been illustrated by crotti et al.  <cit> , who demonstrated the transmission of the symbiont via egg smearing, i.e. by contamination of the egg surface with bacterial cells by the mother, followed by the acquisition by the hatched offspring by consuming or probing the egg. in mosquitoes of the genus anopheles, asaia has been shown to infect through both per-oral  <cit>  and venereal routes, from male to female, followed in each case by vertical spread from the mother to the offspring  <cit> . these transmission routes are in agreement with both the incongruent evolutionary history of asaia and its host species, and with the high frequency of infections with multiple asaia strains in mosquitoes  <cit> . however, very little is known about the rate and mechanisms of horizontal transfer of asaia in hemipterans like s. titanus. horizontal transfer in this species has been only indirectly demonstrated by the capability of asaia to be established in leafhopper individuals fed with bacterial cells and by the ability to colonize insect salivary glands  <cit> .

the exploitation of symbiotic microorganisms of insect vectors is recently emerging as a strategy to limit the diffusion of arthropod-borne diseases through the development of “symbiotic control” strategies  <cit> . this approach could represent a promising alternative to current fd control methods, which are limited to the use of chemical insecticides and to the removal of infected plants. to set up a symbiotic control strategy, a microbial symbiont that meets the requirements needed for a control agent must be firstly identified. such requirements include stable association with the vector, dominance within its microbial community, co-localization with the pathogen, predisposition to in vitro manipulation, and, last but not least, an efficient spread system within insect populations  <cit> . asaia and other acetic acid bacteria have such features in relation to dipteran mosquitoes, so they have been indicated as potential agents for natural or paratransgenic symbiotic control  <cit> . however, the capacity of asaia to be transmitted horizontally among s. titanus has not been yet investigated.

the objective of this work was to evaluate whether asaia is horizontally transmitted among s. titanus individuals by the oral and the venereal transmission routes. this could contribute to the evaluation of the ecology of this acetic acid bacterium in leafhopper populations.

RESULTS
donor insects
insects destined to test transmission of infection  were infected with a marked strain of asaia. to this end, donors were fed with diets added of gfp-tagged asaia for  <dig> hours and then allowed to release the symbiont for  <dig> hours in diets supplemented with kanamycin. afterwards the diets, in which gfp-tagged asaia was released, were exposed to recipient individuals for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hours, respectively. at the same time, the  <dig> individuals used as donor specimens were collected to be tested in q-pcr. all of them were positive for the gfp gene, with an average titre of  <dig>  ×  <dig> gfp gene copies / pg of insect 18s rrna gene . furthermore, gfp asaia represented  <dig> % of total asaia population residing in the insect body , indicating that the newly-introduced symbionts colonized the insect body together with wild type asaia that was already present in the individual. the proportion of the gfp strain and of total asaia in the whole bacterial community of donor individuals were  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively . the asaia to bacteria ratio  was similar to the value previously reported  for populations of the symbiont in field-collected s. titanus  <cit> ; the higher value found in this study could be attributed to the additional uptake of gpf-tagged asaia cells from the diets supplementing those naturally occurring in the insect. a further confirmation of colonization of the insect body by the gfp-tagged asaia was obtained by fish experiments, which highlighted the acquisition by the insect of the tagged strain in different organs, including salivary glands . the colonization of salivary glands indicates that asaia can be released into the feeding medium, potentially allowing bacterial transfer to other individuals.

the concentration of gfp asaia in insect and diet samples as indicated by the number of gfp gene copies per positive sample. in case of insect samples, the gfp copy number was calculated per pg of insect 18sr rna gene, while for diets it was calculated per ng of total dna. average values and standard deviation are shown for each trial. standard deviation is missing when the number of positive samples was < <dig> 

gfpabr  calculated as the ratio between the gfp copy number and the 16s rrna gene copy number of the total bacterial community of the samples. abr  calculated as the ratio between the number of asaia cells and the total bacteria 16s rrna gene copy number. in case of insect samples, all of the final copy numbers were calculated per pg of insect 18sr rna gene. values in the average column represent the average results of each group of trials for insect and diet samples; standard deviation is indicated in parenthesis.

co-feeding experiments
donor individuals previously exposed to gfp asaia were allowed to feed on artificial diets, and ‘recipient’ individuals then exposed to this diet. there was a high frequency of transfer of asaia to both the food source and to s. titanus during feeding, as indicated in figure 1a. the occurrence of gfp gene-positive signals in sugar diets previously exposed to donor insects confirms the earlier indications of a release of asaia by s. titanus during feeding events  <cit> . the proportion of diets that assayed positive for asaia showed a trend characterized by a peak corresponding to  <dig> hours post exposure to the donor , followed by a decrease starting from the  <dig> hours acquisition . the average concentration of the marked strain, calculated by the number of gfp gene copies per ng of dna of the diet sample, increased up to  <dig> hours after the end of the inoculation  and then started decreasing reaching a value of  <dig>  ×  <dig> gfp gene copies / ng dna after  <dig> hours acquisition . the proportion of the gfp strain within the total asaia population followed a similar trend, increasing up to 30% at  <dig> hours, and decreasing after  <dig> hours . this decline could be attributed to the occurrence of other bacteria that can compete with asaia for the nutrient sources. beside the highly frequent release of both gfp- and wild type asaia into the diet, other bacteria were inoculated into the feeding medium by s. titanus, as the gfpabr with abr of 6% and 36% respectively . other bacteria associated with the leafhopper could also be transmitted during feeding events, including the phytoplasma and possibly the endosymbiont “candidatus cardinium hertigii”, observed to reside in s. titanus salivary glands  <cit> . however, even if gfp asaia concentration may be further reduced over time, the decline in concentration observed during the experiment was not significant  .

the quantitative pcr analysis performed on the dna of recipient s. titanus individuals showed that when asaia is inoculated into the sugar diet, it can be ingested by the insect and multiply in its body. even though not all of the positive diets led to the development of an infected recipient insect, indicating that the acquisition process may fail, successful transmission was common . the rate at which recipient individuals became infected remained stable around 60% at an acquisition time of  <dig> hours to  <dig> hours . the rate declined after  <dig> hours of acquisition , which is in accord with the decrease of gfp-tagged asaia in infected diets observed above. despite the reduced number of stable long-term colonization events, gfp-labelled asaia, represented an average of  <dig> % of the bacterial community in infected insects ,and showed high concentrations when insects fed for a longer period. in fact, the average titre of gfp-tagged asaia increased linearly over time passing from  <dig>  × 10- <dig> copies of gfp genes per pg of insect 18s rrna gene at  <dig> hours to  <dig>  ×  <dig> copies of gfp genes per pg of insect 18s rrna at  <dig> hours , suggesting that asaia succeeded in establishing within the host’s body. however, despite the continuous increase of gfp asaia concentration, the concentration values were significantly lower than that of donor individuals for co-feeding periods up to  <dig> hours . only after a 96-hour co-feeding was a value not significantly different to that of donor individuals reached . the ratio of the gfp strain and total asaia also followed a constantly rising trend, although even after  <dig> hours of acquisition the ratio was still much lower than that of donor individuals . the increase of the gfp/asaia ratio suggests that the modified symbiont is able to compete with the naturally occurring asaia within the insect body during the host’s colonization, without upsetting its population. in fact, the average percentage of total asaia in the whole bacterial community of individuals submitted to co-feeding trials  did not diverge from the normally observed abr   <cit>  . in agreement with the co-infection of multiple asaia strains within the same host that has been demonstrated for mosquitoes  <cit> , further long term acquisition experiments could examine whether the two strains may co-exists for longer time periods in the same tissues after a horizontal transmission event.

once the ability of asaia to be horizontally transmitted by sharing food source was verified, the details of colonization patterns within the insect body were examined by whole mount fish experiments on organs dissected from s. titanus individuals after the acquisition of gfp-tagged asaia. to give an example of the colonization pathway, insects submitted to a  <dig> hours co-feeding were employed for this analysis. hybridization experiments on midgut and gonad tissue showed the constant presence of gfp gene signals together with the natural symbiotic strain . the occurrence of gfp gene signals in the digestive tract confirms that the bacterium was ingested during feeding events, and was able to establish in the gut, a favourable environment for acetic acid bacteria  <cit> . furthermore, the detection of the gfp gene hybridization signal in the gonads revealed that asaia, by passing through the hemocoel, is able to reach the reproductive system from which can be further distributed by both venereal and vertical transmission. indeed, the occurrence of gfp gene signals on the epithelium of testis ducts indicates a possible transfer to females during mating, while the presence in ovaries suggests a vertical transmission via egg-smearing, as previously indicated  <cit> . on the other hand, we were not able to detect a positive signal after hybridization with the gfp gene-specific probes in salivary glands of insects exposed to co-feeding trials. these results may reflect that asaia needs a longer incubation period to reach salivary glands and to allow onward transmission via co-feeding.

control experiments were performed on  <dig> leafhoppers sharing sterile sugar solutions . neither the insects nor the corresponding diet samples showed gfp positive signals by q-pcr. fish experiments performed on these individuals confirmed the absence of fluorescent signals after hybridization with the gfp-specific probes, while the presence of bacteria, and in particular of the wild type strain of asaia, naturally associated with the insect, was detected in the same insect specimens .

number of insect specimens used for each trial. the duration of the acquisition period, as well as the type of analysis carried out, are indicated both for samples submitted to experiments performed with gfp-tagged asaia and for negative controls.

venereal transmission trials
when gfp-tagged asaia-infected males were mated with uninfected females, transfer of gfp-tagged symbiotic cells was observed, although a longer period was required to reach infection rates similar to those of the co-feeding trials. after a  <dig> hour incubation time subsequent to mating, only 20% of females  were gfp gene-positive, with 40%  positive after  <dig> hour, 60%  at  <dig> hours, with  <dig> out of  <dig> individuals infected at  <dig> hours . the average concentration of the marked symbiont in the body of s. titanus also increased with longer incubation periods, even though it remained significantly lower than that of donor individuals  . in fact, after a  <dig> hour-incubation time the average titre of gfp-labelled asaia was of  <dig>  ×  <dig> gfp gene copies per pg of insect 18s rrna gene . the ratio between the gfp strain and total asaia aslo underwent a regular increase, as it passed from a very low value after  <dig> hours to a percentage higher than that of donor males  . the average abr was lower  than that reported previously  <cit> , and the average gfpabr was a little lower than the ratio of co-feeders . nonetheless, even though the concentration of the gfp-tagged asaia did not significantly increase, a slow increment was observed, suggesting a bacterial growth within the host after venereal transfer, which indicates that venereal infection from male to female may be followed by stable colonization. moreover fish experiments suggest that gfp-tagged asaia transmission in female individuals mated with infected males starts from the colonization of gonads, where a massive fluorescent signal after hybridization with the gfp gene-specific probe was observed . fish results on gonads are in agreement with the actual occurrence of a venereal transfer, however to avoid misinterpretation of data, and to rule out the possibility that the transmission have took place by co-feeding when the two insects were caged in the same capsule, co-housing control trials were set up, both with pairs of male and female individuals. as co-housing specimens were of the same sex, at the end of the trial we were not able to discriminate between donor and recipient individuals, so all were submitted to qpcr for the gfp gene. for each pair of individuals, one was always gfp-positive  and the other was gfp-negative  . the gfp concentration data relative to donor individuals are included in the “donors” raw in table  <dig>  this result indicates that when the individuals were caged together but cannot mate, transmission did not occur. in effect, in the capsule environment, the copulation between individuals of the opposite sex is more likely than the co-feeding in the same grape leaf: two individuals may never be in contact with the same leaf portion during the relatively short period when they are caged together, on the other hand the capsule is small enough to make the mating very likely.

the results concerning the diets used in venereal transmission experiments from infected males to females showed that no positive signals were detected in samples corresponding to  <dig> or  <dig> hours of incubation by quantitative pcr. a possible explanation could be that the bacterial colonization takes longer periods when it starts from the gonads , passing through the hemocoel and finally reaching the salivary glands. only when the salivary glands are colonized is the symbiont released into the feeding medium. after  <dig> hours, one of the five diets was gfp gene-positive , and after  <dig> hours the infection rate raised a value of 29%  . the low release rate of gfp-tagged asaia in the diets was consistent with data from fish experiments which did not show any signal with the gfp gene-specific probes in the salivary glands of the tested females . in constrast, in positive diets gfp-tagged asaia cells reached a concentration of  <dig>  ×  <dig> gfp gene copies per ng of dna sample  <dig> hours after acquisition . moreover, the density values obtained after a 72-hour feeding were not significantly different from those observed after  <dig> hours and after co-feeding  . the percentage of gfp-tagged asaia respect to the total population of this symbiont, was very low after  <dig> hours of incubation , became noteworthy after  <dig> hours, reaching values similar to those obtained after a co-feeding transmission  . this abundance suggests that oral and venereal routes can act together to horizontally transmit the symbiont. nevertheless, the percentage of gfp-labelled and wild type asaia within the bacterial community of diet samples was lower than the values obtained in co-feeding experiments . this may be due to fact that the duration of venereal transfer tests was too short to reach similar conditions.

to investigate if gfp-labelled asaia-infected females can infect males during mating, a reciprocal transfer experiments was carried out. in this case, an irregular infection pattern was observed. only after  <dig> and  <dig> hours of incubation following mating experiments were positive males observed , while no transmission was detected after  <dig> and  <dig> hours . such a scattered distribution of colonized males suggests a lower transfer of the gfp-tagged strain, or could be related to the low number of analysed samples. furthermore, the titre of gfp-tagged asaia cells within the body of infected insects decreased by one order magnitude from  <dig> to  <dig> hours , and in both cases it was significantly lower than that of donor individuals  . this seems to indicate at least a partial failure of the introduced strain to establish within the host; nevertheless, this possibility is in contrast to the increase of the gfp to total asaia ratio, which is higher after a  <dig> hour-incubation  than after  <dig> hours , and with the average gfpabr, which is higher than in the venereal transfer trials from male to female . more likely, the unstable trend of data that we obtained is related to a random distribution and can not be considered as a trend, even though copulation must have a role in the bacterial transfer, since co-housing experiments made with pairs of male insects did not show the occurrence of transmission. however, correspondence between infected males and gfp gene-positive diets was detected, showing that, whatever the source of infection for these individuals, asaia is able to spread in the insect body and to reach salivary glands to be then injected into the diets. in fact,  <dig> out of  <dig> diets was gfp gene-positive after a  <dig> hour-incubation , and  <dig> out of  <dig> samples after  <dig> hours  . no significant difference was observed between the observed concentrations of the gfp strain  . the percentage of gfp-tagged strain in total asaia was 4% after a  <dig> hour-incubation, and 32% after  <dig> hours , while the gfpabr and the abr percentages were  <dig>  and 3% respectively . the uneven and probably random distribution of effective venereal transmission events from infected females to uninfected males was also reflected in the absence of hybridization signal obtained with the gfp gene-specific probes when fish experiments were carried out on male individuals mated with females colonized by gfp-tagged asaia.

control experiments were performed by mating  <dig> insects with the same number of specimens of the opposite sex previously fed on sterile sugar solutions . no gfp-positive samples were observed when analysing those insects and their respective diets by q-pcr, nor fluorescent signals was detected after hybridization with the gfp-specific probes on these samples .

CONCLUSIONS
horizontal transmission of asaia occurs in populations of the leafhopper s. titanus, as previously reported for mosquitoes  <cit> . co-feeding experiments demonstrated a high incidence of uptake of the gfp-tagged asaia by individuals that were fed on diets previously exposed to infected donor insects, with a colonization level which almost reached that of the donor insects. asaia-s. titanus is one of the few symbiont-host models in which a direct demonstration of horizontal transmission is provided. in general the horizontal transmission is, in fact, indirectly deduced by analysing the distribution of a symbiont among host taxa and the level of phylogenetic congruency between the insect hosts and the bacterial symbiont  <cit> .

beside the asaia spread via co-feeding, the results of the present study indicate venereal transmission in s. titanus, like in the dipteran mosquitoes  <cit> . infection can transfer from infected male to female during mating, even if venereally infected individuals do not attain the concentration of acquired bacteria observed following co-feeding. moreover, venereal transfer may lead to the coexistence of horizontal and vertical transmission. however, the capability of asaia to be acquired by offspring after a venereal transfer from infected males to females was not evidenced in this study, due to difficulties connected with rearing s. titanus in laboratory conditions, and thus it can be only presumed. on the other hand, efficient venereal transmission from female to male cannot be ruled out: the uneven distribution observed in the venereal transmission could be due to the low number of individuals employed in the experiments.

these results on the transmission routes of asaia in s. titanus encourage research towards the understanding of the ecology of the symbiont in its insect host. further experiments are needed to evaluate the role of the bacterial symbiont in the insect and how it can affect the host fitness.

