BACKGROUND
quantitative trait locus  mapping is a powerful method to identify genes regulating complex traits. by combining molecular marker data of genetically related individuals with phenotypic trait values, genomic qtls are identified that likely contain genetic regulators of the trait. this strategy has both been applied to 'classical' traits like body weight, blood pressure or disease susceptibility, as well as to traits measured using high-throughput technologies: mrna abundances measured by microarrays  <cit> , and protein or metabolite abundances measured by mass spectrometry  <cit> . qtls generally span a genomic region containing tens to hundreds of genes. identification of the most promising regulating genes within qtl intervals, which can then be functionally tested, still remains a major challenge. qtlminer has been implemented in the genenetwork  <cit> , a large resource with genotypes, phenotypes and gene expression profiles for multiple organisms and genetic reference populations. it automatically analyses a qtl region and integrates information about the candidate genes, so that the best candidate genes can be quickly identified.

implementation
qtlminer was implemented in python as part of the genenetwork  <cit> .

RESULTS
qtlminer takes a qtl interval as input, which is defined by the chromosome and the start and end positions in megabases. the program automatically generates a list of genes within the interval and retrieves additional information for each gene. the first part comprises annotation data such as gene name, description, genomic position, gene ontology  terms and kegg pathways in which the gene is implicated. next, the amount of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms  within the gene is displayed. nssnps result in amino acid changes in the corresponding protein. these changes may modify its structure and may thus be causative for the phenotypic differences which were mapped. furthermore, the user can select three genenetwork expression data sets. for each of the data sets, gene expression and information about cis-regulation will be added. in this way, the user can see whether candidate genes are expressed in the tissue under study. genes that are only expressed in the tissue of interest and not in others might even be better candidates. the user should however be aware that high expression is not always required, i.e. lowly expressed genes may also have a strong influence on traits. in addition, information about cis-regulation is added. a gene is cis-regulated if its expression maps close to its own genomic position. any cis-regulated gene in the qtl region is a good candidate to regulate the trait, since cis-regulation indicates a difference in gene expression levels, which may regulate the trait. alberts et al.  <cit>  have shown that 'ghost' cis-eqtls  can be detected if there are snps or other sequence variants in the probe regions that cause a difference in hybridization signal. these cases might also be interesting since the sequence variants in the probe regions might result in changes in the protein structure which can regulate the trait.

to demonstrate the utility of the program, we took a qtl hotspot on mouse distal chromosome  <dig> as example. this region, also called qrr <dig>  contains many qtls that control neural and behavioral phenotypes, including motor behavior, escape latency, emotionality, and seizure susceptibility   <cit> . mozhui et al. have further investigated this region and revealed a highly complex gene expression regulatory interval in qrr <dig>  composed of multiple loci modulating the expression of functionally cognate sets of genes. in the distal part of qrr <dig>  they have identified the gene fmn <dig> as a strong candidate. to re-analyze this interval using qtlminer, open a web browser and go to http://genenetwork.helmholtz-hzi.de and click 'search' and 'qtlminer'. in the form that appears, choose chromosome  <dig>  view from  <dig> mb to  <dig> mb. select two mouse strains for which nssnps should be analyzed. choose three genenetwork data sets and click 'analyze qtl interval'. three hippocampus data sets in bxd, cxb and lxs mice are chosen by default.

an additional feature of qtlminer is the visualization of the haplotypes within a qtl region. in the haplotype plot , individuals are sorted according to their quantitative trait value, and their haplotypes are indicated by colors. the gene kcnj <dig> is one of the genes with a strong trans eqtl in the qrr <dig> interval in hippocampus. to obtain bxd haplotypes for this gene, search the bxd hippocampus data set in genenetwork for kcnj <dig>  click probeset  <dig> at, click the button 'interval mapping' and fill in chromosome  <dig>   <dig> until  <dig> mb. select 'haplotype analyst' and click 'remap'. it is immediately obvious that mice with a c57bl/6j  allele at the qtl location have a low trait value, whereas mice with a dba/2j  allele have a high trait value. this visualization may be used for fine mapping qtls. suppose that a qtl separates two groups of individuals with low and high trait value for most individuals, but some individuals  have a recombination within the interval. then these individuals may be used for further genotyping and in this way, a qtl region can be further narrowed down.

CONCLUSIONS
qtlminer automatically integrates gene annotation, gene ontology terms, kegg pathway information, gene expression and cis-regulation data for all genes within a qtl interval. with only a few mouse clicks on the genenetwork website, the most promising candidate genes within a given qtl region are quickly highlighted.

availability and requirements
project name: qtlminer

project home page: http://genenetwork.helmholtz-hzi.de 

operating system: platform independent

programming language: python

other requirements: none

license: none

any restrictions to use by non-academics: none

authors' contributions
ra conceived the study, wrote the manuscript and implemented the program. ks conceived the study and wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

