BACKGROUND
freshwater fish are frequently thought to diversify along a benthic  to pelagic  habitat axis
 <cit> . however, the generality of this pattern has largely been inferred from fishes that inhabit lentic, or lake-like, environments, such as sticklebacks, perch, arctic charr, and cichlids
 <cit> . furthermore, most of these studies have examined microevolutionary processes of interspecific divergence. it remains unclear if benthic/pelagic divergence has commonly influenced macroevolutionary patterns within large clades of fishes inhabiting ecologically complex lotic, or riverine, systems.

cyprinid fishes have radiated extensively within flowing water environments across eastern north america to exploit both benthic and pelagic habitats. therefore, this group should provide an ideal study system to test whether the benthic to pelagic habitat axis drives macroevolution in a species-rich group of fishes. previous phylogenetic analyses have generated a general framework for understanding relationships among these fishes and have shown that most  of the cyprinid species inhabiting eastern north america form a strongly supported clade
 <cit> . this clade is united by the osteological character of a small opening at the base of the skull known as the open posterior myodome . previous studies have also generally agreed that a small clade of seven species, with two distributed in eastern north america  and five endemic to western north america  form the sister group to a much larger group of species that is primarily confined to eastern north america
 <cit> . within this eastern radiation a strongly supported clade of around  <dig> predominantly pelagic species that display terminal mouths and feed generally from the mid-water is consistently recovered as arising following the initial divergence of several depauperate and strictly benthic lineages that display inferior mouths and often posses maxillary barbels
 <cit> . however, phylogenetic ambiguity remains in the branching order of these early benthic lineages, and the phylogenetic affinities of many species that are thought to lie within the predominately pelagic clade have not been resolved
 <cit> . therefore, a much more exhaustively sampled phylogeny combined with data on benthic/pelagic habitat use should facilitate a more robust phylogenetic examination of whether this ecological axis has influenced diversification within opm cyprinids.

habitat divergence clearly promotes coexistence in many lotic systems. for instance, opm cyprinids often form complex communities consisting of up to  <dig> species that partition the water column into vertically stratified foraging zones
 <cit> . furthermore, small, insectivorous or omnivorous fishes from other groups are relatively rare in the pelagic zone of rivers and streams in eastern north america
 <cit> . therefore, the first transition from a benthic to pelagic habitat in opm cyprinids likely represented the invasion of a sparsely occupied adaptive zone that could have resulted in a period of accelerated diversification
 <cit> . given the apparent influence of the benthic/pelagic axis on community structure, mapping this habitat divergence onto the opm phylogeny could highlight its role in generating species diversity.

hypotheses addressing the ecological mechanisms that have influenced historical patterns of diversification can now be examined using robustly sampled molecular phylogenies and applying methods that examine phylogenetic tree shape
 <cit> . acceleration in diversification rate is often thought to result from rapid divergence following invasion of open adaptive zones in groups ranging from vertebrates to prokaryotes
 <cit> . yet within freshwater fishes, several tests for ecologically associated bursts of diversification have failed to reject a constant rate of cladogenesis
 <cit> . however, opm cyprinids could have experienced an exceptional period of lineage diversification following their initial transition from benthic to pelagic habitats.

in this study, we generated the most thoroughly sampled, species-level phylogenetic hypotheses for opm cyprinids using dna sequence data from both a mitochondrial and nuclear marker. we then used ancestral state reconstruction and fossil-calibrated divergence time estimates to infer the history of benthic/pelagic habitat use across our phylogenetic reconstructions. using several independent methods, we addressed the question: was the first major evolutionary shift from benthic to pelagic habitats in eastern north america followed by a period of accelerated lineage diversification in opm cyprinids?

RESULTS
phylogenetic reconstruction
phylogenetic analysis of the cytochrome b  and recombination activating gene  <dig> exon  <dig>  loci provided substantial resolution of relationships among members of the opm radiation . both maximum clade credibility  gene trees and the mcc concatenated analysis included moderately to well-supported clades ) containing the benthic genera campostoma, exoglossum, nocomis, and rhinichthys as the earliest diverging opm lineages in eastern north america . both gene trees recovered the remaining eastern benthic genera dionda, erimystax, macrhybopsis, phenacobius, and platygobio as diverging before the diversification of the strongly supported  focal clade  that is dominated by pelagic species and accounts for approximately 80% of extant opm diversity. this general topology was strongly supported in the concatenated analysis as well . some phylogenetic relationships within the predominately pelagic focal clade were variable between our two gene trees and the concatenated analysis, with many clades receiving varying levels of posterior support. for instance, we consistently recovered poorly resolved nodes and short internode branch lengths at the base of the focal clade.
 <dig>  maximum clade credibility  phylogeny of opm cyprinids based on the cytb + rag <dig> analysis. numbers at nodes represent posterior probability values . asterisks denote 100% pp.

ancestral state reconstruction and divergence time estimates
ancestral state reconstruction points to a similar node in both of our gene trees as representing the initial shift from benthic to pelagic habitat utilization in the eastern opm radiation . in the more thoroughly sampled cytb gene tree, this shift is inferred to have occurred along a branch leading to the most recent common ancestor  of a strongly supported focal clade. we considered the node representing this mrca as the transition node and conducted our tests for variation in diversification rate and an excess of early lineages after the habitat shift with respect to this node. in the rag <dig> gene tree, we recovered that the shift occurred at a slightly more ancestral node. this node was subtended by a clade containing the same set of genera as the cytb focal clade plus its sister group macrhybopsis spp. + platygobio gracilis. however, this node received poor support  in the rag <dig> gene tree. furthermore, the subsequent node in the rag <dig> tree that was subtended by the same set of genera as the cytb focal clade was strongly supported  and had a higher likelihood of being pelagic. preliminary analyses suggested that using this node as opposed to its poorly supported ancestral node had little impact on our calculation of diversification rate and tree shape statistics. therefore, we considered this to be the transition node for the rag <dig> topology as well. we estimated the age of the transition nodes to be  <dig> mya  based on cytb ,  <dig> mya  based on rag <dig> 

following the initial benthic to pelagic shift early in the history of the opm radiation, ancestral state reconstruction recovered several instances of the re-evolution of benthicity within the pelagic focal clade . examples of lineages that have re-evolved benthic specialization within this pelagic clade include the barbeled genus hybopsis as well as a sister species pair of barbeled cyprinella, c. labrosa and c. zanema. based on the more thoroughly sampled cytb mcc topology, we recovered approximately six transitions back to a benthic habitat during the history of the clade. after these transitions back to benthicity, transitions back to pelagic habitats were inferred to be very rare .

diversification rate analyses
our strategies used to examine topological inbalance and variation in diversification rate across the entire opm phylogeny supported the hypothesis that there was accelerated diversification following the initial benthic to pelagic transition in the opm radiation. the relative cladogenesis  test identified  <dig> nodes associated with significantly diverse subclades in our cytb mcc gene tree . these nodes included two that are immediately ancestral to the transition node at the base of the focal clade, the transition node itself, and  <dig> consecutive descendent nodes. the parametric rates comparison  analysis marginally supported a model with a higher diversification rate in the predominately pelagic focal clade relative to the remainder of the cytb gene tree  . we also found that three nodes immediately following the transition node represented clades that were significantly more likely to be modeled as having a greater diversification rate relative to the remainder of the tree at α =  <dig> .

likewise, our examinations of deviations from a constant rate of cladogenesis as compared to randomly generated pure-birth topologies also supported the hypothesis that there was a burst of diversification coincident with the initial shift to a pelagic habit. the γ statistic was significant for our focal clade in both the cytb and rag <dig> mcc gene trees  indicating an excess of early lineages in this clade. the cytb ltt plot for the focal clade lay largely outside the 95% confidence intervals for nearly the entire history of  <dig>  simulated pure-birth trees . the monte carlo constant rates  analyses indicated a strong deviation from a pure-birth process based on cytb and the mccr analyses marginally supported this deviation in the rag <dig> gene tree . tree deviation scores were also significant on our two gene trees, again indicating an excess of early lineages in our focal clade . finally, variable-rate models provided a significantly better fit than constant-rate models to the observed vectors of branching times within the predominately pelagic focal clade . we obtained similar results when we applied these test to the  <dig> post burn-in trees .

p
p
p
these results represent the analyses carried out on the cytb and rag <dig> mcc gene trees. the “best model” indicates the best-fit model of cladogenesis chosen for this clade based on aic scores. .

discussion
the initial evolutionary transition from benthic to pelagic habitats by opm cyprinid fishes likely had a significant impact on the diversification of this hyper-diverse clade of fishes. our two phylogenetic hypotheses, coupled with ancestral state reconstructions and divergence time estimates, indicated that benthic forms dominated the early history of the eastern opm radiation. this group then gave rise to a predominately pelagic clade that began diversifying around  <dig> mya and contains ~80% of extant opm species. our tests for increased diversification rate all highlighted the particular region in the phylogeny where the earliest benthic to pelagic habitat shift is inferred to have occurred. with our thoroughly sampled phylogenies, we were also able to reject a pattern of constant-rate cladogenesis in favor of models that are consistent with a period of accelerated diversification after this habitat shift. importantly, we did not test whether pelagic clades are generally more diverse than benthic cyprinid clades, but we did find that the evolution of the potential for exploiting the pelagic habitat appears to have led to a shift in diversification rates. as such, the opm cyprinids’ first benthic to pelagic transition likely represented evolution into an open adaptive zone that resulted in a period of rapid lineage accumulation
 <cit> .

in the area of the phylogeny immediately following this inferred benthic to pelagic transition, we were not able to confidently resolve relationships among lineages. this region has often been unresolved in other studies of opm evolution
 <cit> . the explosive diversification in this region of the tree likely has contributed to this phylogenetic ambiguity
 <cit> . future phylogenetic studies based on large, multi-locus datasets that utilize a species tree framework could potentially help to resolve these problematic areas of the opm phylogeny
 <cit> . however, determining the exact branching order of lineages whose divergence is coincident with major ecological shifts and periods of rapid diversification might be generally difficult.

the major shift from benthic to pelagic habitats in opm cyprinids should not be considered in isolation from the other freshwater fish diversity in eastern north america. the diversification in the predominately pelagic focal clade that began around  <dig> mya coincides with the estimated age of the darter  radiation
 <cit> . darters are another endemic north american freshwater group of around  <dig> benthic fishes that often co-occur with opm species
 <cit> . cyprinids and darters together dominate the abundance and species diversity in most eastern north america fish assemblages
 <cit> . with the exception of a few omnivorous species, opm cyprinids and darters are both primarily insectivorous and compete for similarly sized prey
 <cit> . therefore, darter diversification might have further reduced eco-evolutionary opportunities within benthic habitats and influenced the shift of the opm lineage into the relatively competitor-free pelagic zone. a macroevolutionary interaction between these two lineages could have contributed to the observed pelagic burst of opm diversity.

interspecific competition, however, might not have been the only mechanism driving the rapid diversification of pelagic opm cyprinids. for instance, there is also an increase in the presence of male nuptial coloration and sexual dichromatism in the more visually dependent pelagic opm species relative to their benthic relatives that rely more extensively on chemical cues during foraging
 <cit> . given this, an increase in visually mediated sexual selection could have also played a role in the diversification of the pelagic opm cyprinids
 <cit> . additionally, an interaction between ecological opportunity and sexual selection might have driven the increased rate of lineage accumulation that followed the first benthic to pelagic transition in this group
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
evolution along the benthic/pelagic habitat axis appears to have played a critical role in generating the impressive species numbers of opm cyprinids inhabiting the lotic systems of eastern north america. future studies of other freshwater fish groups that combine ecological data with more thoroughly sampled phylogenies and examinations of temporal shifts in diversification could provide additional evidence that divergence along this axis has repeatedly influenced fish macroevolution. our results indicate that the influence of this habitat axis is clearly not restricted to lentic environments
 <cit> . instead, the benthic/pelagic axis of diversification appears to be a ubiquitous generator of biodiversity across disparate freshwater ecosystems.

