BACKGROUND
understanding clinical phenotypes through their corresponding genotypes is paramount to unveil inherited alterations that can lead to pathological processes and syndromes. however, such comprehension can be very difficult with complex disorders, which frequently present different clinical phenotypes that may result from interactions among multiple and potentially unknown genetic loci. moreover, considerably different genetic alterations may cause very similar or even the same phenotype  <cit> . thus, complex and multivariate analyses of the molecular processes underlying phenotypically similar disorders are required to possibly obtain insights into the composite gene and protein interactions  <cit> . to computationally perform such analyses, numerous structured information and also a few controlled vocabularies that describe biological processes and molecular functions are available  <cit> .

nevertheless, useful clinical information related to genetic diseases is generally not easily accessible and is mainly included in free text descriptions. hence, it is not suitably organized to be used in computational analyses. this limited availability of controlled structured phenotypic information is hampering the development of effective analytical contributions in the field.

recently, some tools have been developed to extract genetic and disease information from free text  <cit> . these, which are based on term co-occurrence and association rules or natural language processing techniques, automatically extract sets of genetic and phenotypic related terms. however, due to complexity and variety of clinical biomolecular and genomic descriptions they inherently present extraction errors, with different degrees of precision and recall. therefore, extracted information should be revised before applying it in subsequent analyses.

in some medical areas, such as oncology, curated phenotypic information of complex genetic disorders is being collected in structured format  <cit> . nevertheless, currently such data are only available for few classes of diseases and in quantity not yet enough for computational genome-wise analyses.

thus, at present the most important curated, comprehensive, reliable, and updated source of information in human genetics still remains the online mendelian inheritance in man  databank  <cit> , which consist of about  <dig>  detailed entries on human genes and genetic disorders. although it mainly contains free text descriptions on genetic loci, inheritance patterns, allelic variants, biochemical and clinical features, and molecular and population genetics, many omim entries also include a clinical synopsis section that, in structured text format, outlines disease accompanying signs and symptoms  and their locations . regrettably, due to the diversity of presentation of human diseases, and also possibly because omim has been in development for decades, information in the clinical synopsis sections is not represented in a uniform manner. no controlled vocabulary is used for phenotype and location names. several typing errors and synonyms for the same name, and different names for overlapping concepts are often present for phenotype location categories , as well as for specific phenotypes , which additionally include a high number of complex and specific findings. such variability of used descriptive names precludes their direct use in automatic genomic analyses.

to effectively exploit the valuable information in the omim clinical synopsis section, we first extracted phenotype and their location names and normalized them to create a term vocabulary describing phenotype and phenotype location categories. then, we hierarchically structured these category descriptions according to increasing detail or topological levels. finally, within gfinder, a web system we previously developed for analyzing dynamically aggregated annotations of user uploaded gene lists  <cit> , we used the normalized and structured clinical synopsis vocabularies as basis for new gfinder modules specifically devoted to the analysis of inherited disorder related genes. these new modules allow annotating large numbers of user classified biomolecular sequence identifiers with morbidity and clinical information, classifying them according to genetic disease phenotypes and their locations of occurrence, and statistically analyzing the obtained classifications.

RESULTS
normalization and structuring of genetic disease phenotype and location terms
at time of writing, omim contained  <dig>  entries,  <dig>  of them included a clinical synopsis section orderly divided into phenotype location categories representing an organ system  or a type of finding . under a location category of a specific omim genetic disease or locus entry, they are listed the phenotype manifestations in that location known to be associated with the entry. in the omim clinical synopsis sections we found  <dig> different names of phenotype location categories and  <dig>  distinct phenotype descriptions. after location name normalization, we had  <dig> unique location category terms and  <dig> synonyms or typographical errors for  <dig> category terms. this was obtained by combining, for example, "lab", "laboratory abnormalities" and "laboratory" categories into a unique "laboratory" category, "neuro" and "neurologic" into the single "neurologic" category, and by merging each of the "ears", "eyes", "joints", "lungs", "muscles", and "limbs" category names with its correspondent singular category term, respectively. phenotype description normalization produced  <dig>  unique controlled descriptions, which included  <dig>  descriptions internally subdivided into up to six hierarchical levels of increasing detail. for example, the phenotype descriptions "hearing loss, sensorineural, non-progressive, non-syndromic, congenital, greater mid frequency than low- or high-frequency loss", "dysplasia, metaphyseal, marked, of tubular bones, in childhood", "deafness, sensorineural, prelingual, profound", "temperature insensitivity, distal, in some patients", and "hemolytic anemia, following ingestion of fava beans" were subdivided and hierarchically structured into six, five, four, three, and two hierarchical levels, respectively .

similarly, the normalized  <dig> unique phenotype locations resulted hierarchically structured in three topological levels according to their anatomical organization. the main of such hierarchical levels, which includes broader organ systems or sites, comprised  <dig> locations.

all the above normalizations and hierarchical structuring produced a total of  <dig>  phenotype location entries and  <dig>  specific phenotype entries for the available  <dig>  omim entries with a clinical synopsis, which were annotated to  <dig>  distinct genes.

analysis of inherited disorder phenotypes
gfinder  <cit>  is a web system we previously implemented that dynamically aggregates updated functional annotations of user-uploaded gene lists from different databanks and allows performing their comprehensive explorations and statistical analyses. to this aim, gfinder is organized in independent and interconnected modules that use several controlled vocabularies describing gene related biomolecular processes and functions. within gfinder, we developed new genetic disorder annotation, exploration, and statistics modules that exploit the phenotype and phenotype location vocabularies omim provides and which we normalized and structured. the annotation module produces a tabular output of user-uploaded gene ids enriched with related genetic disease phenotypes and phenotype locations, and with several other annotations automatically retrieved from many different databanks. the exploration genetic disorders module  allows to easily and graphically understand either how many and which phenotype locations and their specific signs and symptoms are correlated to each considered gene, or how many of the selected genes refer to each of those locations, or phenotypes. when uploaded genes are subdivided in classes , the statistics genetic disorders module allows to estimate relevance of omim controlled annotations for the uploaded classes of genes by highlighting phenotypic locations and their specific signs and symptoms significantly more represented within the user-defined classes of genes. to this aim, the annotated genes are grouped accordingly to their class and annotation categories, and their distribution among the considered categories is statistically evaluated. for this purpose, different statistical tests and type of corrections for multiple tests have been implemented in gfinder, as following described in the methods section. after selecting a specific gene class, for each inherited disorder annotation category in that class the module provides the observed number of input genes, their expected number, and the significance p-value for that category with its histogram . external links to the omim descriptions and clinical synopsis sections related to the considered genes are also given.

validation of implemented application
to assess capabilities of implemented gfinder genetic disorders modules, we used them to evaluate a set of  <dig>  human clones spotted on the 7734- <dig> or 7736- <dig> clontech microarrays  <cit>  focused on cardiovascular system  and neurobiology , respectively. using gfinder annotation module we found these clones corresponded to  <dig> distinct genes. out of them,  <dig>  were involved in  <dig> inherited diseases, and  <dig>  were associated with  <dig> different phenotypes in  <dig> locations. therefore, we used the gfinder exploration and statistics genetic disorders module to evaluate the relevant presence of genes associated with specific inherited disease phenotypes or locations within the considered cardiovascular system correlated genes  versus the neurobiology related genes .

with the exploration module we observed the distribution of phenotypes and phenotype locations  within the two considered cardio and neuro classes of genes. then, using the statistics module we evaluated the phenotype locations most represented in the cardio versus neuro class. we concentrated only on genes with phenotype location annotations and on location categories associated with at least two of the considered genes. statistical analysis correctly selected phenotype locations related to the appropriate class of considered genes. in fact, the significant selected locations included "cardiovascular" , "heme" , "heart"  and "cardiac"  categories for the cardio class, and "neurologic" , "central nervous system" , "behavioural/psychiatric manifestations" , "peripheral nervous system"  categories for the neuro class.

finally, we analyzed the phenotypes most represented in the cardio versus neuro class. focusing only on genes with phenotype annotations and on phenotype categories associated with at least two of the considered genes, gfinder statistical analysis properly highlighted as most relevant in each gene class signs and symptoms logically pertaining to that class . in fact, apart from inheritance pattern phenotypes, the cardio gene class included "heart failure congestive"  and "hypertension"  phenotypes, whereas the neuro class included "dementia" , "myoclonus" , "dysarthria"  and "mental retardation"  phenotypes.

obtained results demonstrate validity of the approach for the analysis of genetic disorder phenotypes, locations and related genes that we developed, implemented and made available within the gfinder web system.

discussion
our efforts to derive from the omim entries a controlled vocabulary of phenotype locations and descriptions enabled us to normalize and structure the valuable omim phenotypic data according to the obtained vocabulary and make them suitable for computational use. although detailed phenotype descriptions could be further homogenized and standardized, their subdivision in hierarchical levels of detail that we performed allows to group specific phenotypes according to their common general traits, without loosing their specific characteristics. so, for example "mental retardation, moderate" and "mental retardation, nonspecific" can be both generally considered as "mental retardation" and at the same time they can be treated as different types of mental defects. this provides the chance to modulate analysis granularity when searching for phenotypic traits shared among multiple diseases or genotypes. it also ensures more significant and clear results when categorical statistical analyses are performed at lower granularity levels of detail. such interesting feature, proper of the hierarchical structure and hence belonging also to the defined phenotype location hierarchy, is exploited in the new gfinder genetic disorders modules implemented for the study of genetic disorder related genes.

in the exploration module, the user can select the detail level of phenotype description, or topological location, at which exploring the genetic disorder phenotypic annotations associated with a considered set of genes, or explore all levels at the same time . in the statistics module, consecutive statistical tests are executed on each categorical annotation independently on its level of detail. then, analysis results are shown listing each tested categorical annotation with its hierarchical level and the obtained p-value . this simultaneously provides a comprehensive view of the statistical significance of all considered annotations and clearly highlights the phenotypic characteristics with lowest p-value within each of the considered user-defined classes of genes, specifying also their granularity level. validation results showed that the above is correctly performed also when genes in different considered classes are associated with the same genetic disorder phenotypes, as it happens for disorders that may have a cardiovascular and neurological etiology. in these cases, although obtained p-values do not reach statistical significance, lower p-values properly indicate more relevant phenotypic characteristics .

gfinder, which is freely available on-line for non-profit use at , is hence a unique valuable tool that provides support for a phenotypic taxonomy of inherited diseases. although several tools are available for the analysis of gene annotations according to the gene ontology and few other controlled vocabularies, at present to our knowledge none supports phenotype analyses.

CONCLUSIONS
our normalization and structuring of the valuable phenotypic information that omim offers generated a controlled phenotypic vocabulary suitable for computational purposes. as our validation demonstrated, its use within the new-implemented gfinder modules allows effective phenotypic analyses of inherited disorders related genes. the new gfinder functionalities can hence help in better interpreting high-throughput gene lists and in unveiling new biomedical knowledge about the considered genes. thus, they can facilitate a genomic approach in the understanding of fundamental biological processes and complex cellular mechanisms, underlying patho-physiological phenotypes, through their corresponding genotypes.

