BACKGROUND
understanding how human populations interact and admix is one of the primary aims of human evolutionary genetics. to date, three main factors have been studied in detail which could be possible determinants of gene flow within and among human groups: geography, language and social structure.

geographical factors have been shown to play an important role in shaping genetic structure, at both inter and intra-continental levels . along with the evidence which indicates a geographical continental structure of human populations that is, systematically revealed by the analysis of nuclear loci  <cit> , natural barriers have also been indicated as one of the possible elements driving the distribution of human diversity at a local level  <cit> .

the relationship between linguistic and genetic diversity has been investigated in numerous studies aimed at understanding how cultural factors may shape gene pools . their results highlight a variable degree of correlation, depending not only on the geographic location and scale adopted, but also on the genetic loci analysed when the same set of populations is considered  <cit> .

finally, following the seminal study by seielstad et al.  <cit> , there has been a surge of interest in the role of sex-biased matrimonial mobility, an important aspect of human social structure. in accordance with the prevalence of patrilocal habits, where women move to their husbands households after the marriage, higher female transgenerational migration rates have been inferred at both local and continental level in most populations studied  <cit> .

even though the vast literature accumulated over twenty years  has produced important insights into the structure of human genetic variation, there are two critical points in the current approaches which need to be adequately considered when planning new research work. inferences based on extent and patterns of gene flow are usually indirect, being derived from analyses of genetic distances among populations, and assuming simplified migration schemes. this is, in fact, the case of the island model  <cit> . additionally, the relation between genetic variation and geography has been generally investigated simply by focusing on physical linear distances among populations  <cit> , an approach which might be misleading if we consider how human mobility can be influenced by geographical and environmental barriers or even facilitated by natural corridors on both local and global scales  <cit> .

in this context, given their high cultural and linguistic diversity and their complex history, african populations probably represent one of the most interesting case studies. recent studies on large-scale datasets regarding autosomal markers  support the role of both geography and language in explaining the distribution of genetic variation in africa  <cit> . among the four linguistic groups found in the continent, the niger-congo includes populations with the widest geographical distribution, spanning from the west to the east and south, and yet the highest common autosomal genetic ancestry . this is particularly surprising when considering the complexity of this phylum and its history, for the most part deduced from linguistic data. due to the uncertain position of kordofanian languages in the nc tree, the initial centre of diffusion of the phylum is still matter of debate. ehret  proposed the nuba mountains in sudan, whereas blench  suggested the western regions of africa. on the other hand, the later history of this phylum is generally agreed upon. in summary, around 10– <dig> thousand years ago , nc languages moved through the savannah of western africa, reaching the rainforest  <dig> ky later. subsequently, the bantu languages expanded  from cameroon into the equatorial forest of the congo, and southward. finally, they spread to the east  and to the south of the rainforest  around 3kya and from there to the south  <cit> . however, genetic data indicate that the expansion of bantu speaking individuals through the african continent could have been more complex than previously thought  <cit>  and as also previously pointed out by language and archaeology  <cit> .

in this work, we investigated the genetic structure and the patterns of gene flow in a broad dataset  of individuals settled in an area spanning from central to western africa. the populations under study inhabit both the savannah and the rainforest regions, and all speak languages belonging to the niger-congo phylum  <cit>  and share traditional patrilocal behaviour, which is here assumed to have been constant through time  <cit> . therefore, the migration of male individuals should be culturally more limited than females and the analysis of maternal lineages, rather than male-specific and autosomal loci, should allow for the exploration of patterns related to geographical habitat differences and/or linguistic barriers. it is in fact reasonable to expect that female gene flow is the main contributor to gene exchange between populations. in a patrilocal context, if either linguistics or geography is playing a role in structuring genetic variation among the populations under study, this should have left a signature in the distribution of mtdna variation. on the other hand, when the distribution of male lineages is found to be correlated with linguistic diversity  <cit> , it is difficult to determine whether such a correlation is a cause or effect of genetic isolation, due to the lack of formal models relating linguistic to genetic evolution. last but not least, the hypervariable region i of mitochondrial dna  is at present the only source of information on human genetic variation which provides an adequate genetic coverage of populations settled in the region under study  <cit> . we first explore the distribution of maternal lineages using a new multivariate statistical method . thereafter, we compare the fit of three different migration models as descriptors of the relationships among the clusters previously identified, using a bayesian approach  <cit> . by combining these two methods, our study suggests that the genetic structure of central and western african populations may be explained by the effects of recent gene flow constrained by environmental factors, which superimposes on a background shaped by pre-agricultural peopling.

RESULTS
intra-population variation and genetic distances
intra-population diversity parameters are shown in table  <dig>  hd ranges between  <dig>  in eviya and  <dig>  in akampka, and mnpd between  <dig>  in sefwi-wiawso and  <dig>  in orungu. fu's fs neutrality test provided large significant negative values for the great majority of populations analysed. only  <dig> out of  <dig> departed from this pattern, five of which were located between gabon and congo, the other two being settled in western africa .


n, number of individuals for each population; k, number of haplotypes; s, number of segregating sites; hd, haplotype diversity; mnpd, mean number of pairwise differences; fs, fu's statistic; p, statistical significance . in bold, populations typed in the present study; for additional information, refer to additional file 1: table s <dig>  for populations labelled with * please refer to additional file 1: tables s <dig> and original publication for further details.

pairwise genetic distances were calculated among all populations and the matrix represented in a mds plot, shown in figure  <dig>  the two-dimensional plot presented a stress value of  <dig> , which is lower than the 1% cut-off value of  <dig>  ascertained in sturrock and rocha   <cit> . populations from western, central-western and central african regions, are well recognizable in the mds plot , with the latter showing higher average genetic distances. as expected, this geographic trend is no longer observed at single-country level, underlining the non-representativeness of african political boundaries in defining population units. in particular, north cameroonian populations  group together with western populations from senegal and sierra-leone, while western cameroonians  are closer to nigerians and the other western-central groups. both bateke populations from congo appeared to be closer to central western groups than central ones. finally, idoma from nigeria present lower average genetic distances from western african populations than from western central, despite their geographical proximity .


from a linguistic point of view , the different families of the niger-congo phylum already show a geographically structured distribution, but, at a more refined level of classification, linguistic genealogical relationships do not correlate with genetic distances .

population genetic structure
the bayesian information criterion  established that  <dig> was the best number of clusters to describe the genetic structure of the dataset analysed: cluster assignations are presented in table  <dig> and additional file 4: figure s2b. the a.score was  <dig> , which means that the probability of re-assignment of populations to true clusters is three times higher than to randomly permuted clusters. some ambiguity was observed in the population clustering but this mainly concerned pairs of close groups .


for abbreviations and additional information, refer to additional file 1: table s <dig> 

as shown in the bi-dimensional plot, the  <dig> clusters were distributed according to a geographical pattern . in fact, the first discriminant function separated clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  from clusters  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  the second function separated these last four into two clearly distinguishable groups, a western  and a western-central one . the third discriminant function slightly separated cluster  <dig> and  <dig> and presented very similar values for the rest .


most clusters were found to group populations that are geographically close together, with few exceptions . clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> are composed mainly by populations inhabiting the rainforest areas, starting from central cameroon . the less heterogeneous is cluster  <dig> presenting two populations living in central-north cameroon  and one population from nigeria . the variance of the geographic distances among clusters was  <dig> times higher than within cluster . cluster  <dig> was the less geographically homogeneous, including two populations from nigeria  and the three nomadic groups from north cameroon  along with western africans. on the other hand, the ellipses of dispersion indicated that clusters  <dig> and  <dig>  even though they account for the highest number of populations, had lower internal variances. this is probably due to the fact that they include the geographical areas with the densest sampling coverage, which results in a higher number of genetically more closely related populations.

summary statistics calculated for the seven clusters are reported in additional file 5: table s <dig>  the mnpd was shown to increase  moving from clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> to the rest. the minimum evolution phylogenetic trees also presented much longer branches and consequently higher divergence for the sequences belonging to cluster  <dig> and  <dig> in comparison with the others . an amova was performed on the rainforest  vs savannah groups . the percentage of molecular variance among populations within the two groups was lower than among groups .

in addition, the mantel test showed a low but statistically significant correlation between geographic and genetic distances for the whole sample . when dividing the populations according to their habitat, geographic and genetic distances were highly correlated within the savannah region , while the rainforest area seemed characterized by a weaker but still significant correlation between the parameters . this trend was confirmed when plotting the linear regression for the genetic and geographic distances of the clusters in directions west to east  and east to west . in the former case, the correlation between linear and genetic distances was significant at  <dig>  level  and stronger than in the latter  which was non-significant .

interestingly, cluster  <dig> included four populations with a non-significant value of fu's statistics. when averaging this parameter among populations within each cluster, cluster  <dig> presented the least negative value , while the others ranged from a mean value of − <dig>  to − <dig>  . the wilcoxon mann–whitney test indicated that the two sets of fu's values for the savannah and rainforest populations are likely to be drawn from two differing distributions  the median values of the fu's statistic being − <dig>  and − <dig>  respectively.

migration models and migration rates
three different migration patterns were tested through a bayesian approach, including a full island , a linear stepping-stone  and an intermediate model . the calculation of the lbf indicated model b as the best descriptor for the migration processes occurring in the region under study for all the five independent sub-samples . the values of theta  and the migration rates  obtained with model b were averaged for the fifteen independent runs and are reported in table  <dig>  most of the posterior distributions showed normal shapes  and the runs converged to very close values for all the parameters across the three runs . however, posteriors for the m parameters between clusters  <dig> and  <dig> and  <dig> and  <dig> were found to have a mode which was close to zero  and a constantly decreasing distribution when moving towards positive values. in these cases, the contribution of migrants exchanged to the observed variation could be considered as null . therefore, the resulting model is a stepping-stone with two main discontinuities, as described above, across the whole region .


each sub-sampling was run three times for each model allowing  <dig> pairs of model comparisons based on the thermodynamic integration value. ma is the full island model, mb the stepping-stone model and mc is the intermediate model. an lbf >  <dig> indicates a higher probability for the numerator model; values <  <dig> indicate the contrary.

values of thetas are reported on the diagonal. direction of migration is represented as outgoing from the clusters in row and incoming into the clusters in column ; "--" states for migration flows not allowed.

cluster  <dig> shows the lowest value of effective population size, having Θ =  <dig> , while, for the remaining clusters, Θ values range between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  which have the highest Θ values, presented the highest rates of immigrants ranging from  <dig> to 11%. cluster  <dig> is characterized by high flows both incoming and outgoing, while cluster  <dig> exchanges high rates of migrants with cluster  <dig> but no flow is retrieved with cluster  <dig>  finally, cluster  <dig> is connected to cluster  <dig> through a high outgoing but low incoming migrant rate. this is to be expected considering the lower Θ value compared to the other clusters .

discussion
populations speaking languages belonging to the niger-congo phylum have been the object of several studies, some of which aimed to assess the patterns associated with the diffusion of bantu languages  <cit> . this is the phylum containing the highest number of languages worldwide and genealogical classification of its families is still under debate  <cit> . however, there is a consensus on the fact that western atlantic and mande are more ancient than central benue-congo and bantu branches, while the emergence of kordofanian remains unclear  <cit> . when autosomal variation is analysed, only a slight substructure among the populations belonging to the entire phylum is observed  <cit> . by increasing both the number of populations and the geographical coverage, we were able to obtain new insights into the relations among niger-congo speakers.

the populations included in our dataset speak languages belonging to several sub-branches of the nc family  and are scattered through a vast area of sub-saharan africa, which mainly includes two habitats: the savannah and the rainforest. roughly speaking, the first prevails in the region from senegal to northern cameroon while the second characterizes most of the areas corresponding to southern cameroon, gabon and congo. climatic studies have shown that after the phenomenon known as the younger dryas , the climatic conditions in the sub-saharan region became less arid and the distribution and density of the rainforest have remained stable for the last  <dig>  ky  <cit> . the peopling of the sub-saharan region is likely to have increased since then and the populations here considered have probably been in contact within the same time frame.

given the shared traditional patrilocal habit of the populations under study, we were able to focus on mtdna variation as the source of genetic information for microevolutionary inference. by combining a multivariate approach with the test of specific migration patterns, we were able to detect a complex structure among the populations under study, which seems to be better explained by the effect of local environmental factors rather than the internal linguistic complexity of the nc phylum.

after testing three migratory models , we observed that the stepping-stone model better describes the distribution of mtdna variation throughout the whole region. this may indicate a general tendency of women to spread out from their villages with the intensity of the migration decreasing with distance, so that only neighbouring groups share common genetic variation. the isolation by distance  pattern observed in our sample is in agreement with previous studies which showed that geographic distances better explain genetic differences among human populations than ethnic affiliations  <cit> .

apart from this general indication, the analysis of mtdna variation allowed us to identify two main groups quite clearly, with the rainforest populations being more structured and diverse than the savannah groups. in fact, the former populations are characterized by higher values of molecular measures of within-population diversity , larger genetic distances and phylogenetic trees with longer branches, and a lower proportion of different haplotypes . the analysis of genetic structure detected the main signal of differentiation in this group, separating clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> from the others. the two groups also show a significant difference in the distribution of their fs values, with rainforest populations showing a less negative average  as well as including  <dig> out of the  <dig> populations with non-significant fs values , suggesting a less important role of demographic expansions in their evolutionary history. the fu's test, and other statistics relying on haplotype frequencies, were found to be more sensitive for detecting expansions on nonrecombining genomic regions than tajima's d and other tests  <cit> . this signature of genetic drift could have been enhanced by the reduced effective population size of the mtdna compared to autosomal loci, but it is unlikely to have generated the non random genetic structure observed here.

the signature of ibd detected within the savannah region is higher than the one in the rainforest, and indicates, together with the observations of a lower degree of isolation among the former, that the migratory patterns are more straightforward to interpret in the savannah than in the forest. therefore, we may conclude that although geographic factors have a role in both areas, for the savannah this can be simply described as a linear correlation between physical and genetic distances, while for the rainforest the role played by environmental factors is probably more complex. this conclusion highlights the usefulness of explicit geographic models in trying to understand human genetic diversity, which has been previously suggested by ray and excoffier   <cit> .

as an important evolutionary consideration, we should take into account the possibility that differences in fu's statistical values between savannah and rainforest could be also explained by the role of selection. however, although the worldwide distribution of mtdna lineages has been proposed to be driven by selective processes related to temperature changes, the geographic region here analysed appears to be quite homogeneous for this putative temperature effect  <cit> . in future studies, researchers should consider that other climatic parameters which are different in the savannah and rainforest environments have yet to be explored.

another caveat of the present study may be the a priori definition of population units, based on the sampling location and the languages spoken by the individuals. we are aware that such a definition may lead to an approximation in the estimate of the spatial distribution of allele frequencies, since each population is considered as a sampling point. in the present case, we believe that, despite the vast geographical area covered by our dataset, the homogeneous nature of sampling helps overcoming this limitation and is allowing a reliable representation of the distribution of maternal lineages.

the complexity of the migratory patterns observed here is further emphasized by a discontinuity detected between clusters  <dig> and  <dig>  which overlaps with a broad area of the rainforest region  where the sampling coverage is fairly homogeneous. cultural factors do not seem to offer an explanation for this separation. in fact, the populations composing the two clusters speak languages that are closely related, within the narrow bantu family and show no major differences in their subsistence economy. on the other hand, environmental factors could have played a role if one considers that the rainforest habitat may decrease the intensity of gene flow among populations after their initial settlement in deforested areas, making migration more difficult. another discontinuity in the pattern  overlapped with a gap in the sampling coverage of the dataset under study, corresponding to the area of guinea, the ivory cost and liberia, where tropical rainforest vegetation generally prevails. in the absence of these samples, any further inference on the validity of the observed discontinuity would be very speculative. however, their analysis could contribute to a more exhaustive testing of the influence of different environments on the intensity of migrations among human populations.

considering all the previous observations, we suggest that farming rainforest populations have probably undergone a local, more recent, and less intense demographic expansion than other food producer populations of the niger-congo phylum, which has been previously observed in gabon through the analysis of y chromosome lineages  <cit> . evidence of ancient peopling should also be taken into account when interpreting genetic data. in fact, central africa is characterized by a well-defined succession of middle stone age industries while western africa seems to have been populated at very low densities until 10– <dig> kya  <cit> . rainforest farmers have also been shown to share both recent and ancient genetic backgrounds with hunter-gatherer populations  <cit> .

it is interesting to note the unexpected association observed in cluster  <dig> where populations of nomadic shepherds from northern cameroon  were grouped together with western groups. complex relationships among cameroon ethnic groups have already been reported in previous studies  <cit> . although the intermediate model we tested was not the best supported by the analysis, it actually detected high migration rates from cluster  <dig> to clusters  <dig> and  <dig> . mixed hierarchical models of migration combined with a better knowledge of the nomadic routes followed by these populations would be worth investigating in order to clarify our findings.

focusing on the genetic variation of niger-congo-speaking populations, our results highlighted a stronger structure among the populations settled in the central area, which correspond to the bantu-speaking groups. in fact, populations settled in nigeria and ghana  and guinea bissau and senegal , which present a high linguistic diversity, seem to be characterized by a rather continuous gene flow and show smaller inter-population differences. this contradicts the expectations described above, based on linguistic data, of a recent demic expansion from the area of nigeria-cameroon towards central southern and eastern africa, and an earlier diffusion from western to central africa  <cit> .

as a general conclusion, language does not seem to be the main predictor for the distribution of genetic variation among niger-congo-speaking populations. despite the general belief that language is transmitted by migrating women, genetic analyses have repeatedly shown its preferential correlation with paternal rather than maternal genetic variation  <cit> .

unfortunately, we were unable to find a reliable approach for the definition of linguistic distances. comprehensive classifications based on a quantitative measure of lexical similarities are only available for the narrow bantu languages, and not systematically for other niger-congo branches . since in this dataset only 28/ <dig> populations belong to the narrow bantu family, we decided to avoid this approach in order not to introduce interpretation biases due to inaccurate or questionable linguistic classification.

even though the genetic clusters here reported cannot be considered as random mating units, the picture presented in our study suggests that, in particular thanks to female-biased movements, gene flow occurs among human populations speaking very different languages.

the analysis of paternal patterns of migration would be useful to shed light on the substructure and the random mating areas among patrilocal populations, while autosomal and x-chromosomal data could be productively investigated to explore whether sex-biased movements are detectable in the distribution of genome variation.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we present a genetic study on female patterns of migration in populations from central and western africa which share a patrilocal tradition and belong to the same linguistic phylum. our results show how macro habitats seem to play a major role in determining population genetic structure. population samples from guinea, the ivory coast and liberia could allow us to test whether this working hypothesis applies to an even larger area of the continent. however, we highlight here how fundamental the knowledge of cultural factors is when planning a population genetic study. in fact, having reliable information about matrimonial behaviour, even the resolution provided by a relatively small region of mtdna, proved useful in inferring complex patterns of migration and isolation.

