BACKGROUND
one of the challenges of evolutionary biology is phylogeny reconstruction. modern techniques have facilitated the use of dna sequences as the primary source of phylogenetic data. usually, only small fractions of the genome are analyzed. in systematic research, such regions are often assumed to reflect the organismal lineage  phylogeny. in principle, however, the resulting phylogenies do not reflect the history of the species, but rather the history of the individual dna regions themselves . these regions may have different evolutionary histories, which can lead to presence of several conflicting gene phylogenies. taken together, these phylogenies can give clues to the organismal phylogeny . incongruent gene phylogenies may have different causes, e.g. introgression , homo- or polyploid hybridization , mistaken orthology due to gene duplications and losses  <cit> , or incomplete lineage sorting of alleles  <cit> . in fact, coalescence theory predicts that in some cases, the most probable gene tree will not even reflect the species tree  <cit> , and this has also been shown in simulation studies using coalescent models on concatenated data  <cit> .

in order to understand how gene phylogenies relate to organismal phylogenies, it is important to obtain sequence data from different parts of the genomes  <cit> . plant molecular phylogenetics has heavily utilized chloroplast and nuclear ribosomal dna  data, whereas other parts of the nuclear genome, as well as the mitochondrial genome, are much less utilized. to differentiate between different causes of gene tree discordances, the use of multiple, potentially unlinked low-copy gene regions is desirable .

if sampling of a multi-copy gene family is poor, paralogues may be misidentified as orthologues  <cit> . paralogy problems may, however, exist even if entire genome sequences are at hand, if paralogues have gone extinct haphazardly in different lineages  <cit> . to complicate matters even further, members of a multi-copy gene family, and also alleles of the same gene, may recombine and make phylogenetic analysis difficult  <cit> . paradoxically, this property has facilitated the use of nrdna sequences, since cistrons from this gene family often are present in very large tandemly repeated numbers. these copies are usually very similar due to the process of concerted evolution, operating by e.g. unequal crossing over and gene conversion .

to distinguish intralineage processes such as gene duplications from interlineage processes  causing tree discordances, we are mainly interested in gene copies at three different levels. we follow the terminology of  <cit>  and use the term "inparalogues" for genes resulting from duplications within terminal taxa/lineages . duplications that occur along the internal branches of the ingroup species tree will be referred to as "recent outparalogues" . genes that have duplicated before the origin of the group of interest will be referred to as "ancient outparalogues" . "sequence copies" or "sequence variants" means any kind of alleles, paralogues or orthologues that are similar enough to be aligned with each other.

in organisms where complete genome sequences are not available, paralogy determination has to be considered by heuristic methods. a classical method to find paralogues is to use southern blot hybridization  <cit> . a drawback of this method is that it only gives a number of bands able to hybridize with the probe under specific conditions. it does not reveal the actual sequences, which makes it impossible to make any detailed assertions about the homology status of the different bands detected.

another way to examine paralogues is to use a phylogenetic approach to sort out the different copies of the gene. this has been applied to genomes with complete sequence data . to deal with genomes with incomplete sequence information, small & al.  <cit>  suggested a combination of pcr-mediated sequencing, southern blots, and expression studies. they argue that the sequence-based approach is the weakest and that especially southern blots can be used to strengthen orthology assessment. however, they did not consider using multiple pcr primer pairs to amplify several overlapping dna fragments instead of amplifying one single fragment.

while the combination of the approaches certainly is powerful, we think that there is room for improvement of the pcr-mediated approach. in principle, multiple pcr primers could be used with essentially the same coverage as constructed hybridization probes, but with the difference of being more sensitive and, most importantly, giving access to the actual sequences and thus to sophisticated phylogenetic analyses. a major advantage here is that gene trees derived from sequence data provide a possibility to assess the detailed paralogy status  of multiple sequence copies. a weakness of the pcr method, however, is that some sequence copies may be preferred in the amplification . using multiple primer pairs along the sequence might alleviate this problem to some extent, but if these primers were designed from a single sequence, they will on average be biased towards sequences that are similar to the template sequence. to circumvent this problem, one can design primers placed in more conserved parts of the sequence. obviously, this requires some knowledge of the sequence diversity present. although difficult to quantify exactly, pcr bias will decrease and the possibility to find paralogues will increase with the number of independent pcr primer pairs used.

to assess the efficiency of a multiple pcr-primer method, we use a probabilistic approach. under the assumption that different primer pairs are independent and that they do not, on average, preferentially prefer some copies to others, we can calculate the probability that all sequence copies have been detected with these primer pairs.

in order to use nuclear genes in phylogenetic analyses when entire genome sequence information is not at hand, it is often necessary to develop protocols that are specific for the plant group in question  <cit> . popp & oxelman  <cit>  developed a protocol to use rna polymerase genes in phylogenies, which has been successfully used in subsequent sileneae  studies to reveal a number of conflicting gene trees . here, we test the utility of another low-copy nuclear gene, slx1/sly <dig>  sly <dig> is a sex-linked gene described from the y chromosome of silene latifolia poir., a dioecious member of silene sect. elisanthe  ledeb.  <cit> . slx <dig> is a closely related gene, located on the x chromosome  <cit> . there are also homologues in the other dioecious species in elisanthe  <cit>  and on the autosomes in non-dioecious taxa  <cit> . the region is hereafter called "xy1". an initial southern blot study suggested that there may be several paralogues of xy <dig>  <cit> , but in later pcr-based studies, only a single xy <dig> copy has been found  <cit> .

preliminary phylogenetic analyses of xy <dig> sequences indicated that different parts of the gene give rise to conflicting silene phylogenies. these conflicts mainly involved the relationships between a few distinct lineages: silene sections elisanthe and conoimorpha and some of their relatives in silene subgenus behenantha  endl. . the dioecious species in sect. elisanthe  clairv., s. diclinis  lainz, s. heuffelii soó, s. marizii samp.) are characterized by sexual dimorphism and sex chromosomes. previous studies indicate a close relationship between the dioecious species in silene sect. elisanthe and the members of silene sect. conoimorpha otth  <cit> , the members of the conoimorpha group all have calyces with several  prominent parallel nerves. silene vulgaris  garcke represents a group of species having strongly inflated calyces with reticulate nerves. they appear closely related to the annual s. behen l.  and also to s. pendula l.  <cit> .

the aim of this study is to investigate the historical explanation to a case where different parts of a gene  give rise to conflicting phylogenies within silene. to investigate whether gene duplication/loss may be a plausible explanation we present a novel probabilistic pcr approach to determine the number of sequence variants present in an organism.

RESULTS
number of sequence variants
in s. conica l., s. conoidea l. and s. pendula only one xy <dig> sequence variant was found . in s. acaulis l. two variants were found and in s. nutans l. and s. vulgaris three variants were found . using our novel approach to calculate the posterior probability that the actual number of sequence variants is the observed number , we found that for all species except s. nutans, the posterior probability is >  <dig>  that there are no more undetected variants . the divergence between the variants within an individual was always less than the divergence between sequences from different species . the entire alignment of the xy <dig> region contained  <dig> bp and  <dig> indel characters. the reduced 9-taxon alignment, where parts with large amounts of missing data  in many sequences were excluded, contained  <dig> bp.

groups are according to oxelman & lidén  <cit> , and oxelman & al.  <cit> , where b = silene subgenus behenantha  endl., be = silene sect. behenantha otth, c = silene sect. conoimorpha otth, e = silene sect. elisanthe  ledeb., de = dioecious silene sect. elisanthe, l = lychnis l., s = silene subgenus silene. note that be, c, and e are nested within b. "dna type" indicates type of sequence . specimens in bold were sequenced in the present study. for these accessions voucher information  is given. more voucher details can be found in sileneae database  <cit> . for other accessions references to original publications are given. accession numbers in genbank/embl. superscripts a, b, c correspond to sequence names in the phylogenies.

number and length of xy <dig> sequence copies found. indicated are also which parts of the region that are covered in which taxa. the "n" row indicates number of pcr fragments included in the probabilistic calculations of sequence numbers. the "p" row indicates the posterior probabilities that we did find all sequence copies . the divergence estimates are means from pairwise tamura-nei distances ± standard error  from sequences within an individual, and mean distances to sequences from other individuals.

conflicting phylogenetic signals in different parts of the alignment
the gard recombination detection screening suggested several recombination breakpoints in the reduced 4045-bp alignment, resulting in two larger non-recombinant partitions in the alignment. the central part of the alignment was divided into a few short partitions by additional recombination breakpoints. different analysis settings resulted in variation in the number and placement of breakpoints. the positions of the outermost breakpoints, however, differed only slightly: directly before exon  <dig> and in the intron between exons  <dig> and  <dig> . the main differences between the partitions  are that s. vulgaris and s. conica change places in the position closest to the dioecious species s. latifolia and s. dioica .

locations of breakpoints between non-recombinant parts of the reduced 4045-bp alignment suggested by gard, and corresponding positions in the longer alignment. substitution models were suggested by mrmodeltest aic.

bayesian phylogenies
applying bayesian phylogenetic methods to the partitions suggested by gard on the full  <dig> bp alignment with more taxa  resulted in trees compatible to the neighbor-joining trees from gard. in the three cases  where there were more than one sequence variant per individual, these were always monophyletic within the species . silene conica and s. conoidea, representing sect. conoimorpha, grouped together with strong support . also s. dioica and s. latifolia constituted a well-supported group  in both partitions . silene noctiflora l., the type species of sect.elisanthe  <cit> , did not form a monophyletic group with the dioecious species .

in the 5' part of the alignment s. vulgaris grouped together with s. noctiflora as a sister-group to the dioecious species in sect. elisanthe. this whole clade  was sister to a clade with the conoimorpha group and s. pendula . in the 3' part of the alignment, sect. conoimorpha grouped together with s. noctiflora as the closest relatives  to the dioecious elisanthe. silene vulgaris grouped with s. pendula .

the ages of the nodes including s. vulgaris and its closest relatives were  <dig>  million years in the 5' part , and  <dig>  million years in the 3' part for the split with s. pendula . the corresponding ages for sect. conoimorpha were  <dig>  million years in the 5' part  and  <dig>  million years in the 3' part  . however, the 95% hpd intervals for these nodes overlap considerably.

parsimony phylogenies
the parsimony trees for the two partitions were congruent with the corresponding trees obtained by bayesian inference and by the gard analysis, both using the reduced alignment  and the full 6416-bp data set with additional gap characters .

discussion
silene vulgaris and the monophyletic group conoimorpha exchange positions in our phylogenetic trees somewhere between the first  <dig>  kbp and the last  <dig>  kbp of the  <dig> bp xy <dig> alignment . the last  <dig>  kbp gives a phylogeny in agreement with those obtained by the nuclear ribosomal dna region its  <cit>  and the low-copy nuclear genes rpa <dig>  rpb <dig> and the rpd2a gene . also chloroplast dna rps <dig>  <cit>  and a large chloroplast dna data set  <cit>  show agreeing phylogenies. in contrast, the first  <dig>  kbp of the alignment gives an unexpected phylogeny, where s. vulgaris is placed closely related to the dioecious elisanthe species. this deviating phylogenetic pattern was also recently found in the rpd2b gene . the results from the xy <dig> gene agree with previous studies that have shown that s. noctiflora does not belong with the dioecious species in silene sect. elisanthe  <cit> .

conflicts between separate phylogenies based on different genes can be observed on several genomic levels: when comparing phylogenies based on different genomes , different genes or different copies of a gene , or even different parts of one gene. these conflicting phylogenies can either reflect complex phylogenetic patterns , or simply highlight errors and problems in lab procedures and/or phylogenetic methods. we will here discuss possible causes of the observed phylogenetic conflict.

lab errors and artefacts
• contamination or mix-up of extractions, pcr samples or sequence reactions: the sequences are verified by multiple accessions of the species, and multiple pcr and sequence reactions. the data set also includes sequences made in different laboratories from different source plants. thus, this possibility can be safely rejected.

• recombination between paralogues or alleles during pcr: paralogous gene copies or alleles can recombine during pcr . this process could create a pattern like the observed one, if our sequencing reactions would have been based on single pcr products of the entire gene. however, our pcr products include several overlapping fragments, 700– <dig> bp long.

• inconsistent alignment procedures in separate parts of the alignment could also influence the accurateness of the resulting phylogeny. this explanation is also unlikely, because the included alignment appears unproblematic. two  <dig> bp parts of the alignment with much indel variation were excluded in the reduced alignment used in the gard analysis.

• inappropriate phylogenetic methods or sampling errors: choosing the wrong phylogenetic method is a potential cause of inconsistent phylogenies. in this study, we used distance methods, bayesian methods and parsimony methods for phylogeny reconstruction. the same general pattern was found with all methods. the different methods applied here have very different theories and potential problems  <cit> , and in addition, the bootstrap support values and the posterior probabilities are high. therefore, we argue that the observed pattern is not likely to have been caused by inappropriate methodologies. the high support values also make stochastic errors  an unlikely explanation.

biological explanations
• existence of paralogues: if a gene duplicates within a lineage, each of the resulting paralogues will have its own evolutionary fate. difficulties in orthology determination can seriously distort phylogenies and conclusions drawn from them. two processes are potentially serious when inferring organismal phylogenies from multi-copy sequences. first, in vivo recombination between the gene copies may give rise to mosaic sequences, which can give inconsistent phylogenies, where different parts of the alignment will reflect conflicting topologies. second, there is a risk that orthology is mistaken in the phylogenetic analysis if some of the existing outparalogues are not detected, or if some of the paralogues are lost in some lineages. the phylogeny will then be influenced by which copy is lost  in which lineage  <cit> . on the other hand, inparalogues  will not cause such problems . ancient gene duplications  followed by haphazard losses will lead to a pattern with some parts of the ingroup grouping with the outgroup . this effect will, under the assumption that the in- and outgroups are correctly circumscribed, indicate that there is a paralogy problem. thus, only recent outparalogues, i.e. genes that have duplicated after the divergence of the ingroup, but before the origin of the terminal taxa , are of serious concern for orthology/paralogy interpretation in our case .

recombination between two or more paralogues could certainly create a pattern like the one we observe. results from southern blot hybridization experiments made by delichère & al.  <cit>  suggest that there may be one or more copies of slx1/sly <dig> on the chromosomes of s. latifolia. it is unknown whether these extra copies are inparalogues, recent outparalogues, or if their origins are more ancient than the origin of silene . in s. conica, the gene orthologous to slx1/sly <dig> seem to be single copy according to our results and those of atanassov & al.  <cit> . rt-pcr experiments by nicolas & al.  <cit>  also revealed only one sequence in all dioecious species analyzed. the within-species sequence variation we observed in s. vulgaris, s. acaulis and s. nutans is possibly caused by allele variation and/or recent gene duplication, resulting in inparalogues. a natural explanation to the multiple bands detected in some of the southern blots experiments  <cit>  might therefore be ancient outparalogues that diverged before the diversification of silene, or other genes with a similar sequence. however, an alternative explanation might be that they represent silent pseudogenes that have diverged so much that our pcr experiments have failed to target them. although not an impossible explanation, we consider this to be unlikely, given the large number of different pcr primer pairs used by us on taxa representing various major lineages in silene and given the high posterior probabilities from the statistical calculations. note however that relaxation of selective constraints in pseudogenes may result in elevated substitution and indel rates, resulting in violation of the assumption of non-biased targeting of the primers constructed from an alignment of apparently functional gene sequences.

• incomplete lineage sorting: in recently diverged lineages, the alleles from the ancestral gene pool might not yet have become sorted into the new lineages. one way to reject incomplete lineage sorting as a possible cause of incongruence could be to compare the divergence times of the conflicting nodes. assuming that one of the trees does reflect the organismal tree, lineage sorting can be rejected if the divergence time of the organismal tree node is older than in the deviating tree. if we consider the tree from the 3' part of xy <dig> to be the most likely organism tree , we cannot reject incomplete lineage sorting because the ages are very similar  or considerably younger . however, the 95% hpd intervals for the relevant nodes overlap largely , and we lack a robust hypothesis about dating of splits in the species tree. it is therefore not possible either to reject or corroborate incomplete lineage sorting as the cause of the observed incongruence.

• horizontal gene transfer: recently, horizontal  gene transfer in plants has been reported . most of these cases are mitochondrial genes that seem to be transferred between isolated lineages, but two examples of horizontal transfer of nuclear genes have also been suggested  <cit> . although we cannot rule out horizontal gene transfer completely, we do not have a reasonable explanation on the mechanisms and series of events that could create the observed pattern.

• hybridization also creates patterns where different parts of the hybrid's genome reflect relationships with the different parental taxa. if the hybridization is a success, genes or alleles with separate evolutionary histories will become introduced into the offspring. through repeated backcrossing with one of the parental lineages, only a minority of the other lineage's genes will prevail  and the resulting pattern will mimic horizontal gene transfer.

for a hybridization event to be a favourable explanation when groups exchange positions between two trees, the age of the split disagreeing with the species tree should be younger than in the species tree  <cit> . if we assume that the 3' part of the xy <dig> alignment reflects the organism tree , the hybridization explanation is not supported if the ages of nodes viii and v are taken at face value . the 95% hpd intervals for the nodes are broad, however, so hybridization cannot be rejected. nodes ix and iii have very similar median ages, making the discrimination between hybridization and intralineage processes even more obscure. denser taxon sampling could possibly narrow the hpd intervals.

there are no morphological characters suggesting that hybridization has taken place. on the other hand, this putative event probably lies several million years back, and given the rampant morphological homoplasy in silene in general, this is perhaps not surprising.

an enigmatic feature of the phylogenetic results is that the lineages of s. vulgaris and the conoimorpha group appear to mutually switch positions in the trees. there is no reason to expect that recombination should take place at the same sequence location in different lineages, either under a paralogy or under a hybridization hypothesis. however, the taxonomic sampling is sparse, and further sampling might reveal that the phylogenetic positions are not mutually exchanged. the fact that gard actually supports several recombination events may indicate sequential events, rather than a reciprocal switch.

lychnis flos-jovis appears within silene in our trees . the phylogenetic status of lychnis in relation to silene is not strongly supported  <cit> , but recent studies  have rather corroborated the sister-group relationship between the two. however, other data  also indicate complicated patterns that may involve reticulations. here, we follow oxelman & al's  <cit>  generic classification of the tribe sileneae, but the purpose of this paper is not to draw any taxonomic conclusions.

a difficulty when working with organisms where the entire genomic sequences are not known is to estimate confidence in whether the number of sequence variants  detected does reflect all variation within the organism. joly & al.  <cit>  used a binomial distribution to calculate the number of clones from a pcr product that had to be sequenced to achieve a certain probability of sampling all alleles in a tetraploid individual . since the binomial distribution assumes the events of finding an allele to be independent we argue that a bayesian approach is more appropriate. the methods appear to give similar results, however. our approach has the advantage that the total number of sequence copies does not need to be known. also, replicating the number of independent pcr primer pairs decreases the risk of pcr bias.

CONCLUSIONS
there is a phylogenetic conflict in different parts of the silene slx1/y <dig> gene that cannot be explained by gene duplications/losses or artefacts, such as in vitro recombination during pcr. this phylogenetic incongruence may have been caused by recombination of two divergent alleles following horizontal gene transfer, interspecific hybridization or incomplete lineage sorting. given our results of the relative dating, we can reject neither of these hypotheses. however, the fact that we recently discovered a phylogenetic pattern similar to that from the first part of the xy <dig> alignment also in the rpd2b gene  can be interpreted as support for the hybridization/introgression hypothesis.

our novel probabilistic pcr approach, in combination with phylogenetic methods, provides a useful way to discriminate between different paralogue types and to determine the number of outparalogues in a genome, when the entire genomic sequence is not known.

this example clearly demonstrates that different parts of the genome may tell us different stories and stresses the importance of using multiple genes in reconstruction of taxonomic relationships.

