BACKGROUND
the acyl:coa synthetases belong to the "amp-forming superfamily" or "acyl-adenylate/thioester-forming" superfamily. acs catalyze transfer of a wide variety of acyl, aryl and aminoacyl moieties from their corresponding acids to the phosphopantetheine group of coenzyme a  or other carrier proteins through formation of a thioester bond. based on the type of the carboxylate substrate, enzymes of this superfamily have been functionally divided into several subfamilies, namely acetyl:coa synthetases , medium chain:coa synthetases , long chain:coa synthetases , 4-coumarate:coa ligases , luciferases  and adenylation domains of nrpss  . accs activates c2-c <dig> fatty acids, mcs activates c4-c <dig> and lcs activates c10-c <dig> fatty acids. luciferases utilize luciferin as the substrate. 4cls catalyzes the activation of various cinnamic acid derivatives   <cit> . the substrates for adenylation domains of nrps include various proteinogenic as well as non-proteinogenic amino acids. the enzymes carry out a two-step reaction process which proceeds through the hydrolysis of pyrophosphate . in the first step of the reaction, atp in presence of mg2+ reacts with a carboxylate substrate to form an acyl-adenylate intermediate with the simultaneous release of pyrophosphate. in the second step of the reaction, the acyl-adenylate intermediate is esterified to coa in case of accs, lcs, mcs, 4cl subfamily while adenylation domains of nrps catalyze the transfer of the acyl adenylate to 4'-phosphopantheteine group of peptidyl carrier protein . in case of luciferases the acyl intermediate is oxidized by molecular oxygen. since the enzymes form thioester derivatives through an acyl-adenylate intermediate, this superfamily is also known as "acyl-adenylate/thioester-forming" superfamily. apart from facl , which transfer the acyl-adenylate intermediate to coa, recently a new family of enzymes called faal  which transfer acyl adenylate to carrier protein domains of adjacent nrps/pks clusters have been discovered in mycobacterium tuberculosis  <cit> .

acyl:coa synthetases have been characterized from both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms and are found in a wide variety of tissues and cell organelles. acyl:coa derivatives are known to play important role in cell signaling  <cit> , post-translational protein modification  <cit> , intracellular protein transport  <cit>  and transcriptional control of genes involved in lipid metabolism  <cit> . nrpss catalyze the synthesis of a large number of pharmacologically important peptides eg., vancomycin, cephalosporins, cyclosporins, penicillins  <cit> . 4-coumarate:coa ligases play central role in the biosynthesis of phenylpropanoid-derived compounds like coumarins, stilbenes, and lignin, which are important in plant growth and development  <cit> . since the members of the superfamily are involved in synthesis of siderophores like mycobactin and yersiniabactin in m. tuberculosis and y. pestis, which are important for microbial virulence; several studies have implicated these enzymes as important drug targets  <cit> . the enzymes of this superfamily have also been targets of interesting protein engineering studies. eg. the acyl:coa synthetases have been used to incorporate unusual acyl groups into a variety of secondary metabolites, e.g. antibiotics. this helps in the synthesis of novel antibiotics with improved potency. the adenylation domains of nrpss can be engineered to generate novel peptide antibiotics. luciferase is extensively used for in-vivo luminescence monitoring  <cit>  and also as reporter of gene expression and regulation  <cit> . the members of the superfamily are very diverse in their primary sequence and the overall sequence similarity ranges between 20-30%. however there are reports of presence of highly conserved motifs within the superfamily, especially the putative "amp-binding domain signature motif"  . the presence of this motif is used as the main criteria to group these enzymes in one superfamily  <cit> .

crystal structures have been elucidated for several members of the superfamily, some with and some without substrates  <cit> . inspite of large differences in their primary sequences , the enzymes adopt a conserved structural fold with large n-terminal and small c-terminal domain with the active site lying between the interface of the two domains . the three-dimensional structures in complex with substrates have allowed identification of the substrate binding pocket. the crystal structure of adenylation domain of gramicidin synthetase  has helped in identification of  <dig> amino acids forming the substrate  binding pocket . the hypothesis that the amino acids forming the substrate binding pocket can potentially be the specificity determining residues was established by the fact that the changes in these residues have directly altered the substrate specificity of peptide synthetases  <cit> . for adenylation domains of nrpss, it has been shown that prediction of substrate specificity based on the active site pocket residues are more accurate than whole sequence comparisons  <cit> . similarly, putative substrate binding pocket residues have been identified for 4cls and luciferases and their mutations have successfully altered the substrate specificity profiles of these enzymes  <cit> .

recently there have been reports of enzymes which show "anomalous" substrate specificity. cg <dig> from drosophila melanogaster shows maximum sequence similarity to luciferase. however biochemical experiments show that it is a long chain fatty acyl:coa synthetase and does not function as luciferase  <cit> . similarly two proteins from arabidopsis thaliana, namely at <dig> g <dig> and at <dig> g <dig> are annotated as 4cl-like proteins in the databases. however biochemical analysis revealed them to be utilizing long chain fatty acids as the substrates  <cit> . another example is at <dig> g <dig> which shows similarity to 4cl but is experimentally found to be a medium chain coa ligase and has been shown to be involved in pollen development and sporopollenin biosynthesis  <cit> . it is unclear how these enzymes show high sequence similarity to one subfamily but have substrate preference corresponding to other subfamily. a large number of genes belonging to acyl adenylate superfamily have been deposited in public databases without any substrate preference being assigned to them. predicting the substrate preference of these enzymes will help in unravelling their specific biological functions.

in this manuscript, we have attempted to develop a novel computational approach which will be fast enough for genome scale prediction of substrate specificity of this biologically important enzyme family. we have used a knowledge-based approach which combines substrate specificity information from experimentally characterized members of this superfamily with structural information from available crystal structures to derive predictive rules for correlating sequence to substrate specificity. based on detailed sequence and structural analysis we have identified residues which play a crucial role in dictating substrate preference of this enzyme superfamily. we also demonstrate that, based on profiles of such specificity determining residues it is not only possible to predict the substrate specificities of various subfamilies accurately, but also rationalize the observed substrate preferences of enzymes which show anomalous substrate specificity. we have also carried out detailed structural analysis and ligand docking studies for each subfamily to understand the structural basis of substrate selection.

RESULTS
phylogenetic and hmm profile analysis
the sequences belonging to various different subfamilies of acyl-adenylate superfamily were collected by keyword search and repeated blast searches  <cit>  against the nr database of ncbi  <cit> . only sequences with known substrate preference were catalogued. the resulting database comprised of  <dig> protein sequences with known substrate specificity . since the adenylation domains are part of multidomain proteins,  <dig> adenylation domains with known substrates and correct domain boundaries were extracted from nrpsdb, a comprehensive database on domain arrangement and substrate specificity of nrpss  <cit> . all-against-all pairwise sequence alignments were carried out for all  <dig> sequences to determine the similarity across the whole superfamily. as can be seen from table  <dig> the similarity within the superfamily varies from 10-30%. inter-subfamily similarity and intra-subfamily similarity values were overlapping i.e. a lcs may show higher percentage similarity to another lcs in the range of 10-30% and it may show similarity in the same range with luciferase also . hence for this superfamily of enzymes the substrate preference for an uncharacterized sequence cannot be assigned based on the closest sequence homolog.

all against all pairwise sequence comparisons were carried out by needleman and wunsch program of the emboss package. the figures in the parenthesis indicate the number of sequences included in our analysis for each subfamily.

prediction of substrate specificity based on sdrs
it is possible that, the enzymes cg <dig>  at <dig> g <dig>  at <dig> g <dig> and at <dig> g <dig> which show anomalous substrate preference have acquired specificity for long chain substrates as a result of specific mutations in the active site pocket residues, while rest of the protein shows similarity to luciferase or 4cls. to test the hypothesis, we attempted to develop a prediction protocol based on a limited set of binding pocket residues responsible for substrate selection. in an earlier study on adenylation domains of nrps, stachelhaus et al have demonstrated that predictions based on binding-pocket residues were significantly better than whole sequence based approaches  <cit> . based on the crystal structure of adenylation domain of gramicidin synthetase  in complex with the substrate phenylalanine, it had been proposed that the substrate selectivity of nrps adenylation domain is governed by the residues forming the substrate binding pocket  <cit> . since the phenylalanine binding site on 1amu is in close proximity of the conserved amp binding site and the catalysis by the superfamily of enzymes involve formation of covalent bond between amp and acyl group, it was reasonable to assume that other subfamilies will have the acyl group binding site at a position structurally analogous to the phe binding pocket of 1amu. therefore in our work, all amino acids which fall within  <dig> Å distance from the cβ of the substrate phenylalanine were identified as putative substrate specificity determining residues  . by this method,  <dig> amino acids positions were identified. these include  <dig> out of the  <dig> residues which are identified in 1amu as the substrate binding pocket residues  <cit> . the remaining three,  were also included in our analysis, even if they were at a distance slightly larger than  <dig> Å. hence, a total of  <dig> amino acid positions were defined as the sdrs. the sequential order of these  <dig> sdrs was defined as the active site profile  for each enzyme in the training set . multiple sequence alignments were obtained for each subfamily by clustalw and separate position specific scoring matrices pssms were built for each subfamily as described in methods. the pssm for the asps for each subfamily were used to score the asp of a query sequence and the substrate preference was assigned based on the highest scoring pssm. the prediction accuracy of this protocol was also evaluated using the above mentioned test and training set approach. table  <dig> also shows the results for prediction of substrate specificity based on  <dig> active site pocket residues. it was encouraging to note that for the acyl adenylate superfamily, the substrate specificity can also be predicted with high accuracy using a limited number of residues which define the putative substrate binding pocket. the  <dig> sdrs were able to correctly predict the substrate preference for cg <dig> to be long chain:coa ligase, rather than a luciferase. similarly for at <dig> g <dig> and at <dig> g <dig> the pssm- <dig> based method correctly identified the substrate preference as long chain fatty acid . our sdr profiles indicates that, at <dig> g <dig> is not a 4cl in agreement with experiments. however, by our pssm- <dig> based method this sequence was predicted as long chain coa ligase, rather than medium chain coa ligase . the origin of this discrepancy might be due to the ambiguity in literature regarding definition of acyl chain length which distinguishes medium chain coa ligase from long chain coa ligases. thus, our analysis suggests that, for this superfamily of enzymes a limited number of residues lining the substrate binding pocket are involved in substrate selection. in some cases, the enzymes having whole sequence homology to one subfamily, have evolved to acquire specificity for completely different substrates by mutating a limited number of active site residues. prediction of substrate specificity based on limited number of specificity determining residues  has the additional advantage that, based on the identified residues site directed mutagenesis experiments can be designed to alter substrate specificity by protein engineering.

even though pssm- <dig> method could successfully predict for cases in which enzymes showed so called anomalous specificity, the overall prediction accuracy for the pssm- <dig> method was slightly lower compared to the prediction by whole sequence hmms. the prediction accuracy fell from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for lcs, from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for mcs and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for 4cls. this could be due to the fact that these  <dig> sdrs were identified based on a smaller substrate phenylalanine. for larger substrates like luciferases, long chain and medium chain fatty acids the binding pocket could be larger and they can comprise of more number of sdrs. to confirm this hypothesis, sdrs were increased from  <dig> to  <dig> by increasing the distance cut-off for defining putative sdrs from  <dig> Å to  <dig> Å. the pssm for each subfamily were rebuilt for  <dig> positions and the prediction accuracy recalculated. as can be seen, from table  <dig> the prediction accuracy with larger binding site was comparable to that obtained by whole sequence based method .

analysis of conservation pattern of sdrs
since these  <dig> residues could successfully predict the substrate preference, it was intriguing to see the amino acid conservation pattern at these positions across the different subfamilies. figure  <dig> shows the conservation pattern of the  <dig> sdr positions . the conservation pattern was identified using an approach is similar to that used in the evolutionary trace method, which has been used in earlier studies to identify functional sites on proteins  <cit> . as can be seen in figure  <dig>  eight out of these  <dig> positions clearly change in a subfamily specific manner. the binding pocket of all subfamilies is majorly composed of hydrophobic amino acids. the consensus active site profile of lcs, mcs and luciferases are very similar. this is also reflected in the substrates of the enzymes. lcs and mcs only differ in the chain length of the fatty acid that they use as substrate. there are reports where luciferases have been known to catalyze formation of long chain fatty acyl:coa  <cit> . many biochemical and mutagenesis experiments have been carried out to determine the residues governing substrate specificity in this superfamily. these experiments also independently show that, many of these  <dig> sdrs are indeed important for substrate selection. the position  <dig>  has a conserved tryptophan in accs , whereas in all other subfamilies which utilize larger substrate , this position has a conserved glycine. analysis of the substrate binding pocket in the available crystal structures, it clearly shows that bulkier tryptophan makes the substrate binding cavity smaller whereas a glycine will allow accommodating larger substrates . various structural and mutagenic studies have confirmed the role of tryptophan in controlling the substrate preference of the enzyme  <cit> . similarly, position  <dig> has a conserved tryptophan in accs, a conserved histidine in 4cl, lcs, mcs and luciferases and a conserved phenylalanine in nrpss. we hypothesize that this histidine may play a role in attracting the carboxylic acid substrate into the deep seated binding pocket. in nrpss this role is played by negatively charged aspartic acid  which interacts with the nh3+ group of amino acids  <cit> . the conserved tryptophan in accs might provide a suitable chemical environment for the substrate acetate which allows it to easily move in and out of the binding pocket. hence it is hypothesized that this histidine may act as an attracting hook which pulls the larger substrates  into the active site; however for small substrates like acetic acid only chance entrapment can catalyze the reaction. mutagenic experiments in different subfamilies have shown the importance of this histidine  <cit> .

structural similarity between members of acs superfamily
it is known that, various members of acs superfamily adopt a highly conserved three dimensional fold despite low sequence similarity. we analyzed the extent of structural similarity between available crystal structures of acs superfamily of enzymes. since, the orientation of the c-terminal domain relative to the n-terminal domain is known to change upon ligand binding  <cit> , the structures were aligned only over the n-terminal domain and rmsd was calculated. simultaneously, the percentage similarity between the sequences is also calculated by needleman-wunsch program. the table s <dig> in additional file 2summarizes the results. it clearly shows that luciferase  and acetyl:coa ligase  which show only 17% similarity at sequence level, are found to have almost identical folds with rmsd of  <dig>  Å. also luciferases from photinus pyralis  and luciola cruciata , which show higher similarity  show rmsd in the comparable range . during the protein structure comparison studies it was noticed that, the large n-terminal domain of the acs fold, can be further subdivided into two subdomains, namely subdomain a and b. the subdomain a stretches from amino acid  <dig> to  <dig> and b subdomain from amino acid  <dig> to  <dig> . these two domains are relatively independent and there are very few contacts between the two . the b subdomain contains all the substrate binding residues. as seen from the multiple sequence alignment  most of the insertions and deletions are confined to the subdomain a and the subdomain b is relatively more conserved. this may be due to the functional constraint of the superfamily of catalyzing the same reaction but with different substrates. during superimposition the n-terminal domains of various structures of the superfamily, it was found that there are relative movements between the subdomain a and b in different structures. thus our structural analysis helped in explaining how enzymes of this superfamily can adopt a highly conserved tertiary fold despite large divergence in primary sequence. it is also interesting to note that, the core of the conserved structural fold consists of the subdomain b of the n-terminus domain. since substrate binding pocket is primarily confined to subdomain b, binding pockets of the various members of this superfamily can be modelled using the limited number of available crystal structures as templates.

effect of the choice of structural templates on sdrs
at the time when the work was carried out, crystal structures were available for adenylation domain of nrps , luciferases  and acetyl:coa ligases . for long chain:coa ligases, medium chain coa ligases and luciferases, ligand free luciferase structure 1lci was used as the template. however, the sdrs for all subfamilies were identified based on superposition of the modeled structure on 1amu. with the availability of substrate bound crystal structures for all the subfamilies, it is important to understand whether sdr profiles for various subfamilies would change with the choice of structural template. currently substrate bound structures are available for five out of the six sub families of acyl adenylate superfamily discussed in this work. they are 1pg <dig> , 3eq <dig> , 1v <dig> , 2d1r  and 1amu . for the enzymes 1pg <dig>  3eq <dig>  1v <dig> and 2d1r, active site residues were identified by three different methods and compared.

in method  <dig>  the sequences were submitted as query to our web server http://www.nii.res.in/pred_acs_substr.html which models long chain:coa ligases, medium chain coa ligases and luciferases using the ligand free luciferase structure 1lci as the template, but identifies binding pocket residues based on superposition of the modeled structure on 1amu. in method  <dig>  no structural modelling is carried out, instead the crystal structures 1pg <dig>  3eq <dig> and 1v <dig> are used, but binding pocket residues are identified based on superposition of the crystal structures on 1amu. in method  <dig>  binding pocket residues are identified from the ligand bound crystal structures based on amino acids which are within a distance of  <dig> Å from the ligand. this will correspond to the true binding pocket as seen in experimentally determined structure. the sdrs identified by these three different methods for the four enzymes 3eq <dig>  1pg <dig>  2d1r and 1v <dig> are listed in additional file  <dig>  tables s2-s <dig> 

it is interesting to note that, for 3eq <dig>  the medium chain coa ligase  <dig> out of the  <dig> binding pocket residues were common in the three different methods for binding pocket identification . the binding pocket in the medium chain fatty acid bound crystal structure had only four additional residues which were not predicted by our web server. similarly, in case of 1pg <dig>  the acetyl coa ligase, which has a smaller ligand compared to our reference structure phenylalanine bound 1amu,  <dig> out of the  <dig> binding pocket residues were found to be common in the three different methods and the true binding pocket in the acetyl bound structure had only  <dig> extra residues . in case of 2d1r, the luciferase, all the  <dig> amino acids identified by the web server were common to the three different methods, but because of the larger size of luciferin  <dig> additional residues were identified in the actual luciferin bound crystal structure . similarly, in case of 1v <dig>  the long chain coa ligase,  <dig> out of the  <dig> binding pocket residues identified by our web server were present in the true binding pocket, but additional residues lined the actual binding pocket in view of the larger chain length of the bound ligand . thus the binding pocket residues identified based on 1amu agree very well with the true binding pocket as seen in crystal structure and only in case of enzymes having larger substrates additional residues constitute the binding pocket. in view of the high degree of structural conservation in the superfamily, modeled structures  and actual crystal structures  give almost identical binding pocket residues.

our analysis demonstrates that, in view of the high degree of structural conservation in the acyl adenylate superfamily, active site based substrate specificity can be done using information from single structural template. the identification of sdrs based on single structural template has certain advantages for prediction of substrates for acyl adenylate superfamily without knowing a priori the subfamily information. in absence of prior information about subfamily, it will be difficult to choose subfamily specific structural templates. this becomes a major problem, specially in those cases which show anomalous substrate specificities i.e. sequences showing high homology to 4cl but utilizing long chain acyl substrates. secondly, use of different structural templates from different subfamilies would lead to different number of binding pocket residues and this will make comparison of scores across subfamilies for matches to active site profiles a difficult task. therefore, in cases where subfamily information is not known, a better approach for prediction of substrate specificity would be would be to first identify the subfamily using single structural template and then align the sequences with the respective templates for more accurate identification of binding pocket residues.

ligand docking
we next proceeded to carry out docking of substrates to their respective proteins and understand how exactly the identified sdrs stabilize the cognate substrates in their respective binding sites. in view of the large sequence divergence within each subfamily and availability of only a limited number of crystal structures, structural features of various members of this superfamily can only be obtained by homology modeling approach. we decided to carry out all the docking studies using homology models based on phea  and compare the results to actual crystal structures wherever available . a representative sequence from each subfamily was chosen. acetyl:coa ligase from salmonella enterica , long chain:coa ligase from thermus thermophilus , luciferase from photinus pyralis , coumarate:coa ligase from arabidopsis thaliana   and medium chain:coa ligase from pseudomonas oleovorans  were chosen for model building. the structure of adenylation domain of gramicidin synthetase  was used as a template and its alignments with the query sequence were obtained from genthreader  <cit> . based on these alignments modeller <cit>  package was used to build the homology models. during docking simulations the docking grid was defined based on cavities found adjacent to the amp binding pockets. the cavities were identified in the models, using the program acsite  <cit> . for each model, a docking grid was built to encompass the whole cavity . during docking amp was kept in the amp binding site as a fixed ligand.

for accs, mcs and lcs, c <dig> , c <dig>  and c <dig>  fatty acids were used as substrates respectively. at4cl <dig> has been shown to utilize coumarate and caffeate efficiently  <cit>  and hence caffeate was chosen for docking on the model of at4cl <dig> . the conformations of the ligand generated after docking runs were clustered at different rmsd cut off value. for accs, this was set at  <dig> Å and for larger substrates; it was set at  <dig>  Å. the final orientation of the ligand which was selected as the docked conformation was based on three criteria; the energy rank, cluster rank and the distance of the carbonyl carbon and the donor phosphate of amp. the energy rank is based on the docking energy and the cluster rank is based on the number of conformations in the cluster. for the catalytic activity, the carbonyl group of the substrate should be close to the donor oxygen of amp. hence, the conformation having lower energy rank and cluster rank and minimum distance between the carbonyl carbon and phosphate of amp is selected as the docked complex.

the table shows the energy and population rank for the cluster having the carboxyl group at interacting distance from the phosphate of amp. the last column depicts the distance between the carbonyl carbon and oxygen of the donor phosphate.

hence for this enzyme superfamily, inspite of low sequence similarity, one is able to build approximate homology models, dock the ligand and identify the correct binding pocket. therefore, the best docking solution from each subfamily was analyzed to identify additional functionally important residues apart from the  <dig> sdrs. the residue at position number  <dig> was found to be important for long and medium chain:coa ligases. the long chain:coa ligases have a conserved asparagines, whereas mcs have a conserved histidine . this position could potentially be the one controlling substrate chain length. in medium chain:coa ligases, the presence of a positively charged histidine in the fatty acid binding tunnel will disfavour binding of longer fatty acyl substrates. however, in long chain:coa ligases, the presence of partially hydrophobic asparagine might favour binding of fatty acids having longer chain length. interestingly, in luciferases this position has a conserved arginine which has been suggested in earlier studies to form the base of the cavity for luciferin binding  <cit> .

thus the results from our docking studies as well as conservation profile analysis of binding pocket residues indicate that, in various subfamilies of acyl adenylate superfamily, the amino acids in the binding pocket have changed collectively to accommodate their respective substrates. the amino acids forming the binding pocket of acetyl:coa ligases are larger in size than the ones forming the binding pocket of other subfamilies, e.g. position numbers  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  . these observations from our in silico analysis are also in agreement with experimental studies. in methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus acs, the mutation of valine  to smaller amino acids  have shown to lengthen the binding pocket to accommodate longer substrates like propionate  <cit> . the glycine corresponding to position  <dig> in firefly luciferase  has been found to be very important for proper luciferin binding  <cit> .

identifying new members of acyl adenylate superfamily from nr database
since the benchmarking studies on the test set of acs sequences clearly demonstrated the power of sdr based prediction of substrate specificity, we developed a user friendly web based tool for genome scale prediction of substrate preference for acyl coa synthetase superfamily of enzymes. figure  <dig> shows the results of a typical analysis using this web server available at http://www.nii.res.in/pred_acs_substr.html. this server permits classification of acyl amp superfamily of enzymes into various subfamilies using both whole sequence hmm profile as well as pssm based on  <dig> sdrs. we used this novel tool to identify new members of the amp superfamily from nr database. nr database was downloaded. hmmer profiles built for each subfamily were used to pick up homologous sequences. duplicated sequences and sequences which were part of the training set were removed. this way a total of  <dig> sequences were fetched out. sequences with length ranging from 300- <dig> amino acids were considered. table  <dig> shows the number of proteins which could be assigned to various substrate specific subfamilies. it is important to note that, using our computational protocol it is possible to assign specificity to a large number of proteins which were originally annotated as just amp ligases or hypothetical/unknown proteins. interestingly apart from classifying various amp ligases as per their chain length specificity, our method has identified several coumarate:coa ligases and nrps adenylation domains. these sequences deserve special attention for experimental studies as they do not show obvious sequence homology to coumarate:coa ligases or nrps adenylation domains, but might utilize coumaroyl moiety or amino acids as substrates. thus our analysis demonstrates that, using our computational method it is not only possible to identify acs superfamily of enzymes in various genomes, but also get valuable clues about the biosynthetic pathways they could possibly be involved based on in silico assignment of their substrate specificity.

the numbers within parenthesis in the top row indicate total number of proteins in nr database which have been originally annotated as acyl-amp ligases, putative proteins or unknown proteins due to lack of suitable tools for assigning substrate preference. the various rows indicate the number of such proteins which could be grouped into various subfamilies by our substrate specificity prediction methods.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we have used an in silico approach to investigate the relationship between sequence and substrate specificity for acyl adenylate superfamily of enzymes. we have demonstrated that, using profile hmms derived from experimentally characterized members of various subfamilies, it is possible to identify cognate substrates for each subfamily with high sensitivity and specificity. however, to alter the substrate utilization profile of an enzyme it is important to identify key residues which might be controlling the substrate preference. using substrate bound homologous crystal structures, we have identified a limited number of contact residues crucial for substrate recognition i.e. specificity determining residues . benchmarking on a data set of known specificity indicated that, using the sdr patterns the substrate preference can be predicted for different subfamilies with high accuracy. the power of the sdr approach was further demonstrated by correct prediction of substrate in the cases of enzymes which exhibit apparently anomalous substrate preference. since our substrate specificity prediction method based on sdrs is fast enough for genome scale prediction of substrate preference, we analyzed the nr database of ncbi using this prediction protocol and assigned substrate preference to many uncharacterized sequences.

molecular modeling of the substrate in the active site of each subfamily was carried out for further understanding the structural basis of substrate preference. homology models were built for representative member of each family using structural template from a single subfamily and the cognate ligand was docked. the results were compared to actual crystal structures wherever available. it was encouraging to note that despite the low sequence homology, the modeled structures could be superposed on the corresponding crystal structures with a cα rmsd in the range of  <dig> to  <dig> Å. similarly for the docked lcs-myristic acid complex, the docked ligand could be superposed on the experimentally determined ligand position with an rmsd of  <dig>  Å and 80% of the sdrs identified by docking studies matched with those identified from actual crystal structure. comparison of docked enzyme-substrate complexes involving acetyl coa liagse, medium chain coa ligase and luciferase with the corresponding crystal structures showed that, predicted binding sites had reasonably good overlap with the experimentally identified binding sites. in summary, our structural analysis helped in explaining how enzymes of this superfamily can adopt a highly conserved tertiary fold despite large divergence in primary sequence. the core of the conserved structural fold consists of the subdomain b of the n-terminus domain, while most insertions and deletions in primary sequence are confined to the subdomain a. since substrate binding pocket is primarily confined to subdomain b, binding pockets of the various members of this superfamily can also be modelled using the limited number of available crystal structures as templates, despite high sequence divergence.

