BACKGROUND
comamonas testosteroni is a ubiquitously occuring β-proteobacterial species which has been isolated from aquatic as well as terrestrial environments. it has been shown to be capable of transformations of steroid compounds  <cit>  and also of degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons  <cit> . c. testosteroni is thus of interest for potential biotechnological applications such as chemical transformations in fine chemical manufacturing  <cit>  and bioremediation processes  <cit> , as indicated by laboratory results.

due to the widespread environmental distribution and the potential relevance of c. testosteroni in biotransformation processes, it may be of interest to follow the population dynamics of this species over time in a mixed-species environment. since culture-dependent methods are not sufficiently accurate to detect and quantify one particular species within a mixed bacterial community, methods targeting the 16s rrna and/or its gene need to be applied to such a problem, as has already been done in previous investigations  <cit> . probes for species of the genera comamonas and delftia  as well as for species of the family comamonadaceae  have been described earlier, but might lack the desired specificity. the use of reporter genes such as gfp or dsred is also possible, but only applicable to environments with intentionally introduced labelled strains and not to the investigation of uncharacterized environmental samples. additionally, the introduction of reporter genes may impair the environmental fitness of the introduced strain  <cit> , and variations in reporter expression might interfere with detection. the use of reporter gene carrying strains also means working with genetically modified organisms, which may not be possible in all cases.

the following study reports on the development of 16s rrna sequence based oligonucleotide probes which are suitable for detection and quantification of comamonas testosteroni in mixed cultures using pcr and/or fluorescent in situ hybridization .

RESULTS
16s rrna sequence diversity of comamonas testosteroni
a short survey of 16s rrna sequence diversity of c. testosteroni was carried out. fig.  <dig> shows a phylogenetic tree based on 16s rrna sequences of species of the genera comamonas and delftia, with an emphasis on sequences of c. testosteroni isolates with more than  <dig> bp length available from ribosomal database project ii. the c. testosteroni sequences form two clades  with a sequence divergence of approximately 1%. clade a contains far more sequences than clade b, and all physiologically characterized strains as well as all strains isolated during studies dealing with biotransformation or biodegradation fall within this clade.

probe design
the sequence alignment from which the tree was constructed was then used as a basis to identify sequence regions which could be used for the design of fish probes and pcr primers specific for c. testosteroni. useful stretches were identified around nucleotides 450– <dig>  990– <dig>  and 1130– <dig> . however, it was not possible to design oligonucleotides targeting simultaneously sequences from clades a and b together. since clade a seemed to contain the organisms with a higher environmental and biotechnological relevance, we decided to design probes targeting this sequence cluster. two pcr primer pairs and one fish probe were designed . blast searches revealed that these oligonucleotides had a complete match only with sequences showing >99% identity to the sequence of the c. testosteroni type strain.

pure culture evaluation of the designed oligonucleotides
all oligonucleotides were evaluated in situ on a selection of proteobacterial pure cultures including all c. testosteroni strains available from the german collection of microorganisms . the tests revealed that the newly designed primers and probe were specific for the strains of this species. primer pair ctea <dig> yielded a pcr product with a size of  <dig> bp, whereas primer pair ctea <dig> produced an amplicon of  <dig> bp length. it should be noted here that both primer pairs produced products from all examined c. testosteroni cultures, indicating that all tested cultures fell within clade a. a clade b culture was not available for testing, but since all developed oligonucleotides except primer ctea2-rev show  <dig> or more mismatches with the available clade b sequences, it can be expected that these strains would be excluded from detection by pcr or fish. the cy <dig> labelled fish probe ctea gave well-fluorescing signals when used with 30% of formamide in the hybridization buffer. cells of all available c. testosteroni isolates except of strain dsm  <dig> gave well-fluorescing signals when fish was applied to paraformaldehyde fixed cells. to identify the reason for the reduced signal intensity in strain dsm  <dig>  its 16s rrna sequence was determined . the sequence had a central mismatch with probe ctea. accordingly, we suggest to work with a degenerate version of the probe with the sequence cat gac ccg gg ata tta gc. all non-target strains tested did not produce pcr products with primers ctea <dig> and ctea <dig>  nor did they give a fluorescence signal when using probe ctea in fish, although low background fluorescence was observed in some cultures.

analysis of testosterone enrichment cultures and isolates
in order to test the developed oligonucleotides on an unknown mixed culture, we provided conditions for the enrichment of c. testosteroni from activated sludge by two successive enrichment steps in liquid media containing testosterone as the sole source of carbon and energy and finally by spreading samples of the second culture on agar plates composed of the same medium. samples of the activated sludge, the two enrichment cultures, and of five isolates obtained from the testosterone plates were then analysed by pcr and fish.

fig.  <dig> shows the results of an end-point pcr reaction  carried out using primer pair ctea <dig>  no product was obtained from dna from the activated sludge, suggesting a low initial abundance of c. testosteroni. in contrast, dna samples from both enrichment cultures as well as two of the isolates produced a band at  <dig> bp, indicating a successful enrichment and isolation of c. testosteroni. when the pcr product amplified from the first enrichment culture was subjected to direct sequencing, a clean sequence  with  <dig> of the  <dig> obtained nucleotides identical to the sequence of c. testosteroni dsm  <dig> was retrieved. partial analysis of the 16s sequences of the isolates  showed that the two isolates giving pcr products with the ctea <dig> primers displayed 100% sequence identity with the sequence of c. testosteroni dsm  <dig>  whereas the other isolates showed 100% identities to the sequences of pseudomonas sp. b <dig> , pseudomonas sp. was <dig> , and rhodococcus equi , respectively. the two c. testosteroni strains could also be identified by fish using the probe ctea.

in order to assess the suitability of the oligonucleotides for quantification of c. testosteroni in mixed cultures, primer pair ctea <dig> was used in real-time quantitative pcr and probe ctea was used for quantitative image analysis. the primer pair eub341f/534r and the fish probes eub <dig> mix were used in parallel as a measure of total cell abundance. the ratios between c. testosteroni specific signals and the eubacterial specific signals will produce a fractional number representing the c. testosteroni abundance in a given sample. this approach has been applied to cells labelled by fish  <cit>  or fluorescent proteins  <cit>  and has also been used in real-time pcr quantification  <cit> .

a dilution series of genomic dna of c. testosteroni dsm  <dig> yielded products from  <dig> fg on, which can be considered the detection limit, and showed a linear relationship between the ct-value and the log over  <dig> orders of magnitude  with nearly identical slopes close to the optimal value of - <dig>  for the ctea <dig> and the eub primer pairs. this indicates that both primer pairs are suitable for use in qpcr analysis. a comparison of the c. testosteroni fractional numbers obtained by qpcr and fish  shows identical trends for the abundances of c. testosteroni in the activated sludge and the following two enrichment steps. the initial c. testosteroni abundance was low , and increased via a moderate level in the first enrichment culture  to a major proportion of the population detected by the eub primers or probe mix  in the second enrichment culture.

determination of c. testosteroni abundance in a reactor bioaugmentation experiment via quantitative pcr
a further test of the qpcr primers ctea <dig> in mixed culture experiments was done on dna samples extracted from  <dig> laboratory scale biofilm reactors in an experiment to introduce degradation of 3-chloroaniline  via conjugal transfer of the 3ca-degradative plasmid pnb <dig>  a full description of the experiment can be found elsewhere  <cit> . briefly, all reactors where initially inoculated with an activated sludge-derived mixed bacterial culture. reactor pb then received a pseudomonas putida strain and reactor p received a comamonas testosteroni strain, both carrying plasmid pnb <dig>  whereas control reactor n did not receive additional bacteria. the p. putida strain was not able to degrade 3ca, whereas the c. testosteroni strain was. all reactors received a feed containing 3ca and four easily degradable carbon sources . reactor pb started to degrade 3ca after an initial lag phase, and finally, a number of c. testosteroni pnb2-transconjugants capable of 3ca-degradation could be isolated from this reactor. reactor p showed 3ca-degradation from the beginning of the experiment on, whereas no degradation could be observed in reactor n.

using quantitative pcr, we determined the c. testosteroni abundance in dna samples obtained at the start of the experiment  as well as on day  <dig> after onset of degradation of reactor p and towards the end of the experiment on day  <dig> . whereas initial abundance of c. testosteroni in reactor pb was low around 1% and rose via 3% to a final level of 9%, reactor p initially showed a high c. testosteroni abundance of 36% due to addition of the pnb2-carrying c. testosteroni strain which then dropped to values around 18%. surprisingly, reactor n showed the same trend as reactor pb with an increase of the c. testosteroni abundance from low levels of 2% to finally 10%. although the increase in c. testosteroni abundance in reactor pb is partly explained by growth of a 3ca-degrading, pnb2-carrying c. testosteroni subpopulation, this indicates that also non-degrading c. testosteroni strains might benefit from the general growth conditions in our reactors.

discussion
in our study, we present two sets of pcr primers and an rrna directed oligonucleotide probe for use in fish which can be applied for detection and quantification of a comamonas testosteroni subgroup in mixed bacterial populations.

relative quantifications  conducted by real-time pcr and fish followed by image analysis demonstrate the same development of c. testosteroni populations during an enrichment process using testosterone as a carbon source. however, since neither of the two methods measure cell number, but rrna gene copy number  and cell area , a direct numerical comparison is not possible here. both quantification methods may display a sample-inherent bias, when the average 16s rrna gene copy number per cell differs from the number of 16s rrna gene copies per c. testosteroni cell in pcr or the average cell area in a sample differs from the average area of a c. testosteroni cell in fish. additionally, we applied the real-time pcr approach presented here to successfully determine abundance of c. testosteroni in a set of laboratory-scale wastewater treatment reactors inoculated with activated sludge bacteria and additionally bioaugmented with different bacteria of which one was a c. testosteroni strain.

comparison of the target groups of the new probe set with the previously described probes targeting comamonas species reveals that our oligonucleotides exclusively match sequences of comamonas testosteroni strains. primer ctea2-rev is somewhat less specific, but the combination with primer ctea2-for ensures specificity of the primer pair. in contrast, probe cte matches with most sequences of the genera comamonas, acidovorax and hydrogenophaga, but has mismatches with the sequences of c. koreensis, comamonas sp.  <dig>  c. testosteroni smcc b <dig> , and of the delftia species among the sequences shown in fig.  <dig>  probe ppt targets mainly comamonas and acidovorax, but both ppt and cte also target a range of sequences from other genera of the comamonadaceae  <cit> . among the previously published probes, com <dig> has the narrowest range targeting predominantly comamonas and delftia  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the oligonucleotides presented here are a useful tool to study c. testosteroni population dynamics in mixed microbial communities, when considering the method-inherent bias disussed above.

