BACKGROUND
iron is an essential micronutrient required for almost all organisms, functioning as a cofactor for proteins that are involved in a number of fundamental metabolic and enzymatic functions. despite its high abundance, iron is a limiting nutrient in most biological systems due to its poor solubility under physiological conditions or because it is tightly sequestered by high-affinity proteins, such as transferrin and lactoferrin in eukaryotic hosts  <cit> . on the other hand, high iron levels can generate toxic hydroxyl radicals by the fenton reaction  <cit> . thus, organisms have evolved multiple strategies to maintain accurate control over intracellular iron levels.

in most bacteria, iron homeostasis is mediated by fur , an iron-sensing repressor protein, that controls the expression of genes involved in iron uptake, storage and usage. under iron sufficiency, fe2+-fur  binds at operator sites  in the promoters of multiple iron-responsive genes, and represses their transcription  <cit> . in a few bacterial species, fur seems to have a broader scope of regulation, acting also as a direct transcriptional activator  <cit>  or as an apo-regulator   <cit> . however, the most common fur-mediated activation mechanism occurs indirectly via small regulatory rnas , such as ryhb in escherichia coli <cit> , prrf <dig> and prrf <dig> in pseudomonas aeruginosa <cit> , nrrf in neisseria meningitidis <cit>  and fsra in bacillus subtilis <cit> . in all these cases, the srnas inhibit the production of non-essential iron-using proteins under iron limitation, allowing relocation of the intracellular iron for essential proteins  <cit> .

the fur protein is the most widely found and best-studied iron-responsive regulator in bacteria from diverse taxonomic groups, such as subdivisions γ, β, δ and ϵ of proteobacteria and bacilli  <cit> . however, in α-proteobacteria iron regulation is still little studied and appears to be mediated by regulators different from fur. direct experimental data, available mostly to rhizobiales, indicate that rira and irr are the master regulators of iron homeostasis while a fur-like protein, named mur, regulates only a manganese transporter  <cit> . it has been suggested, based on bioinformatics and phylogenetic analyses, that rira and irr emerged as the main iron regulators in the common ancestor of the rhizobiales and rhodobacterales, whereas in more basal lineages of α-proteobacteria , fur remained as the global iron regulator  <cit> . this in silico prediction was recently confirmed by experimental data for at least two α-proteobacteria, caulobacter crescentus <cit>  and the magnetotactic bacterium magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense <cit> .

we have previously demonstrated, using an in silico approach combined with experimental data, that fur controls iron homeostasis in c. crescentus by regulating many iron-responsive genes, and protect this freshwater oligotrophic bacterium from oxidative stress  <cit> . however, the response of c. crescentus to iron limitation and a comprehensive investigation of its fur regulon remain to be determined on a global scale. in this work, we performed dna microarray analysis to determine the transcriptional response of c. crescentus to iron availability, using wild-type cells growing under iron-replete versus iron-limiting conditions. we also used transcriptional profiling, comparing wild-type versus fur-mutant strains, to find novel members of the c. crescentus fur regulon.

RESULTS
effect of iron and fur on the c. crescentus transcriptome
whole genome transcriptional profiling using dna microarrays were performed to identify iron-responsive and fur-regulated genes in c. crescentus. two sets of microarray experiments were conducted in duplicate using rna samples prepared from two independent biological cultures. first, to define the c. crescentus iron limitation stimulon, we compared the transcriptome of wild-type cells treated with  <dig> μm feso <dig>  with that of wild-type cells treated with  <dig> μm  <dig> -dipyridyl for  <dig> hours , an experimental condition previously established to study gene expression of iron-responsive genes in c. crescentus <cit> . iron limitation altered expression of  <dig> genes of which  <dig> were upregulated and  <dig> downregulated . second, to identify fur-regulated genes, we compared the transcriptome of wild-type cells with that of a fur mutant both cultivated in iron sufficiency. the expression of  <dig> genes was found to be significantly changed by the fur mutation  .

the up- and down-regulated genes, identified in these two microarray experiments, were compared to identify genes regulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation or genes affected by only one of these conditions . we found  <dig> genes upregulated both under iron limitation and in the fur mutant  and  <dig> genes that were found to be downregulated on both these conditions , indicating that fur has a major role on controlling expression of iron-responsive genes in c. crescentus. we also found many genes regulated exclusively in response to iron limitation, namely  <dig> upregulated genes and  <dig> downregulated genes, suggesting that the c. crescentus iron limitation stimulon is controlled by additional regulatory mechanisms.

lastly, a group of genes showed differential expression in the fur mutant  independent of iron availability . we were unable to determine whether these transcriptional changes are secondary effects or are mediated directly by fur in an iron-independent manner. nevertheless, the most upregulated genes in the fur mutant are the genes involved in transport  and catabolism  of myo-inositol in c. crescentus, belonging to the iolr regulon  <cit> . as expected, the level of fur mrna  was severely reduced in the fur mutant . interestingly, the sodb gene  encoding an iron/manganese superoxide dismutase was  <dig> -fold downregulated in the fur mutant , although its iron-dependent regulation verified in other bacteria  <cit>  was not observed in our microarrays.

the repertoire of iron-responsive and fur-regulated genes in c. crescentus
the genes regulated by both iron limitation and fur are those showed in tables  <dig> and  <dig> . in addition to those genes, we observed that expression of some genes assumed as significantly up or downregulated under only one of the tested conditions changed to levels very close to our cutoff criterion  in the other condition . thus, it is probable that these genes are also responsive to both iron levels and fur, especially if one considers that most of them are in putative operons with genes whose expression was significantly changed under both iron limitation and fur mutation. therefore, these genes were discussed here as part of the repertory of iron-responsive and fur-regulated genes.

a the terms in parenthesis are pfam domains found in hypothetical proteins or metals predicted to bind the proteins. metal cofactors were found by searching the expasy and brenda databases.

b values are fold changes in the expression levels comparing wild type cells exposed to iron-limiting versus iron-replete conditions  or comparing fur mutant strain versus wild type strain both exposed to iron-replete condition . the values were obtained as the average of the four last probes for each gene.

c according to previously proposed in earlier work  <cit> , the most probable initiation codon of cc <dig> is at position + <dig> relative to the initiation codon annotated in the genome. thus, the last four probes designed for cc <dig> are not useful to measure its expression. the values showed for this gene correspond to the average of four initial probes of the cc <dig> gene, which hybridize within the final portion of cc <dig> 

a values are fold changes in the expression levels as described in table  <dig>  negative values denote downregulation.

a values are fold changes in the expression levels comparing wild type cells exposed to iron-limiting versus iron-replete conditions .

b promoters of these genes have a predicted rpoh-binding motif identified in mcgrath et al.,   <cit> .

cthese genes are probably also upregulated in the fur mutant since their expression changes were very close to our cutoff criterion.

a values are fold changes in the expression levels as described in table  <dig>  negative values denote downregulation.

bthese genes are probably also downregulated in the fur mutant since their expression changes were very close to our cutoff criterion.

the genes upregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation  were grouped into functional categories and according to their transcriptional organization in the chromosome . many of these genes are organized in large clusters that contain at least one gene predicted to be involved in transport, implicating them in iron-acquisition associated functions . these include four gene clusters containing tonb-dependent receptors, which are outer membrane proteins probably involved in fe3+-siderophore acquisition , the operon encoding the ferrous iron transporter feoab  as well as two gene clusters encoding predicted abc transporters  and two gene clusters encoding hypothetical proteins that are putative transporters  . although none of these putative transporters have been characterized yet, their high derepression by both iron limitation and fur mutation  indicates that they could play a major role in the adaptation of c. crescentus to low-iron conditions. unexpectedly, it has been shown, using hyper-saturated transposon mutagenesis, that feoab is an essential operon in c. crescentus even for growth on rich media   <cit> , highlighting the vital role of iron acquisition in this bacterium.

in addition to these putative iron acquisition systems, a riboflavin biosynthesis operon  as well as the bfd gene  encoding a ferredoxin associated with bacterioferritin were upregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation . it has been reported for helicobacter pylori and campylobacter jejuni that the production of riboflavin is also regulated by iron and fur and secreted riboflavin has a role in fe3+ reduction and hence in iron acquisition  <cit> . genes involved in oxidative stress response , rna processing , transcriptional regulation  and ammonia assimilation  were also fe2+-fur repressed. a tight connection between iron homeostasis and nitrogen metabolism has been reported for the nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium anabaena sp.  <cit> .

finally, seven genes encoding hypothetical proteins were also upregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation, of which two genes are of particular interest . a previous report, based on tiled microarray analysis, suggested the existence of two candidate small regulatory rnas  located in the intergenic regions between cc0680-cc <dig> and c00681-cc <dig>  but attempts to validate these srnas by northern blot allowed the detection of only a large transcript comprising all this region  <cit> . considering that the putative operon cc0682-srna1-cc0681-srna <dig> was found to be fe2+-fur repressed in our microarray analyses  we are tempted to speculate that it could be processed under iron limitation, generating two srnas and two mrnas translated to small proteins. these components could mediate the iron sparing response in c. crescentus, similarly to what was observed in bacillus subtilis in which a srna  and three small basic proteins  act in conjunction to repress the expression of iron-rich proteins  <cit> .

additionally to these fe2+-fur repressed genes, our microarray analyses allowed us to identify the genes positively regulated by fe2+-fur, in other words, the genes that were downregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation . as expected, many of these genes encode iron-containing enzymes. these included succinate dehydrogenase , nadh ubiquinone oxidoreductase , cytochromes , cytochrome p <dig> enzyme , glutamate synthase , a hypothetical protein predicted as catalase and a hypothetical protein with a ferritin-like domain . this mechanism of repressing iron-rich enzymes to prioritize iron usage when this metal is scarce, sometimes referred as iron sparing response, has been described in many bacteria, such as e. coli <cit> , p. aeruginosa <cit>  and b. subtilis <cit> .

unexpectedly, a large number of genes encoding proteins involved in transport were also downregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation . among these, there are transporters belonging to the major facilitator superfamily  , porins  and many tonb-dependent receptors. at least six of these genes  are also highly induced by carbon limitation  <cit>  and are positively regulated by cfra, a srna that regulates adaptation to carbon starvation in c. crescentus <cit> . although the reason for these genes to be repressed by iron limitation and induced by carbon starvation is still not clear, it is reasonable to suppose that these tonb-dependent receptors are required for uptake of carbohydrates instead of fe3+-siderophore complexes, since it has recently been shown that novel substrates, such as nickel and different carbohydrates, are transported via tonb-dependent receptors  <cit> .

importantly, three genes  encoding regulatory proteins that specify an oxygen signaling network required for c. crescentus growth under hypoxia  <cit>  were found to be downregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation . the c. crescentus fix signaling system consists of the sensor histidine kinase fixl , its cognate response regulator fixj, the transcriptional regulator fixk, and the kinase inhibitor fixt , besides the downstream regulators ftra and ftrb  <cit> . consistent with downregulation of fixk, many hypoxia-dependent fixk-activated genes containing a fixk binding site  <cit> , were also downregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation, including cc <dig> , cc <dig> , cc <dig> , cc <dig> , cc <dig> , cc <dig> and cc <dig> . therefore, the fixk-dependent hypoxia stress response seems to be positively regulated by fe2+-fur under iron sufficiency and repressed in iron limitation condition, similarly to what was described for the anaerobic regulator fnr in e. coli <cit>  and salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium <cit> . the regulatory link between oxygen and iron availability could be mediated by the histidine kinase fixl that senses oxygen through its heme-containing amino-terminal pas domain  <cit> .

to further discriminate whether regulation by fur was direct or indirect, we conducted in silico searches in the upstream region of all up- and down-regulated genes identified in the microarray experiments . meme-based analyses, including all genes together or each group of genes separately, identified a motif very similar to the fur binding site previously detected in c. crescentus <cit> . these fur binding sites were detected only for genes regulated by both iron and fur . as indicated in figure  <dig>  sixteen fur binding sites were identified in the group of the genes upregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation, indicating that most of these genes  are direct target for fur-mediated repression. in contrast, only three fur binding sites were detected in the group of the genes downregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation, suggesting that fur indirectly mediates positive regulation of many genes, in addition to the direct positive regulation previously demonstrated  <cit> .

fur-independent regulation of c. crescentus iron-responsive genes
in addition to the fur modulon iron limitation also affected the c. crescentus transcriptome in a fur-independent manner, given that  <dig> genes were upregulated  and  <dig> genes were downregulated  during growth in iron-limitation condition that were not affected by the fur mutation .

among the genes strongly upregulated exclusively in response to iron limitation there is a large gene cluster , which encodes the transcriptional repressor iscr  and enzymes of the suf system of fe-s cluster biogenesis . e. coli possesses two operons implicated in fe-s cluster assembly, iscrsua-hscba-fdx, encoding the housekeeping fe-s cluster biogenesis pathway and sufabcdse, which synthesize fe-s clusters under iron limitation or oxidative stress conditions [ <dig> ), whereas c. crescentus appears to have only one operon that contains a combination of isc  and suf  genes. in e. coli both isc and suf operons are induced by iron limitation and oxidative stress, but while the isc genes are regulated by iscr, the suf genes are under control of oxyr and fur  <cit> . in c. crescentus upregulation of this large operon by iron limitation is fur-independent and we postulate that it could be mediated by iscr via an iscr binding site previously predicted upstream of the cc <dig> gene  <cit> . because iscr senses damage to the fe-s clusters of the cell, it is possible that iron limitation is generating some kind of stress in c. crescentus which is able to damage fe-s clusters.

in agreement with this assumption, many of the genes upregulated exclusively by iron limitation are related to various stress responses  and were found to be induced when c. crescentus was submitted to heavy metal stress  <cit> . among the genes induced by both iron limitation and heavy metal stress , there are those related to oxidative stress defense , detoxification efflux pumps , dna repair  and nucleotide biosynthesis  . interestingly,  <dig> heat shock genes, encoding chaperones, proteases and small heat shock proteins, were also upregulated by iron limitation, as well as some genes encoding peptidases containing metals as cofactors , what is consistent with previous observations in shewanella oneidensis <cit> . induction of these genes might be directly mediated by the heat shock sigma factor rpoh , for the reason that the own rpoh gene  is upregulated in iron limitation . moreover, a predicted σ32-binding motif , which has been identified upstream of cadmium-induced genes  <cit> , was found here upstream of nearly half  of the  <dig> genes upregulated in iron limitation , indicating induction of the rpoh regulon by iron limitation. the c. crescentus rpoh gene is transcribed from two promoters, a σ70-dependent p <dig> promoter and a heat shock autoregulated σ32-dependent p <dig> promoter  <cit> . it remains to be determined how these different signals  could increase transcription of rpoh in c. crescentus, activating its regulon.

when the genes downregulated exclusively in iron limitation are grouped into functional categories, the most prominent groups of genes are involved in amino acid metabolism, chemotaxis and motility, and energy metabolism . among the enzymes of amino acid biosynthesis pathways repressed by iron limitation there are many involved in methionine biosynthesis, such as methionine synthases , adenosylmethionine synthtase , s-adenosyl-l-homocysteine hydrolase  and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase , which is required to produce 5-methyltetrahydrofolate as methyl-group donor for methionine synthesis. pathways of protein catabolism were also repressed by iron limitation as revealed by downregulation of many genes encoding peptidases  . furthermore, some genes for flagella assembly  and chemotaxis  were downregulated in iron limitation. repression of motility and chemotaxis genes by iron limitation has been described in sinorhizobium meliloti <cit>  and acinetobacter baumannii <cit> . finally, some known fe2+-fur activated genes  <cit>  were downregulated in iron limitation, but not in the fur mutant in this work. of these, there are genes encoding the fe-s clusters-containing enzymes aconitate hydratase , nadh ubiquinone oxidoreductase , glutamate synthase  and dihydroxy-acid dehydratase  . in some cases, at least part of the operons  was downregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation . a possible explanation is that the fe2+-fur activated genes showed modest differential expression  , thus small experimental fluctuations could exclude some genes based on our cutoff criteria for differential expression in the microarray analyses.

comparing our microarray data with other large-scale transcriptomic studies performed under iron-limiting condition in bacteria from diverse taxonomic groups  <cit> , we observed that, in spite of the multiplicity of regulatory mechanisms, the core of iron-regulated genes is extremely conserved, including mainly those related to transport, use and storage of this metal. some responses seems to be confined to few bacteria, such as upregulation of the heat shock response, also described in s. oneidensis <cit>  and downregulation of chemotaxis and motility, observed in s. meliloti <cit>  and a. baumannii <cit> . however, our study expands the range of genes involved in iron homeostasis when we consider physiological processes unique to the c. crescentus lifestyle, such as adaptation to growing in oligotrophic environments and under different oxygen tensions. in fact, many tonb-dependent receptors, predicted to be required for sugar transport, and the hypoxia fixk regulon were surprisingly downregulated by both iron limitation and fur mutation.

verification of iron- and fur-dependent expression of the cc <dig> and cc <dig> operons
nearly all of the genes previously identified as members of the c. crescentus fur regulon  <cit>  were found to be differentially expressed by microarray analyses , validating the experimental procedure. to further confirm our microarray data, we selected genes located in two clusters that encode putative transporters for validation by β-galactosidase activity assays and emsa. the first cluster  encodes a hypothetical protein containing an ef hand motif , a putative glutathione peroxidase  and a hypothetical protein . the cc <dig> gene appears to have been incorrectly annotated in the cb <dig> strain given that in the chromosome of the c. crescentus na <dig> strain, recently sequenced  <cit> , two open reading frames were annotated in this region, ccna <dig>  and ccna <dig>  encoding a hypothetical protein with a domain of unknown function . the second cluster  contains three genes encoding a putative transporter , and two genes involved in iron-related functions  . interestingly, the genes of these two clusters most highly upregulated in iron limitation and fur mutant   encode two paralogous proteins belonging to the widespread pfam family duf <dig>  although the proteins of this family are widely distributed in various groups of bacteria , nothing is known about their function or regulation.

the promoter regions of cc <dig> and cc <dig> were cloned in a lacz reporter plasmid and the constructions were introduced into the wild type and fur mutant strains. beta-galactosidase activity assays indicated that the expression of these two genes was induced under iron limitation and derepressed in the fur mutant strain, validating the microarray data . to verify whether fur acts as repressor by directly binding upstream of the cc2193-92- <dig> and cc3059-60-61-62- <dig> gene clusters  we performed gel mobility shift assays using purified fur protein . fur bound to the probes corresponding to the promoter region of cc <dig>  as well as to that of cc <dig>  validating the fur binding sites found overlapping the − <dig> and − <dig> promoter elements of these two genes . these data illustrate the high performance of the microarray analysis to identify unknown genes with potential functions in iron acquisition and new members of the fur regulon. for instance, the high derepression of cc <dig> and cc <dig> by iron limitation and fur mutation suggests that these two members of a widespread family of proteins with unknown function  could be involved in transport or signaling in response to iron limitation.

CONCLUSIONS
using dna microarray analyses, we have defined the global transcriptional response of caulobacter crescentus to iron availability, providing an overview of the physiological strategies that this oligotrophic α-proteobacterium employs for survival in iron limiting conditions . our data reveal that the iron stimulon in c. crescentus is larger than the fur regulon previously identified  <cit> , involving a more complex regulatory network. among the responses mediated by fur it is worth pointing out the upregulation of genes involved in iron acquisition systems and biosynthesis of riboflavin in iron limiting condition, as well as the downregulation of genes encoding many iron-using enzymes involved in energy metabolism . fur binding site prediction suggests that fur acts mainly as a direct transcriptional repressor, whereas positive regulation could be mediated either directly by fur in a few cases or indirectly for most genes. in many cases this indirect effect was provoked by downregulation of the hypoxia regulator fixk, causing decreased expression of fixk-activated genes in iron limitation condition . other genes could be indirectly activated by fur via an unidentified iron-responsive srna. while the fe2+-fur mediated repression of some genes encoding tonb-dependent receptors confirmed our previous data  <cit> , the fe2+-fur mediated activation of many other tonb-dependent receptors putatively associated with sugar transport was unexpected. fur-independent regulation of c. crescentus iron-responsive genes was also observed, indicating an overlap with other regulatory pathways . it is worth mentioning that iron limitation caused upregulation of the heat shock sigma factor rpoh with consequent activation of its regulon, and upregulation of the iscr regulon, whose genes are involved in fe-s cluster biogenesis. since most of these iron-responsive genes identified in this work have not been experimentally investigated in c. crescentus, they are good targets for future studies.

