BACKGROUND
the phosphoinositide-3-kinases  constitute an enzyme family of p85/p <dig> heterodimers responsible for regulating numerous biological processes in diverse cell types  <cit>  such as cellular proliferation, differentiation and survival. of particular interest is the role of this pathway in lymphocyte activation, where antigen and cytokine receptor ligation result in activation of pi3k-driven signals  <cit> . a key target of pi3k activity is akt/pkb, which mediates many of the effects of pi3k activation  <cit> .

pi3k is activated in t-cells both in response to t-cell receptor  stimulation, and by engagement of the co-stimulatory receptor cd <dig>  gene targeting studies have emphasised the essential role pi3k plays in these responses: whereas pi3k-deficient mice are immunodeficient  <cit> , constitutive activity is associated with hyperproliferative t-cell responses and autoimmunity  <cit> . equally, preventing the termination of pi3k activity by conditional gene targeting of the lipid phosphatase pten in t-cells leads to autoimmunity and development of lymphoma  <cit> . these studies demonstrate that pi3k activity is tightly regulated and plays an integral role in the maintenance of lymphocyte homeostasis.

the notch signalling pathway plays a critical role in a wide range of developmental processes in the embryo, including binary lineage decisions and boundary formation  <cit> . binding of the notch ligands delta or jagged to the notch receptor instigates proteolytic cleavage which releases the notch intracellular domain   <cit>  which activates the transcription factor cbf- <dig> which, in turn, controls target genes such as hes- <dig>  <cit> . central to notch's role is its ability to modulate the differentiative potential of pluripotent cells, for instance in the neural stem cell compartment. the effects of notch also extend to the developing immune system, where it directs the differentiation of lymphoid precursors  <cit> . recent data have highlighted unexpected functions for the notch pathway in regulating cells of the peripheral immune system. co-incident delivery of notch signals to t-cells exerts a profound effect upon the outcome of antigen-stimulation in vitro  <cit>  suggesting that interplay between the antigen receptor and notch pathways regulate the outcome of peripheral t-cell responses.

mice expressing catalytically inactive pi3k subunit p110δ  <cit>  or a deletion of p110δ  <cit>  exhibit defective b-cell and t-cell receptor signalling: antigen-mediated activation of bcr or tcr fails to activate akt and cells exhibit defective proliferation and cytokine responses. recent publications have demonstrated that notch signals modulate cytokine production by t-cells  <cit> , suggesting that the notch pathway integrates with tcr-mediated signals to modulate cytokine production. furthermore, marginal zone b  cell development is severely impaired in both p110δ- and notch2-deficient mice  <cit> . taken together with notch's ability to modulate tcr signals, this phenotypic similarity suggested to us the possibility of notch/pi3k signalling integration. our studies reveal that the pi3k-akt pathway is a potent inducer of notch-dependent responses in cell types as diverse t-cells and neurons, demonstrating that this is a cell signalling paradigm with broad applicability.

RESULTS
inhibition of the pi3k-akt pathway impairs notch signalling in jurkat t-cells
to address whether the pi3k pathway is a regulator of notch-responsiveness, we generated a jurkat e <dig>  t-cell line which stably expresses full-length human notch <dig> cdna . j-n <dig> cells were treated with plate-bound recombinant human delta <dig> protein  fusion protein, and notch signalling was measured using a transiently-transfected cbf1-driven luciferase reporter construct . plate-bound recombinant delta1-fc efficiently transactivated cbf1-luc, driving around a 10-fold increase in activity . a similar result was obtained using the murine hes- <dig> promoter cloned upstream of the luciferase reporter . strikingly, treatment of these cells with the pi3k inhibitor ly <dig> led to a dose-dependent decrease in delta1-fc-induced notch signalling . a similar result was observed with the mechanistically-distinct pi3k inhibitor wortmannin . the integrity of this reporter assay as an accurate reflection of notch signalling was confirmed by assessing mrna levels of the notch target gene hes- <dig> by q-pcr in delta1-fc-treated j-n <dig> cells . as with the cbf1-dependent reporter, treatment with ly <dig> inhibited the up-regulation of hes- <dig> by delta1-fc.

the lipid phosphatase pten dephosphorylates the 3' phosphoinositide products of pi3k catalysis and prevents downstream pi3k signaling  <cit> . jurkat e <dig>  cells are deficient in expression of pten, and therefore have a highly active pi3k-akt pathway  <cit> . we therefore hypothesised that reconstituting this enzyme would reduce notch signalling. transient expression of pten in j-n <dig> cells led to a decrease in both basal and notch ligand-induced activation of cbf1-dependent gene expression . pten-transfected and control cells showed equivalent cbf1-reporter activity in the presence of ly <dig>  demonstrating that once pi3k activity is abolished pharmacologically, pten over-expression becomes redundant.

the pi3k pathway activates several enzymes, including the central signalling molecule akt/pkb. to further define the mechanism by which pi3k activity regulates notch signals, we asked whether the inhibitory effect of ly <dig> could be recapitulated with an inhibitor of akt. blocking akt activity in j-n <dig> cells with the selective inhibitor sh- <dig>  <cit>  inhibited delta1-fc-mediated upregulation of notch signalling . taken together, these data identify the pi3k-akt pathway as being responsible for the high level of ligand-induced notch activation in j-n <dig> cells.

the pi3k-akt pathway regulates notch-responsiveness in primary human cd4+ t-cells
we next investigated whether pi3k activity also regulates notch-responsiveness in primary human cd4+ t-cells. we asked whether pi3k induction, triggered by tcr activation, could influence hes- <dig> levels . in the absence of any exogenously added delta  <dig> , tcr activation  up-regulated hes- <dig> levels in a ly294002-sensitive manner. significantly, this induction was also blocked by the gamma secretase inhibitor dapt, consistent with an absolute requirement for n-ic. we also studied the induction of hes- <dig> by delta 1-fc treatment . in the absence of tcr activation, delta 1-fc induced a small, but consistent induction of hes- <dig>  however, coincidence of delta 1-fc with tcr activation  dramatically up-regulated hes- <dig> levels in a ly294002-sensitive manner. again, this induction was also blocked by the gamma secretase inhibitor dapt. ly <dig> also inhibited notch signalling in primary human cd4+ t-cells transfected with p10xcbf1-luc and a notch <dig> intracellular domain expression plasmid , demonstrating that the effect of pi3k on notch is exerted downstream of notch cleavage. thus, tcr activation dramatically increases the cellular response to notch signals in primary human t cells via a mechanism requiring the pi3k-akt pathway.

we then tested whether akt activation is sufficient to boost notch-responsiveness in human t cells. over-expression of a constitutively-active akt construct  was sufficient to potentiate the ability of pn1-ic to drive cbf1-dependent reporter activity .

pi3k regulates notch signals through gsk3β activity
previous data has suggested that inactivation of gsk3β by the wingless pathway enhanced notch signals by preventing inhibitory phosphorylation of n-ic by gsk3β  <cit> . therefore, given that akt phoshorylates and inactivates gsk3β  <cit> , we hypothesised that akt-dependent inactivation of gsk3β might be responsible for notch potentiation. to address this question, we looked at the n1-ic-induced notch response in primary human cd4+ t-cells treated with the gsk3β inhibitor lithium chloride. increasing concentrations of licl induced a dramatic increase in notch signalling .

in contrast to n1-ic overexpression, triggering notch signalling using recombinant ligand to ligate endogenous full length notch generates far weaker signalling. this fact, coupled with limited transfection efficiency of primary t cells, makes it technically difficult to achieve robust induction of a transfected cbf <dig> reporter construct by delta1-fc. however, given the large potentiation of notch-responsiveness by licl , we hypothesised that, in the presence of licl, robust delta1-fc dependent induction of a cbf <dig> reporter could be observed. we found that, consistent with the technical issues outline above, plate-bound delta1-fc activates the cbf <dig> reporter weakly and unreliably in the absence of licl . however, licl greatly potentiates activation of the reporter by plate-bound delta1-fc . thus, the gsk3β inhibitor licl is sufficient to potentiate primary notch-responsiveness in primary human cd4+ t-cells, triggered either by n1-ic expression, or by ligation of endogenous full length notch by plate-bound ligand.

in jurkat t-cells, deficient in pten expression, basal akt activity is high  <cit> , so we expected gsk3β to be maximally inhibited. consistent with this, licl treatment did not exert any further effect on delta1-induced signalling in jurkat-n <dig> cells .

pi3k activity also regulates notch responsiveness in cho cells and neurons
to investigate whether pi3k-dependent regulation of notch responsiveness may be a general phenomenon extending beyond t-cell biology, we took advantage of a notch-dependent cho cell reporter assay which we have previously described  <cit> . in this assay, cho cells which stably express a human notch <dig> receptor cdna and a cbf1-dependent luciferase reporter construct  are co-cultured with a second cho cell line which stably expresses the full-length human delta <dig> cdna . cho-hdelta <dig> cells trigger a dose-dependent luciferase response to the cho-n <dig> cells, whilst control cho parental cells fail to activate the notch pathway . we next asked if activation of the pi3k pathway influenced notch signals in this assay system. as predicted from our t-cell studies, including insulin in the culture medium potentiated notch signalling, and this effect was blocked almost completely by inclusion of ly <dig> . from our observations with t-cells, we hypothesisesd that gsk3β inhibition with licl could substitute for insulin in potentiating notch signalling induced by cho-hdelta <dig> cells. licl does indeed potentiate notch signalling in the cho co-culture system, leading to a substantial enhancement of ligand-dependent reporter activity .

we then extended our study further, this time into primary neurons, cell types where notch plays an emerging role in processes such as dendritic patterning and synaptic plasticity  <cit> . as observed with t-cells, inhibition of gsk3β with lithium chloride strongly enhanced the level of notch signalling in rat primary hippocampal neurons in a dose-dependent manner . pi3k-activating neurotrophins such as bdnf regulate cell survival, proliferation and differentiation of both peripheral and central neurons  <cit> . strikingly, bdnf treatment potentiated pn1-ic-driven reporter activity, and this was abrogated by treatment with ly <dig> . pten transfection ablated both basal and bdnf-stimulated reporter signalling, further underlining the role of the pi3k pathway in promoting notch-responsiveness in neurons. moreover, over-expression of constitutively active gagakt was sufficient to potentiate pn1-ic-driven reporter activity . to further reinforce this finding, expression of a constitutively-active gsk3β construct , which is resistant to inactivation by akt, prevented bdnf induction of notch responsiveness . in contrast, expression of wild-type gsk3β, which is inhibited by akt activity, failed to significantly reduce reporter activity. as observed with t-cells, inhibition of gsk3β with lithium chloride strongly enhanced the level of notch signalling in a dose-dependent manner . thus the pi3k-akt pathway positively regulates notch signals via gsk3β in neurons as well as t-cells, as summarised in fig.  <dig> 

discussion
the dynamic and interactive nature of intracellular communication dictates that cells are in receipt of multiple environmental signals at any given time. the cellular output must represent a net response to a diverse set of cues, and therefore the pathways mediating these responses are frequently integrated. our studies demonstrate for the first time that pi3k activity strongly potentiates notch responsiveness in diverse cell types. given the vital nature of pi3k and notch in controlling cellular survival and differentiation, the implications of this finding are far-reaching.

reciprocal signalling between the notch and pi3k pathways in t cells
ligation of lymphocyte antigen receptors leads to activation of pi3k, initiating a diverse and wide-ranging set of signalling pathways  <cit> . our findings that pi3k activation enhances notch signalling leads us to suggest that notch pathway activation might be an inherent consequence of lymphocyte activation. this positions the notch pathway as a central mediator of antigen-dependent stimulation of immune cells.

t-cells are entirely quiescent in the absence of antigen signals, but are shifted rapidly into a state of activation following tcr ligation. inappropriate control of this activation can lead to autoimmune disease, and therefore negative feedback loops are an inherent feature of t-cell biology. recent data show that notch signals block akt activation in peripheral cd4+ t-cells  <cit> . indeed we also observe that in primary human cd4+ t-cells recombinant delta1-igg <dig> fusion protein, or notch-ic expression, blocks tcr-mediated phosphorylation of akt and gsk3β . although akt activation is essential for production of cytokines such as il <dig> and ifnγ by t-cells  <cit> , constitutive activity is associated with cellular transformation  <cit> , and therefore the existence of a negative feedback loop to limit antigen-dependent akt activation would appear rational. we have shown that co-incident notch signals are enhanced upon tcr activation, and we hypothesise that by inhibiting akt activity, enhanced notch signalling may constitute a negative feedback control impacting upon peripheral t-cell activation.

it is interesting to note that whilst the model we propose is consistent with the data generated in peripheral t-cells, a number of studies suggest that the opposite is true  <cit> . ciofani et al demonstrate that during the earliest stages of t-cell development in the thymus notch signals co-operate with pre-tcr signalling to activate akt-dependent metabolism, thereby promoting expansion of those t-cells which have undergone favourable tcr rearrangement. the functional outcome of pi3k/notch pathway interaction thus appears to reverse from developing to mature t-cells, an observation which further underlines the ability of the notch pathway to perform multiple, context-dependent, tasks during development. we suggest that a molecular understanding of how notch can function as a bi-directional regulator of akt activity is a research priority.

pi3k and wnt signalling modulate notch responses via a common pathway
our data strongly suggests that pi3k activity links to the notch signalling pathway through akt-mediated inactivation of gsk3β, a known downstream effector of akt. in support of this data, pi3k and gsk3β  <cit>  have both been identified as binding partners for n-ic in immunoprecipitation studies. gsk3β has also previously been positioned as a component of the downstream notch signalling pathway in lateral inhibition in drosophila  <cit> . furthermore, gsk3β activity is inhibited downstream of both the wingless and pi3k pathways, and thus represents a convergent site for integration of extracellular signals with the notch pathway. indeed, inhibiting gsk3β activity by activating the wingless pathway with wnt- <dig> has been shown to enhance notch-dependent reporter activity in nih-3t <dig> cells  <cit> . we note, however, that although an interaction between gsk3β and notch seems conclusively proven, the functional consequences of this interaction are not consistent between different studies. whilst our data agrees with that of espinosa et al.  <cit> , that is that gsk3β activity inhibits notch signalling, data from the nye laboratory in gsk3β-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts demonstrates that gsk3β phosphorylates and stabilises notch-ic, leading to enhanced signalling  <cit> . although we have no definitive explanation for these experimental differences, it is possible that, as discussed above for thymocytes and t-cells, the effect of gsk3b on notch changes between embryonic and mature tissues.

notch signalling in neural cells
notch's role during embryonic development is not to directly program neuronal differentiation itself, but to inhibit this cell fate choice in neighbouring cells during the lateral inhibition process  <cit> . during neurogenesis, this is achieved by notch target genes blocking transcription of pro-neural transcription factors such as mash- <dig>  interestingly, conditional deletion of pten in neural progenitors leads to dramatic alterations in brain architecture, an observation which the authors attribute to increased proliferation and self-renewal of neural stem cell populations  <cit> . given that the data presented here establishes the notch-suppressing capability of pten, deregulated renewal of progenitors in these mice may be in part due to enhanced notch signalling. this hypothesis awaits testing.

notch also plays an emerging role in differentiating neurons by inhibiting dendritic outgrowth  <cit> . it is tempting to speculate that notch-dependent dendritic retraction, reliant on neuron-neuron interactions, is augmented by target-derived neurotrophic factors promoting pi3k signalling. in differentiated neurons, notch contributes to synaptic plasticity, learning and memory  <cit> . the long-standing involvement of bdnf and other neurotrophins in synaptic plasticity raise the possibility that pi3k-notch interplay is at work in this scenario as well.

CONCLUSIONS
our data demonstrates that the potentiation of notch signalling by pi3k is conserved in ontologically-distinct cell types, leading us to suggest that it represents a general mechanism of signal integration linking two evolutionarily-conserved pathways together. this apparently simple observation has far-reaching implications regarding the mechanisms by which stem cell self-renewal and differentiation proceeds. it will be interesting to assess the relevance of this finding in other signalling contexts, such as tumour formation, where notch and pi3k have important roles.

