BACKGROUND
sequence similarity has proven to be useful for many years in attempting to annotate genomes  <cit> . a simple way to infer the possible function of a protein is to use an alignment procedure such as psi-blast  <cit> , to find possible homologues in sequence databases, such as uniprot  <cit> . however, sequence homology has its limitations. only a fraction of newly discovered sequences have identifiable homologous genes in current databases, and its viability is limited to cases where substantial sequence similarity to annotated proteins can be found  <cit> . moreover, the growing number of annotations extrapolated from sequence similarity is prone to errors  <cit> , hence, new bioinformatics methods are developed to complement traditional sequence homology-based methods.

the development of high throughput technologies has resulted in large amounts of predicted protein-protein interaction networks  for different genomes and, subsequently, methods using ppi data for functional inference  <cit>  have been developed. it has been demonstrated that we may be able to use the semantics of gene annotations  <cit>  and that we can obtain greater precision to predict new annotations using gene ontology  information inside ppi  <cit> . several semantic similarity measures using the go database have been applied to gene products annotated with high ratios of prediction accuracy  <cit> .

recently, other methods using ppi to predict functions for individual genes or proteins have been developed by considering modularisation in biological networks  <cit>  these methods attempt to first identify coherent groups of proteins and then assign functions to all of the proteins in each group. in terms of topology, a functional module can be typically understood as a group of proteins that are densely interconnected and contribute to perform for a specific biological function  <cit> . once a module is obtained, the function prediction within the module  <cit>  is usually conducted in a straightforward way by simple methods like orthology exploitation  <cit> .

however, most of these approaches use ppi and, while very useful, they have limitations. the obtained ppi data result in a rich, but quite noisy and still incomplete, source of information. also, ppis are only available for a reduced group of organisms  <cit>  due to the problems of using high throughput technologies in important study organisms such as mycoplasma.

this last case implies a significant restriction since mycoplasma genitalium is one of the most studied species, as it is the smallest organism having a small genome size  <cit>  and has limited metabolic capabilities  <cit> . due to all of the above, it has become a close approximation to the minimal set of genes required for bacterial growth  <cit> , so, in order to study the proteomes of these species, other type of protein-protein networks is necessary.

in many ways, protein-protein association networks  are a more informative way of describing proteins and their mutual interactions  <cit> . in contrast to ppi, ppan make no assertion as to how exactly two proteins interact: proteins can show a productive functional interaction without physically interacting with each other . therefore, whenever two proteins form a specific functional partnership, they can be thought of as being associated, independently of what the actual mechanism of their association is  <cit> . ppan have been widely used recently in order to predict protein function  <cit> .

in this work, a new protocol is described for predicting new gene annotations involving different approaches using ppan for mycoplasmas: functional module identification, orthology exploitation and gene ontology  semantic similarity-based measures  <cit> . we have developed a simple, but effective, procedure in order to assign function transferring go terms to unannotated protein nodes inside functionally conserved modules between two mycoplasma species.

the procedure is as follows: first, identify functional modules between two mycoplasma ppan ; second, assign gene ontology  terms to each protein inside the species b modules ; third, calculate the orthology value between each potential pair of orthologs , and if the value exceeds a threshold, transfer go terms specifically from species b ortholog proteins to the species a unannotated protein; finally, the transferred go terms list of unannotated species a protein was analysed, comparing them with the annotated proteins go terms inside the species a module that they belong to, using go semantic similarity measures. if the similarity value is above a threshold, then the species a unannotated protein is associated with these assigned go terms. a schematic view of the algorithm is depicted in figure 1

RESULTS
 <dig>  calculations and algorithm procedure
 <dig> . protein-protein association networks for mycoplasma species
we have performed this study on seven mycoplasma species proteomes. one of the main limitations in using protein-protein interactions for function prediction is the availability of interaction data, especially if one wishes to work with mollicutes. the entries in string  <cit>  correspond to protein-protein functional associations for more than  <dig> organisms, including mycoplasmas. a protein-protein functional association can mean either a direct physical binding or an indirect interaction, such as participation in the same metabolic pathway or cellular process. the associations are derived from high-throughput experimental data, from the mining of databases and literature and from predictions based on genome context analysis. string carefully assesses and integrates all of these data in order to obtain a single confidence score for all protein interactions, taking a more generalised perspective on proteins and their associations than other databases whose main purpose is to collect and curate direct experimental evidence about protein-protein physical interactions.

moreover, the improvement of the use of string in protein function network procedures has been indicated  <cit> , and in a recent work, string has been used to study the proteome organisation of mycoplasma pneumoniae.

the ppan for each species were obtained from the string database , the information for mycoplasmas being extracted and then a protein-protein network for each of the species being constructed, resulting in undirected ppan. the networks were built using high-associations . see additional file  <dig> for all the mycoplasma ppans used in this study. these ppan have been used for the following calculations. the following procedure is depicted on figure  <dig> 

 <dig> . functional module identification
we first identified the functional modules shared between m. genitalium and every other mycoplasma species using networkblast  <cit>  as follows:

first, the proteomes in fasta format were obtained for each mycoplasma species from the genbank repository dated october  <dig> ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/, and for every two species analyzed, we performed a bi-directional blast  <cit>  search of m. genitalium was performed over the other mycoplasma's species  <dig> and vice versa. the algorithm was fed with the blast results and ppan s of each of the species analyzed. networkblast outputs a set of modules that are evolutionarily conserved across the two ppan. 

 <dig> . gene ontology  terms assignation to proteins inside the modules
the standardized gene ontology vocabulary   <cit>  was used as a standard to annotate the proteins inside the ppan. the annotation for each gene in each proteome was obtained from gene ontology annotation files   <cit>  available for each mycoplasma proteome in the go database http://www.geneontology.org. . the filtered go terms were associated for each node in each conserved module detected by networkblast. each m. genitalium protein with no go terms assigned in the goa file is susceptible to be annotated by using its orthologs in the other species.

 <dig> . transferring go terms to unannotated protein
the orthology value calculated between each potential pair of orthologs between conserved modules using orthomcl  <cit> . if the value exceed a threshold, the pair was considered as real orthologs and the procedure of jaeger and laeser  <cit>  was followed for transferring go terms specifically between those ortholog protein pairs and generating a list for the unannotated m. genitalium protein.

 <dig> . semantic similarity analysis of transferred go terms
the transferred go annotations list of unannotated m. genitalium proteins was analyzed, comparing them with the go annotations from annotated proteins inside the module that they belong to. the information theory-based semantic similarity  for predicting function through interacting proteins was followed  <cit> :

• to calculate semantic similarity between the transferred go terms from unannotated protein and go terms from interacting neighbours inside the same functional module.

• to consider go terms with a similarity value above a threshold, then associate unannotated protein with these go terms

however, we can accept the predictions if they are similar to the annotations in the module, i.e., have similar go ontology annotations, then a "manual curation" procedure is needed. a schematic view of the itts procedure is depicted in figure  <dig> 

 <dig>  performance measures
 <dig> . effectiveness of the method
the performance of the method was measured as an average value in a five-fold cross-validation analysis, where the goa dataset for m. genitalium was randomly divided into five parts. four parts for model learning , and the remaining part for validation . known go annotations were removed from the test set and it was tried to predict the terms of the proteins in the test set using the rest of the sets .

finally, the predicted terms were compared with original annotations to determine the amount of correctly predicted annotations. effectiveness is validated using standard information retrieval measures: recall and precision. several terms have defined:

a: set of annotated go functions 

p: set of predicted go functions

f: go functions in train set

so, we can establish:            

then, define:      

the variance of the reconstructed annotation was computed in order to see if it is affected by the random split choice. the performance of the method was measured as an average value in a five-fold cross-validation analysis using each of the mycoplasma genomes  to predict the m. genitalium annotations for two ontologies: biological process and molecular function. these genomes vary greatly in the availability of annotations and interaction data, which provides a good setup to study the strengths and limitations of our procedure. as shown in table  <dig> for molecular function ontology, the average of recall is nearly 90% in all species  and the average of precision is 65%. on the other hand, the average of precision is 30% and the average of recall is 80% in the biological process ontology. as expected, recall is higher in the molecular function ontology due to, in previous studies, researchers having found that sequence similarity is strongly correlated with semantic similarity based on the molecular function aspect of go  <cit> . this aspect fits with the biological expectations. the sequence of a protein determines its molecular function but does not necessarily relate to the biological process that it is involved in.

average precision and average recall values for the  <dig> folds in each genome and for each ontology is presented. left side biological process, right side molecular function.

the high recall in both ontology cases indicates that a large number of go terms is recovered by our method from all of the go terms that are relevant to the search. the high precision in the molecular function ontology case indicates that a large proportion of the go terms are relevant to the search among all of the go terms recovered by our method.

 <dig> . predictions in the m. genitalium dataset using different goa files
two goa files for m. genitalium were used in this study. the goa <dig> in this article is dated march  <dig>  and was obtained directly from ncbi. goa <dig> contains  <dig> distinct gene-go entries. the second go annotation file, referred to as goa <dig>  is dated october  <dig> and was obtained from ncbi also. table  <dig> summarises the content of both files. it is seen that the two files are consistently similar in terms of go annotations for each gene  despite the number of annotation gaps between them.

see text for details

in order to determine the accuracy of the predictions in real-world conditions where most genes are poorly annotated or not at all , the same procedure as above was followed , but now using the older go <dig> file and then validating the newly predicted annotations using the newer goa <dig> association file as a second evaluation. using a similar procedure as tao's  <cit> , those go terms marked as 'obsolete' and the ambiguous terms 'biological process unknown', 'molecular function unknown' were excluded from goa <dig>  we limited our testing dataset to include only those go terms that had at least three associated genes  <cit> . two separate experiments were conducted: one to predict annotations for the molecular function ontology and another for the biological process ontology. the semantic similarity was calculated using different measures according to couto  <cit>  . the cut-off values of semantic similarities were varied to generate the different data points on the curves. the results are shown in figure  <dig>  due to space constrictions, only m. genitalium predictions using m. pneumoniae results are presented here. however, the rest of the results can be obtained from the authors upon request .

we found that our procedure performed well, for the molecular function ontology, and high precision scores  and recall values of nearly 60% were obtained. in the biological process ontology, precision scores obtained were also high  and recall values of nearly 85% were obtained for those go terms that were associated with two or more genes. however, it can be seen that in both experiments  poor values were obtained compared with the other genome predictions in the case of m. mycoides. we believe that the cause of these results could be that the higher semantic similarity values obtained for all of the go terms predicted and those that are part of the modules are barely  <dig>  , while the higher semantic similarity values for the other genomes oscillate between  <dig>  and  <dig> .

 <dig> . predictions of informative go terms in the m. genitalium dataset using different approaches
we also, wish to determine if our method can be compared with other similar method in terms of precision and recall when trying to predict informative go terms. informative go terms were defined as those terms that are annotated to at least n proteins  and has at least a level- <dig> or higher. defining:

t: relevant/informative go terms

n: retrieved go terms   

and define now precision and recall as:      

here, how well our procedure detects informative go terms, as compared to other similar approximations is studied. fs-weight is an algorithm which predicts the function of a protein based on the idea that the interaction between indirect neighbours inside a ppi is likely to share common functions  <cit> . these indirect neighbours may interact with the same protein due to some common physical or biochemical characteristics, especially if they share many common interaction neighbours. the fs-weight algorithm was chosen, from others for several reasons: first, because the method is one of the latest ppi-based algorithms for predicting protein function using go annotations. secondly, because it was tested to predict protein function using the string database, showing significant improvement and, thirdly, because fs-weight can predict protein function effectively for all of the three categories of go across different genomes, indicating that it is a robust approach  <cit> . we also compared our procedure with two other approximations: the first one  <cit>  attempts to learn a linear model of how likely a protein is to have a function given the frequency with which a proteins neighbours have that term. parameters of the model are estimated using quasi-likelihood estimation techniques. in order to provide a fair comparison, the proposed method has been compared to a sequence based annotation method which is based on the transfer of annotations in a closely related species, which is bypass  <cit> . this method predicts the putative function for the protein from its sequence integrating the results from the psi-blast programme and a fuzzy logic algorithm using several protein sequence characteristics which have been checked, with regards to their ability to rearrange a psi-blast profile according more to their biological functions.

we wish to study the prediction performance of our procedure for detecting conserved modules among mycoplasma species. due to space constrictions, only m. genitalium and m. pneumoniae results are presented here, however, the rest of the results can be obtained from the authors upon request. the precision versus recall graphs for the prediction of informative go terms are depicted in figure  <dig> for both molecular function and biological process ontology.

different semantic similarity measures were used to obtain scores between the go terms included inside of each predicted module and the go terms obtained using our procedure. for ppi predictions, the modules obtained were assigned using networkblast and then calculated the semantic similarity between the go terms included and the go terms predicted. for bypass predictions, the go terms were assigned to the predictions using the gene ontology database directly. the semantic similarity values were then used as variable thresholds. .

it can be seen in figure  <dig> that, for the three semantic similarity calculations our algorithm makes predictions with better precision and recall, as compared to ppi  and sequence-analysis methods. the main advantage of our procedure is that, despite obtaining a low number of predicted go terms, they are related to the terms inside of each module, while the ppi predictions use only one ppan  and, then, the predicted go terms have lower similarity values than do our predictions. it can be seen, however, that our results have the same problem as do the ppi aproximations  <cit> . due to the lack of annotation information and our previous parsing in trying to avoid inconsistency in go terms, the informative terms chosen are a low number  and may not provide statistically strong comparisons.

finally, the number of m. genitalium unnanotated genes with function predictions, with respect to go annotations, can be found in table  <dig>  using our method, not only general functional categories are assigned to unannotated proteins, but they are also assigned very specific functions to unannotated proteins . predictions are consistent with effectiveness results. these genomes vary greatly in the availability of annotations and interaction data. as shown in table  <dig> the coverage of annotations vary from 17% to nearly 70%, for the species that have more functionally conserved modules with m. genitalium, m. pneumoniae, m. hyopneumoniae and m. penetrans.

discussion
it has been shown herein, that our procedure out-performs other similar algorithms to predict go-based annotations using protein-protein networks, with equal or higher overall precision from a significantly broader range of go terms. the incorporation of other approximations such as functional module detection, conserved between species and orthology exploitation, predict function with higher precision and recall in two ontologies of the go database. as compared to other go search engines, our algorithm is capable of finding go terms with high semantic similarity values due to using orthology information between proteins predicted inside functional modules conserved between species, and it has been also shown to recapitulate "known" future go annotations artificially removed from the dataset using five-fold cross-over validation, with high precision and recall.

CONCLUSIONS
we believe that our combined approach could be applied in future as a high-precision mollicute genome annotation procedure: moderately well go-annotated mycoplasma genomes could help to improve protein function in other mycoplasma less-annotated genomes in a more effective way than ab initio classic annotation methods. however, caution must be exercised when using this technique. we have shown how critical neighbour genomes with good go annotation are: the performance of this procedure is limited because it needs mycoplasma genomes with a high go annotation degree and a high number of predicted conserved modules. if genomes were used with low predicted modules and a low number of go terms annotated within those modules, a reliable number of predictions could not be achieved . future work will cover this by using the latest development of the go database, and which evolutionary distances between mollicute genomes are still allowable in order to predict a reliable number of conserved functional modules between them.

