BACKGROUND
phenotypic plasticity is the ability of a single genotype to produce different phenotypes in distinct environments  <cit> . the resulting phenotypic flexibility may increase an organism's fitness in a heterogeneous environment and phenotypic plasticity is a common feature in nature across many taxa  <cit> . however, an organism that encounters an environment that fluctuates over time and/or space may also respond by genetically-based local adaptation, resulting in canalized phenotypes suited to different parts of its range  <cit> .

phenotypic plasticity can operate jointly with ecotype formation and may further increase fitness. moderate levels of phenotypic plasticity may facilitate a population's expansion into novel environments as the trait may place the population on the slope of an adaptive peak from which natural selection can advance  <cit> . habitats may also change slightly over generations and partial phenotypic plasticity may fine-tune the phenotype around a mean appropriate to the focal habitat. we use the term 'partial plasticity' to refer to cases where the plastic response can explain only a limited proportion of the phenotypic difference between individuals occupying different environments, i.e. cases where genetically distinct ecotypes exist but their phenotypes may be adjusted by plastic responses.

whereas sensitivity to environmental variation is often an advantage, its adaptive value cannot automatically be assumed  <cit> . several cases of adaptive plasticity have been proposed  <cit> , while there are other examples demonstrating maladaptive plasticity  <cit> . some theories posit that a phenotypically plastic response may be able to produce a less extreme phenotype, compared to a canalized phenotype adapted to the same environment, due to the costs of possessing a plastic response or constraints on the ability of plastic development to achieve the target, optimal phenotype   <cit> . accordingly, a key step in the study of phenotypic plasticity is to test the putative adaptive value that plasticity may have, preferably by implementing reciprocal transplant experiments in natural conditions  <cit> . this has rarely been attempted for cases of partial plasticity .

littorina saxatilis is a marine gastropod which has gained attention in the study of ecological speciation  <cit> . the species includes two adjacent ecotypes living under different ecological conditions, with one ecotype experiencing predation from the green crab, carcinus maenas, while the other habitat lacks the green crab but is exposed to strong hydrodynamic forces. in sweden, the conditions with crab predation have selected the s-ecotype  to evolve a relatively large and thick shell with a pronounced apex and with a small aperture to prevent winkling  <cit> . in the absence of crabs but with exposure to wave action a small e-ecotype  has evolved with a squat morphology and a thin shell, and with a large aperture to increase the foot area and so improve adhesion  <cit> . previous studies have utilized transplant experiments on this species and demonstrated that the ecotypes are highly adapted to their native environments as each ecotype showed high mortality in the contrasting habitat  <cit> . however, despite the genetically-based local adaptation of the ecotypes  <cit> , the species shows some plasticity. this is ecotype and habitat specific, with the greatest plasticity in the resident habitat  <cit> . ecotype formation is a response to well-understood divergent selection pressures from the crabs and the wave environment. thus, littorina saxatilis is an excellent model for the study of partial plasticity, especially for a test of the adaptive value of the plastic response within ecotypes, compared to the fitness effects of the genetically-based differences between ecotypes.

hollander and colleagues  <cit>  demonstrated that the ecotypes of littorina saxatilis are genetically distinct since the plasticity shown in their experiment varied around a mean for each ecotype, but the ecotypes remained well separated despite the variation in environment between treatment groups. here, we report an experiment where l. saxatilis individuals of both ecotypes were exposed to several ecological treatments in a laboratory environment, to initiate plastic development in different ontogenetic directions, and were then transplanted into natural conditions in the wave exposed habitat, to test the adaptive value of any plastic responses that may have influenced phenotypic variation within and between ecotypes. we predicted that the s-ecotype in general would experience high mortality due to fixed maladapted characters, and that the crab-induced form of each ecotype would suffer greater mortality than the wave-exposed form.

RESULTS
following laboratory treatment, snails of the s ecotype were larger than those of the e ecotype  but there was no effect of treatment on size . the first two axes of the relative warp analysis described  <dig> % of the total variation . the e and s ecotypes were significantly differentiated along the first axis  and treatment groups were discriminated primarily on the second axis  . the effect of rearing jar was excluded during model simplification and therefore the f-ratio was tested over the residual variance. post hoc tests found significant differences between all groups  except for the comparison e-wave vs. e-control. visualization of deformation grids revealed large variation in relative size around the aperture both between ecotypes and among treatments. the thin-plate spline also demonstrated a deformation zone around the apex with the s-ecotype being more pointed, in general, compared to the e-ecotype.

the numbers of snails that survived from the experimental treatments and were available for transplant to the shore were:  <dig> s-control,  <dig> s-crab,  <dig> s-wave,  <dig> e-control,  <dig> e-crab and  <dig> e-wave . survival rate on the shore differed between ecotypes and treatment groups. only six snails altogether survived  among the  <dig> s-ecotype individuals released. two individuals survived from the control treatment,  <dig> from the crab treatment and  <dig> snail from the wave treatment. the glm test did not find survival differences among the treatments as expected given such high mortality. survival of e-ecotype individuals was much higher than s-ecotype individuals , but varied among treatments:  <dig> of  <dig> snails from the wave-simulated treatment survived,  <dig> of  <dig> from the control treatment and  <dig> of  <dig> from the crab treatment. a glm testing for an effect of treatment on survival rate among the e-ecotype snails confirmed significant variation among groups  with snails from the wave-exposed treatment showing significantly higher survival than the other two groups .

the minimum adequate model from the analysis including shape variables eliminated effects of rw <dig>  patch and treatment, and retained only a significant effect of the second shape axis, rw <dig> . survival increased in the e-ecotype with decreasing rw <dig> scores, i.e. with more rounded aperture and less pointed spire.

to estimated the strength of selection we included both rw <dig> and rw <dig> in the linear regression model and obtained partial regression coefficients  of: rw <dig>   <dig> ; se  <dig> ; p <  <dig>  and rw <dig>  - <dig> ; se  <dig> ; p <  <dig>  with  <dig> degrees of freedom.

discussion
we tested the plastic response of the two ecotypes of littorina saxatilis to experimentally altered environments and the consequences of this response for survival in one of the two contrasting natural habitats. the experimental treatments mimicked the major selection pressures experienced by the snails in each habitat, crab predation and hydrodynamic forces due to wave action. we showed that the plastic response over the experimental period is smaller than the difference between ecotypes and in a different direction in shape space. a greater plastic response might have been expected had the snails spent longer in the experimental conditions, and possibly if their mothers had also experienced those conditions. previous studies have always shown a strong inherited component to the ecotype difference  <cit> , but maternal effects have not been examined. despite the limited plasticity, the response influenced survival in the expected direction: wave exposed snails of the e-ecotype survived better and crab exposed snails worse, in the wave exposed habitat. the estimated selection gradients were steep, but not atypical for morphological traits  <cit> , both on the axis separating ecotypes  and on the axis showing the greater plastic response .

earlier studies on swedish littorina saxatilis applying reciprocal transplant experiments have demonstrated a considerable mortality rate in the contrasting habitat  <cit> . we confirm this result: the mortality rate was very high for all individuals of the s-ecotype, even after experiencing simulated wave exposure, mimicking the environment they were later transplanted into. it is noticeable that the s-ecotype snails remained distant in the morphological shape space from the e-ecotype: the plastic response could not compensate in shell shape sufficiently to increase survival . our sample size for the e-ecotype that was transplanted to the field was small. nevertheless, we found significant differences between the groups, both between the ecotypes and also among the experimental groups within the e-ecotype, where shape variation was a strong predictor of survival differences.

both genetic and plastic variation are pervasive in contributing to species' abilities to evolve local adaptation. organisms may combine phenotypic plasticity with genetically based fixed characters to increase their average fitness  <cit> . providing the background environment is stable over generations, the overall phenotype is expected to become more canalized. however, with patches of micro-habitats generating temporal and/or spatial variation, organisms experience some environmental disparity across generations and partial phenotypic plasticity may evolve in concert with the canalized trait to fine-tune the phenotype towards adaptation. a similar study to ours was conducted by keeley et al.  <cit>  where they examined phenotypic plasticity among ecotype populations of the rainbow trout . the authors discovered that morphological variation among the fish is explained mainly by fixed genetic characters  while the plasticity response governed only  <dig> % or variation. however, for a number of morphological traits, especially among the fins, the balance of control was more in favour of phenotypic plasticity. the authors suggested that this was probably a developmental strategy associated with varying conditions of water flow. they did not test for increased fitness as a result of the plastic responses.

relyea  <cit>  studied tadpoles of rana sylvatica to test the extreme-phenotype hypothesis and found no relationship between increased plasticity and less extreme phenotypes. this hypothesis is an example of the view that genetically divergent ecotypes and variable phenotypes due to plasticity are opposing strategies to evolve local adaptation. this false dichotomy has hindered the study of combined strategies for adaptive traits , and their effectiveness compared with purely canalized or entirely plastic development. there are, however, several insightful studies in plants that consider phenotypic plasticity among ecotypes , although few examine explicitly the adaptive value of plasticity within ecotypes .

CONCLUSIONS
pigliucci  <cit>  stated, "while ecotypes can indeed be plastic, such plasticity is likely to be either incidental or the residual of previous history". hollander et al.  <cit>  showed that the plastic responses of the e and the s ecotype of littorina saxatilis develop in the same direction, but specific for their parental habitats since the magnitude of the plasticity was greatest in the resident habitat. our current study clearly demonstrates that these plastic responses are adaptive, at least in one ecotype, likely to be maintained by selection and likely to play a significant role in allowing survival of the snails in contrasting and variable habitats. they are neither incidental nor residual. studies in plants evaluating the magnitude of plasticity in different ecotypes, the fitness effects that result and the specificity of the phenotypic plasticity  <cit>  similarly show that the observed plasticity is not a relic but an adaptive trait.

in the future, we need to concentrate on the genetic control of developmental strategies to understand, for example, how gene expression varies among ecotypes to produce canalized phenotypes yet simultaneously can be modified in response to environmental cues to influence the same character, albeit in a somewhat different direction. the plasticity observed in this study is most likely not a historical artefact, on the contrary the partial plastic response observed within the e-ecotype of l. saxatilis is adaptive and assists the snails to approach a phenotypic optimum.

