BACKGROUND
the enzyme commission  classification scheme for enzymes, which has been used worldwide for many years, is based mainly on the whole chemical structures of substrates and products, and on the cofactors involved  <cit> . however, because the ec classification scheme neglects protein sequence and structure information, it is sometimes difficult to detect a correlation between an enzyme sequence or structure and function based on ec classification. for instance, some homologous enzymes that are results of divergent evolution from the same ancestral enzyme might catalyze different reactions, whereas some nonhomologous enzymes from different super-families might catalyze the same reaction because of the convergent evolution. the enzyme pair of trypsin and subtilisin shares the ser-his-asp catalytic triad. it is a typical example of “analogous enzymes” produced by convergent evolution  <cit> .

more recent reports suggest that such cases of active sites shared by analogous enzymes are not rare  <cit> . considering those facts, nagano developed an enzyme reaction database, ezcatdb, which provides a hierarchic classification of enzyme reactions, rlcp, which clusters the same reaction types together based on the reaction type, the reactive site of the substrate, the catalytic mechanism, and the catalytic site of enzymes  <cit> . consequently, both the homologous reaction and the analogous reaction can be clustered together in the rlcp classification if they share the same catalytic mechanism and the catalytic site of the same type  <cit> .

for enzyme-function prediction, particularly for detection of analogous enzymes, it is necessary to examine the specific local structures of the active sites that might reflect enzyme functions, rather than the global structures, such as the domain level or the chain level  <cit> . regarding local structure comparison methods used to detect similar active sites, several “template-based” methods have been reported  <cit> . those template-based methods search among target protein structures for the occurrence of a pre-defined template structure that consists of active-site residue atoms.

our study specifically examines two practical applications of template-based methods. one is single template analysis, by which a single template is used as a query to search proteins for active sites that might have the same function as the template. another is multiple template analysis, by which a particular protein structure is examined as a query to discover the possible active sites, whose structures resemble that in a set of templates. the key technique for both analyses is comparison of local site structures with template structures.

this paper presents machine learning techniques for two measurements to enhance the accuracy in comparing local sites with templates. one is an extension of the standard measurement: rmsd. the measurement parameterizes the deviation function so that the deviation can be refined by machine learning. another measurement compares distance matrices instead of 3d structures. this measurement also employs machine learning to obtain a discriminative similarity between local sites and templates. in this work, the machine learning approaches are validated in the two applications: single template analysis and multiple template analysis. our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of machine learning for both analyses.

because of limited space, some figures and tables were not included in this paper. figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and tables  <dig>   <dig> are provided in the paper, although figures 5– <dig> and tables 3– <dig> are included in supplemental materials. the mathematical notations, the post-processing methods, and the abbreviations are also described in the supplemental materials.

template 1ams is used to generate this example.

protein structure 1bio is used to generate this example.

RESULTS
overview of experiments
this section presents experimental results to underscore the performance of template-based active-site prediction algorithms. template is definable as a set of atoms in an active site of an enzyme protein. roughly speaking, active-site prediction is performed by comparing the active sites of templates with local sites in protein structures; if the local site structure is sufficiently similar to the active-site template, the local site can be predicted as an active site. precisely, there are two typical ways of predicting active sites using templates: single template analysis and multiple template analysis.

single template analysis
in the single template analysis, it was attempted to search protein structures for local sites similar to a query template, to discover proteins that have the same active site as the template. the input and output in the single template analysis are described as follows:

input : template structure.

output: list of proteins in a protein structure database. the proteins in the list are attached with the coordinates of local sites that are similar to the query template.

an example of the output in the single template analysis is given in table  <dig>  template 1ams is used to generate the list. the top  <dig> proteins are listed as sorted in descending order of the similarity values. the predicted local sites in the  <dig> proteins are also included in the list. indeed, all the  <dig> proteins have the same function as that of the template, and their active sites coincide exactly with the listed sites.

a typical procedure of single template analysis consists of two stages as follows:

 <dig>  local site search. a local site search  algorithm, such as tess  <cit>  and jess  <cit> , is used to enumerate the candidates of local site structures similar to the template.

 <dig>  similarity/deviation computation. the similarity or deviation of each candidate site to or from the template is computed. the candidate sites are sorted in descending and ascending order of the similarity and deviation values.

multiple template analysis
multiple template analysis is attempted to find active sites in a query protein structure by searching for local sites that are similar to a template structure in a set of pre-defined templates. this is used for predicting the function of the query protein.

input : protein tertiary structure.

output: list of local sites that are similar to a pre-defined template.

the list in table  <dig> is an example of the output in the multiple template analysis. this result is generated by attempting to predict the active sites in a query protein structure of 1bio. the list contains  <dig> local sites, which are sorted according to the confidence level. the true active-site in 1bio is “his  <dig> a, asp  <dig> a, gly  <dig> a, ser  <dig> a”, which is predicted at the top of the list.

a typical procedure of multiple template analysis consists of three stages:

 <dig>  local site search. a local site search  algorithm is used to enumerate the candidates of local structures similar to a template.

 <dig>  similarity/deviation computation. the similarity or deviation of each candidate site to or from the corresponding template is computed.

 <dig>  post-processing. the similarities or deviations above are transformed to some probabilistic scores to compare and sort the local sites in descending order of the score values.

experimental settings
to investigate the performance of the templates, a search experiment was conducted against the pdb protein structure dataset. an enzyme database, ezcatdb  <cit> , which contains information related to catalytic reaction classification and active-sites of enzymes, was used for the experiment. ezcatdb provides a hierarchic classification of enzyme reactions, rlcp, which clusters the same reaction types together based on the reaction type, the reactive site of the substrate, the catalytic mechanism, and the active-site of enzymes  <cit> . the rlcp classification differs from the conventional enzyme classification, ec, as described in the background section. in all,  <dig> templates were prepared based on the rlcp classification. to evaluate the prediction methods, protein structures that are assigned to have the same rlcp class as one of the  <dig> templates were enumerated for use in our experiments. consequently,  <dig>  structures were obtained.

a template can be created from a set of amino acid residues in an active-site from an ezcatdb entry. in the ezcatdb database, each residue in the active-site is classified into one of four types: catalytic-site residue, cofactor-binding-site residue, modified residue, and mainchain catalytic residue. for catalytic-site residues and modified residues, atoms from the sidechains of residues are included automatically in the template, whereas all atoms are included in the template for cofactor-binding-site residues. for mainchain catalytic residues, only the mainchain atoms are included in the template. the  <dig> templates were created by this procedure. in table  <dig> , the original pdbids for those templates are listed.

in our study, tess  <cit>  was implemented as an lss algorithm to perform the local site search that is used for the first step in the catalytic-function prediction system. the lss algorithm was applied to the  <dig>  protein structures, and local sites that have rmsd larger than  <dig>  Å were removed from the detected local structures. as a result,  <dig>  local structures were detected and used for our experiments. then, local sites were labeled as positive sites for a template if they were annotated in ezcatdb to have the same function as the template; the other local sites were labeled as negative sites. some templates hit many local sites, but others hit only a few. template 1acb hits the largest number of positive sites among  <dig> templates, and the number is  <dig>  the template 1qk <dig> detected  <dig>  negative sites, which is the greatest number among the  <dig> templates. the medians of the quantities of positive and negative sites are, respectively,  <dig> and  <dig> .

mostly, only a few positive sites were detected in each protein structure by the lss algorithm, although many more negative sites were detected. the distribution of the detected sites in the multiple template analysis is shown in the histograms ), where the x-axis shows the number of detected sites for each query protein and the y-axis shows the frequency of hit proteins. therein, the same local sites can be detected several times when the sites are detected by several different templates. only one positive site was detected among  <dig> protein structures. the remaining  <dig> protein structures have multiple positive sites. about  <dig> % of protein structures contain fewer than five positive sites. the number of negatives is much greater than the number of positives in most protein structures. the median of the number of negative sites in a protein structure is  <dig>  the 95th percentile is  <dig>  and the maximum number is  <dig>  this fact motivated us to devise precise similarity or deviation measurements between local site structures and template structures in order to extract true positive sites among the vastly numerous local sites detected in a protein structure.

to examine the generalization performance of prediction algorithms, the dataset of  <dig>  pdb entries was divided randomly into a training set and a test set, so that each dataset can have 50% of the original dataset. the divisions were then adjusted so that at least one active-site can be hit in a training set by the lss algorithm for every template. the test set was used only for prediction. consequently, the test pdb set was never used for learning. this procedure was repeated  <dig> times. the average of the prediction performances over the  <dig> trials is described in this section.

single template analysis
to predict local sites detected by the lss algorithms, precise similarity or deviation measurements are necessary. currently, the standard measurement is the so-called rmsd. our study introduces two measurements: weighted mean deviation  and dali score-based discriminative similarity . rmsd is computed by taking the unweighted average of square euclidean distances, whereas wmd takes the weighted average of distances. furthermore, dsds is the linear combination of dali scores. the parameters for both wmd and dsds are obtained using machine learning algorithms, which will hereinafter show notable differences from the conventional measurements in prediction performance. to confirm the effectiveness of machine learning for dsds, the mean of dali scores  was tested as the similarity between local sites and templates for the experimental control. the square of rmsd is designated as the unweighted mean deviation , revealing the same ranking as rmsd.

an example of the prediction results in the single template analysis is shown in table  <dig>  this is a result obtained by the dsds measurement, using template 1ams. all local sites in the list are positive, as described above. for comparison, table  <dig>  portrays a prediction result obtained using the umd measurement, with the same template. unfortunately, all the local sites in the list are negative.

to evaluate the performance of active-site prediction algorithms for the single template analysis, two criteria were adopted: roc score and sensitivity. the roc score is the area under the roc curve that is shown in two-dimensional space where the x-axis shows the false positive rate , and the y-axis shows the true positive rate . as a discrimination threshold of the similarity/deviation varies, different fprs and tprs are obtainable, yielding many points in the fpr-vs.-tpr space. connecting those points yields an roc curve for each template and for each of  <dig> trials. here, the average of roc scores was obtained. sensitivity is also evaluated where the discrimination threshold is adjusted so that the specificity is 95%. in this article, the capitalized word, sensitivity, was adopted to denote the sensitivity at specificity of 95%.

multiple template analysis
to perform multiple template analysis for predicting the function of a query protein structure, the similarity or deviation measurements, such as rmsd, must be transformed through post-processing into some unified scores, which can be compared among different templates. one post-processing is the logistic regression   <cit> . the lr method provides posterior probabilities for given similarity or deviation values. the parameters of the posterior probability function are estimated using training data. another post-processing is pints <cit> . results of our experiments revealed that pints works well for the square root of wmd. however, pints can be applied to neither mds nor dsds.

methods of experimental control, designated as direct in this paper, which compare the similarity or deviation measurements directly, were also tested. in the direct methods, post-processing is not conducted. consequently, there are now  <dig> combinations of the similarity or deviation measurements using post-processing methods: umd-direct, wmd-direct, mds-direct, dsds-direct, umd-lr, wmd-lr, mds-lr, dsds-lr, umd-pints, wmd-pints.

an example presented in table  <dig> was generated using wmd-pints. the local sites in the list are the predicted results for active-sites in the protein structure 1bio. as described above, the top in the prediction results is the true positive site. table  <dig>  portrays a prediction result obtained using the umd-pints measurement, to predict the active sites of the same protein structure 1bio. in this case, no active site was predicted in the top  <dig> 

to evaluate the prediction performance in the multiple template analysis, an roc curve is drawn for each protein structure to compute the area under the curve: the roc score. a modified version of the roc score, called roc <dig> score  <cit> , is also used for performance evaluation. the roc <dig> score is the area under roc curve up to the first five false positives; the score is scaled so that it will be 0– <dig> 

to compare the machine learning-based methods with the experimental control, the roc and roc <dig> scores of the three methods, umd-pints, wmd-pints, and dsds-lr are shown in the scatter plots of figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> . these three are, respectively, the best methods among the methods with umd, wmd, and dsds. figure  <dig> shows the roc scores for  <dig>  pdb structures, and figure  <dig>  portrays the roc <dig> scores. for both the criteria, the two methods, wmd-pints and dsds-lr, performed much better than the baseline method, umd-pints, which suggests that machine learning is effective for the multiple template analysis. no remarkable difference between the two machine-learning-based methods were observed.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper presented an examination of the effectiveness of novel machine-learning-based similarity or deviation measurements for comparison of template structures with local site structures in proteins. the measurements are applicable to two situations: one for seeking proteins that have a particular catalytic function by comparing a template with local sites in those proteins , and another for predicting the function of a particular protein by comparing local sites in the protein structure with a set of templates whose functions are annotated . our experimental results demonstrated that, for both situations, machine learning-based methods performed better than the conventional methods. further improvements in the machine learning methods presented in this paper by transferring information from the learning of other templates  <cit>  or by incorporation of additional information such as sequence and ligand structure into our current methods are anticipated as interesting avenues for future work.

