BACKGROUND
dna methylation is an indispensable epigenetic modification of mammalian genomes. in mammals, it occurs predominantly at cpg dinucleotides which are sparsely distributed through the genome except at short genomic regions called cpg islands   <cit> . the state of cpg methylation regulates and stabilizes chromatin structure, and possibly regulates accessibility of these dna regions to the transcription machinery  <cit> . dna methylation is essential to diverse processes such as development, x-inactivation, and imprinting  <cit> . alterations to the normal patterns of dna methylation are linked to many human diseases, such as cancer  <cit> . many studies have explored the aberrant patterns of dna methylation in cancers, as they might possibly be of value as cancer cell markers, markers of tumor prognosis, predictors of response to chemotherapy, and therapeutic targets  <cit> . human tumors have been shown to undergo a massive loss of dna methylation, but also to become hypermethylated at certain gene promoters  <cit> . however, the entire genomic distribution of aberrant methylations and the molecular mechanisms underlying the methylome alterations in cancers remain unclear, mainly due to the limitations of existing techniques for analyzing dna methylation at specific sequences  <cit> . for example, the conventional strategies using methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes require high-molecular-weight dna and are limited by the sequence context of the chosen enzyme.

recently an important technical advance for analyzing dna methylation was made by using immunoprecipitation with an antibody against 5-methylcytosine to enrich methylated dna fragments  <cit> . this methyl-dna immunoprecipitation -based approach enables the rapid identification of multiple cpg sites universally, and it can be combined with gene-by-gene pcr detection and with several promoter, cgi and tiling microarrays  <cit> . however, predefined cgis cover only  <dig> % of all cpgs in the human genome and the entire human genome is not yet represented in any microarray. analysis of dna methylation has also been advanced recently by the application of high-throughput dna sequencing technology that allows robust, quantitative, and cost-effective functional genomic strategies. medip in conjunction with high-throughput sequence  provides a genome-wide mapping technique that has successfully been used to profile the global dna methylation patterns of mature human spermatozoa genome  <cit> . bisulphite sequencing has also been combined with high-throughput sequence  to describe the  <dig> mb arabidopsis dna methylome  <cit> . in addition, bs-seq was recently applied to the human dna methylome  <cit> . unfortunately, it still remains too hard work to apply bs-seq on a multiple comparative analysis of methylomes in mammalian genomes.

in this study, we used medip-seq to investigate the whole-genome distribution of aberrant dna methylation in eight breast cancer cells  lines and compared these with the methylation patterns of normal human mammary epithelial cells . furthermore, to investigate the mechanisms of methylome alteration and determine the effects of such changes on the morphology of bcc lines, we identified alterations to the methylation profile that occurred during the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition  in mcf <dig> cells treated with tgfβ and tnfα. using this experimental approach, we obtained novel insights in to the molecular and genetic mechanisms of methylome alterations in bcc lines and their functional association with cancer phenotype.

RESULTS
high-throughput sequencing analysis of medip dna
we profiled the genome-wide dna methylation status of normal and cancerous mammary cells by first generating medip-enriched dna libraries. real-time quantitative pcr was used for several genomic regions that included known methylated or unmethylated promoters to confirm that medip specifically enriched methylated dna and efficiently removed unmethylated dna . immunoprecipitated fractions were subjected to high-throughput sequencing using an illumina genome analyzer to obtain comprehensive methylation maps. the influence of genomic amplifications and deletions in the bcc lines was investigated by high-throughput sequencing of input dna fragments from each samples, with the exception of mdamb <dig> and mrknu <dig> which yielded an insufficient number of reads. we obtained  <dig> million uniquely mapped singleton reads and  <dig> million paired-end reads for the medip samples and  <dig> million singleton reads for the input samples with high quality read placements against the human genome . the mapping of input reads allowed the efficient detection of genomic amplifications, including known regions of amplification   <cit> . we excluded these regions from the following analyses as they might result in failure to identify regions with hypermethylation. overall, 87% of genomic cpgs all over the genome were covered by any sample with  <dig> times depth, the average of each sample's maximum depth . thus, our data sets successfully provided non-biased genome-wide information. we observed that some pairs in the paired-end reads had identical outer coordinates. as this should happen rarely, we assumed this to be due to pcr biases introduced by the whole-genome amplification after immunoprecipitation. we therefore removed any duplicates from each data set to improve the overall reproducibility in the following analyses.

to confirm the reproducibility of the analyses, we performed two replicates of the medip-seq experiments with hmec. the numbers of reads overlapping each cgi and  <dig> kb genomic segment were highly correlated between the replicates  . to assess whether the medip-seq analyses correctly identified methylated regions, we compared mcf <dig> medip-seq results with previously reported mcf <dig> promoter methylome data generated by the medip-chip technique . for each probe region, we counted the number of medip-enriched reads and subtracted the number of input reads. overall, regions detected by medip-seq were found to have higher methylation levels in medip-chip results., indicating accurate detection of methylated regions by medip-seq . we also observed considerable hypomethylation at some repeat sequences, such as human satellite ii , known to be primary targets of hypomethylation in many cancers  <cit> .

a number of studies have reported that cgis are hypermethylated in many cancers  <cit> ; we therefore investigated the differential methylation status of cgis. compared to hmec, we found a more than four-fold increase in methylation levels in cgis in many bcc lines . the known hypermethylation status of many cgis, for example wt <dig>  <cit>  and hoxa <dig>  <cit> , was confirmed by the medip-seq data sets . we also identified other cgis highly methylated in bcc lines and confirmed their methylation levels using bisulfite sequencing . additionally, we perfomed bisulfite sequencing on randomly chosen regionsto confirm our medip-seq results . we observed a strong correlation between the medip-seq data and bisulfite sequencing data, confirming the reliablity of the medip-seq data .

genomic distribution of aberrant dna methylation in bcc lines
we thought it would be useful to obtain overview methylation maps, albeit at reduced resolution, to understand the pattern of methylation at the genome-wide level. we divided the entire genome into  <dig> kb segments and counted the number of reads mapped within each segment. to compare methylation levels within each sample, the number of reads were normalized against the total number of reads; and the inferred number of reads per  <dig> million total reads was calculated for each sample. the normalized number of reads in  <dig> kb regions was clearly correlated to the number of cpgs in the hmec medip sample , whereas the input sample showed nearly constant values irrespective of the number of cpgs. compared to hmec, bcc lines showed a lower correlation between the number of reads and cpgs, suggesting broadly altered methylation levels in bcc lines.

the number of medip-reads were divided by the input and used for pairwise comparisons among the samples, in order to classify each segment as hyper-, hypo-, and not-differentially methylated groups. we defined hypermethylation and hypomethylation in bcc lines as a two-fold increase and decrease, respectively, in the normalized tag frequency compared to hmec. in all bcc lines, hypomethylation occurred  <dig> to  <dig> times more frequently than hypermethylation . hierarchical clustering showed distinct methylation patterns of hmec, compared to bcc lines . compared to hmec,  <dig> % of the segments in bcc lines showed on average a two-fold decrease in methylation levels . next, we investigated the distribution of hypomethylated and hypermethylated positions across the entire genome. hypomethylated regions in bcc lines were distributed throughout entire genome, while hypermethylated regions were clustered at specific loci , including 16p <dig> , 19p <dig> , and 9q <dig>  . the number of cpgs within the hypermethylated and hypomethylated segments was highly biased toward a lower or higher frequency of cpgs, respectively . hypermethylation was also positively correlated with the number of genes within the segment region . all bcc lines showed significantly higher methylation levels in gene-rich regions. in contrast, hmec showed a lower association between methylation levels and gene frequency , suggesting that aberrant methylation preferentially targets genes. we also performed these analyses using smaller window sizes  and obtained consistent results .

target position of aberrant methylation in bcc lines
we sought to determine whether the positions of aberrantly methylated cpgs were related to genomic features. we defined promoter regions as the  <dig> kb upstream region of all transcription start sites deposited in the refseq database. exons and introns were also defined by this database. the repetitive sequences were excluded. as ratios could not be determined when methylated dna fragments were not detected by medip-seq in one sample, we evaluated methylation status by a qualitative criterion in this analysis; we defined hypermethylation as the region covered by all bccs but not by hmec, and hypomethylation as the region covered by hmec but not by any bccs. we found that the majority of hypermethylated cpgs were related to gene promoters, exons and introns . by contrast, hypomethylated cpgs did not show significant enrichment of any defined genomic feature. hypermethylated cpgs were also found within the hypomethylated  <dig> kb segments described above and were preferentially found at gene-related features . we then investigated the distance between aberrantly methylated gene-related positions and transcription start sites . the cpgs around tss were classified into promoters, exons and introns, and then we calculated their distances to tss. hyper- and hypomethylated cpgs tended to be concentrated in regions proximal to tss, suggesting that these regions are important for the regulation of gene expression . since the density of cpgs was highest at regions proximal to tss, the relative frequencies of hyper- and hypomethylations at distal regions were higher than proximal regions, when considering the ratio with the cpg content. we also analyzed the distribution of the distance from transcription start sites to hyper- and hypomethylated cpgs in cpg islands  and found that relative frequencies of hypermethylations at distal regions were higher than proximal regions.

to examine the effect of methylations both proximal and distal to tss on gene expression, we performed a correlation analysis between methylation patterns and gene expression. the gene expression profiles of six bcc lines  were obtained from a public database   <cit> . regions around tss  were divided into  <dig> kb segments and the number of reads within each segment was counted for each sample. the fraction of genes with expressions positively correlated to methylation patterns was higher at distal regions . on the other hand, the fraction of genes with expressions negatively correlated was higher at proximal regions, although the fraction of negatively correlated genes were lower than positively correlated genes at any distance from tss.

aberrant methylations at cpg-rich regions in bccs
as described above, hypermethylation was associated with cgis. however, the hypermethylation observed at gene-related regions was not limited to predefined cgis : 53% of hypermethylated cpgs in bcc lines belonged to non-cgi regions. our observations therefore challenge the current presumption that hypermethylation is restricted to cgis and proximal promoters. we investigated the characteristics of hypermethylated cpgs across the entire genome by counting the number of neighboring cpgs within the  <dig> bp regions surrounding hypermethylated sites and calculated the cpg observed/expected ratio   <cit>  for each cpg.

to screen for association between cpgo/e and aberrant methylation targets, we examined the cpgo/e distribution across all cpgs covered by each medip sample. the cpgo/e ratio distribution of cpgs that belonged to promoter regions was divided into two distinct classes at the cpgo/e ratio  <dig> , which is also the criterion for cgis  <cit> . the promoter cpgs covered in hmec were considerably biased towards a low  cpgo/e ratio . on the other hand, cpgs with a high  cpgo/e ratio were highly covered by all bcc lines. we also found that hypermethylation of a cpg-rich region was more likely to be shared by bcc lines, compared to that in a cpg-poor region . by contrast, hypomethylation in a cpg-poor region was more likely to be shared by bcc lines, compared to that in cpg-rich region. we then defined the hypermethylated cpgs that were covered in all bcc lines but not in hmec, and hypomethylated cpgs that were covered in hmec but not in all bcc lines. hypermethylation was mainly observed in cpgs with a high cpgo/e ratio, and hypomethylation was highly biased towards cpgs with a low cpgo/e ratio . hypermethylation was also observed at exons and introns in high cpgo/e regions.

emt-induced methylome alteration
according to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition  hypothesis, bccs undergo phenotype alterations during the sequential in vivo progression of cancer from atypical hyperproliferation to metastatic disease, subtended or not by genetic changes  <cit> . although altered methylations of some gene promoters have been reported to be one of the principal causes of emt  <cit> , the relationship between the epithelial-mesenchymal phenotype of breast cancers and the genome-wide methylation profile remains unclear. here, we screened for genome-wide methylome alterations during emt induction in mcf <dig>  treatment with tgfβ and tnfα efficiently altered the normal epithelial phenotype of mcf <dig> cells to a mesenchymal phenotype. pairwise comparisons of normalized methylation levels in  <dig> kb segments revealed that emt had little effect on the global distribution of dna methylation . however, compared to normal mcf <dig> cells, the percentage of reads covering cgis was reduced following induced emt . emt induction was associated with a massive loss of hypermethylated cgis and gain of hypomethylated cgis . furthermore, emt induction more frequently resulted in hypomethylation rather than hypermethylation at gene-related cpgs , and emt-induced hypomethylation was predominant especially at cpg-rich regions .

we also investigated whether emt-induced methylome alterations in cpg-rich regions were associated with epithelial- or mesenchymal-specific patterns of methylation. based on the phenotypic classification of cell lines into epithelial  and mesenchymal   <cit> , epithelial- or mesenchymal-specific methylation patterns were determined. approximately 40% of epithelial-specific methylation sites were hypomethylated following emt-induction, while only 10% of total sites were hypomethylated . in addition, approximately 40% of mesenchymal-specific methylation sites were hypermethylated following emt-induction, while only ~10% of total sites were hypermethylated. these cell-type specific methylome alterations were found in all gene-related regions. although these changes are partial, the results suggest that emt-induction affects the morphological phenotype of the cells through methylome alterations within cpg-rich regions.

discussion
this study provides the first comprehensive, detailed map of dna methylation patterns in human mammary cell lines. methylated dna fragments were detected using a highly sensitive method involving enrichment by medip, and high-throughput sequencing enabled the non-biased mapping of aberrant methylation sites across the genomes of bcc lines. we examined  <dig> different cell populations in total, including emt-induced mcf <dig> cells, to investigate the association between dna methylome alterations and changes in cellular morphological phenotypes. our data sets covered almost the entire genome with sufficient depth to identify differentially methylated regions, thereby providing high resolution and reproducibility, and proved that medip-seq is a cost-effective approach for comparative analyses of the mammalian dna methylome. although many researchers have sought to describe dna methylome alterations in cancers, to our knowledge this is the first methylome study that effectively encompasses the entire genome and is not limited to specific sequences. this study has thus provided important new insights into the biological implications of dna methylation.

firstly, the global methylation map provides an indication of the intricate relationship between the methylome and transcriptome. most cancer methylome studies have assumed that functionally important dna methylation is restricted to promoters and that most dna methylation changes in cancer occur in cgis, and they ignore all other regions. in our analysis, although hypermethylation at predefined cgis was a remarkable feature of the bcc lines, we also found that many non-cgi regions were broadly hypermethylated. hypermethylation occurred not only at proximal promoters but also at exons and introns, including regions distal from the tss. since dna methylation interrupts the binding of transcription factors to their response elements  <cit> , changes in methylation at distal regions may affect the expression of a gene. since proximal promoters or cgi methylation are not always correlated with gene expression  <cit> , our comprehensive methylation maps will help us to better understand methylation-dependent transcriptional regulation.

secondly, the comprehensive methylation maps help us to understand how methylation is maintained and how it is disrupted in bcc lines. we found that the number of reads was positively correlated with the number of cpgs within  <dig> kb segments and this relationship was especially clear in hmec. although hmec showed relatively low methylation levels in gene-related cpg-rich regions , overall, methylation of each cpg seemed to be maintained at a nearly constant level. the most prominent feature of aberrant methylation was the massive overall hypomethylation and simultaneous hypermethylation at cpg-rich regions. while these observations are consistent with previous reports  <cit> , our results provide the most detailed map of aberrant methylation in bcc lines. we found that hypomethylation in bcc lines was biased towards cpg-poor regions, and analysis of genomic features indicated there was no preference for repeat sequences but included all gene-related regions equally. furthermore, hypermethylations of cpg-rich gene-related regions was present in bcc lines although within extremely hypomethylated  <dig> kb segments. these results support the idea that there are at least two distinct maintenance mechanisms that produce the aberrant methylation patterns in cpg-poor regions and cpg-rich regions. one mechanism maintains cpgs at a constant methylation level, which is downregulated in bcc lines. another mechanism maintains gene-related cpg-rich regions at a specific methylation level, which is generally upregulated in bcc lines.

finally, the comparative analysis of methylation maps of mcf <dig> cells with or without emt induction provided an increased understanding of how cells undergo dna methylome alterations. analysis of  <dig> kb segments revealed almost unchanged overall methylation levels throughout emt, while hypomethylation was observed at many cgi sites. with respect to the two distinct mechanisms of methylome alteration described above, emt had little effect on the maintenance of the overall methylation level, but had a considerable effect on cell-type specific methylation. on the other hand, emt induction altered cell-type specific gene-related methylation such that hypomethylation was predominantly observed at cpg-rich regions. the idea that there are cell-type and gene specific mechanisms for regulation of methylation patterns within cpg-rich gene-related regions received further support from the following observations. the methylation status within cpg-rich regions were likely to be shared by bcc lines, and cpgs within cpg-rich repetitive sequences such as hsatii were extensively hypomethylated in bcc lines. considering that the methylation status participates in determining the morphological phenotypes of the cells  <cit> , our results suggested an interdependence between cell-type and gene specific regulation of dna methylations and morphological changes during emt.

CONCLUSIONS
we performed a comprehensive methylation profiling of human mammary cell lines using the medip-seq analysis, revealing aberrant methylation patterns in bcc lines and emt-induced alteration of the methylome. methylome alteration in bcc lines had two principal characteristics: a downregulated overall level of cpg methylation; and cell-type specific regulation of dna methylation at gene-related cpg-rich regions. our results provide important insights into the mechanisms of methylome alterations during tumor development.

