BACKGROUND
ectomycorrhizal  fungi form a mutualistic symbiosis with tree roots and play key roles in forest ecosystems. in return for receiving nutrients and water from the soil via the roots, they receive carbohydrates as photosynthate from their host plants  <cit> . as is the case for other soil fungal species, the composition of the ecm community is affected by both biotic and abiotic factors; these include climate changes, seasons, soil micro-site heterogeneity, soil and litter quality, host tree species and forest management  <cit> . to describe in more detail the impact of environmental factors on community composition, long-term, year-round monitoring and a detailed spatial description of the community has to be carried out. however, analyses are very often hindered by a limited sample number and by the ephemeral or cryptic lifestyle of the fungi  <cit> .

over the last fifteen years, pcr-based molecular methods and dna sequencing of nuclear and mitochondrial ribosomal dna have been used routinely to identify mycorrhizal fungi  <cit> . however, these methods are time-consuming and are limited in the number of samples that can be treated in a realistic time frame  <cit> . with automated molecular genotyping techniques, appropriate dna databases  <cit>  and a better knowledge of its variability within fungal species  <cit> , identification of fungal taxa in environmental samples can now be expanded from the aforementioned methods to high-throughput molecular diagnostic tools, such as phylochips  <cit> . so far, dna arrays have been mainly used for genome-wide transcription profiling  <cit> , but also for the identification of bacterial species from complex environmental samples  <cit>  or for the identification of a few genera of pathogenic fungi and oomycetes  <cit> . phylochips may comprise up to several thousand probes that target phylogenetic marker genes, such as 16s rrna in bacteria or the internal transcribed spacer  region in fungi  <cit> ; indeed, the latter is one of the most widely used barcoding regions for fungi  <cit> . phylochips have several advantages over traditional approaches, including higher specificity, cost efficiency, rapid identification and detection of target organisms, and the high numbers of samples throughput; therefore, they are increasingly used for the detection of bacterial and pathogenic fungi  <cit> . in the ecm fungal ecology field, the first application of ribosomal dna arrays was reported by bruns and gardes  <cit> ; they developed a specific phylochip  to detect suilloid fungi. recently, this approach has also been used for truffle identification  <cit> . to the best of our knowledge, no study has reported the construction and application of an ecm fungal phylochip to detect a large number of ecm fungal species that belong to various genera from environmental samples.

here, we report the first application of a custom ribosomal its phylochip to describe the community composition of ecm fungi on roots. the phylochip carried specific oligonucleotides for  <dig> fungal species that belong to  <dig> ecm fungal genera. the specificity of the oligonucleotides was evaluated using its amplicons of known reference species. the method was then used to describe ecm fungal communities that were obtained from 30-year-old spruce and beech plantations. to validate the phylochip, morphotyping and its sequencing of the ecm root tips, together with sequencing of its clone libraries, were carried out. we discuss the pros and cons of the phylochip in comparison to conventional approaches, and outline its potential applications for environmental monitoring.

RESULTS
identification of ecm fungi from environmental samples by morphotyping/its sequencing and sequencing of its clone libraries
by combining morphotyping and its sequencing of individual ecm root tips, and sequencing of its clone libraries,  <dig> fungal species were identified on the roots of beech and spruce trees; these included  <dig> ecm fungi . rarefaction curves of clone library coverage nearly reached a plateau, which indicated a near complete sampling of the ecm species in the soil samples that were taken from under the beech and spruce. in order to detect only one more species from spruce samples and a further two species from beech samples, it would be necessary to increase the sequencing effort two-fold . the species richness was very similar for the two plantations, with  <dig> and  <dig> species being associated with spruce and beech, respectively; however, the community compositions were clearly distinct. only three ecm taxa were found on the root tips of both hosts: cenococcum geophilum, xerocomus pruinatus and tomentellopsis submollis . sequencing of the its clone libraries or identification of individual ecm morphotypes revealed similar fungal ecm profiles. most fungi that were detected on spruce roots by sequencing of the its library were also detected by morphotyping . of these morphotypes, nine were also supported by sequencing the its of individual morphotypes . one taxon was only identified with morphotyping and its-sequencing of individual ecm morphotypes, and another was identified only by morphotyping. overall,  <dig> of  <dig> taxa  from the spruce roots were identified by both molecular methods. a total of  <dig> of  <dig> taxa  from the beech roots were identified by both approaches. sequencing of the its clone libraries resulted in the detection of an additional two taxa. one of these was related to an unidentified endophyte, which was difficult to identify by morphotyping alone as it is likely leaving inside the root tissues . a single taxon was identified only by the morphotyping/its sequencing approach, and three taxa were identified only by morphotyping. using its1f and its <dig> primers  <cit>  or nsi1/nlb <dig>  <cit> , the its region from six ecm morphotypes  were not amplified. the its regions from four fungi  of those six morphotypes were also not amplified using the its clone library approach . however, the use of the second primer pair, nsl1/nlb <dig>  enabled the molecular biological characterisation of four morphotypes  that were not amplified with its1f/its <dig> 

for the sequence homology search, blastn was carried out with the ncbi  and unite  databases. accession numbers  and identities are given.

specificity of designed oligonucleotides
the specificity of the  <dig> designed oligonucleotides  was evaluated using pcr amplicons that were generated from sporocarp tissues. pcr amplicons mainly hybridised to the phylochip oligonucleotides according to the expected patterns , and the patterns were highly reproducible in the replications conducted with each of the templates. the hybridisation signal intensities ranged from - <dig>  to  <dig>  units. ninety-nine percent of the oligonucleotides tested generated positive hybridisation signals with their matching its. cross-hybridisations were mainly observed within the cortinarius and lactarius species complex. among the boletaceae species, a few cross-hybridisations were observed between the species that belonged to the boletus and xerocomus genera. within the amanita, russula or tricholoma genus, rare cross-reactions occurred between single sequences from closely related species.

identification of ecm species in root samples using phylochip
the its amplicons that were obtained from the two different environmental root samples were labelled and hybridised to the phylochips. the phylochip analysis confirmed the presence of most of the ecm fungi that were detected with the morphotyping, with the its sequencing of individual ecm tips, and with the its clone library approaches that were obtained using the same pcr products . the exceptions included the following fungal species for which corresponding oligonucleotides on the phylochips were lacking: pezizales sp, atheliaceae  sp, sebacina sp, sebacinaceae sp, and unknown endophytic species. the inability to detect these four morphotyped ecm fungal species by molecular typing suggests that these morphological identifications could be incorrect .

comparison of the abundance of sequences analysed by the cloning/sequencing approach and the species detection via the phylochip approach, indicated that the phylochip has the potential to detect taxa represented by approx. 2% of a dna type in an environmental dna sample. however, to assess the sensitivity of the current custom phylochip in more detail, further analyses will be carried out.

discussion
many different environmental factors influence the dynamics and the spatiotemporal structure of ecm communities  <cit> . a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying these dynamics will require year-round ecm monitoring at incrementally increased spatial resolutions. however, the limited number of samples that can currently be analysed hinders the use of molecular approaches for large-scale studies. with the ongoing development of high-throughput molecular diagnostic tools, such as dna oligoarrays  <cit>  and  <dig> pyrosequencing  <cit> , larger scale surveys  of soil fungi are now possible. ecologically relevant sample throughput in the in the  <dig> to  <dig> range is now accessible. so far, phylochips have been used for the identification of bacteria  <cit> , viruses  <cit> , and a few genera of closely related fungal species  <cit> .

in the present study, we constructed a custom ribosomal dna phylochip for the identification of ecm fungi that was based on the its <dig> and its <dig> regions. one of the great advantages of using its regions for oligonucleotide design is the high number of sequences that are available in public databases  <cit> . furthermore, these regions are some of the most frequently used regions for the barcoding of ecm fungi  <cit> , and compared to other possible barcoding regions, they show a high specificity at the species level  <cit> . we designed a total of  <dig> oligonucleotides, from which  <dig> were species-specific for ecm fungal species. according to regular fruiting body surveys, these  <dig> ecm species are the most common species to be found in the long-term observatory of the breuil-chenue forest over the last ten years  <cit> . the ease with which high-quality species-specific oligonucleotides could be selected , depended on the fungal genera. for example, the its sequences of laccaria species showed only a few discriminative nucleotides that were spread as single nucleotide polymorphisms over the its <dig> and its <dig> regions. consequently, prior to synthesis, oligonucleotide sequences were screened in silico for the presence of fortuitous similarities with fungal its sequences for which they were not designed.

the specificity of the spotted oligonucleotides was tested by hybridising its amplicons from reference species. most of the oligonucleotides exhibited the expected hybridisation patterns . however, cross-hybridisation was observed and it accumulated particularly in the genera cortinarius or lactarius that targeted other species in the same genus . with an estimated  <dig>  spp. worldwide, cortinarius is the most species-rich genus of mushroom-forming ecm fungi. species delimitation within this genus is often controversial  <cit> . for these cryptic species, as for lactarius or inocybe species, the phylogenetic separation of species is ambiguous; indeed, most of these fungi have less than 3% intra-specific variability in the its region of their nuclear ribosomal dna  <cit> . to keep cross-hybridisation low, we used a two-step data filtering process that involved:  accepting only spots with a significantly higher signal intensity value than the one obtained for the negative controls and,  the requirement for a positive signal for at least four of the six replicates of one spot . the hybridisation results were identical over the different replicates.

to test whether the current custom phylochip could be utilised in environmental studies that sought to describe the composition of an ecm community, its amplicons of root samples taken from beech and spruce plantations were hybridised to the array. as the focus of the current study was the validation of the phylochip, rather than an ecological study of the whole ecm fungal communities of the two plantations, a total of only six soil cores were used. the results of the phylochip were compared to the results that were obtained from the morphotyping/its-sequencing of individual ecm morphotypes and the sequencing of its clone libraries. provided that the corresponding oligonucleotides were included on the array, all species that were detected by cloning-sequencing could also be identified with the phylochip. as the corresponding oligonucleotides were lacking on the phylochip, species belonging to the atheliaceae, sebacinaceae or pezizales were not detected. furthermore, the comparison of array signal intensity with its sequence frequency in the its clone library revealed the potential of the phylochip to detect taxa that were represented by approx. 2% of dna types in the amplified dna sample. however, the quantitative potential of this custom phylochip remains to be further accessed as bias linked to the pcr amplification could take place. the phylochip also detected species that were not expected according to the results obtained from the use of the other two approaches. this could be due to cross-hybridisations and/or to the fact that these under-represented species in the community could not be detected by the other approaches as the rarefaction curves of the its library sequencing method did not reach a plateau .

when compared to each other, both of the other approaches provided similar, but not identical, profiles of the ecm communities. approximately 70% of the species were detected using either method individually . for the beech sample, three species were detected only by morphotyping as the pcr amplification of their dna using its1f/its <dig> and/or nsi1/nlb <dig> primer pairs failed. tedersoo et al.  <cit>  showed that pcr of its from several ecm species failed using these universal fungal rdna primers, and they stressed the need for additional taxon-specific pcr primers to be used for comprehensive genotyping of ecm communities. one of the morphotypes detected in the beech sample was a lactarius species. in the same root sample, a pezizales species was found by its-sequencing and cloning/sequencing; this suggests a possible co-colonisation of the ecm root tip  <cit> . ecm root tips can be colonised by more than one fungal taxon, by two different ecm species, or by one ecm species and an endophytic or parasitic species. typically, these species are overlooked by the use of only morphotyping, but they can be detected by molecular biological approaches.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we demonstrated that identification of ecm fungi in environmental studies is possible using a custom phylochip. the detection of most of the species by the phylochip was confirmed by two other widely used detection methods. although the possible application of the phylochip technique to other study areas is dependent on the fungal species to be analysed, high-quality sequence support for several temperate and boreal forest ecosystems is found in databases such as unite  <cit> . for the next generation of phylochips, we will add additional species-specific probes or use additional marker gene regions in the probe design to overcome the small number of observed cross-hybridisations. in addition, we will increase the number of specific oligonucleotides that are spotted onto the phylochip  to adapt to the taxonomic diversity found in soils at the study sites. small-scale phylochips, so-called "boutique" arrays, such as the one designed in this study, are a time-saving and cheap approach for monitoring specific fungal species over years and/or in several hundred of samples. at the present time, the detection of a single species with our custom phylochip cost only one sixth of the price paid for the cloning/sequencing approach. the upscaling of detectable species on the phylochip  will further lower the cost . thus, the phylochip approach should be an attractive method for routine, accurate and reproducible monitoring of fungal species on specific sites, in which a high sample throughput is required.

