BACKGROUND
anopheles funestus is a major vector species of malaria in sub-saharan africa  <cit> . similar to the more extensively studied vector species anopheles gambiae, resistance to commonly used insecticides is a growing problem in an. funestus . efforts to improve the design and implementation of resistance management strategies require a good understanding of the molecular basis of resistance. use of genomic tools is paramount to achieve this goal. in contrast to an. gambiae, for which significant progress has been made in its genomics since its genome was sequenced more than a decade ago  <cit> , an. funestus has received much less attention. however, progress is being made as the genome of anopheles funestus was recently sequenced as part of a program to sequence a number of anopheles species genomes  <cit> . the draft genome assembly, in the form of unplaced scaffolds not assembled into chromosome sequences, is publicly available via the vectorbase web resource  <cit> . the draft genome assembly has been annotated, using the genome annotation pipeline maker  <cit> . however, this annotation has not been extensively manually curated and is inaccurate for a number of known genes of interest such as cytochrome p <dig> monooxygenase and glutathione s-trasferase  genes. thus, more efforts are currently needed to maximise the usefulness of the an. funestus genome and allow more studies to be performed such as transcriptome profiling or genome-wide association studies. one approach to optimise the quality of this genome is to use rnaseq to improve genome annotation.

rnaseq is a powerful method to study the transcriptomes of organisms, providing a rich dataset allowing transcriptional profiling as well as the identification of novel transcripts, alternative splicing and detection of expressed sequence polymorphisms  <cit> . however in the case of anopheles mosquitoes, limited information have been generated to determine the best methodology for library preparation to ensure an accurate profiling of transcriptomes, notably between the enrichment of polyadenylated ) rna transcripts and the alternative method of ribosomal rna  depletion. methods of mrna enrichment have been shown to have an effect on the observed transcriptome . comparisons of poly mrna enrichment with rrna depletion methods report that the depletion methods result in more reads aligned outside of annotated gene coding regions  <cit> . this may be due to the presence of novel transcripts and/or a greater proportion of genomic dna in the library. also, the greater number of reads aligned within introns in depletion libraries could be derived from immature transcripts  <cit> . depletion libraries show more even read distribution less 3′ bias than poly-a libraries  <cit> .

in malaria-transmitting mosquitoes, insecticide resistance is often due to ‘metabolic resistance’: up-regulation of genes involved in detoxification, such as cytochrome p <dig> and gst genes. this is particularly the case in an. funestus, for which pyrethroid resistance is caused by metabolic resistance and not by target site resistance, such as mutations in the voltage gated sodium channel gene. as there are no known genomic biomarkers to detect metabolic resistance, transcriptomic analyses are necessary. these analyses have commonly used microarrays to detect up-regulated genes . rnaseq may offer advantages over microarrays in that unannotated, or poorly annotated, transcripts can be defined and corrected using the sequence alignment, which is more data-rich than the results of microarray analysis. this data richness includes information on alternative splicing, as well as non-protein-coding rna transcripts  that may play a role in differential gene expression.

here, we perform an rnaseq experiment on anopheles funestus , primarily to compare two methods to enrich messenger rna  relative to ribosomal rna : ribosomal depletion and poly selection. we compare the results of both methods applied to total rna from the same individual mosquitoes and identify the most differentially represented transcripts between the methods to identify non-polyadenylated transcripts. we use the rnaseq data along with published de novo assemblies of anopheles funestus transcripts  <cit>  to improve the genome annotation for selected genes, focusing on detoxification associated gene families.

RESULTS
preparation of transcriptome sequencing libraries
total rna was extracted from pools of whole mosquitoes of the an. funestus fang colony. extracts showed a pink colouration, probably due to eye pigments. it was not known if this would affect the sequencing library quality, so one sample was split and bead clean-up carried out on one of the sub-samples, to compare results with its uncleaned counterpart and assess whether this discolouration had any effect on the sequencing results. bioanalyzer traces of total rna  showed evidence of the ‘hidden break’ reported in other insect total rna samples  <cit> : two peaks of approximately 2000 bp representing 18s rrna and the 28s rrna subunits alpha and beta. the total rna traces also showed some ‘spikiness’ the cause of which was unclear. the profile of degraded rna tends to look smoother, with a broad peak extending left of the major 18s/28s rrna peaks. whether this spikiness would affect the sequencing results was not known at this stage.

after ribo-zero rrna depletion or poly mrna enrichment, bioanalyzer traces suggested that all samples were of sufficient quality for rnaseq library preparation, with no obvious quality differences among samples within each method . the amount of rrna remaining in the samples appeared to be much lower for ribo-zero depleted samples than for poly enriched samples, where even after  <dig> rounds of poly selection, samples displayed a large peak near 2000 bp . later analysis indicated that this peak may represent mitochondrial 16s rrna.

initial quality checking of the sequence read data showed that the  <dig> libraries were evenly represented in the sequenced pool  and of good quality, with little read trimming due to sequenced adapters or low quality base calls .

alignment of sequence reads to reference genome
all read libraries were aligned to a reference consisting of  <dig> scaffolds derived from the anopheles funestus fumoz colony with the an. funestus mitochondrial genome sequence added. broad alignment metrics are shown in table  <dig>  overall, a median of  <dig> , <dig> , or 57 %  of the reads to be aligned could be aligned. alignment of spliced reads is more difficult than for unspliced reads and leads to lower proportions of the starting libraries being aligned, but this alone is unlikely to account for the relatively low alignment rate. the incompleteness of the reference genome sequence and high levels of sequence polymorphism and genetic divergence between laboratory colonies fang  and fumoz  may also contribute to it. a greater proportion of the poly than the ribo-zero libraries tended to be aligned . for the sample where an initial bead clean-up was applied , the proportion of reads aligned for the ribo-zero library  was greater than for the uncleaned sample . this difference was not seen for poly libraries . this suggests that the purity of the sample may affect the efficacy of the rrna depletion reaction, which is supported by the ribosomal rna mapping results shown in table  <dig> table  <dig> metrics describing the transcriptome alignments


a% of reads to align


b% of aligned reads


cproperly paired means both read and its mate are mapped to opposing strands of the reference sequence, with 3′ ends innermost and within the allowed distance from each other 

total a

atotal rrna gene tag counts as a % of total aligned tags for each sample



tag counting for annotated genomic features and analysis of the ribosomal rna content of libraries
tag counting means quantifying read pairs or singletons  aligned in genomic regions annotated as genome features . as the rnaseq protocol used is strand-specific, tags can be aligned sense or antisense to a feature, which mean different things: i.e. that antisense tags come from an antisense transcript, rather than from the primary annotated transcript. sense and antisense tag counting was performed for each sequence alignment.

to assess how much ribosomal rna was represented in each sequence library  gene features annotated as rrnas were extracted from the genome annotation. there were ten of these features :  <dig> resulting from automated annotation of the genome assembly and  <dig> annotated on the mitochondrial genome. for putative nuclear 28s and 18s rrna genes, poly mrna enrichment almost always  resulted in fewer tags from these genes than ribo-zero rrna depletion. putative  <dig> s rrna genes rarely showed any tags . the mitochondrial 12s rrna gene showed the same trend as for nuclear 28s and 18s rrna genes. however, the mitochondrial 16s rrna gene showed the opposite trend, with more tags in the poly mrna enriched libraries than in the ribo-zero depleted libraries.

tag counting is summarised in table  <dig>  as counting used annotated genomic features, antisense counts should be much lower than sense counts. this was the case, with a ten-fold greater assignment of tags to features in the sense orientation than antisense. the count data generated for each genomic feature is the data analysed in differential gene expression  analysis. therefore, in general, the more sense tag-count data available, the greater the power of dge analysis to detect differential gene expression. overall, the poly mrna-enriched libraries produced more “on target” sense tags, as a proportion of all aligned tags , as might be expected given enrichment on the poly tails of mrna transcripts . however, after excluding tag counts from  <dig> putative rrna genes, the differences between ribo-zero and poly samples were less marked and for all samples  ). overall, “on target” sense tag counts  comprised around  <dig>  to  <dig>  % of the total aligned tags. this relatively low proportion probably reflects the fact that 5′ and 3′ un-translated regions  are rarely predicted by automated annotation pipelines, so a large proportion of tags from mrna transcripts are not counted as such when using gene models mostly comprising protein coding regions. overall , our differential “gene expression” analysis would be based on between  <dig>  and  <dig>  million tags per sample.table  <dig> summary of sense tag counting


aa tag is a read pair or a single, un-paired read


b% of “total tags”


ctags assigned to features after subtracting tags assigned to  <dig> putative rrna features

fig.  <dig> sense tag counts per annotated gene feature as a proportion of total aligned tags. grey bars show total sense tag counts as a proportion of total aligned tags while black bars show this after excluding  <dig> putative rrna genes



comparison of poly mrna-enriched and ribo-zero rrna-depleted samples
usually, the variation between samples within a sample group  is smaller than that between samples from different sample groups  because the former consists of technical and biological variation only, while the latter also contains variation due to the treatment effect. when the treatment effect is the dominant term of variation, the sample groups can be clearly separated by statistical tools. if the treatment effect is weak compared to the technical and biological variation the samples will be difficult to discriminate based on the data. here, the treatment effect is the difference between poly and ribo-zero mrna enrichment methods and a large treatment effect indicates that the mrna enrichment/rrna depletion method greatly affects the composition of the transcriptome. we assessed these effects.

initial visual inspection of sequence alignments indicated that the ribo-zero libraries showed more ‘background’ alignments  than the poly datasets. it is not certain whether this represents real, un-polyadenylated transcripts or possible erroneous sequencing of dna. however, as samples came from the same pool and were dnase treated prior to being split, any difference in the amount of dna being sequenced should be due to specific differences in the enrichment/depletion process.

as an initial gene-wise analysis of gene expression levels, reads or read pairs  mapped in the sense orientation to annotated gene models were counted for each sample. one caveat to this analysis is that the gene models used to generate tag counts were from a draft genome annotation and therefore were likely to contain errors.  <dig> of the  <dig>  annotated features had sense tag counts of zero in all eight samples and were not analysed. to assess variation in the data, log <dig> sense tag counts per gene were plotted among sample pairs . these give an indication of how similar are samples belonging to the same group and how different are samples from different sample groups. the associated correlation coefficients are displayed as a correlation heatmap . principal component analysis , using log <dig> sense tag counts per gene, was used to plot each sample relative to all others . these analyses showed very low technical variation between the cleaned and uncleaned fang- <dig> samples and greater biological variation among fang- <dig>  fang- <dig> and fang- <dig> samples. ribo-zero samples showed more biological variation than poly samples, though this was mainly due to the fang- <dig> ribo-zero sample, which was a clear outlier . fang- <dig> ribo-zero was the smallest sample library, with around  <dig> million reads compared to around 55– <dig> million reads for the other samples, which may be associated with this result. together, these assessments indicate that the mrna enrichment method has a large effect on the sequenced transcriptomes of the samples.

analysis of differential transcriptome composition between mrna enrichment methods
to assess differences between the transcriptomes due to the mrna enrichment method applied, differential gene expression  analysis was carried out to identify significantly differentially represented annotated genome features. first, as technical variation due to pre-enrichment sample cleaning of fang- <dig> was low and to make full use of the data, the mean tag counts for cleaned and uncleaned samples were calculated and used in the dge analysis. the data were modelled using a generalized linear model in a one-factor  experiment with two levels ”). full results of the analysis are shown in additional file  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows the relationship between log <dig> fold change in expression between ribo-zero and poly and mean expression level across all samples. the power in the data to discriminate between ribo-zero and poly samples  is reflected in the large number of significantly differentially represented transcripts among the two transcriptomes. this analysis indicates that results based on ribo-zero and poly mrna enrichment may be very different from one another. great care must therefore be taken when comparing results derived using the different methods.fig.  <dig> plot of differential transcript abundance in ribo-zero and poly transcriptomes. the y-axis shows log <dig> fold-change of transcript abundance between ribo-zero and poly samples. greater than  <dig> indicates that a transcript is more abundant in ribo-zero samples than in poly samples and vice versa, as indicated on the plot. green lines indicate  <dig> -fold change. red points are significantly differentially represented among treatments . orange points are transcripts represented in only one sample, so fold-change could not be calculated. the x-axis shows the log <dig> average abundance of the transcripts in both ribo-zero and poly transcriptomes. the shape of the plot and distribution of significantly differentially represented transcripts indicates that low abundance transcripts show more variation among ribo-zero and poly transcriptomes due to sampling effects than do higher abundance transcripts



in order to assess why the composition of ribo-zero and poly transcriptomes differ so much, we looked at the  <dig> most differentially represented genome features in each group . table  <dig> lists the  <dig> features most over- or under-represented in the ribo-zero transcriptome relative to poly. the two most over-represented features in the ribo-zero transcriptomes were ncrnas, suggesting a large population of non-polyadenylated transcripts, including many ncrnas, may exist in the cells and be under-represented in poly transcriptomes. two histone genes  were over-represented in the ribo-zero transcriptome, consistent with the occurrence of replication-dependent, unpolyadenylated and replication-independent, polyadenylated histone forms  <cit> . also, three genes with cadherin domains were over-represented in the ribo-zero transcriptome. in other systems, cadherin is among a set of genes controlled at the translational level by cytoplasmic polyadenylation  <cit> . if this were occurring in an. funestus, we would expect transcript forms with short poly tails to be over-represented in the ribo-zero transcriptome. further investigation would be needed to confirm if this is the case. among the genes over-represented in the poly transcriptome were a number of putative core metabolic genes such as transcription-associated proteins and ribosomal proteins. a study of poly tail length in yeast showed that ribosomal proteins had long poly tails  <cit> . we speculate that preferential enrichment of transcripts with longer poly tails may affect the resulting transcriptome composition.table  <dig> the most significantly differentially represented genome features between ribo-zero and poly transcriptomes


alog <dig> fold change between ‘expression’ levels in ribo-zero and poly samples ; for values < <dig>  poly > ribo-zero)


blog <dig> counts per million mapped reads. mean ‘expression’ level for all samples


csignificance of differential ‘expression’, p-value adjusted for a 5 % false discovery rate



a broader analysis of functional categories and gene ontologies represented in the gene sets showed differences between poly and ribo-zero libraries. the broad functional categories  of genes over-represented in the ribo-zero or poly libraries were quite different. 28 %  of genes were annotated for the ribo-zero set, compared to 51 %  for the poly set and 36 %  for genes not differentially represented among treatments. the largest category  for the ribo-zero set was “environmental information processing”, while for the poly set it was “genetic information processing” . many of these “genetic information processing”-associated genes in the poly set were ribosomal proteins, as indicated by gene ontology analysis , where ribosome-associated terms were enriched in this set . in contrast, many of the “environmental information processing”-associated genes in the ribo-zero set may be membrane and/or nuclear proteins involved in signal transduction or transcriptional regulation .fig.  <dig> representation of functional categories in poly and ribo-zero over-represented gene sets and in genes not differentially represented 


aan “instance” refers to a go term associated with a gene id


bbg = background ; rz = ribo-zero; pa = poly


csignificantly differentially represented go terms 

fig.  <dig> cellular compartment go terms differentially represented between gene sets over-represented in poly  and ribo-zero  samples



detection of un-annotated transcripts
to further compare the transcriptomes, transcripts were annotated from aligned data from each method.  <dig>  genes  were predicted using the poly data and  <dig>  genes  using the ribo-zero data . after removing transcripts that overlapped those predicted in the afunf <dig>  annotation, more remained in the ribo-zero transcriptome  that in the poly transcriptome , suggesting the presence of transcripts not detected in the poly transcriptome. some of this difference could be due to an increased amount of immature transcripts  and/or a greater contribution from dna contamination in the ribo-zero samples . however, visual inspection of a sample of these putative transcripts showed that a number were indeed unannotated, ribo-zero-specific transcribed regions that did not occur within the introns of annotated genes and were predominantly strand-specific . an example is shown in fig.  <dig>  further analyses are needed to elucidate the functions of these transcripts.table  <dig> comparison of the published genome annotation with de novo annotations based on rnaseq alignments


aexcludes mitochondrial genome


bfeatures that do not overlap any in the reference annotation

fig.  <dig> example of putative novel transcript represented in the ribo-zero libraries but not in the poly libraries. the top panel shows a coverage depth summary plot  and aligned reads  for the poly data. below these are the same for the ribo-zero data. below these are gene models  from the gene set afunf <dig> . a large transcribed region on the minus strand is evident in the ribo-zero data only, representing one or more putatively poly- transcripts



validation and improvement of the annotation of anopheles funestus genes, focused on detoxification-associated gene families
an important part of genome annotation is validation of the predicted gene models. these rnaseq data allowed this to be done. on a genome-wide scale there were  <dig>  predicted introns, of which  <dig>  were unique . of these,  <dig>   were validated by at least  <dig> reads in the fang- <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> poly data sets . a small number of introns were supported at only one end, suggesting mis-annotation of the gene models. of the  <dig>  predicted introns,  <dig>  were supported only at the 5′ end and  <dig>  only at the 3′ end. introns supported only at the 3′ end tend to be the first predicted intron , while introns supported only at the 5′ end tend to be the last predicted intron , suggesting that the ends of up to around  <dig>  gene models are mis-annotated and could be manually improved. results of the validation analysis for all predicted introns are shown in additional file  <dig>  for the  <dig>  validated introns, consensus motifs at intron-exon boundaries are shown in fig.  <dig>  the 5′ end of the intron has an extended gtaagt motif, while the 3′ end of the intron has the conserved ag motif preceded by an extended pyrimidine-rich region. no conserved motif is seen in the flanking exons, except for a slight enrichment of purines at the last position of the upstream exon.fig.  <dig> consensus sequences at the 5′ and 3′ intron-exon boundaries of  <dig>  introns validated by rnaseq. position  <dig> at the 5′ end marks the first nucleotide in the intron. position  <dig> at the 3′ end marks the first nucleotide in the following exon. two diagonal lines denote the variable central portions of the introns. the y-axis indicates the bit-score for each nucleotide position. an extended motif of gtaagt is seen at the 5′ end, with a slight enrichment of purines at the last position of the preceding exon. the conserved ag motif is seen at the 3′ end, preceded by an extended pyrimidine-rich region. little or no sequence conservation is seen in the flanking exons, apart from at the last position of the preceding exon



visual inspection of the automated maker genome annotation of anopheles funestus showed that, in many cases, the maker annotation had inferred a single gene model from multiple closely located genes. this behaviour is particularly problematic for detoxification-associated genes such as cytochrome p <dig> and gst because these genes often occur in clusters of tandemly duplicated paralogous genes. manual editing was required to improve the genome annotation, an example of which is shown in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> example of an incorrect gene model  and three manually edited gene models. the top panel shows a coverage depth summary plot  and aligned reads . below these are the gene models . the gene model in gene set afunf <dig>   is shown above three manually edited gene models based on read alignments and orthologous genes in the anopheles gambiae  genome annotation . the three genes are carboxylesterases 



we aimed to improve the annotation of genes involved in the three phases of detoxification: transformation , conjugation  and transport/efflux . two major enzyme families, p <dig>  and gst , have already been manually curated and, at the time of writing, are being incorporated into the vectorbase genome annotation, afunf <dig>  . therefore, we focused upon seven other detoxification gene families. these were: the phase i enzymes carboxylesterases , flavin-containing monooxygenases , aldehyde oxidases  and aldehyde dehydrogenases ; the phase ii enzymes udp glucosyltransferases  and sulfotransferases ; and the phase iii transporter-encoding atp-binding cassette genes .

manual editing considerably improved the annotation of detoxification-associated genes. a table of manually edited gene models and unedited, putatively correct, gene models belonging to each family is shown in additional file  <dig> 

for the carboxylestarase genes ,  <dig> gene models were manually edited to produce  <dig> putative coe genes and  <dig> non-coe genes,  <dig> gene models were not modified. for the flavin-containing monooxygenase genes   <dig> gene models were identified and were not modified. for the aldehyde oxidase genes ,  <dig> gene models were manually edited to produce  <dig> putative ao genes,  <dig> xanthine dehydrogenase genes and  <dig> non-ao genes,  <dig> gene models were not modified. for the aldehyde dehydrogenase genes ,  <dig> gene models were manually edited to produce  <dig> aldh genes and  <dig> non-aldh gene,  <dig> gene model was not modified.

for the udp-glycosyltransferase genes ,  <dig> gene models were manually edited to produce  <dig> ugt genes and  <dig> non-ugt genes,  <dig> gene models were not modified. for the sulfotransferase genes ,  <dig> gene model was manually edited to produce  <dig> sult genes and and an oestrogen sulfotransferase gene,  <dig> gene models were not modified.

for the atp-binding cassette genes ,  <dig> gene models were manually edited to produce  <dig> abc genes and  <dig> non-abc genes,  <dig> gene models were not modified.

all manually edited gene models have been submitted to vectorbase for incorporation into the anopheles funestus genome annotation.

integration of an. funestus transcriptome datasets and assignment of fumoz scaffolds to chromosome arms
two an. funestus whole transcriptome datasets were published before the whole genome assembly  <cit> . we integrated both the “crawford” transcriptome  and the “gregory” transcriptome  with the fumoz predicted transcript set, afunf <dig>   by clustering them based on sequence similarity. the results are shown in additional file  <dig>  clustering the full set of  <dig>  sequences at 95 % similarity resulted in  <dig>  clusters. the results suggested that the “gregory” transcriptome was more fragmented than the other two: its  <dig>  sequences were represented in only  <dig>  unique clusters, compared to  <dig>  clusters for the “crawford” transcriptome and  <dig>  clusters for the afunf <dig>  transcript set.

genome sequences assembled to the level of whole chromosomes are more useful than draft assemblies for analyses of genome wide variation and gene expression, because structural and spatial information can be important . the comparison of an. funestus predicted genes to those of an. gambiae allowed a number of scaffolds to be tentatively assigned to chromosome arms based on homology to an. gambiae. table  <dig> summarises the number of scaffolds with  <dig> or more genes assigned to a chromosome arm by putative 1: <dig> orthology with an. gambiae . in a small number of anomalous cases where a scaffold contained genes with orthology to genes on a different chromosome an. gambiae arm, the minority chromosome arm was never supported by more than  <dig> gene and these were removed by setting a threshold of  <dig> genes to support assignment of a scaffold to a group. this conservative approach to defining linkage groups assigned only a small number  of scaffolds. however, these were generally large scaffolds and represented the greater proportion  of the total genome length. these groups could form a starting point for genome assembly finishing and for further analysis of synteny and co-linearity of genes between an. funestus and an. gambiae.table  <dig> 
anopheles funestus scaffolds assigned to groups representing putative chromosome arms

chromosome arm a

a
an. funestus chromosome arm, accounting for the whole arm translocation between 2 l and 3r relative to an. gambiae



b number of an. funestus scaffolds with  <dig> or more putative 1: <dig> orthologues with an. gambiae



c length includes sequencing gaps



CONCLUSIONS
the sequencing of the genome of the major malaria vector anopheles funestus allows new analyses of its biology and may accelerate research on this species, which currently lags behind that of anopheles gambiae. to carry out analyses of gene expression relevant to insecticide resistance, we have piloted the use of rnaseq. in addition, we have improved the genome annotation for a number of gene families with roles in the detoxification of xenobiotic agents.

as reported in other eukaryotic systems, the method used to enrich for mrna relative to rrna has a large effect upon the observed transcriptome . functional classes of genes are differentially represented in poly mrna-enriched and ribo-zero rrna-depleted transcriptomes, with greater representation of ribosomal proteins with poly and membrane-associated proteins with ribo-zero. genes with both poly + and poly- transcripts, such as histones, and ncrna, such as signal recognition particle rnas, were also highly represented in the ribo-zero transcriptome. the ribo-zero libraries show a higher proportion of reads aligning outside of annotated exons, which may represent a combination of novel, poly- transcripts and the introns of immature transcripts.

in making recommendations for which method to use for studies of the transcriptomes of mosquitoes, several factors should be considered. for analyses of differential gene expression, power to detect different expression levels is proportional to the number of reads aligned to each gene. poly mrna enrichment does provide more of this ‘on-target’ data than ribo-zero rrna depletion, yet the difference is less striking after accounting for rrna genes, in particular a highly poly-enriched mitochondrial 16s rrna. the transcriptome profiles of poly samples were more highly correlated with each other than ribo-zero samples, indicating that power to detect differential gene expression would be greater for poly mrna-enriched samples. however, we argue that ribo-zero rrna depletion produces a truer representation of the transcriptome because  there is less pcr amplification of transcripts, which can bias the final results and  the transcriptome includes the poly- fraction, which may be functionally relevant. due to the large effect that the mrna enrichment method has on the transcriptome obtained, researchers should be very careful in comparing results obtained using different methods.

the draft genome annotation of an. funestus is currently inadequate for detailed studies of gene expression targeted at insecticide resistance mechanisms. major gene families involved in detoxification of xenobiotic substances, such as cytochrome p <dig> and gst genes, are not well annotated by automated approaches. manually edited gene models for these gene families are being incorporated into the genome annotation at the time of writing . we extended this annotation improvement to  <dig> more key detoxification genes families:  <dig> associated with phase i;  <dig> with phase ii and  <dig> with phase iii. this effort offers a major improvement of the utility of the an. funestus genome as a tool to study insecticide resistance in this species. accurate annotation of these gene families is particularly important for an. funestus, as insecticide resistance appears to be primarily mediated by detoxification of the compounds in this species.

