BACKGROUND
atherosclerosis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality  <cit> . many in vitro experiments on the early development stage of
atherogenesis have been performed using pro-inflammatory mediators, such as
lipopolysaccharide in bacterial cell walls  <cit> , as stimuli. endothelial cell -leukocyte interaction of these stimuli
induces changes in shape, permeability, and gene expression of ecs  <cit> . however, previous studies overlooked the effects of the extracellular
matrix  on variations in morphology and growth of ecs. thus, this study
experimentally investigated the effect of ecm properties on endothelial
dysfunction.

the ec layer functions as an interface between circulating blood and surrounding
tissues  <cit> . ecs modulate thrombosis and inflammation, and control mural smooth
muscle cells and vascular health. these cells also function in physiological
processes, such as innate and adaptive immune responses. thus, endothelial
dysfunction is associated with the development of atherosclerosis and other
cardiovascular disorders  <cit> . ecm degradation, which is possibly regulated by matrix-degrading
metalloproteinases  and their endogenous tissue inhibitors, is closely
involved in the outbreak of atherogenesis  <cit> . mmps belong to a family of zinc metalloendopeptidases. these enzymes,
which degrade ecm proteins, exhibit important functions in embryo development,
morphogenesis, and tissue remodeling, as well as in various diseases, such as
arthritis, atherosclerosis, invasion, and metastasis of cancer cells  <cit> . a maximum of  <dig> mmp members are found in humans and animals. among these
mmps,  <dig> are related to atherosclerosis  <cit> . vascular cells, including ecs and macrophages, secrete mmps. ecs also
express mmp- <dig> , mmp- <dig> , and mmp- <dig>   <cit> .

the mechanical properties of arterial walls and susceptibility to pathological
vascular remodeling are mainly determined by the macromolecular structures of
collagen, elastin, and proteoglycans  <cit> . under low pressure, the high compliance of elastin dominates the wall
displacement. at high pressure, the wall displacement is limited by the stiffer
collagen. degradation of these mechanical properties with aging  <cit> , smoking  <cit> , diabetes  <cit> , hypertension  <cit> , and atherosclerosis  <cit>  is associated with changes in the collagen and elastin scaffold. although
these macromolecules generate the biphasic mechanical response of arterial walls to
pressure, the specific features of their microstructure remain as a missing element
in the modeling of wall mechanics  <cit> . therefore, we hypothesized that the structural change in collagen by
mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> expression may induce endothelial dysfunction, such as
disorganization and thickening of the ec layer. to validate this hypothesis, we
prepared two different collagen films as ecm models. the normal collagen film
corresponded to the ecm of normal blood vessels, and the denatured collagen film was
adopted to mimic the ecm of atherosclerotic blood vessels. the denatured collagen
film was intentionally disrupted by collagenase treatment to simulate the denatured
ecm by increasing mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> expression under in vivo conditions.
through preliminary experiments using zebrafish models for investigating the early
development stage of atherogenesis, we observed an ec monolayer surrounded by a
collagen basement membrane in the normal vascular endothelium. the vascular
endothelium of the early development stage of atherogenesis shows the
disorganization and thickening of the ec layer  <cit> . to simulate these morphological results, we cultured human umbilical
vein endothelial cells  on two different types of collagen films.

in this study, morphological variations in the bio-inspired ecm were experimentally
investigated. the spatial distribution of surface roughness of ecs on the ecm was
observed by phase-contrast digital holographic microscopy . biological
specimens, such as living cells, are transparent. however, transparent biological
samples are difficult to observe clearly by bright-field microscopy. therefore,
non-invasive high-resolution imaging of living cells under in vivo
conditions is important to visualize biological processes. interferometry-based dhm
can be performed to determine the spatial distributions of the phase and optical
path length of a test sample. this technique can also provide quantitative phase
information of a sample with a spatial resolution of tens of nanometers  <cit> . temporal variations in morphological structure and ec layer thickness
can be clearly observed with a time-resolved dhm technique.

to study the mechanism of endothelial dysfunction, we investigated the expression of
cd <dig>  vascular cell adhesion molecule , and e-selectin on the surface of
abnormal ecs. these three molecules are used as biomarkers of ec injury  <cit> . we also examined the positional information of vascular endothelial
cadherin  of ecs. ve-cadherin has an important function in controlling
vascular organization and modulating endothelial permeability  <cit> .

to develop an optimal delivery system for vascular targeting and maximize drug
accumulation on the ec layer while avoiding entrapment in the lung and small
capillaries  <cit> , the specific ligand-receptor interaction with the vessel walls  <cit>  and surface properties related to specific vascular adhesion and reduced
macrophage uptake should be investigated. to establish an in vitro study
for drug screening of circulatory diseases, fluorescent bead accumulation on ec
layers was examined under circulating flow conditions.

RESULTS
collagen film and denatured collagen film
figures 1a and 1d illustrate the
collagen and denatured collagen films coated on octadecyltrichlorosilane
-self-assembled monolayer -treated coverslips. figures 1b and 1e show typical scanning
electron microscopy  images  of huvecs on the collagen and
denatured collagen films, respectively. the surface structures of the two films
were also observed using atomic force microscopy . figures 1c and 1f are typical afm images
showing the morphological structures of the collagen and denatured collagen
films, respectively. as shown in figures 1b and 1c, the collagen film had fiber structures. however, the
fibers were broken in the collagenase-treated collagen film .
study.  normal collagen film, which mimics the
ecm of normal blood vessels. typical sem image  and afm image
 of the collagen film.  denatured collagen film,
which mimics the ecm of abnormal blood vessels. the structure of the
denatured collagen film was intentionally broken using collagenase to
simulate the abnormal ecm. typical sem image  and afm image
 of the denatured collagen film.

roughness of ecs
the spatiotemporal thickness profiles of huvecs cultured on collagen film
 or denatured collagen film
 were quantitatively analyzed. the
biophysical properties of huvecs grown on normal or enzyme-degraded collagen
films were measured using phase-contrast dhm . the typical phase-contrast dhm images in figures 2d and 2e show the spatial distributions of the physical
thickness of huvecs cultured on collagen and denatured collagen films,
respectively. we evaluated the surface roughness of huvecs using phase-contrast
dhm images. the surface roughness of ecs was represented mathematically using
the root mean square  value of its fluctuations. the huvecs initially
seeded on the collagen film and denatured collagen film exhibited relatively low
rms values. figure 2f shows that the rms value of
huvecs cultured on collagen film slightly increased after 6 h, and then
rapidly decreased in the time period  from 6–24 h. this
result was attributed to normal cell adhesion to the ecm substrate. the average
rms value was approximately  <dig>  μm  24 h after
initial seeding. this value corresponded to an approximate reduction of 59% from
the initial rms value . the surface roughness of
huvecs cultured on collagenase-treated collagen film for 5 min gradually
increased until t = 24 h after huvec seeding. the rms
value increased by approximately 178% at t = 24 h
compared with the initial value  at
t = 1 h. the surface roughness of huvecs cultured on
collagenase-treated collagen film for 15 min increased more rapidly at
t = 6 h compared with those treated with
collagenase for 5 min, and then gradually decreased as the cells detached
from the ecm substrate after 6 h. the rms value increased to 300% at
t = 3 h compared with the initial value
 at t = 1 h, and decreased
by approximately 255% at t = 24 h. the rms value of
huvecs cultured on normal collagen films decreased after 24 h of seeding
because the cells adhered to the ecm substrate. by contrast, the rms values of
huvecs cultured on collagen films treated with collagenase for 5 min
increased because of abnormal cell deformation. the surface roughness of huvecs
on collagen films treated with collagenase for 15 min increased more
rapidly than those treated for 5 min. however, the rms value decreased
after 12 h because the abnormally clustered cells were detached from the
ecm substrate.
huvecs were incubated on top of the collagen film  and
denatured collagen film . surface roughness of huvecs on the
two collagen films was analyzed using phase-contrast dhm. 
experimental setup of the phase-contrast dhm and cell-substrate samples
used in this study.  spatial distribution of physical
thickness of huvecs on the normal collagen film 
and denatured collagen film . holograms exhibit the
thickness distribution of huvecs in the non-treatment group 
and treatment group .  temporal variations in
surface roughness of huvecs cultured on the collagen film and
collagenase-treated collagen film. rms = root mean square.
n =  <dig> 

cell migration
we established two different collagen films as ecm models: the collagen film,
which had a fiber structure similar to that of the ecm of normal blood vessels,
and the denatured collagen film, which mimicked the ecm of atherosclerotic blood
vessels. to observe the dynamic behaviors of cell-to-cell interactions, we
cultured huvecs on the collagen and denatured collagen films. dynamic motions of
ecs were observed using confocal laser scanning microscopy . ecs cultured
on collagen film or denatured collagen film were mounted in the flow chamber.
figures 3a and 3b show that
ecs on the normal collagen film  formed a monolayer,
whereas those found on the denatured collagen films  were
aggregated and multistacked. their movements were detected for 90 min at an
interval of 10 min using clsm. for the time-resolved tracking of ecs, cell
movement was systematically analyzed by tracking the nuclei of cells. we marked
the center of the nucleus of each cell to track its trajectory. the circular
plots shown in figures 3c and 3d represent the direction angle of cell migration and number of
distributed cells on the collagen film and denatured collagen film. all cells
were positioned at the zero point of the starting time, but these cells spread
out as time progressed. as shown in the circular plots, ecs on the collagen
films moved radially outward in all directions almost evenly. however, cells on
the denatured collagen film moved in a preferential direction. therefore, the
non-treatment group showed a monolayer, whereas the treatment group exhibited
aggregated ecs.
confocal images of huvecs cultured on the collagen film .  confocal images of huvecs cultured on the
collagenase-treated collagen film . circular plots of
the migration angle and number of huvecs for the non-treatment group
 and treatment group . scale
bar = 100 μm.

growth properties of ecs
to compare the proliferation and survival of huvecs between the two groups, dna
damage, apoptosis, and cell proliferation were analyzed using
fluorescence-activated cell sorting  technique. the control group  and treatment group  were cultured for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and
36 h. as shown in figures 3a–3d, cells with dna damage  and
apoptosis  were not observed for both groups.
h2ax-negative cells  and parp-negative cells  did not show noticeable differences on both films.
furthermore, huvecs on the denatured collagen film enhanced the proliferation
rate compared with the control group . these results show that the
aggregated form of huvecs on the denatured collagen film was caused by the
selective migration of huvecs into a specific area or by enhanced proliferation
of huvecs in a specific area, such as the remaining collagen fibers in the
denatured collagen film.
films for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 36 h. dna damage, apoptosis, and cell
proliferation of huvecs plated on the collagen-treated film were
analyzed using flow cytometry to investigate their survival and
proliferation. comparison of histograms of h2ax-negative cells
 and parp-negative cells
 on the normal collagen
film  and denatured collagen film . cell death by dna damage  and
apoptosis  was not detected.
 comparison of huvecs on the collagenase-treated
collagen film showed enhanced proliferation rates.

mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> of ecs
huvecs were transfected with mmp-1/enhanced green fluorescent protein  and
mmp-2/mcherry vectors to visualize the secretion of mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig>  cells were
cultured on normal  and denatured collagen films  for 24 h. these cells were then fixed with paraformaldehyde
solution, and stained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole .
figure 5a shows that mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> were not
expressed in the non-treatment group. as shown in figure 5b, mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> were observed in the treatment group. these
results indicate that ecs on the denatured collagen film could secrete mmp- <dig> and
mmp- <dig> 
mmp-1/egfp , and mmp-2/mcherry  images of normal 
and abnormal huvecs  cultured for 24 h. scale
bar = 100 μm.

collagen zymography
mmp is secreted as a pro-enzyme, and only activated mmp can degrade the collagen
matrix. therefore, immunofluorescent images do not show mmp activity. to
overcome this limitation, we performed substrate activity using collagen
zymography assay. as shown in figure 6a, collagen
zymography showed three distinct mmp bands. the lower band was mmp- <dig>  which was
about 40–60 kda. the middle band was gelatinase-a , which was
about 72 kda. the upper band represented gelatinase-b , which was at
about 95 kda. the mmp- <dig> level decreased in the 5 min group compared
with that in the control group , and
further decreased in the 15 min group. by contrast, the levels of mmp- <dig> and
mmp- <dig> increased in the 5 min group compared with those in the control
group. however, they significantly decreased in the 15 min group.
activity measured by collagen zymography for huvecs cultured for
24 h.  collagen zymography.  densitometric
analysis of mmp- <dig>  - <dig>  and - <dig> activity in huvecs. control, huvecs on the
collagen film; 5 min, huvecs on the denatured collagen film treated
with collagenase for 5 min; 15 min, huvecs on the denatured
collagen film treated with collagenase for 15 min.
n =  <dig> 

expression of e-selectin, vcam, cd <dig>  and ve-cadherin
the expression levels of e-selectin, vcam, cd <dig>  and ve-cadherin on the ec
surface for the two collagen films were visualized using immunostaining method
and confocal imaging technique. among the four adhesion molecules, cd <dig> and
ve-cadherin were expressed on the ec surface cultured on both collagen films
. figure 7f
shows that cd <dig> expression significantly increased on the ec surface of the
denatured collagen film compared with that on ecs cultured on normal collagen
film . the results from the present in
vitro studies on the cultured ecs suggest the important function of the
biophysical properties of ecm in the formation of the ec layer. in particular,
mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> caused weak cell interactions. therefore, cd <dig> expression
increased on the ec surface of the denatured collagen film.
ve-cadherin. huvecs cultured for 24 h on the collagen film
 and denatured collagen film treated with
collagenase for 5 min . fluorescence images
of actin ,
nucleus , adhesion molecules , and their merged images. e-selectin , vcam , cd <dig> , and ve-cadherin
. scale bar = 250 μm.

bead accumulation on the ec layer
ecs cultured on the collagen film or denatured collagenase-treated collagen film
for 24 h were mounted on the flow chamber. the dynamic motion of beads on
the cultured ecs was observed by time-lapse microscopy. weakly adhered beads
were detached under flow conditions, and some beads attached to the huvec layer
were continuously concentrated to form ec clusters. in huvecs cultured on the
collagen film and denatured collagen film for 24 h, the size and number of
clusters gradually increased  as the flow rate increased. the
beads were clustered on the huvec layers, and the cluster size increased.
figures 8a and 8b show the
confocal images captured after 1 min at a flow rate of 1 ml/h.
figures 9a–9d show
the fluorescence images captured after 1 min at the same flow rate. as
shown in these figures, the beads on the normal ec layer 
were less accumulated than those on the abnormal ec layers .
in addition, the clusters in the treatment group were larger than those in the
non-treatment group. figures 9e and 9f show the temporal variations in the number of clusters and in the
sum of cluster areas, respectively. these values were obtained from time-lapse
images recorded consecutively at a flow rate of 1 ml/h. in
figure 9e, the number of clusters gradually
increased, and the number of clusters on the normal ec layer was lower than that
on the abnormal ec layer. figure 9f shows that the
beads on the normal ec layer were less accumulated than those on the abnormal ec
layer. the slope increased by approximately 30% for the abnormal ec layer group
compared with that for the normal ec layer group. in addition, the sum of
cluster area in the collagenase-treated group was higher than that of the
non-treatment normal group. the slope was higher  for the abnormal ec
layer group than that for the normal ec layer group.
accumulated beads  on the normal huvec layer .  accumulated beads  on the abnormal huvec layer
. the images were captured after 1 min under a
flow rate of 1 ml/h . white arrows
indicate the direction of medium flow, and red arrows in 
denote the bead clusters accumulated near the huvec clusters. the
cross-sectional profiles are displayed along the yellow lines in the
right ends and bottom parts. scale
bar = 100 μm.
fluorescent images of accumulated beads  on the normal  and abnormal huvec  layers . the images
were captured after 1 min under a flow rate of 1 ml/h . the images in the yellow dotted box were
magnified two times . scale bar: 100 μm.  temporal variations in the number of clusters 
and sum of cluster areas .

discussion
in this study, the expression levels of mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> were observed in ecs on
denatured collagen film. the results show that the destruction of the ecm structure
was caused by mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig>  which was secreted by ecs on denatured collagen film.
in addition, mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> could influence the formation of ec clusters and
detachment of ec clusters from the ec layer. the experimental results obtained from
the present in vitro studies on the cultured ecs suggest that the
biophysical properties of ecm had an important function in the formation of the ec
layer. only huvecs grown on the denatured collagen film expressed mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig> 
whereas no mmp expression was found in huvecs grown on the collagen film. previous
studies have shown that huvecs grown on collagen gels express mmp- <dig>  - <dig>  and mt1-mmp
to degrade the collagen matrix  <cit> . consequently, mmp expression is higher on stiffer matrix 
compared with that on softer matrix   <cit> . given that mmp is secreted as a pro-enzyme  and only activated
mmp can degrade the collagen matrix, immunofluorescent images do not show much about
mmp activity  <cit> . the collagen zymography data obtained in this study show that huvecs on
the three different collagen films had relatively different mmp activities.
zymography is an electrophoretic technique to detect hydrolytic enzymes based on the
substrate repertoire for the enzyme. collagen zymography allows us to examine mmp
activity, whereas fluorescence images of mmp in figure 5
distinguish whether the mmp is present or not. thus, the fluorescence images showing
the expression of mmps in figure  <dig> are different from the
zymography data showing the activity of mmps in figure  <dig> 

huvecs adhered to the collagen films during collagen zymography, but the experimental
results do not reflect the entire endothelium. to overcome this limitation, further
collagen zymography experiments using detached ecs  or mmps
secreted by ecs are required in the future.

all the experiments were performed by culturing ecs on the collagen films for up to
24 h. at 24 h after seeding of ecs, huvecs clustered on the denatured
collagen films gradually detached from the substrate. given the difficulty in
quantitatively analyzing the cells because of their complexity, we only carried out
the experiments for up to 24 h.

among several adhesion molecules, cd <dig> expression significantly increased on the ec
surface of the denatured collagen film compared with that on ecs cultured on normal
collagen film. the adhesion molecules of ecs possibly modulated gene expression by
changing the morphological structures of the ecm by mmp- <dig> and mmp- <dig>  these molecules
may activate many signaling molecules in focal adhesion and cytoplasm by dynamically
interacting with ecm proteins. the denatured ecm may cause endothelial dysfunction
by mechanotransduction mechanisms. cd <dig> is a marker for circulating endothelial
cells. the increased levels of cd <dig> are positively correlated with active
inflammatory reactions in idiopathic myopathy  <cit> , chronically inflamed tissues  <cit> , inflammatory skin disease  <cit> , rheumatoid arthritis  <cit> , inflammatory bowel disease  <cit> , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  <cit> , and multiple sclerosis disease  <cit> . the engagement of cd <dig> initiates the protein kinase phosphorylation
cascade through association with fyn, a src family kinase. phosphorylated fyn
subsequently transfers phosphate to the downstream kinase of pkc-γ, which
triggers a ca2+ burst within cells. consequently, the induced association
among proteins of p <dig>  pyk <dig>  and paxillin, as well as activated p <dig> ,
promotes the polarization actions of actins. thus, this cd146-mediated signaling
pathway can be used to decipher the mechanism that cd <dig> promotes cell motility
through extracellular signals to downstream-signaling components for cytoskeleton
remodeling  <cit> . the integrins of ecs may activate many signaling molecules in focal
adhesion and cytoplasm via dynamic interaction with collagen fibers. therefore, the
mechanical properties of denatured collagen fibers may contribute to the
preferential ec migration on the denatured collage film. for better understanding of
its function in signaling transduction, further study on the crosstalk with members
of various signaling pathways is required  <cit> .

the functional assessment of ecs can be used to identify endothelial damage and
predict cardiovascular risks. however, this type of assessment does not provide
sufficient information about the mechanisms underlying the development of
endothelial dysfunction  <cit> .

in this study, the flow rates used for bead accumulation experiment do not fully
reflect the in vivo pathophysiological conditions. to select effective
drugs for circulatory vascular diseases, the size and surface properties of the test
drugs and flow condition  of microfluidic
devices are highly important. in particular, the physical dimensions of the
microfluidic devices used in the present in vitro study should be optimized
based on data obtained from in vivo disease models to maximize the
throughput.

CONCLUSIONS
using an in vitro disease model, we observed the endothelial dysfunction,
such as disorganization and thickening, of the ec layer. huvecs cultured on normal
collagen films were thinly adhered to the substrate. by comparison, huvecs cultured
on denatured collagen films exhibited abnormal cell growth, such as aggregation and
cluster formation of ecs. the expression levels of mmp- <dig>  mmp- <dig>  and cd <dig> increased
in ecs on the denatured collagen film. these results indicate that the denatured ecm
was closely related to endothelial dysfunction, which is one of the main
pathogeneses of circulatory vascular diseases. the morphological structures of the
denatured collagen film likely caused ec deformation. in addition, more fluorescent
beads accumulated on the ec layer on the denatured collagen film. these in
vitro studies would be useful for understanding the outbreak mechanism of
circulatory vascular disorders. in vitro studies using a bio-inspired ecm
could contribute in developing a unique experimental modality for optimizing the
design parameters to screen effective therapeutic drugs, and determine the physical
dimensions and flow rate condition of a microfluidic device used for clinical
treatments of circulatory diseases by matching in vivo pathophysiological
conditions.

