BACKGROUND
proteases are degradation machines that aid in the proper functioning of cells by sustaining the balance between protein synthesis and hydrolysis. the proteolytic enzymes are also involved in post-translational modifications and generation of active peptide molecules in the cell  <cit> . in fact, almost 2% of all proteins in the cell are proteolytic in nature, highlighting the decisive role of proteolytic enzymes in cellular regulatory circuits  <cit> . serine proteases are family of proteases that can cleave a peptide bond using a nucleophilic serine residue in their catalytic triad. they are involved in diverse biological processes, and are considered as attractive targets for drug design  <cit> . prokaryotic serine proteases play an important role in cell signaling, metabolism and various defense responses  <cit> , and help these microorganisms to adapt to a wide variety of environments and growth conditions  <cit> .

a particular type of serine protease that can hydrolyse internal proline residues distinctly is referred as prolyl oligopeptidase   <cit> . pops are distinct from other proteases that cannot cleave peptide bonds formed by proline residues due to its imino ring structure. pops are highly selective as their oligopeptidase activity is restricted to the substrates of up to  <dig> amino acids  <cit> . this specificity in cleaving short peptides and exclusion of large proteins make them unique in nature. pops are widely distributed in all the domains of life ranging from bacterial and archaeal species to humans  <cit> . however, unlike other serine proteases, the exact physiological role, genomic distribution and evolutionary details of pops in bacteria is still unknown.

in most of the species, pops are ~ <dig> residues long with a cylindrical structure  <cit> . crystal structure of bacterial pops  from myxococcus xanthus, sphingomonas capsulata and aeromonus punctata suggested two domain architecture with a sequentially discontinuous catalytic α/β hydrolase and a β-propeller domain  <cit> . the α/β hydrolase domain in pops consists of a short helical  n-terminal stretch and a large c-terminal region comprising of catalytic triad. the catalytic triad of ser, asp and his is hidden at the interface of the two structural domains. recently, seven crystal structures of pops of aeromonus punctata suggested induced-fit mechanism of substrate entry, where addition of a substrate induces large-scale conformational changes in two domains along with alterations at the active site  <cit> . studies have shown the ability of the bpops to cleave even 33-mer peptides  <cit> . pops from different bacteria can also have differences in chain-length and sub-site specificity towards substrates  <cit> .

pops are one of the members of the larger ‘pop family’ , which also includes dipeptidyl peptidase iv , acylaminoacyl peptidase  and oligopeptidase b   <cit> . all the members of pop family are ubiquitous and exhibit restricted substrate specificities. while pop hydrolyses peptides at the carboxyl side of proline residue  <cit> , dpp liberates dipeptides where penultimate amino acid is proline  <cit> . opb cleaves at arginine and lysine bonds  <cit>  and acc remove n-acetylated amino acids from blocked peptides  <cit> . dpps are homodimers and exist in both soluble and membrane bound forms . pop and opb are cytoplasmic endopeptidases, while dpp and acc are exopeptidases. though the sequence similarity of these four peptidases is low, they have similar three-dimensional structures with catalytic hydrolase and propeller domains. the propeller domain of pop, acc and opb is seven bladed, as compared to more irregular eight bladed propeller of dpp  <cit> .

pops and pop family members are pharmaceutically important enzymes. bpops are considered as therapeutic agents for the oral treatment of celiac sprue, which is a small-intestinal disorder caused by abnormal response to gluten proteins  <cit> . high proline content of gluten makes it resistant to digestion by enzymes present in gastrointestinal tract. treatment of gluten peptides with pops from flavobacterium meningosepticum, sphingomonas capsulatum and myxococcus xanthus has shown rapid cleavage of them  <cit> . physiological role of the prokaryotic dpps is not very clear, but there is evidence suggesting their involvement in virulence of porphyromonas gingivalis, which is a major pathogen associated with adult periodontitis  <cit> . similarly, opbs are involved in the pathogenicity of t. brucei, the causative agent of african trypanosomiasis  <cit> . in trypanosome both pops and opbs are considered to be important virulence factor  <cit> .

the availability of genomic information of many bacterial and archaeal species offers a great opportunity to understand the detailed distribution and biochemical role of pops in prokaryotic lineages. motivated by the clinical importance of pops, we have carried out genomic identification of pops and its homologs using exhaustive sequence search procedures. we found pops to be widely distributed in all the classes of bacteria and archaea with diverse domain architectures. these bpops were depicted to be involved in protein-protein interactions and cellular signaling. rigorous sequence searches employed in this study aided the identification of many additional pops, which were not characterized earlier. detailed clustering and identification of class specific sequence motifs allowed classification of bpops into eight subtypes. we found that multiple horizontal gene transfer events were responsible for the differential expansion of pop gene family in bacteria. to our knowledge, this is the first analysis that reports the presence of multiple pops in many bacterial genomes.

RESULTS
genomic identification of pop homologs in bacteria and archaea
we first implemented direct and profile-based sensitive sequence search methods to identify pop homologs from  <dig> bacterial and  <dig> archaeal phyla . hits were considered as ‘true’, if the sequence search algorithms could identify them with both β-propeller  and α/β hydrolase  domains, or with at least α/β hydrolase domain. at a stringent e-value of 10- <dig>  only  <dig>  pop homologs could be identified, while relaxing the e-value to 10- <dig> could capture  <dig>  additional pop homologs . in total,  <dig>  pop homologs were collected using exhaustive phmmer, jackhmmer and profile-based approaches, including  <dig>  bacterial and  <dig> archaeal pop homologs  <cit> .

the collected hits included annotated pops, pop family members and nearby hydrolases of α/β hydrolase superfamily. altogether, they are referred as ‘pop homologs’ in this report. in certain bacterial  and archaeal  lineages no pop homologs could be identified. blast searches also failed to capture pop homologs in these phyla except in dictyoglomi <cit> . however, sequence searches against appended-pali + database could pick at least one pop homologue in the above phyla except for nanoarchaeota <cit> .

wide distribution of pop homologs in prokaryotic lineages
we noticed that all the collected pop homologs were widely distributed across all the major lineages of bacteria and archaea with apparent loss in nanoarchaeota. phylum actinobacteria was identified to be the most populated with ~ <dig> pop homologs , while in archaea, many pop homologs were captured from euryarchaeota and crenarchaeota. in pop family, pops were more abundant  in prokaryotic lineages than dpps  and opbs  . we could also capture all the  <dig> annotated pops from prokaryotes.figure  <dig> 
distribution of pop homologs in prokaryotic lineages. a) distribution of archaeal pop homologs. b) distribution of bacterial pop homologs. c) distribution of pop family members.



bacterial pop homologs are both secretory and membrane proteins
earlier studies have shown that bpops are associated with the signal peptides  <cit> . signal peptides are sequence motifs that permit the proteins to translocate across endoplasmic reticulum in eukaryotes and to the cytoplasmic membrane in prokaryotes. therefore, we examined all the collected pop homologs for the presence of signal peptides. our results showed that 20% of the pop homologs were predicted to be associated with such signals, from which  <dig>  were annotated pops . bacteroides  and acidobacteria  had maximum number of pop homologs with signal peptides, while in some bacterial phyla  signal peptides were completely absent. pop homologs from gram-positive bacterial phyla  showed relatively less number of signal peptides.figure  <dig> 
bacterial pop homologs with signal peptides and transmembrane regions.




recently, membrane-bound forms of pops isolated from synaptosomal membranes of bovine brain were also reported  <cit> . cytosolic and membrane forms are different with respect to sensitivity to inhibitors, relative molecular mass, affinities for the peptide substrate and the presence of a hydrophobic membrane anchor  <cit> . transmembrane helix prediction by tmhmm identified  <dig> annotated bpops with single transmembrane helices located at the n-terminal  <cit> . transmembrane helices were absent in pops of phyla spirochaetes and fusobacteria.

diverse domain architectures reveal putative functions of pop homologs
we then investigated the coexisting domains to understand the possible biological functions of pop homologs in the prokaryotic lineages. bacterial and archaeal pop homologs were associated with  <dig> and  <dig> different domain architectures respectively . both the archaeal and bacterial pop homologs share similar domain architectures suggesting similar function of pop homologs in these two kingdoms. domain architectures of pop homologs were also mapped on species tree of bacteria and archaea. as shown in figure  <dig>  pops were associated with diverse domain combinations in proteobacteria, while in mycobacterial species pops were replaced by other hydrolases. within a phylum, anomalous distribution of pops was observed. mapping of domain architecture on archaeal species tree depicted presence of only c-terminal pop domain in most of the organisms, while full-length pop domains were observed in a few species of crenarchaeota .figure  <dig> 
domain architecture of annotated bpops.
abbreviations: pop_n-prolyl oligopeptidase n-terminal, pop_c-prolyl oligopeptidase c-terminal, dpp_n-dipeptidyl peptidase n-terminal, wd-wd domain, abh-α/β hydrolase, lpqb –lipoprotein,duf- domain of unidentified function, smp-smp-30/gluconolactonase/lre-like region, fgs-formylglycine-generating sulfatase, axylan-acetyl xylan, xpro -x-pro dipeptidyl-peptidase, etrans-eukaryotic translation.

domain architecture of pop homologs mapped on the species tree of bacteria.
abbreviations: dpp-dipeptidyl peptidase, lip-lipoprotein lpqb, est-esterase, pop_n-prolyl oligopeptidase n-terminal domain, pop_c-prolyl oligopeptidase c-terminal domain, lipo-lysophospholipase, abh-α/β hydrolase, xpr -x-pro dipeptidyl-peptidase, dlh-dienelactone hydrolase, tol- tolb amino-terminal, wd-wd domain.

domain architecture of pop homologs mapped on the species tree of archaea.
abbreviations: dpp-dipeptidyl peptidase, pop_n-prolyl oligopeptidase n-terminal domain, pop_c-prolyl oligopeptidase c-terminal domain, lipo-lysophospholipase, apf- anaphase-promoting complex, abh-α/β hydrolase, xpr-x-prodipeptidyl-peptidase, wd-wd domain.




pop homologs were frequently associated with protein-protein interaction domains e.g. pdz and tetratricopeptide  repeats. two of the ‘c-terminal processing peptidases’  had pdz domains, which are associated with signaling proteins of bacteria, plants and higher order organisms. pdz domains are involved in assembly of large protein complexes, thereby coordinating and guiding the flow of regulatory information  <cit> . pdz domains present in peptidase s <dig> of candidatus solibacter usitatus  and roseiflexus  were associated with wd <dig> and dpp domains. tpr repeat motifs facilitate interaction with other proteins. these motifs were also related with hydrolase domain in candidatus solibacter usitatus . tpr-proteins are also associated with multi-protein complexes, and are involved in functioning of chaperones, cell-cycle, transcription and protein transport complexes  <cit> .

pop homologs were also associated with signaling modules such as wd-repeats. proteins with wd-repeat exhibit high degree of functional diversity . some archaeal pops were also predicted to be associated with wd-repeats suggesting conserved function of pops in the two domains of life. besides wd repeats, pop homologs were also related with sel <dig> repeats, which are subfamily of tpr sequences. in prokaryotes, these repeats allow proteins to be membrane attached and mediate interaction between bacterial and eukaryotic host cells  <cit> . one of the pop proteins from ferrimonas balearica  was predicted to be associated with sel <dig> repeats.

bacterial pop homologs were also found to co-exist with several dna-binding modules of transcription regulatory domains. numerous bacterial transcription regulatory proteins bind dna via a helix-turn-helix motif  <cit> . these are sequentially diverse transcriptional activators and most of them are known to negatively regulate their own expression. transcription regulatory domain is associated with response regulator receiver domain and plays an important role in dna-binding and regulation of transcription  <cit> . pop homologs that co-existed with bacterial regulatory domains include candidatus solibacter usitatus  and caulobacter segnis , and those with transcription regulatory domain include four homologs , yp_ <dig> , yp_ <dig>  and yp_ <dig> ). targeted deletions of the predicted accessory domains will be beneficial to understand the related biological functions.

different cellular localization of annotated bpops
we have also examined the cellular localization of annotated bpops to infer the possible functions of pop in more detail. prediction of cellular localization using psort-b also revealed cytoplasmic nature of the annotated pops    <cit> . interestingly, we predicted some of these pops to be localized in cell wall, cytoplasm and outer membranes of bacteria and archaea. different bacterial phyla depicted differences in preferred cellular localization of pops. for example, in phylum proteobacteria, most of the pops were periplasmic in nature. clustering analysis of the predicted cytoplasmic and periplasmic pops resulted in a clear separation of cytoplasmic and periplasmic pops with a few exceptions.

phylogenetic analysis of annotated bpops shows high co-clustering
to investigate the differences in the annotated bpops, we next performed phylogenetic clustering of  <dig> annotated pops that showed nine distinct clusters, with co-clustering among members of different phyla . this co-clustering trend and absence of phylum-specific clusters suggested high conservation of pops within bacterial lineages. genus shewanella of marine metal-reducing bacteria was highly populated with considerable number of annotated bpops in all the nine clusters. similarly, archaeal pops were also co-clustered well with other bpops. this co-clustering suggested the possibility of lateral transfer of pop genes among bacteria and between archaeal and bacterial species .figure  <dig> 
phylogenetic analysis of annotated bpops. color code: thermotogae-cyan, firmicutes-lime, chloroflexi-green, deinococcus-thermus-blue, chlorobi-magenta, actinobacteria-blue, acidobacteria-yellow, alphaproteobacteria-teal, betaproteobacteria-grey, gammaproteobacteria-olive, deltaproteobacteria-blue, bacteriodetes-black, planctomycetes-black, cyanobacteria-purple, gemmatimonadetes-red branch with species name in black, spirochaetes-pink branch with species name in black, fibrobacteres-light grey, archaebacteria-red. nine distinct clusters are marked in red.



unique sequence signature motifs depict diverse sequence properties
to further analyse the co-clustering trend of annotated bpops, we identified conserved class specific sequence motifs. an alignment stretch was considered as a ‘conserved motif’, if 95% of the sequences had conserved amino acids at least at three consecutive positions. from these highly conserved sequence motifs, we next identified class specific motifs. a ‘class-specific motif’ was defined as a sequence motif in a cluster, which was completely absent from all the other clusters. in the first and seventh clusters , no class-specific motifs were observed. figure  <dig> shows a part of the alignment of fifth cluster of bpops representing class specific motifs. detailed analysis of motifs of all the clusters was carried out to understand their relative position on the structure of bpops. class-specific motifs of second, sixth, eighth and ninth cluster were localized in the hydrolase domain, while motifs of cluster third, fourth and fifth were distributed on both the domains .figure  <dig> 
part of sequence alignment of pops of the fifth cluster representing class specific motifs. red boxes and arrows represent class specific motifs, only 90% conserved residues are colored.



classification of annotated bpops into eight subtypes
detailed analysis of class specific sequence motifs indicated high sequence variations in annotated bpops. therefore, on the basis of identified class specific motifs, we propose a classification of bpops into eight different subtypes as shown in figure  <dig>  some of these class-specific motifs were surface exposed, depicting their possible involvement in protein-protein interactions with other interacting partners , while some other motifs were located in the core of protein, near functionally important residues, which could possibly cause differences in interaction with the versatile substrates of pops.figure  <dig> 
different subtypes of bpops and the motifs associated with them. most frequently observed motif is shown in weblogo. details of these motifs are present in additional files  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 



subtypes of bpops differ in the conservation of functionally important residues
we then investigated the conservation of functionally important residues in different subtypes of bpops. detailed analysis revealed high conservation of catalytic triad residues in all the subtypes. however, high number of non-permissible amino acid replacements was observed to be concentrated at two sites―ser- <dig> and thr- <dig> , which are located at the interface of two domains. these sites were replaced by non-polar and positively charged amino acids in most of the subtypes of bpops . these two residues were also situated in vicinity of arg- <dig> and ile- <dig> that were reported to be crucial for the incoming peptide substrate in bpops. w- <dig>  which is important for the substrate binding was conserved in some of the bpops, while in a few other bpops it was substituted by other amino acids. altogether, the hydrophobic environment required for the substrate binding was not conserved in all the bpops. these findings strengthen our hypothesis that the proposed bpop subtypes can also be different with respect to the possible substrate. mutation experiments of these functionally important residues can provide further insights about their role in the catalytic activity and substrate specificity.

divergence of pop family members
besides analysing the co-clustering pattern of annotated bpops, we have also examined the divergence of pop family members. from all the  <dig>  collected pop homologs, we could obtain  <dig>  pop family members including  <dig> annotated pops,  <dig> opbs,  <dig> accs and  <dig> dpps. these members were used to construct a joint phylogenetic tree, where a set of bacterial carboxylesterases  were considered as an outgroup. we observed that opbs and dpps were distinctly clustered, while the accs and pops were dispersed all over the tree . bpop family tree was contradictory to the tree earlier reported by venäläinen et al., where distinct clusters of pop family members from all the domains of life were observed  <cit> .

the phylogenetic analysis also suggested high divergence of other pop family members. some of the pops have diverged from the rest of the pop family members before opbs, followed by the divergence of accs and dpps. accs were diverged along with some of the other pops, since distinct cluster of accs could not be obtained. this clustering pattern was confirmed by generating additional phylogenetic tree, where only dpps, opbs and accs were considered to understand their phyletic distribution . if pops were excluded from the phylogenetic tree, other members of pop family formed distinct clusters, which revealed that pops were responsible for the observed co-clustering among the pop family members.

anomalous distribution of annotated bpops revealed many multi-pop bacterial genomes
while performing the sequence analysis, we noticed high variations in the number of annotated pop genes in bacterial genomes, ranging from no pops to multiple copies of pops within a genome. overall, out of  <dig> identified bacterial genomes with annotated pops,  <dig> had a single copy of pop gene. the overrepresentation of pop was particularly observed in genus shewanella of gammaproteobacteria, where most of the species had multiple copies of pop gene. one of the interesting examples of multi-pop proteome was shewanella woodyi with  <dig> pops sharing an average sequence identity of 15% . moreover, we could identify  <dig> copies of pop gene in shewanella piezotolerans, and  <dig> copies each in shewanella pealeana and shewanella sediminis. besides genus shewanella,  <dig> pop genes were also identified in solibacter usitatus. high sequence variations in paralogs of pop suggested that they are not closely related to each other, except in s. thermophilus genome . these multiple pops within a genome also differ in their cellular localizations .figure  <dig> 
sequence variations of the pops of multi-pop bacterial genomes. numbers of putative pops identified in these genomes are shown in brackets.



horizontal gene transfer as a driving force for the expansion of pop gene family in bacteria
examination of the complete genomes of bacterial and archaeal lineages showed considerable variations in the number of annotated pop genes within a genome. horizontal gene transfer  and gene duplication are the two driving forces, which may lead to expansion of gene families in prokaryotic systems  <cit> . we have studied the expansion of pop gene family in more detail using pop rich genus shewanella. members of genus shewanella have been described from diverse habitats, including deep cold-water marine environments to shallow antarctic ocean habitats, to hydrothermal vents and freshwater lakes  <cit> . we examined sequence similarity and chromosomal positioning to determine if hgt is prevalent in these genomes. chromosomal mapping of  <dig> annotated pop genes of s. woodyi depicted non-co-localization, representing possible hgt events during evolution . only two genes  were found to be slightly closer on the genome, still separated by six other genes. similar patterns were also observed in pop genes of other species of shewanella. this suggests possibility of multiple hgt events during the evolution of these bacteria .

annotation of uncharacterized pop homologs of bacterial lineages
during sensitive sequence searches, we could identify many hypothetical proteins with pop-like signatures. we have implemented various approaches such as protein domain identification, secondary structure prediction, protein fold prediction and go annotation mapping to characterize  <dig> hypothetical sequences as pops and  <dig> proteins as α/β hydrolases . a hypothetical sequence was annotated as pop if an annotated pop query picked the sequence at least at an e-value of 10- <dig> and it had similar domain architecture . during this analysis some partial pops comprising of only catalytic domain were also identified . rps-blast  using four different profiles  was carried out to further scan each unannotated sequence, thereby confirming that these sequences are α/β hydrolase superfamily members  <cit> .

limitations of the computational methods used in this study
although we have used multiple methods for the detailed analysis of pop homologs from the bacterial and archaeal lineages, yet the current study has certain limitations. instead of relying on any one-sequence search method, here, we have employed multiple sequence search algorithms to detect all possible homologs. we validated all the obtained hits by mapping functional domains and active site residues, yet the possibility of obtaining false positives cannot be ignored.

the complete absence of pop genes from some of the bacterial phyla could be because of the caveats of the sequence search algorithms. it is possible that pops of such phyla are so diverged that most of the methods failed to identify them, including current remote homology detection methods. therefore, further experimental characterization of these genomes is essential to conclude the presence or absence of pops. the available computational methods to predict protein domains, cellular localizations and signal peptides of protein sequences are also associated with wrong predictions.

during this study, we have also encountered many incomplete pop sequences with either missing n-terminal hydrolase domain  or with incomplete propeller domain  or with only hydrolase domain . these partial pops could be due to errors in the available gene prediction algorithms. additionally, wrong or incomplete annotation of collected protein sequences could also lead to another source of error. experimental validation of these reported sequences would help in improving the current annotations of the corresponding genomes.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have performed an exhaustive computational analysis of pops in prokaryotic lineages. our analysis revealed wide distribution, high diversity and functional importance of pops in the analysed bacterial and archaeal genomes. many novel domain combinations were identified in bpops, emphasizing the need for systematic studies to understand them further. in addition, we noticed different selection pressures on propeller and hydrolase domains.

the pop family has primarily expanded by multiple hgt events. pop paralogs differ considerably with respect to sequence, cellular localization and domain architectures, suggesting functional divergence and maintenance by natural selection  <cit> . finally, the proposed classification of bpops will help in understanding the sequence specific characteristics and structural differences of these pops.

in conclusion, our systematic analysis of pops in bacterial and archaeal species will aid in a better understanding of these proteins. this bacterial pop repertoire will also facilitate comparative and functional genomics studies, and experimental characterization of unique domain combinations. with the rapidly growing numbers of sequenced genomes, our work can be considered as a benchmark in the extension of such analysis to other less-studied protein families.

