BACKGROUND
micrornas  are a class of small non-coding rna molecules of approximately  <dig> nucleotides in length that regulate gene expression. they typically bind to complementary loci in the 3′ untranslated region  of mrna and prevent translation to mature protein. an individual mirna can regulate the expression of hundreds of genes. some genes, particularly those with longer 3′ utrs, are often the targets of multiple mirnas and consequently, mirna mediated regulation tends to result in the fine tuning of the expression of many proteins within a cell  <cit> . in mammals, mirnas are thought to regulate the expression of as many as 50% of protein coding genes  <cit> . mirna expression impacts on almost every cellular process and mirna dysregulation has been implicated in many pathologies  <cit> .

mirnas regulate a range of biological pathways associated with cancer including apoptosis  <cit>  and cell proliferation  <cit> ; dysregulation of mirnas has also been widely observed in cancer  <cit> . for example over expression of mir- <dig> has been implicated in hodgkin’s and burkitt’s lymphoma  <cit> , while mir- <dig> and mir- <dig>  which target the anti-apoptotic gene bcl <dig>  have been shown to be dysregulated in chronic lymphocytic leukemia  <cit> . mirnas have been found in many of the genomic regions associated with chromosomal abnormalities in cancer, including regions of amplification, which may contain oncogenes, regions of loss of heterozygosity, which may harbor tumor suppressor genes and fragile sites which are preferential sites for translocation, deletion, amplification, sister chromatid exchange and insertion of tumor associated viruses like human papilloma virus  <cit> .

while many specific maturation steps have been uncovered for different mirnas, most known human mirnas are processed in the same way by the mirna biogenesis pathway. mirna precursors, known as primary mirna  are transcribed by rna polymerase ii or iii. these transcripts are subsequently cleaved by the microprocessor complex drosha-dgcr <dig> to form the pre-mirna, which is transported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm by xpo5-ran-gtp. there, it is cleaved by dicer1-trbp to form the two stranded mirna duplex; the passenger strand is detached and normally degraded, although in some cases it acts as a separate functional mirna. the remaining functional strand combines with e1f2c <dig> proteins and forms the rna-induced silencing complex . the mirna then guides risc to prevent translation of target mrnas. translation is prevented by mrna deadenylation, mrna target cleavage or translational repression  <cit> . of the mechanisms of post-transcriptional regulation by mirnas, lowered mrna levels  accounts for most  of decreased protein production  <cit> . this implies that it is possible to assess levels of mirna mediated gene silencing from the mrna levels of a mirna’s target transcripts.

cheng et al. quantified mirna activity in this way by defining the regulatory effect score  of a mirna in a sample as the average expression rank of genes that are not predicted to be targeted by the mirna minus the average expression rank of the predicted targets of the mirna  <cit> . thus, the re-score is intended to measure the extent to which targets of the mirna are downregulated in a sample relative to other genes. it is not informative to compare the re-scores of different mirnas, but comparison of the re-score of a given mirna between samples can provide an indication of a difference in the repressive effect of the mirna in the samples. for example, if the targets of a given mirna relative to non-targets are ranked higher in a set of cancer samples than in comparable normal tissues, this suggests that the mirna exerts less control over gene expression in the cancer samples. there have been numerous other studies published that have also investigated mirna regulation by assessing changes in expression of mrna targets  <cit> .

we sought to investigate whether there is evidence of natural variation in this phenotype between human individuals using re-scores calculated from microarray and rna-seq data generated from the ceu  and yri  lymphoblastoid cell lines of the hapmap project  <cit> . microarray data were available for  <dig> trios of related individuals in these populations . we used these data to investigate the genetic component of the variation in re-scores. positive correlation between the value of a phenotype in an offspring and the mean value in parents provides evidence of a heritable component in the variation of the phenotype and the slope of the linear regression line relating parent mean to offspring values can be used as an estimate of the narrow-sense heritability  <cit> .

RESULTS
heritability of the regulatory effect of mirnas
microarray data  <cit>  were obtained for  <dig> trios  from the ceu and yri populations of the hapmap project  <cit> . using mirna targets predicted by targetscan  <cit>  we compared re-scores between parents and offspring. for 51% of mirnas the mean re-score of parents and the re-score of the offspring were significantly  positively correlated . population of origin was included in these regressions to model biological and technical differences between the ceu and yri cell lines. regression p-values and slopes for heritability of individual mirna re-scores from targetscan and a second mirna prediction algorithm  are provided as additional file 1; histograms of these p-values are shown in additional file 2: figure s <dig> 

we calculated the mean of the re-score over all mirnas. unsurprisingly, the mean re-score is also strongly correlated between parents and offspring in hapmap trios . this correlation is statistically significant using mean re-scores calculated from targets predicted by targetscan . the slopes of these regression lines provide estimates of the narrow-sense heritability of the mean re-score. we also assessed mean re-score heritability based on targets predicted by four other algorithms . of these pictar , miranda  <cit>  and mirtarget <dig>  <cit>   showed significant evidence of heritability, while one mirna target prediction algorithm, mirbase  <cit> , did not reach statistical significance .

it is possible that the apparent genetic contribution to the regulatory effect of mirnas is a consequence of the heritability of gene expression, rather than a novel molecular phenotype. since the expression levels of a large proportion of human genes have a strong genetic component  <cit> , the correlation in re-score between parents and offspring could simply reflect the correlation in the expression levels of a proportion of the genes targeted by the mirna. we devised a permutation test to evaluate this possibility. for each set of mrnas predicted to be targeted by a given mirna we replaced predicted target genes by genes chosen at random . if the apparent heritability of re-scores is merely a consequence of heritability of individual gene expression levels, the re-scores obtained from sets of random genes should exhibit similar levels of heritability to the re-scores based on the true predicted target sets. greater evidence of heritability from true predicted targets compared to sets of randomly selected genes suggests that the re-score heritability cannot be explained by the heritability of individual gene expression levels. of  <dig>  randomizations, just eight  reached a regression p-value as extreme as the target sets predicted by targetscan.

genome-wide association of mean re-score
in order to explore the genetic contribution to re-score variation further, we carried out a genome-wide association  test, treating mean re-score, calculated using mirna targets predicted by targetscan, as a quantitative trait, and using genotype data from the hapmap project  <cit> . to avoid artifacts resulting from population structure, we carried out these tests separately on the ceu and yri samples and excluded related individuals . re-scores were recalculated using expression data derived from rna-seq  <cit> , which was available for parents but not for offspring of hapmap trios. histograms and manhattan plots of p-values are shown in additional file 2: figure s <dig>  the p-value distributions show a peak towards low p-values, suggesting the presence of some true positive associations. the top ten most significantly associated loci in both populations are shown in additional file  <dig>  none of these associations remained significant following a permutation-based correction for multiple testing. this is not surprising given the relatively small number of samples compared to typical gwa studies.

association of mean re-score with snps in the mirna biogenesis pathway
cheng et al. <cit>  used the re-score metric to compare mirna repression in estrogen receptor positive  and estrogen receptor negative  breast cancers and found that mirnas tended to have higher re-scores  in the latter. the differences in re-scores between the two cancer subtypes was attributed to dysregulation of key genes in the microrna biogenesis pathway  <cit> . we used linear regression to investigate the relationships between seven key genes in the mirna biogenesis pathway,  and mean re-score, first using all samples from both populations pooled  and then in each of the populations separately. expression levels of five of these seven genes were significantly correlated with mean re-score , consistent with a contribution of differential regulation of the mirna biogenesis pathway to differences in mean re-score. in fact, a large proportion  of all genes were significantly associated  with mean re-score; however, this proportion was somewhat higher  for genes in the mirna biogenesis pathway. given this relationship between re-score and the activities of genes in the mirna biogenesis pathway these genes are worthy of closer examination for genetic association with mean re-score.

p-values and slopes from the linear regression of expression level of genes in the mirna biogenesis pathway against mean re-score, in the ceu, yri and for both populations pooled.

we carried out a second test of association, restricting to  <dig> snps that map to the genomic regions of these seven key genes involved in the mirna biogenesis pathway. a snp is mapped to the genomic region of a gene by dbsnp if it lies between 2kb upstream and 500bp downstream of the gene. again there appear to be more low p-values than would be expected under the uniform distribution, pointing to a proportion of true positive associations in both populations . the ten snps most strongly associated with mean re-score in ceu and yri are shown in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. one snp, rs <dig>  in an intron of drosha remained statistically significantly  associated with mean re-score in the ceu following bonferroni and permutation-based control for multiple testing. this snp was also nominally significantly associated with mean re-score in the yri ; however, the minor allele frequency was much lower in yri, limiting the power to detect an association with a significance that could survive multiple test correction. the magnitude and direction of the re-score differences between genotypes are consistent across the two populations . taken individually, the vast majority  of re-scores are associated  with genotype at this snp in the ceu. this number drops to  <dig> of  <dig> in the yri, however the lower minor allele frequency in yri again limits the power to detect the association.

the results for association of mirna biogenesis pathway related snps with mean re-score in the ceu.

as a further test of the association between rs <dig> and mean re-score, we investigated the re-scores of a particular class of intronic mirnas , which are not processed by drosha <cit> . if the association between the snp and mean re-score is real and is mediated by an effect on mirna processing by drosha, the snp should not be associated with the re-scores of mirtrons. consistent with this prediction, we found that a much lower proportion of mirtron re-scores  are associated  with the drosha snp . we have found evidence that the subset of mirtrons that do show an association with the snp do so because of an overlap between their target gene sets and the target gene sets of conventional mirnas, as the mirtrons which are most significantly associated with rs <dig> tend to target genes that are also targeted by many other mirnas; and mirtrons that target genes that are targeted by few conventional mirnas are less significantly associated with rs <dig> .

searching for causal snps
we investigated the function of snp rs <dig> using the “snp function prediction” tool, which is part of the snpinfo suite   <cit> ; however, no significant results were identified. we also searched the “gwas catalog” but did not find any previous studies which had identified this snp  <cit> . to search for other snps that may be causally responsible for this association we used confidence intervals  <cit>  as implemented in haploview to calculate haplotype blocks for the ceu hapmap data. rs <dig> is located within a haplotype block that includes the drosha promoter region . we verified that this is the active promoter of drosha using data recently released by the encode project et al. <cit> . chromatin states for this locus are shown in additional file 2: figure s <dig>  the expression level of drosha is significantly associated with mean re-score ; however, the genotype of this locus was not significantly correlated with drosha expression level  or with the relative expression level of any drosha transcript isoforms . a further possibility is that rs <dig> is in linkage disequilibrium  with an exonic snp that was not genotyped on the hapmap microarrays. using snp calls from genome sequence data released by the  <dig>  genomes project  <cit>  we found no coding snps with a stronger association to mean re-score than rs <dig>  the regions assayed included the 3′ and 5′ utrs. we caution however, that there was much less statistical power to detect an association using the  <dig>  genomes data, as there was an overlap of only  <dig> samples between the  <dig>  genomes project dataset  and the rna-seq samples from the ceu used in this analysis, which means that it is difficult to rule out the possibility of linkage of rs <dig> with a causative snp in the coding region. these results are provided in additional file  <dig>  thus, the causal mechanism linking genetic variation at the drosha locus to variation in the re-score remains unclear.

integrative analysis of mirna expression and re-score data
mirna expression data has recently been generated for some of the hapmap ceu and yri cell lines  <cit> . in the majority of cases, mirna expression levels and their corresponding re-scores were not significantly correlated. average spearman correlation between mirna expression and corresponding targetscan based re-score from the rna-seq data is only  <dig>  in the ceu and - <dig>  in the yri. although surprising, this observation is consistent with the findings of cheng et al.  <cit> , who, for the original re-score study, performed spearman correlations of the t-scores of comparisons of mirna expression and re-scores between er- and er+ breast cancers, finding only very weak positive correlation. similar results have also been observed on two separate datasets by liang et al. <cit> . correlations between mirna expression level and re-scores are included in additional file  <dig>  however, we find that in the ceu, the expression of  <dig> of  <dig> mirnas that were consistently expressed across the cell lines is associated  with rs <dig> and that  <dig> of these associations are in the same direction as mean re-score. one mirna is associated with the snp in the yri, but once again, the lower minor allele frequency of rs <dig> in the yri limits the power to identify associations. p-values and false discovery rates for these  <dig> mirnas  for genotype association are included in additional file  <dig>  thus, this snp represents a trans-eqtl cluster for mirna gene expression. we hypothesize that this trans-eqtl reflects inter-individual differences in the efficiency of mirna processing by drosha. given that mirna expression measurements are relative , it is possible that this polymorphism may affect the absolute copy numbers of a large fraction of mirnas, even though an association between mirna expression and the snp is detectable for a relatively small fraction of mirnas. this hypothesis could be tested using transcriptome sequencing strategies designed to measure the abundance of mirnas relative to other rna species. indeed, given a global and consistent change in expression of all mirnas in a sample, one may not expect the expression of any mirnas to be associated with rs <dig>  as the proportion of the transcript pool occupied by any given mirna, would remain unchanged. however, the mirna regulatory effect polymorphism need not affect the expression of all mirnas to exactly the same degree, potentially leading to both positive and negative associations of mirna expression with the snp.

as discussed above, re-scores of the majority of mirnas were not correlated with mirna expression. this remained the case when we restricted to mirnas whose expression varied most across samples. however, the re-scores of individual mirnas were correlated with the mean re-score calculated across all mirnas. we restricted this analysis to the  <dig> most variable mirnas. of the top  <dig> in either population,  <dig> in the ceu and  <dig> in the yri had targetscan prediction data and therefore re-scores. we only considered these highly variable mirnas because quantities that are relatively constant across samples are not expected to be correlated, given the noise inherent in microarray data. the correlation between mean and individual mirna re-scores is not simply a consequence of overlaps in genes targeted by different mirnas, since it holds true even when the mean re-score is recalculated, for each mirna correlation test, after all of the individual mirnas targets have been subtracted from the target sets of the remaining mirnas.  <dig> of the  <dig> highly varying mirnas in the ceu and all  <dig> of  <dig> in the yri show a stronger association between the individual re-score and  mean re-score, than between the individual re-score and the expression of the mirna itself. in most cases this difference is large , hence, the mean re-score in a sample may be a much better predictor of the expression level of the targets of any particular mirna, than is the expression profile of the mirna itself. it is, perhaps, not surprising that the expression level of an individual mirna is not indicative of the expression of its target genes, given that targeted genes are often targets of a large number of mirnas. of  <dig>  genes which are predicted to be targeted by at least one mirna , the average number of mirnas targeting each gene is  <dig> . in this context, the fact that the mean re-score has power to predict the expression levels of a mirna target, even when the mean re-score is calculated without considering the targets of that mirna is interesting and points to differences in the effect of the mirna pathway on target genes across the cell lines.

CONCLUSIONS
we have found evidence of heritability of the regulatory effect of mirnas in human. we have also identified an association between the regulatory effect of mirnas and a snp in the mirna processing gene drosha. this association was identified in lymphoblastoid cell lines and it remains to be seen whether and in which primary cells the regulatory effect of mirnas is associated with the drosha locus. as noted in the background, cheng et al. had observed that there is a change in mirna re-scores between er- and er+ breast cancer subtypes. thomsom et al. showed that mature mirna levels are generally lower in several human primary cancers, despite unchanged pri-mirna levels and this has been attributed to defective processing by drosha <cit> , while drosha and dicer have also been shown to be downregulated in endometrial cancer and specific subgroups of breast cancer  <cit> . thus, it will be important to investigate further the phenotypic consequences of inter-individual differences in mirna regulatory efficiency and the influence on gene expression, possible tumorigenesis and the impact of such inter-individual differences in the context of the use of mirnas as biomarkers.

