BACKGROUND
micrornas  are crucial players in tumorigenesis and patient prognosis in cancers  <cit> . upon complementary binding to target mrnas, they lead to mrna degradation or translational repression  <cit> . recently, an alternative role of mirna as a “bridge” of gene interaction, namely the competing endogenous rna  interaction, was proposed and verified using in vitro and in vivo models . in the scenario of cerna interaction, genes  achieve coexpression by competing for a common pool of targeting mirnas . cerna interaction has been shown to play essential roles in the development and progression of cancers, and to potentially serve as new therapeutic targets . recent studies also revealed its role in propagating the effects of alterations in 3′ untranslated regions of genes, including single nucleotide polymorphisms and alternative polyadenylation . strength of such mirna-mediated gene crosstalk can even outperform the one achieved by direct transcriptional regulation  <cit> . in vitro and in silico investigations suggest that a balance among mirna and cerna abundance and targeting affinities is essential for optimal cerna interaction . taking into consideration the variations from high-throughput profiling , cerna interaction appears to be modulated by  the expression of bridging mirnas  <cit>  . in other words, coexpression between a pair of cernas  is optimized when its bridging mirna is expressed within a certain range , suggesting the necessity to consider mirna modulation in a systematic screening of cerna interaction.fig.  <dig> illustration of mirna-modulated cerna interaction. a illustration of cerna interaction. an increase in the expression of one cerna attracts its targeting mirnas and protects the other cerna from mirna-induced degradation. such competition leads to coexpression between two cernas in a mirna-modulated manner. b based on previous reports and the characteristics of high-throughput profiling, interaction strength between two cernas is optimized within a certain range of mirna abundance. c illustration of mirna-modulated cerna interaction. we devised a cerna inference by differential correlation analysis  to identify mirna-modulated cerna interaction pairs. for each putative cerna triplet, ceidca partitions samples based on mirna expression levels and statistically infers whether the two cernas are differentially correlated in one group compared to another




glioblastoma multiforme  is the most aggressive type of brain tumors. previous works have extensively explored the molecular alterations and heterogeneity in order to better understand its biology and develop effective prognostic biomarkers . however, 2-year and 3-year survival rates remain lower than 50% and 20%, respectively  <cit> , suggestive of the urgent need for new therapeutic strategies. gbm was one of the cancers in which the cerna hypothesis was postulated and experimentally validated  <cit> , where cerna interaction was demonstrated to play important roles in tumor initiation and progression. existing systematic methods for cerna analysis, e.g., hermes  <cit> , are mostly built based on mutual information  that requires heavy computation for statistical inference. thus, a comprehensive investigation into the functional and prognostic significance of cerna interaction on a genome-wide scale that may reveal crucial biological and clinical clues to gbm remains an uncharted territory.

addressing these needs, in the present study we devised a cerna inference by differential correlation analysis  for a systematic identification of mirna-modulated ce-pairs. facilitated by its vastly improved computational efficiency, we conducted a genome-wide analysis and unveiled the essential involvement of cerna interaction in the information flow of global gene signaling, cellular signaling, and gbm-related crucial processes. furthermore, incorporating survival data, we discovered the prognostic significance of cerna interactions among three immune response genes , which was verified in two independent cohorts. taken together, our data highlight the crucial roles of this alternative layer of gene interaction in gbm. the proposed method is broadly applicable to systematically explore cerna interaction in cancers with novel applications to regulatory biology and prognosis prediction.

RESULTS
overview of the ceidca algorithm
the study is aimed to comprehensively explore the functional landscape and prognostic significance of cerna interaction in gbm. we devised the ceidca algorithm to systematically identify cerna interaction pairs from sample-paired mirna and gene expression profiles. incorporating the findings from previous in vitro and in silico studies that cerna interaction is modulated by mirna abundance, ceidca identifies a pair of cernas  that are significantly differentially correlated with each other with changes in mirna expression levels . we defined putative ce-pair as two genes  that share at least one predicted targeting mirna . for each putative ce-triplet  we tested whether the interaction strength, measured by pearson correlation transformed to the t-domain , between i and j changes among samples partitioned by the level of m. out of simplicity, samples were stratified into high , medium , or low  expression of m . statistical significance of an inter-group change  was evaluated by a simulation-based lookup table. a ce-pair showing significantly intensified coexpression from one state of m  to another was identified as a mirna-modulated ce-pair . details of ceidca are described in the methods section .

analysis of mirna-modulated cerna interaction
in sample-paired mirna and gene expression datasets of  <dig> gbm samples profiled by the cancer genome atlas project   <cit> , we defined a total of  <dig> , <dig> putative ce-triplets  that corresponded to  <dig> , <dig> unique ce-pairs , composed of  <dig>  cernas and  <dig> mirnas. ceidca called  <dig>   significant mirna-modulated ce-triplets . among them,  <dig> % ,  <dig> % , and  <dig> %  were optimized in samples with high , medium , and low  expression of bridging mirnas, respectively . a highly interconnected cerna interaction network was constructed by merging these ce-pairs using cytoscape  <cit>  . interestingly, the network was also highly centralized; the top  <dig>  hub cernas or the top  <dig>  bridging mirnas accounted for over one-half ce-triplets . the most well-studied cerna, pten, had an overrepresented number of ce-triplets . in line with findings of previous in vitro investigations , its partner cernas were associated tumor suppressive functions, such as cell death  and apoptosis , reported by the knowledge-based ingenuity pathway analysis software .fig.  <dig> core cerna interaction network and its significance in genome-wide gene interaction. a examples to high- , medium- , and low-  mirna-optimized cerna interaction pairs. coexpression of two cernas is significantly intensified in the optimized group. b the core cerna interaction network. a total of  <dig>  core cerna triplets were identified by a stringent criterion . node size is proportional to node degree. cernas accounting for more than 1% of edges are labeled with gene symbols. highlighted in colors are cernas involved in the largest three enriched functions reported by david. c node degrees of core cernas and other genes in the genome-wide gene coexpression network. statistical significance of difference is assessed by the wilcoxon rank sum test. d proportions of core cernas and other genes appearing as hub genes  in the genome-wide interaction network. statistical significance is assessed by a fisher’s exact test. e validation of core cerna triplets in cgga datasets. interaction scores were compared between the  <dig>  core ce-triplets identified in tcga datasets and other putative triplets by the t-test




functional landscape of core cerna interactions
to further investigate the functional landscape of cerna interactions in gbm, we extracted  <dig>  core ce-triplets  by a stringent criterion . these ce-triplets were composed of  <dig>  cernas. we evaluated the role of core cerna interactions in global gene interaction. notably, they had much higher node degrees in the genome-wide coexpression network than other genes , where the network was composed of gene pairs with pearson correlation coefficient > <dig>   that includes all core cerna pairs. furthermore, a higher proportion of core cernas appeared to be hub genes, defined as the top 5% genes by degree  <cit> , in the genome-wide network , suggesting the essential roles in maximizing information exchanges of gene interactions.

interestingly, the top overrepresented cernas, aak <dig>  bsn, and sv2b , are all known to participate in cellular signaling of membrane-bound receptors or synapse . functional annotation analysis of the  <dig>  core cernas by the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery   <cit>  revealed concordant enrichments in synaptic/cellular signaling, accordingly plasma membrane , cell/synapse junction , cytoplasmic vesicle , intracellular transport , and transmission of nerve impulse  . our findings substantiate a recent report that cerna is involved in routine functions of the nervous system  <cit> , and further imply that cerna interaction, similar to other dynamic gene-gene interactions  <cit> , enables flexibility to the genome-wide interaction networks and facilitates cells to transiently respond to cellular stimulus and organize communication and signaling.

we also analyzed the involvement in physiology and disease by ipa. the core cernas were enriched in the canonical pathway of “molecular mechanisms of cancer”  and other functions, such as “tumorigenesis of malignant tumor”, “growth of tumor”, and “epithelial-mesenchymal transition of tumor” .

validation analysis of core cerna interactions
we validated the core ce-triplets identified in tcga  by an independent dataset of sample-matched mirna and gene expression profiles ; n = 64)  <cit> . we note that for cohort variability, tumor heterogeneity, and difference in profiling technologies , the validation analysis was conducted with respect to interactions scores, not examining the consistency of g
opt between the two datasets. the  <dig>  core ce-triplets showed concordantly increased interaction scores than other putative ce-triplets with respect to density functions  and cumulative distributions . our data suggest the reliability of ceidca and the stability of mirna-modulated cerna interaction among cohorts.

comparison with mi-based methods
we compared ceidca to two mi-based methods, namely smi and cmi , with respect to identified cerna triplets , cernas , and computation time. since ceidca utilizes a random simulation in the t-domain, high precision of p-values was achieved , enabling a statistically stringent inference and theoretically lowering false-positive rates. generally, results of the three methods were highly comparable . while only a moderate proportion of ceidca-reported core ce-triplets  were reported by smi or cmi, reflecting the distinct mathematical characteristics of correlation and mi in detecting cerna-cerna interactions, we noted the two methods covered up to  <dig> % of ceidca-identified cernas . the data correspond to our previous study that suggests a massive rewiring among a stably maintained set of cernas underlie cerna interaction networks in different cancer settings  <cit> . since ceidca pre-generated a lookup table for the significance of interaction scores, the evaluation of ~ <dig>  million ce-triplets cost less than  <dig>  h on a xeon x <dig> server with full 4-core  <dig>  ghz processors . however, mi-based methods, for the need to permute datasets for each cerna triplet, are computationally expensive , limiting their applications to genome-wide analyses. more general simulation comparisons regarding mi-based vs. correlation-based methods can be found in  <cit> .fig.  <dig> comparison of ceidca to two mi-based methods. the core cerna network identified by ceidca was compared to the ones by smi and cmi methods  with respect to  cerna triplets  and  cernas . significance of overlaps was assessed by fisher’s exact tests. c computation time for an inference of ~ <dig>  million putative cerna triplets




prognostic significance of cerna interactions
for each of the core ce-pairs, we compared the survival distributions between g
opt samples and others. interestingly, pairwise interactions among three immune response-related genes, irf4 − ccl <dig>  ccl22 − il2rb, and irf4 − il2rb, were found with the highest significance . the three l-ce-pairs were optimally coexpressed and associated with favorable survival in patients with low hsa-mir-34a . expression levels of ccl <dig> and irf <dig> were also associated with patients’ overall survival  . we analyzed two mrna-only datasets, gse <dig>   <cit>  and gse <dig>   <cit> , to see whether the prognostic associations were attributed to the coexpression per se among the three cernas. of note, expression levels of none of the three cernas were significantly associated with os . we designed a machine learning procedure to identify an optimized subset of samples for the three ce-pairs by iteratively including samples until the average t-domain correlation cannot be further increased . concordantly, patients with strong positive correlation among the three cernas showed significantly prolonged os . to test the convergence of our machine learning procedure, we repeated the entire learning procedure for  <dig>  times. overall, patients with strong positive correlation  showed significantly extended median os by  <dig>   and  <dig>   months . also, patients with strong correlation achieved higher estimated 2-year survival rates than the complete cohorts in  <dig> % and  <dig> % repeats. the data strongly suggest the prognostic value of modulated cerna interaction and warrant further investigations into irf4 − ccl22 − il2rb in gbm.fig.  <dig> prognostic significance of cerna interaction in gbm. a kaplan-meier curves of cerna regulatory strength, as well as expressional abundance, of three immune response genes, ccl <dig>  il2rb, and irf <dig>  of the tcga dataset. b illustration of the association between patients’ survival and the strength of cerna interaction among the three genes. in samples with lowly-expressed hsa-mir-34a, cerna interactions among the three genes were intensified and prognosis was improved. c-d kaplan-meier curves of two validation datasets. in each dataset, a machine learning procedure was performed to identify a group of samples with high average correlation among the three cernas. the procedure was repeated for  <dig>  iterations to ensure convergence. left panels, kaplan-meier curves between the optimized group and others in a representative iteration . right panels, kaplan-meier curves of individual cernas




discussion
immunotherapy is an emerging field in cancer biology and therapeutics. for the nature of the immune system to respond to cancer-specific or -associated antigens, it can be employed to attack, and even prevent, cancer cells and achieve a durable response in cancer patients  <cit> . regulatory t cells  are known to infiltrate brain tumors and preferentially accumulate in high-grade ones, such as gbm  <cit> . an investigation into gbm patients’ molecular profiles reported the association between tregs and adverse survival  <cit> . interestingly, ccl <dig> , one of the three cernas we found to jointly predict survival, is a crucial mediator of treg migration towards brain tumors  and specifically expressed in gbm   <cit> . although the other two genes in the 3-cerna signatures, irf <dig> and il2rb, are not yet functionally characterized in gbm, they play essential roles in immune responses and cancer. irf <dig> encodes interferon regulatory factor  <dig>  a member of the interferon regulatory factor family of transcription factors that are essential in interferon regulation in response to infection. the expression of irf <dig> is restricted to the immune system  <cit> . it is a critical player in the development/differentiation and the adaptive responses of b and t lymphocytes . on the other hand, il2rb  is a crucial player in t cell-mediated immune responses. it was implied to be associated with apoptosis of gbm cells  <cit>  and to participate in il- <dig> induced activation of tumor-specific gamma delta t cells  <cit> , a subset of t cells that express a unique t cell receptor and are multi-functional in cancer  <cit> . taken together with our findings, mirna-bridged crosstalk among the  <dig> immune genes is implied in cell-mediated immunity. such crosstalk may enhance cellular immune response against cancer and thus has favorable prognostic effects on gbm patients. further investigations are necessary to delineate the underlying mechanisms.

several interaction-based approaches to predict survival were previously developed. for instance, the dynamicity in protein-protein interactions was predictive of breast cancer outcome  <cit> . an association-based biomarker was proposed to distinguish patients harboring strong mirna-gene interactions from others  <cit> . the biomarker was significantly associated with patient survival in both gbm and breast cancer. recently, by incorporating a potential modulator feature, npm <dig> mutation, we proposed a prognostic predictor for acute myeloid leukemia based on the interaction strengths between several mirnas and their modulated target genes  <cit> . these reports showed the value to consider, in addition to expressional abundance, the interaction strength between genomic features for the development of prognostic markers. our discovery of the ccl22 − il2rb − irf <dig> signature illuminated the potential of cerna interaction as a novel candidate for the interaction-based biomarkers. though the signature was identified by stratifying patients according to the expression levels of hsa-mir-34a in tcga data, we note that our further analysis verified the prognostic effect of the interaction strength per se by using two independent mrna-only datasets. the finding echoes a central concept of cerna scenario that bridging mirnas serve as only “buffers” or “sponges” of protein-coding genes that execute biological functions.

cerna interaction requires the correlation between two mrnas modulated by mirna expression levels. to systematically analyze cerna interaction, hermes  <cit>  was developed by comparing the mi between a mirna and one cerna against the conditional mi given the expression profile of another cerna. although mi is a widely used measure of coexpression in genomic interaction networks  <cit> , it poses a heavy computational burden due to the permutation-based statistical inference and is limited in the application to genome-wide studies. instead, for the mathematical transformability, correlation-based methods are computationally efficient and biologically straightforward alternatives. studies have confirmed its efficiency and comparable, or even better, performance to mi-based methods in simulated and patients’ datasets  <cit> . concordantly, we showed that ceidca identified results highly comparable to those achieved by mi-based methods , while greatly improving computation efficiency and statistical stringency, identify a core set of cerna triplets from a genome-wide study. we also note that the  <dig> prognostic ce-pairs cannot be identified by the mi methods . incorporating findings from a synthetic gene circuit or mass-action modeling  <cit> , ceidca was designed based on a stratification of samples according to the expression level of a bridging mirna. out of simplicity, we set the number of groups at three . while an increase in the number of groups  equips the method the capability to identify cerna pairs with subtle changes, it may compromise sensitivity to systematic noises, statistical power, and computational efficiency. to understand the effect of this parameter on ceidca, we compared the core cerna interaction pairs identified by different settings . notably, the results seemed to be quite stable , suggestive of the robustness and wide applicability of ceidca, while computation time rose roughly linearly from  <dig>  to  <dig>  h with k.

future studies may address several limitations of this work. first, since the tcga gene expression dataset was derived by dna microarrays, cernas analyzed in this study are mostly protein-coding mrnas. however, some long non-coding rnas , such as a well-known oncogene, hotair, and pseudogenes , perform their functions, at least partially, by acting as cerna partners of crucial mrnas . such lncrna-mirna-mrna scenario was overlooked in this study. next, ceidca analyzes each of these putative triplets independently. realizing those interactions among mirnas and mrnas are highly complex in living cells, cerna triplets may be to some extent associated with each other and form higher-order cerna modules, which poses great computation burden and mathematical complexity to further investigations. future studies may, based on our findings, conduct network-based analysis to dissect higher-order graph properties among cerna triplets. furthermore, we corroborated the prognostic value of the 3-cerna signature by stratifying patients based on the average pairwise correlation. a per-sample prediction  was not developed. further studies may incorporate mathematical advances in interaction-based prediction and translate our results into a personalized biomarker. also, though we have validated its prognostic value in two independent cohorts, analysis of other large datasets is needed before it can be applied clinically.

CONCLUSIONS
this work addresses the lack of a comprehensive exploration into the functional and clinical relevance of cerna interaction in gbm. we devised a novel and efficient algorithm that integrates mirna and gene expression profiles of patients. as summarized in fig.  <dig>  by the proposed comprehensive and efficient algorithm, we showed that mirna-modulated cerna interaction is involved in synaptic transmission as well as tumor-related functions in gbm. furthermore, this is, to our knowledge, the first study to show that the interaction strength per se of three immune cernas, ccl <dig>  il2rb, and irf <dig>  is predictive of patient prognosis. overall, our findings illuminate the potential of cerna interaction in prognostication and therapeutics of the malignancy and warrant further biological and clinical investigations.fig.  <dig> summary of discoveries from this study. cerna interaction participates in crucial processes in brain, such as intercellular signaling and synaptic transmission, as well as oncogenic or tumor suppressive functions in gbm, including growth of tumor, tumorigenesis of malignant tumor, proliferation of malignant tumor, and proliferation of tumor cells. furthermore, interaction strength among three immune response genes, ccl <dig>  il2rb, and irf <dig>  is predictive of patient prognosis




