BACKGROUND
the number of known genes in atlantic salmon  is limited compared with the very large numbers known in mammals. however, the salmon is so important as an aquaculture species that a lot of effort has been put into acquiring knowledge of its genome compared to many of the other aquatic species. although only  <dig> full-length genes are listed for atlantic salmon at ncbi  <cit> , there are  <dig> 457-nucleotide sequences , many containing complete cdna sequences. the genome and biology of the atlantic salmon are complex and the genome has not been well characterised. the salmonidae species underwent a genome duplication event about 25– <dig> million years ago  <cit> . this event resulted in a tetraploid genome, but since then the salmon has been gradually returning to the diploid condition. this process is still continuing, and the salmon now has a partially tetraploid genome. although many genes have been lost after the duplication event  <cit> , the fact that regions of the genome are duplicated and almost identical does complicate the hunt for genes in this species. it means that there may be four almost identical copies of a gene in the genome, but it is an open question whether all four copies are active. furthermore, the atlantic salmon goes through a process known as smoltification as a step in its maturation. the salmon spends the first part of its life in fresh water before migrating to the ocean, where it lives until returning to rivers to spawn. smoltification  <cit>  involves synchronised morphological, physiological and behavioural changes that enable the young salmon  to survive in the ocean and to grow and migrate normally. since smoltification occurs while the fish are still in fresh water, they are pre-adapted to the marine environment. given this enormous change in both fish biology and environment, it seems reasonable to suggest that the pre-smolt expresses a different set of genes from the smolt. it is therefore important to identify the genes that are expressed both before and after the smoltification process and at each of the different developmental stages in order to obtain a complete set of genes expressed in the salmon genome. one strategy for identifying the genes expressed in specific life stages and tissues is to use expressed sequence tags or ests. these are short stretches of single pass sequences obtained from sequencing cdna  <cit> , and are widely used for gene discovery, mapping, polymorphism analysis, expression studies and gene prediction. gene discovery methods using ests include hunting for new members of gene families in the same species , for functionally equivalent genes in other species , or even for alternatively spliced forms of known genes. ests are also used to predict or refine computational predictions of the location of genes in genomic dna. recently, a lot of effort has been put into acquiring ests from atlantic salmon, and over  <dig>  est sequences , mainly from smoltified fish, have been deposited in genbank  <cit> the aim of the present study was to increase the number of ests available from pre-smolts in order to identify genes that are expressed in the early life stages of atlantic salmon. we have focused on the gills and the intestine.

RESULTS
one of the goals was to accumulate cdna libraries with large insert sizes. the average insert size was determined from  <dig> clones from each library fraction after digesting the clones with ecori/xhoi. the approximate size distribution for the libraries is given in table  <dig> 

a the numbers after the tissue type indicate when the cdna was collected from the column, the lowest numbers being eluted first. the mean insert sizes are given in the second column

b shown in base pairs

c seq. is an abbreviation of sequence

a total of  <dig> clones from each library were sequenced from the 5'direction. after basecalling and trimming of vector, contaminants and poor quality sequences, the number of sequences was reduced to  <dig> for the gills and  <dig> for the intestine. the trimmed sequences were clustered and assembled. after the combined clustering of the gill and intestine sequences, a total of  <dig> unique sequences were left, of which  <dig> were singlets and  <dig> were consensus sequences from contigs. of these,  <dig> showed similarity to known sequences after they were run through a combined blastx and blastn pipeline. a summary of the blast results is given in table  <dig>  all the sequence alignment results are accessible at the salmon genome project website  <cit>  in the libraries section . all trimmed est sequences have been submitted to genbank. the accession numbers are . the annotation of the clustered ests using go terms is accessible through links at the salmon genome project website  <cit>  in the annotation section . a shorter version is given in table  <dig> for molecular function.

a threshold for a significant hit for blastx against pdb was defined as expectation value <10-10

b threshold for a significant hit for blastx against swissprot and nr, and blastn against nr was defined as expectation value <10–15

c the number of significant hits observed in each databases

d the number of significant hits observed given as a percentage

a a selection of go categories is presented. all annotations are accessible at 

b indented terms are 'children' of the above 'parent' term.

discussion
the total number of gill and intestine clones available was  <dig>  table  <dig> shows the sampled means of the insert sizes after fractionation, which varied between  <dig> and  <dig> base pairs. cdna cloning rarely produces full-length gene products but rather products containing varying proportions of the whole sequence. 5'sequencing may overcome this problem since clustering can be used to cover larger parts of the transcripts. in this study, after trimming and quality control followed by clustering, approximately 65% of the trimmed sequences from both libraries ended up in contigs.

sequence annotation was carried out using go terms. a fairly strict criterion of e-value below  <dig>  × 10- <dig> for a significant hit was used both for blastx run against the swiss-prot and nr protein databases, and blastn against the nr nucleotide database. this rather low value was chosen to reduce the number of hits on very remote homologous genes with functions unrelated or only remotely related to the sequences in the current libraries. for blastx against the pdb database, the significance level chosen was an e-value below  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  and  <dig> or 16% of the sequences gave significant hits in this database. almost all of these showed sequence similarity above 30%, indicating that they might be suitable targets for homology modelling of protein 3d structure if the hit produces a biologically meaningful alignment.

approximately one third of the sequences gave hits when blastx was run against the swiss-prot database, and were annotated by annotation transfer from go-annotated uniprot sequences as described in section  <dig> . since we used a fairly strict criterion for a significant hit, we would argue that the derived go annotation is meaningful for a large fraction of these  <dig> sequences. we plan to use a more elaborate annotation pipeline for future work, including estimates of accuracy and sensitivity and making it possible to detect more remote homologous sequences, for example by profile-based sequence similarity searches. annotating the sequences and collecting the links to all annotated sequences in tables that correspond to molecular function, biological process, and cellular component go terms makes it possible in future studies to extract genes of interest merely by looking at the go term tables from the links at the salmon genome project website  <cit>  in the annotation section . figure  <dig> illustrates this. a researcher interested in immunology would simply go to the biological process go term table and search for 'immune response', and could then follow each of the  <dig> links to the sequences that appear to have a connection with immunology and their sequence alignment results. this will make it possible to find possibly relevant sequences much more directly, without having to browse through thousands of sequences and their associated sequence alignment data.

in the two libraries, we discovered several genes that may be involved in the smoltification process, genes involved in cell homeostasis and genes coding for hormones that may influence salmon maturation. certain genes were of particular interest, for example the glucagon-family neuropeptide precursor, tyrosine 3/ tryptophan 5-monooxygenase activities and thyroid receptor interactin protein  <dig> . in addition, five different genes related to growth factor activity were also present: granulin, neuregulin  <dig>  syntenin, bmp <dig> and pleiotrohin  <dig>  all of the above-mentioned genes are thought to play a part in the smoltification process in salmon, along with the osmoregulatory genes. however, it is possible that some of the more interesting genes involved in the smoltification process have not yet been annotated and characterised and are therefore listed as unknown. approximately 50% of the sequences gave no significant hits in the blastx-blastn pipeline. a large proportion of these gave hits with higher e-values to more remote homologous sequences, but a significant number, at least 500– <dig> sequences, are of completely unknown function at present. however, the 5' utr of fish may differ significantly from that of mammals and terrestrial organisms. this means that the failure to match 500– <dig> sequences does not confirm that the genes are unique to fish or markedly different from the coding region of transcripts of other organisms. a number of factors, including the 5'utr, may help to explain why no similarity was found for these sequences, but the unusual biology of salmon and the fact that the sequences are from pre-smolt fish may be contributory factors. pre-smolt salmon live in fresh water, and presumably different sets of genes are turned on and off in response to the two different habitats, the freshwater and the marine environment. in addition, the lack of similarity to already known sequences in other vertebrates could influence these results. although large amounts of sequence data from other species have been generated, a large fraction of the genes in higher organisms is still uncharacterised. it therefore seems likely that the lack of similarity of these ests to known genes is partly explained by the fact that many genes are still uncharacterised.

CONCLUSIONS
this work has made available approximately  <dig> sequences from pre-smolt salmon, one third of which have been annotated for function, biological process and cellular component. several hundred sequences code for proteins that show enough sequence-similarity to proteins of known structure to be suitable candidates for homology modelling. the results of this study will be a valuable resource for future studies of atlantic salmon biology since it is now possible to search for genes sequenced in salmon rather than having to use comparative data from other species.

