BACKGROUND
the information threshold  <cit>  puts a limit on the maximum amount of information that can be evolutionarily maintained by a single population of replicators. for an evolutionary process this implies that the length of genomes of replicators and the number of errors during replication  is limited. it raises the question of how a 'simple' prebiotic system can evolve towards a more complex living system. to increase the complexity of a prebiotic system, replicators which should both store information and act as an enzyme, must have been able to accumulate and pass on information correctly. to correctly transfer more and more genetic information between generations, the fidelity of replication has to improve as well. this could be done for example with specific replicase or proofreading enzymes. however, this requires an increased coding length, which cannot be maintained without these same enzymes. thus it is not possible to have a  genome without enzymes, but the evolution of enzymes would not be possible without large genomes. this is referred to as eigen's paradox  <cit> .

this paper aims to extend the context in which the information threshold is studied and its possible role in the early evolution of life. traditionally the information threshold is formulated in terms of a master and quasispecies of genotypes with a static, single-peaked fitness landscape  <cit> . these studies have been extended by taking a nonlinear genotype-phenotype mapping into account, using rna folding as a prototype example. in such systems neutral mutations play an important role, and due to this neutrality larger sequences can be maintained, but this increase is limited  <cit> . we extend these previous studies in three different directions: 1) replicators have a flexible coding structure, leading to a variable genome length and variable genotype-phenotype mapping,  the acquisition, rather than the maintenance of information is studied, and  replicators evolve within a non static environment.

the first attempt that has been proposed to cross the information threshold involved the introduction of multiple replicators  <cit> . such hypothetical replicators, later on mostly considered to be rna , could form the basis of a prebiotic ecosystem, sometimes referred to as 'the rna-world'  <cit> . most likely, the only viable solution to eigen's paradox lies in the co-existence of several different replicators, such that the information necessary for coding enzymes can be stored and transmitted by a population of co-existing smaller replicators. due to the fact that the co-existence of different species is typically considered to be an ecological problem, these approaches have been called 'the ecological solution'  <cit> . the two main models that attempt to formulate such ecological solutions to eigen's paradox are the hypercycle model  <cit>  and the metabolic system model  <cit> . however, these studies address the maintenance of a replicator-ecosystem despite mutations , rather than the generation of an ecosystem as a consequence of high mutation rates. moreover, although the original question involved the mechanism of obtaining functionality despite high mutation rates, no function beyond reproduction was incorporated in these models. here we study how a system can cope with externally defined requirements under various mutation rates . we consider the case that viable replicators can evolve functionality through either individual or population based diversity  <cit> - eg. all replicators perform all functions by themselves  or different functions are divided over different replicators, the latter being an ecosystem based solution. in other words, the ecosystem as a whole can provide a solution for the posed 'problems' in the environment. in our system these problems in the environment change over time, co-evolving with the replicators, resulting in a dynamic fitness landscape.

regarding this environment, almost all theoretical studies published so far have demonstrated that some kind of spatial structure is indispensable for the persistence and/or the parasite resistance of any feasible replicator system  <cit> . through spatial pattern formation, selection is extended from purely individual-level selection to multi-level selection. multi-level selection is considered to be a defining property of ecosystems  <cit>  and the success of evolution strongly depends on how the ecosystem is able to structure itself  <cit> . as such, our model system allows for an emergent structure on two levels: both the coding of replicators and the spatial distribution within the ecosystem.

to summarize, we study the problem of the information threshold, bearing in mind that information has to be obtained, rather than merely maintained under high mutation rates. we use a flexible coding structure at the level of individuals and in addition we allow for the evolution of ecosystem based solutions using a spatial co-evolutionary setup. we study how such a system copes with high mutation rates, ie. whether an ecosystem based solution can replace an individual based solution when the latter is not attained.

RESULTS
we study the information threshold assuming that all replicators are under physiological constraints that require the acquisition of mechanisms  to process food for survival and reproduction. replicators have to cope with their varying  environment, having different solutions for different situations . to this end we use co-evolutionary function approximation as a tool for modeling eco-evolutionary dynamics  <cit> . we develop a model-ecosystem of predators, prey and scavengers. predators and scavengers are the studied replicators and the consumption of prey acts as an analogy for coping with the environment. the environment takes the form of co-evolving numerical examples or problems . prey consists of numerical values, here . during prey replication, these values can change by mutation. coping with the environment  is defined as producing a numerical value defined by a global external function on the values of a prey  would get maximum fitness).

the genotypes of predators and scavengers are based on lisp-constructs, which allow for a flexible integration of numerical functions in a genome .

predators and scavengers observe the state variables  of prey and should respond by producing the numeric value in accordance with an externally defined function . for predators this is the exact value of the target function; for scavengers this is the value of what is left over by the predator. note that scavengers do not observe what has been eaten by predators. each generation a replicator is confronted with several prey competing with surrounding replicators  to eat it and fitness is defined proportional to the fraction of prey consumed.

the evolutionary targets used are chosen such that a solution is evolved easily by predators alone under a wide range of parameters. they differ in the absolute minimum amount of coding needed and in the composition of x, y and mixed -terms. the amount of coding is expressed in the number of elements  on a genome, referred to as length. table  <dig> lists the evolutionary targets used, the corresponding minimal coding length m, and some examples of genomes with minimal coding length for a solution. note that this minimum can only be reached by 'smart' coding. that is, coding used for different terms has to overlap. an example of overlapping terms is ) , which is shorter than  ), which uses  <dig> elements to code for the same function.

evolutionary targets with corresponding minimal coding length m needed to code for them. in the last column an example of a genome with the minimal length coding for such a full solution.

the coding and the setup of our model-ecosystem enables the possibility to find two types of solutions: individual based solutions where all possible prey can be fully consumed by a single predator and an ecosystem based solution where a solution is formed by an ecosystem of multiple replicators, namely a predator and a scavenger. simulations can be classified into three main classes: an individual based solution whereby the majority of prey are fully consumed by single predators coding for the full target function, an ecosystem based solution whereby the majority of prey are fully consumed by complementary predator-scavenger pairs which together code for exactly the target function, or no solution at all when none or only a small minority of prey is fully consumed . note that an individual based solution excludes an ecosystem based solution. however, it is possible that an individual based solution replaces an ecosystem based solution over evolutionary time.

in figure  <dig> we see a clear transition between the type of solutions found under various mutation rates. a similar pattern is seen for all functions in table  <dig>  the shift to the right occurs because of the different length of coding needed. that is, under lower mutation rates an individual based solution is evolved in almost all cases  and under increased mutation rates it becomes increasingly difficult to reach an individual based solution. at the solutions increase . these ecosystem based solutions can be found up until quite severe mutation rates, clearly beyond the range of individual based solutions. the exact transition is also influenced by the nature of coding needed for a target, as exemplified by the difference in transition for targets with minimal coding length  <dig> 

the remainder of this section is divided in two parts. first we will discuss the role of mutation rates on the information accumulation of individuals by focusing on basic genomic characteristics such as length and structure. secondly, we extend our scope by looking at the role of co-evolutionary and ecosystem dynamics and how an ecosystem based solution can arise under circumstances where individual based solutions cannot. with these results we show how flexibility in a evolutionary system can help in overcoming the information threshold.

information accumulation and individual based solutions
first we focus on the full solution of individual replicators, and therefore we study the evolutionary trajectory from the point in time where such a solution arises in the predator population. figure  <dig> shows the influence of mutation rates on the length of evolved solutions for the shortest and longest evolutionary targets, respectively. for each mutation rate  <dig> different simulations are run. the distribution of the length for the full solutions, evolved under different mutation rates is shown. note that in some cases the correct individual based solution first reached cannot be maintained due to the information threshold and is lost again. the initial genome length of the predators first to reach the evolutionary target decreases under increasing mutation rates. secondly, it is evident that  <dig> generations after the arrival of this first solution, the length of coding used by the solution becoming dominant in the population has decreased. the length of coding approaches the absolute minimum for the corresponding targets. thus the predators in the ecosystem have restructured their coding such that the same phenotype is coded for by a shorter genome. such shorter genomes tend to be more robust because of less mutations per generation. in table  <dig> an example of this streamlining of genotypes and altered genotype-phenotype mapping is shown for μ =  <dig> . after arrival of the first solution, multiple 'mutant' strains  with the correct individual solution arise in the ecosystem, all with a shorter coding for the same phenotype. these different genotypes co-exist in the population, however in the long term, the most compact coded solutions will out-compete those with a longer genome.

observed streamlining of genotypes for the phenotype of an individual based solution found in a simulation with μ =  <dig> . after the arrival of a first individual based solution of length  <dig>  the length of consecutive mutants is decreased after prolonged evolution. examples are shown of two strains leading to a solution with length  <dig> and  <dig> respectively. note that intermediate mutants are not necessarily shown.

these observations strongly suggest that, despite a strong preference for having a coding structure as short as possible, predators initially exploit more information than strictly necessary to evolve a solution. under increased mutation rates these longer solutions cannot arise or maintained anymore. thus we observe that high mutation rates decrease the degrees of freedom and thereby restrict the chance of finding an individual based solution. under severe mutation rates an individual based solution cannot be found anymore at all.

these conclusions are corroborated by results on the average time to reach the evolutionary target. figure  <dig> illustrates that under increased mutation rates it takes longer to evolve a full solution. this contradicts the expectation that a higher rate of change and a smaller search space because of smaller genomes would lead to a faster coverage of genotype space. as shown in figure  <dig> only a subset of genotypes coding for the full solution is reached . moreover, on average it takes predators longer to evolve a solution, again suggesting mutational restrictions in usable coding length.

to disentangle the role of mutation rate and genome length, and establish that it is indeed the genome length rather than mutation rates which determine efficacy, we perform experiments with an external restriction on the available genome length for replicators . as shown in table  <dig> both under low and high mutation rates it becomes increasingly difficult to find individual based solutions. the median time needed for evolving individual based solutions increases and success rate drops dramatically. assuming 'optimal' mutation rates  <cit>  would predict that predators with a restriction on length would perform better under higher mutation rates in search for an optimal rate of change. however, although the influence of both length and mutation rate cannot be disentangled completely, this is clearly not the case with present results. taking into account the decreased multiplicity of reachable genotypes coding for individual solutions as observed in figure  <dig>  we can only conclude that reachable genotype space  are restricted by high mutation rates via the genome length of replicators.

evolution of replicators with a restriction on their genome length of  <dig> and  <dig> elements respectively, compared with no restriction for μ =  <dig>  and μ =  <dig> . with restriction, replicators exceeding the maximum number of elements allowed, are considered as lethal mutants. the number of simulations which established an individual based solution are shown and in parentheses the median time to find these solutions. for each set  <dig> simulations are run with the shortest evolutionary target .

population based diversity and ecosystem based solutions
before an individual based solution has been reached, the composition of the predator population is heterogeneous. due to co-evolutionary dynamics between predator and prey, both populations become speciated. prey maximize the genotypic distance between the different sub-populations and different sub-populations of predators specialize to-wards each of these . because of the spatial embedding, predators and prey structure them-selves such that wave-like patterns arise as shown in figure  <dig>  in table  <dig> an example of co-existing sub-populations is shown, taken from a simulation with the longest evolutionary target at μ =  <dig> . within the population of prey, one sub-population evolves a high x-value and a low y-value, while in the other sub-population this is reversed. predators speciate in 'eating' a different part of prey. one sub-population feeds mostly on y , prospering on prey with a high y-value, and a predator feeding best on the x-value of prey has the opposite preference. note that this does not necessitate strict partitioning in x and y-terms of the evolutionary target.

example of evolved ecosystem based solution for the longest evolutionary target used: f = y <dig> + x <dig> + y <dig> + y * x <dig> + y <dig>  these predator-scavenger combinations can feed perfectly on all possible prey in the model universe.

scavengers, feeding on the remains of prey, also speciate during evolution, trying to have a preference opposite to the dominant predator in their neighborhood. under moderate mutation rates, predators keep evolving towards the full evolutionary target, possibly diminishing the remains of prey more and more. scavengers can keep up in such a case only by feeding on smaller parts. note that they can keep fitness, because fitness is assigned as a fraction of the remains. however, when an individual based solution evolves, scavengers loose all their functionality because there is nothing left to feed on.

only under higher mutation rates, the ecosystem based solutions become a stable evolutionary attractor. under high mutation rates the system is no longer able to evolve individual based solutions due to mutation rates and the constraints in genome length as shown above. due to the high mutation rates, predators can obtain only enough information to code just for feeding "sufficiently enough" on local prey. robustness in solving only a subset of possible prey with high local fitness is 'chosen' above high, but unstable global fitness . due to spatial pattern formation several such partial solutions can co-exist in a stable ecosystem. scavengers are able to feed on the remains of prey, resulting in a structured ecosystem based solution, as shown in figure  <dig>  despite the sub-population sizes possibly being small due to a large amount of mutants, predators and scavengers forming the correct complementary partial solutions can stabilize over time, even under high mutation rates, as shown in figure  <dig> 

finally we compare our results for acquiring information with the threshold for maintaining information  <cit> . when seeding the population with individual based solutions of the minimal coding length for the evolutionary target, these full solutions can only be sustained for mutation rates up until μ =  <dig> , μ =  <dig>  and μ =  <dig> , respectively for the targets with a length of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> elements . therefore we can conclude that the limits posed by the information threshold are even more severe for obtaining information than they are for maintaining information. moreover, individual based solutions with a longer genome  cannot persist under such severe mutation rates and the individual based solutions will be lost completely or recoded to a shorter solution. thus, by allowing for variable coding, the information threshold for obtaining certain functionality can already be alleviated by using a more compact coding.

as for the actual crossing of the information threshold , ecosystem based solutions should be able to fully consume prey under mutation rates under which individual based solutions with minimal coding cannot even persist. in figure  <dig> we show an example for the shortest target with μ =  <dig> , i.e. above μ =  <dig> , identified as the maximum mutation rate under which an individual based solution can be maintained. we observe thus a case where an individual based solution with a most compact coding  is indeed out-competed completely, and the ecosystem takes over, processing the required information and still consuming a considerable amount of prey fully each generation.

discussion
first we studied the influence of mutation rates on the evolutionary trajectory by observing how evolved individual based solutions are coded for under different mutation rates. we also looked at the structure and length of predators first reaching the evolutionary target. it has previously been observed that the information threshold restricts the amount of information that replicators can maintain under increased mutation rates  <cit> . we showed that under high mutation rates a more severe threshold restricts the required increase of information before replicators are fully functional.

for genomes with a fixed length it has been shown analytically that 'optimal' mutation rates exist  <cit> , that mutation rate itself is a selectable trait  <cit> , and that the time to reach a target increases given higher mutation rates  <cit> . moreover, for evolving towards a static target with variable genome length it has been shown that high mutation rates lead to compact coding for functionality on a genome  <cit> . here we see that in the case of flexible coding, replicators use different lengths under different mutation rates. for a fixed mutation rate per base, more length leads to more mutations per replicator and thus by adjusting the length of coding, the mutation rates per generation are altered. however, a restriction of genome length does not result in a more efficient covering of genotype-space under higher mutation rates nor in an increase in efficacy. in contrast, under lower mutation rates without length restrictions, an increase in the success rate can be related to an higher diversity of reachable genomes coding for individual based solutions. that is, an increased multiplicity of available solutions has a clear positive effect on efficacy. the possibility to generate longer genomes increases efficacy. similar results have been shown experimentally with the isolation of novel ribozymes from random-sequence rna pools, where longer random sequences increase the probability of finding complex structures  <cit> . with variable genome length it is not maximum mutation rates which increase genetic diversity as one would intuitively expect. instead, moderate mutation rates increase genetic diversity through increasing genome length and therewith enlarges evolutionary search space which in turn maximizes evolutionary efficacy. the diversity of attainable genomes, coding for an individual based solution, decreases under higher mutation rates. however, we have shown that high mutation rates lead to the persistence of more niches for replicators which are only partially functional. in contrast, recent work based on rna-like replicators has shown that a lowering in mutation rate can lead to an increase of niches  <cit> . the difference between these systems is that in our case there is a predefined set of "tasks", whereas in a rna-system the only "task" is  reproduction. when selection is solely acting on replication through interaction, high mutation rates disrupt the interaction strength within an ecosystem by dilution of the fittest sequences, preventing the formation of new species. this differs from our current system where high mutation rates maintain more niches by preventing the out-competition of multiple partial solutions  by the full solution. when not fully functional replicators are viable , replicators can suffice with lower functionality under increased mutation rates. this shows a new side of the information threshold: the impossibility of evolving replicators with full functionality leads to an increase in diversity because of the multiplicity of partly functional replicators in the system. under moderate mutation rates, spatial structuring of co-evolving populations benefits the information integration over evolutionary time in replicators  <cit> . if, however, the necessary information cannot be integrated in a single replicator, the diversity of partial solutions can be kept in the ecosystem because of this co-evolutionary nature and spatial distribution of the system.

we showed that under high mutation rates our system does switch from individual based solutions to-wards the generation of an ecosystem based solution. thus we conclude that ecosystem structuring enables the increase of the complexity despite the presence of an information threshold.

CONCLUSIONS
the coding structure of evolved replicators reveals the influence and severity of mutation rates. the information threshold not only influences the maintenance of information in the genome, but it also constrains the degrees of freedom of the evolutionary trajectory by restricting the permissible genome length. in our system, multiple 'solutions' are possible due to a complex genotype-phenotype mapping and freely evolving coding structures. however, the number of genotypes coding for a full solution which can be reached is increasingly restricted by higher mutation rates. if the length of maintainable information is limited by the information threshold, replicators can adapt their coding structure. in this way, for a given functionality the information threshold can partly be alleviated by using a different, more compact, coding. this aspect of the information threshold is of great importance for questions about the evolution of complexity. we show that in a system with such severe mutation rates that an individual based solution cannot evolve, the ecosystem can take over and still process the required information, forming ecosystem based solutions. therefore, we conclude that, when taking eco-evolutionary dynamics and flexible coding structures into account, the integration of information within the ecosystem under circumstances where individual based solutions cannot evolve, can be a feasible solution to eigen's paradox and a possible option for crossing the threshold for obtaining information.

