BACKGROUND
most organisms live in changing environments, and gene and protein networks respond dynamically to extracellular change. understanding these dynamic responses is one of the challenges of biology
 <cit> , but it is difficult to monitor changes within cells as they happen. microscopy
 <cit> , particularly when combined with microfluidics
 <cit> , offers a way forward, but requires specialized expertise and equipment.

most laboratories do, however, have access to a fluorescence plate reader. fluorescence plate readers allow multiple experiments to be run in parallel on populations of cells in a temperature-controlled environment with optional agitation. such experiments produce quantitative time-course data measuring absorbance and fluorescence. these data provide information about cell growth and, by using genetically encoded fluorescent reporters, gene expression. plate readers report only on the mean response of the population of cells and information on the variation around that mean is lost. nevertheless, such mean data is often suitable for many applications either in itself
 <cit>  or as additional data to support experiments at the single-cell level.

there are two factors that complicate the analysis of data from plate readers. first, when measuring absorbance, optical density  does not always increase linearly with the density of cells, although this effect can be corrected with a calibration procedure
 <cit> . second, the measured fluorescence, in addition to containing emissions from the fluorescent proteins under observation, also includes contamination from other sources: autofluorescence of the plate and media and autofluorescence from the cells. for weakly expressed proteins, this autofluorescence can dominate the signal from the fluorescent reporter.

developing an effective technique for separating out the signal of interest from the background autofluorescence would make it possible to collect quantitative data on the mean level of gene expression per cell over time. while various methods have been developed for escherichia coli and applied to fusions of promoters and green fluorescent protein 
 <cit> , the few published examples of measuring protein expression using a fluorescence reader in other organisms such as yeast have been limited to highly expressed proteins .

in the following, we describe a technique for quantifying plate reader experiments using spectral unmixing and show that we can capture and quantify a wide range of levels of protein expression in the budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae. budding yeast, one of the world’s most well-studied organisms, has long been a focus for high throughput experiments. we demonstrate that our method is robust enough to allow medium throughput measurements of protein levels in yeast using, for example, the gfp fusion collection
 <cit> . it therefore provides an additional type of data to complement other high throughput characterizations of gene expression, which typically consider only transcription. we illustrate the methodology with two examples: the expression of genes for galactose import and metabolism , a classic example of a eukaryotic response to an environmental change
 <cit> , and the response to a shift from a poor to a rich carbon source, where we study expression of  <dig> genes from the gfp fusion collection .

RESULTS
correcting autofluorescence following a procedure for bacteria is not appropriate for budding yeast
for experiments with escherchia coli, the fluorescence of interest is often corrected using the autofluorescence of wild-type cells as an estimate for the autofluorescence of cells expressing fluorescently tagged proteins
 <cit> . for example, to correct for autofluorescence at a particular time point, either the fluorescence per cell for the wild-type cells  was subtracted from the fluorescence per cell for tagged strains
 <cit>  or the fluorescence levels from the wild-type strain interpolated to the od of the tagged strain was subtracted from the fluorescence of the tagged strains
 <cit> .

such correction procedures, however, require that both the tagged and wild-type strains have identical levels of autofluorescence. typically, though, there are differences in growth curves between strains because of biological reproducibility, perturbations generated by the fluorescent reporter, or both. such differences are important because autofluorescence need not only depend on the size and stage of growth of the population, but also on the contents of the growth media, which changes over time as nutrients are depleted by the cells and products excreted. indeed, examining the autofluorescence of wild-type cells revealed that the autofluorescence does vary with the type and amount of sugar available, at least for budding yeast. further, for low levels of gene expression, strains with fluorescently tagged proteins could have lower fluorescence values than wild-type cells, leading to predictions, with the correction procedure of
 <cit> , of negative levels of fluorescence per cell . ideally then, we would like to correct each cell by its own autofluorescence rather than by an average value calculated from other cells in a different well in the plate reader.

spectral unmixing corrects autofluorescence
by measuring emissions at two wavelengths, rather than the usual one, we can infer the mean autofluorescence of a particular population of cells in a given well at a given time and so partly meet this goal. we use a single excitation wavelength, but measure emissions both at the wavelength appropriate to the fluorescent reporter and at a higher wavelength where most emissions come from autofluorescence. for example, the emission spectrum of autofluorescence is broader than that of enhanced gfp , and we can infer the extent of autofluorescence emissions in the wavelength used for the fluorescent reporter from the autofluorescence emissions measured at the high wavelength.

we use spectral or linear unmixing to remove autofluorescence
 <cit> . in linear unmixing, signals measured at each wavelength are assumed to be a linear combination of the different components in the sample. for the plate reader data, we assume that each measured fluorescence is a linear sum of autofluorescence and the fluorescence from any fluorescent reporter present in the cells. at each time point, we make two fluorescence measurements: excitation at  <dig> nm  and emission at both  <dig> nm  and at  <dig> nm . for all fluorescence measurements, we first remove the autofluorescence of the media and plasticware by subtracting the fluorescence of wells containing only media.

for our analysis, we assume that:  the ratio of emissions of autofluorescence at  <dig> nm to  <dig> nm after excitation at  <dig> nm is the same for the wild-type and tagged strains at a given od, and  that the autofluorescence and the fluorescence of the tagged strain combine linearly. our assumption  is weaker than assumptions of equal growth curves and equal levels of autofluorescence per cell required by the bacterial correction method. assumption , as mentioned, is standard .

for each time point, we have four measurements of fluorescence: two for fluorescently tagged strains and two for wild-type strains. the two measurements for the tagged cells are: 

  f525=g+af585=rgg+raa 

where f <dig> is the fluorescence measured at  <dig> nm and f <dig> is the fluorescence measured at  <dig> nm. the symbol g denotes fluorescence from the protein tags with excitation at  <dig> nm and measurement at  <dig> nm, and a denotes autofluorescence also from excitation at  <dig> nm and measurement at  <dig> nm. we wish to determine g. for emissions at  <dig> nm, we write the fluorescence from the tagged proteins as a product of a constant r
g
 and g and the autofluorescence as the product of r
a
 and a. the constant r
g
 is the ratio of enhanced gfp emissions at  <dig> nm to that at  <dig> nm. normalized emission of enhanced gfp at  <dig> nm is  <dig>  and normalized emission at  <dig> nm is  <dig>  implying that r
g
≃ <dig>  . this number is consistent with the same fluorescence ratio measured from cells strongly expressing an egfp-tagged protein . the two wild-type measurements only have contributions from autofluorescence: 

  f525wt=awtf585wt=raawt 

where r
a
, the ratio of the autofluorescence at  <dig> nm to that at  <dig> nm, is assumed to be the same for both wild-type and tagged cells  above), but the autofluorescence of the wild-type cells, awt, can be different from the autofluorescence of the tagged cells, a.

in essence, our method is then to estimate r
a
 from the wild-type data, eqs.  <dig>  as 

  ra=f585wtf525wt, 

and then solve eqs. <dig> for g, the signal of interest: 

  g=raf525-f585ra-rg 

where the r
a
 is calculated for wild-type data at the same od as the od of the tagged strain. dividing g by od then gives an estimate of the fluorescence per cell.

in practice, the data are often noisy  and we allow r
a
 to change smoothly with od. further, we often wish to calculate error bars on our estimates of fluorescence, g, and so need to determine how errors in estimating r
a
 propagate through to the estimation of g . finally, we present the fluorescence per cell by dividing g by the appropriate relative cell density, which we find by correcting od levels for any non-linear dependence on absolute cell density .

time-series measurements for expression of gal genes
applying spectral unmixing to measurements of six proteins in the gal pathway tagged with enhanced gfp reveals the timing of gal gene expression . cells were grown in 2% raffinose and then transferred to galactose and followed in the plate reader. the three leloir enzymes, gal1p, gal7p, and gal10p, are strongly expressed in response to galactose and convert galactose into a form of glucose
 <cit> . other gal proteins regulate the response: gal2p is a galactose permease; gal3p is a sensor of intracellular galactose and its activation promotes induction of the gal genes; and gal80p is a transcriptional repressor and  reduces gal expression. both gal <dig> and gal <dig> are only weakly induced, but their expression can still be detected .

we see  that levels of gal7p reach their maximum before levels of gal1p and gal10p, the other leloir enzymes, and the ability of gal7p to remove a toxic intermediate may explain this early expression. galactose is converted to galactose-1-phosphate, glucose-1-phosphate, and then glucose-6-phosphate before being able to enter glycolysis
 <cit> . this process must be efficient because galactose-1-phosphate is toxic to cells
 <cit> . gal7p is a uridyl transferase that converts udp-glucose and galactose-1-phosphate to udp-galactose and glucose-1-phosphate. it thus removes toxic galactose-1-phosphate, which is created by the combined action of gal1p and gal10p. having sufficient quantities of gal7p ready early may therefore prevent a deleterious build up of toxicity.

excluding the regulatory proteins, gal3p and gal80p, the permease gal2p is expressed first, which may ensure that cells take advantage of the new carbon source as quickly as possible. both negative feedback through expression of the repressor gal80p and positive feedback through expression of the sensor gal3p initiate at similar times and levels of both proteins peak approximately simultaneously. naively, gal3p expression might have been expected to precede expression of gal80p to ensure that the system is initially dominated by positive feedback generating a fast response. the strength of feedback, however, is determined not just by levels of proteins but also by binding affinities, and therefore positive feedback through gal3p could still dominate expression at the promoters of the leloir enzymes. interestingly, both regulatory proteins peak earlier for lower concentrations of galactose .

probing gene expression using the collection of gfp fusion proteins
our method is sufficiently robust that we can simultaneously assay at least tens of genes. a collection of over  <dig>  strains of budding yeast has been created
 <cit> , each of which expresses a different gfp fusion protein and that potentially allows for high throughput studies of gene expression. surprisingly the collection has been rarely used in this way, and then only for tens of genes  or with custom-built microfluidics
 <cit>  and never apparently with plate readers. we now show that our methodology combined with robotics could straightforwardly allow expression of hundreds of genes to be followed over time.

after growing  <dig> strains from the gfp collection in 3% glycerol, we transferred each strain into 2% glucose and followed expression in the plate reader . an increased availability of glucose to starved cells of budding yeast is known to cause substantial transcriptional reprogramming
 <cit> . we had two replicates of each strain, which with two further wells containing wild-type strains and four containing media, filled a 96-well plate. one strain  did not grow, but all other genes were amenable to our analysis.

a similar experiment has been performed by wang et al. <cit> , but with gene expression followed by microarrays up to one hour after the cells were placed in glucose. we used this data to select our strains: those with the largest positive or negative changes in mrna levels relative to their median level and that were in the gfp collection. to quantify the change in mrna levels, we used the difference between levels at  <dig> and  <dig> minutes after exposure to glucose normalized by the median level of mrna for that gene .

in general, this measure of change in mrna based on the microarray data was a poor predictor of the dynamics of the corresponding protein , in agreement with conclusions drawn from proteomics
 <cit> . although all  <dig> genes that had decreasing levels of mrna also had decreasing levels of protein , only one out of the  <dig> genes with increasing levels of mrna had increasing levels of protein : the vast majority of genes had falling levels of protein. we emphasize though that our experiment followed cells for almost  <dig> hours whereas the microarray experiment ran for  <dig> hour and that the cells stopped growing after about  <dig> hours when the cell density, as measured by od, flattened. reflecting this loss of growth, expression from many genes levels off around  <dig> hours .

genes with decreasing levels of mrna do typically have high levels of proteins, at least initially , indicating that these proteins are potentially required for growth on glycerol but not for growth on glucose. indeed, the hexokinases, hxk1p  and glk1p  are induced by non-fermentable carbon sources and repressed in glucose
 <cit> . further, acs1p , an acetyl-coenzyme a synthetase, ach1p , an acetyl coenzyme a hydrolase, ald3p , an aldehyde dehydrogenase, and pdc6p , a pyruvate decarboxylase, have been reported to have their expression repressed in glucose
 <cit> , as has cat8p , an activator of a variety of genes under non-fermentative growth
 <cit> .

where expression has been investigated, our data largely support previous studies. they are consistent with the expectations for levels of pgm2p , phosphoglucomutase, which should rise as glucose falls
 <cit> , for hsp30p , a heat shock protein present in stationary phase
 <cit> , and for glc3p , glycogen branching enzyme, whose transcription peaks when glucose is exhausted 
 <cit> . nevertheless, we do not see evidence of the expected induction during late exponential phase of gph <dig> 
 <cit> , a glycogen phosphorylase.

CONCLUSIONS
we have introduced a new method to quantify protein expression that uses plate reader measurements of emissions at two wavelengths and spectral unmixing to correct for autofluorescence. our approach uses linear unmixing and is similar in spirit to others that have been proposed to solve the problem of autofluorescence during flow cytometry
 <cit> . while we have considered just one fluorophore, the methodology could readily be applied to samples with two or more
 <cit> .

our method allows medium throughput measurements of gene expression through resources, such as the collection of gfp-protein fusions in budding yeast
 <cit> . protein levels from the expression of hundreds of genes can be followed over tens of hours. although other approaches have been applied to bacteria
 <cit> , these methods require that the growth curves of a wild-type and all tagged strains are identical and consequently do not scale to hundreds of strains with different tagged genes, which will not all have the same growth curves. the work in bacteria, though, used gfp-promoter fusions rather than gfp-protein fusions, and promoter fusions may perturb growth rates less .

time-series data describing the mean behaviour of a typical cell in population of cells is ideal for testing mathematical models of cellular behaviour based on ordinary differential equations
 <cit> , and our analysis allows such data to be generated from plate readers. further, and unlike other methods, we provide error bars on the fluorescence per cell that combine both measurement error and the errors generated by correcting for autofluorescence. such error bars are invaluable when fitting models to data
 <cit> .

high throughput studies of gene expression typically focus on levels of mrna, but levels of mrna need not correlate with levels of protein
 <cit> . our methodology combined with strain collections such as the gfp fusion collection will allow complementary data at the level of proteins to be gathered using standard laboratory equipment. this data will increase our understanding of physiological change and cellular decision-making because it is largely proteins, not mrna, that enact such responses.

