BACKGROUND
genetic markers accurately distributed throughout a genome are pivotal to the success of association mapping, marker-assisted breeding , map-based cloning, and studies relating to genome structure and function. single nucleotide polymorphisms  are the most abundant type of dna variation currently used as genetic markers  <cit> . snp assays directly interrogate the sequence variation, reducing genotyping errors compared to assays based on size discrimination or hybridization. snp assays are also amenable to high-throughput technologies, making them an excellent tool for use in modern genomics research.

advances in sequencing technology have enhanced genome-wide snp discovery, and snp platforms have been developed for a number of diploid species. these resources have enabled comprehensive genetic analyses in barley  <cit> , rice  <cit> , maize  <cit> , and soybean  <cit> , including studies on diversity and population structure, comparative genomics, and qtl identification  <cit> .

as with snp discovery methods, snp genotyping technologies have proliferated in recent years, with available platforms utilizing mass spectroscopy  <cit> , direct sequencing, fluorescence detection, and microchip hybridization  <cit> . each technology has advantages and limitations. for example, the widely utilized taqman® assay has a high sample success rate, with excellent repeatability and cluster separation  <cit>  but requires fluorescence-labeled probes, making the assay cost prohibitive for large numbers of assays. the illumina goldengate assay  <cit>  is also widely used, but limited to allele differentiation, and is cost-effective only for a large number of snps run in a single parallel assay. a practical and more flexible alternative may be available using amplicon melting analysis in conjunction with real-time pcr  <cit> . this method uses unlabeled primers and interrogates the entire amplicon, providing an efficient snp genotyping system in terms of reagent cost, throughput, and data production.

although direct detection of sequence variation is robust and accurate, the requirement of sequence information for snp discovery has been an obstacle in complex uncharacterized genomes with limited funding, including cultivated oat . current-generation roche  <dig> pyrosequencing now allows cost-effective de novo sequencing and assembly with excellent depth and coverage, low error rates, and rapid output  <cit> . novaes et al.  <cit>  sequenced transcriptomes from six tissue types of seven eucalyptus grandis  families using  <dig> technology. the sequencing effort generated  <dig> mbp of expressed sequence that assembled into  <dig>  contigs. comparison of individual reads with a consensus assembly detected  <dig>  putative snps. these results demonstrate that current-generation transcriptome sequencing can overcome obstacles in crops with sparse sequencing resources; however, additional work is needed to apply these high-throughput snp-discovery approaches to polyploid plant genomes.

utilization of next-generation sequencing for snp discovery requires significant data management and analysis of sequence information. a system for handling data complexity has been developed for pine  <cit> , and could serve as a model for snp mining in other species. the method runs on a unix/linux platform written in perl, using phred for base calling, and phrap and probconsrna for sequence alignment. individual alignments are converted to fasta files and aligned to an overall consensus. snps are called using a customized weka classifier package and validated manually with phrap. the hybrid program increased the speed and accuracy of snp calls.

effective snp discovery in complex genomes would require additional analysis to consider duplicate loci and to identify and eliminate pseudo-snps produced by misassembly of paralogous and homoeologous sequences inherent to polyploid genomes. for example, cultivated wheat, including common wheat  and durum wheat , has been the subject of intense genetic investigation, but snp discovery and assay development have not kept pace with other species of similar importance . a recent report by akhunov et al.  <cit>  demonstrated the feasibility of using the illumina goldengate assay for snp development in both tetraploid and hexaploid wheat genomes, but also underlined the complications presented by multiple targets in polyploid genomes. although gene duplication is frequent even in diploid genomes  <cit> , redundant loci are far more prevalent within polyploid genomes, complicating the discrimination of haplotypes and allele ratios  <cit> . complications may also arise if polymorphisms are discovered through transcriptome analysis, since the transcriptome only represents copies of expressed alleles. for example, adams et al.  <cit>  showed that homoeologous genes in cotton produced various levels of gene silencing, with expression biased in different genes and tissues. if not accounted for, these homoeologous gene sets could distort and prevent marker development in regions with subgenome homologies.

genome assembly will be especially complicated in cultivated oat, where partial homoeology, numerous chromosomal rearrangements, and cis- and trans- sequence duplication exist within the genome. oat research is also handicapped by a lack of dna sequence information. genbank holds only a few thousand ests, most of which are from a limited number of genotypes and tissues  <cit> .

several attempts have been made to develop good marker resources in oat. microsatellite technology has produced several hundred oat markers  <cit> ; however, the number of robust markers available for routine laboratory use is limited  <cit> . recently, a high-throughput marker array based on dart technology was developed for cultivated oat  <cit> . these markers have quickly become the marker of choice for the oat community; however, efficient and repeatable use of this technology has thus far been limited to a single service provider, and the marker produces a dominant polymorphism which does not allow discrimination of both alleles at a locus. the lack of numerous, easily assayed, and co-dominant markers remains a major barrier in oat genetics research. whole-genome snp discovery is, therefore, a high priority to advance genetics research in this complex genome.

here, we report a method for high-throughput snp discovery in cultivated oat, a species with a large, complex, and uncharacterized genome. specific objectives were 1) to develop genotype-specific transcriptome libraries from four cultivars, 2) to mine snps by comparative alignment of transcriptome data, 3) to validate snps with new-generation melt curve analysis, 4) to determine putative snp positions on the current ot linkage map, and 5) to utilize the snp loci to study genetic diversity in a panel of oat germplasm.

RESULTS
rna extraction
mean quantities of rna included  <dig> μg from shoot tissue,  <dig> μg from roots,  <dig> μg from pistillate structures, and  <dig> μg from mature embryos . individual tissue samples were pooled within a genotype, yielding, on average,  <dig> μg rna from each of the four oat genotypes.

roche  <dig> gs-flx sequencing and contig assembly
read depth and coverage were greatest for tam o- <dig>  followed by ogle <dig>  hifi, and gem. sequencing runs generated between  <dig>  and  <dig>  reads per genotype . approximately 80% of reads assembled into contigs, with a mean of  <dig>  contigs per genotype and total contig length ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mb. individual contig size ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> bp, with an overall mean of  <dig> bp and mean sd of  <dig>  average transcript coverage for the four genotypes ranged from  <dig> × to  <dig> ×, with a mean of  <dig> ×.

of the contigs formed from the four germplasm accessions, matches < e- <dig> to the uniprot database by blastx numbered  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> for cvs. gem, hifi, ogle, and tam, respectively . contigs were categorized by go molecular, biological, and cellular terms and the gene classes in common to all cultivars ranged from  <dig> to 88% .

in silico snp detection and assay development
contig assemblies from tam sequence reads were most numerous , and were therefore used as the reference assembly  for in silico snp detection. comparison of genotype-specific reads with the ra indicated that 61% , 40% , and 50%  of the ra were covered by contigs from ogle, gem, and hifi, respectively. the snp screening pipeline was based on re-assembly of reads from each genotype against the ra using roche gs reference mapper software, identification of all snp-containing contigs, and elimination of those not meeting a set of criteria. the first step was the elimination of polymorphisms identified within the tam re-assembly. although these could be sequencing errors, they would interfere with clear identification of other snps. of the  <dig>  reference contigs,  <dig>   were eliminated due to insertion-deletion  polymorphism and  <dig>   contigs were removed because of ambiguous base calls . when comparing the remaining  <dig>  reads to the ra,  <dig>   were removed based on indels, and  <dig>   were removed based on insufficient read depth . the greatest attrition in candidate snps, however, was based on snp conservation between reads of a single germplasm . in this case,  <dig>   in silico snps were rejected. this conservative in silico snp selection method produced  <dig>  candidate snp loci  for assay development, of which  <dig>   interrogated snp variation between a single genotype and the ra, and  <dig>  and  <dig>  interrogated variation between the ra and two or three genotypes, respectively.

in this study, the class containing snp variations between all three genotypes and the ra  was chosen to mine snps for assay development. this subset was chosen to maximize mapping efficency in the ot population and to identify a small representative cross section of loci. of these,  <dig> contigs were eliminated because they contained multiple snp targets within a  <dig> bp region, which could be problematic for successful assay development. sequences from the remaining  <dig> contigs were imported into the batchprimer <dig> v <dig>  software  <cit> . a total of  <dig> candidate snp assays were designed, of which  <dig> snps representing  <dig> unique ra contigs were selected for validation.

snp assay validation
the  <dig> assays selected to interrogate previously described snp loci were validated in ogle and tam and the  <dig> recombinant inbred lines of the ogle × tam  population  <cit> . sixty-seven primers  generated a robust reaction between the parents, with  <dig> primers producing clear reactions across the ot progeny. of these, four revealed a high proportion  of heterozygous genotype calls. these were not considered markers because the heterozygous class could indicate a mixture of alleles at two different loci. the remaining  <dig> primers yielded bi-allelic reactions with minimal segregation distortion  and were added to the ot linkage map. forty-four markers mapped to  <dig> linkage groups and one fragment group, with four markers remaining unlinked . in general, snp map positions correlated with previous marker density, with more snp markers mapping to larger or more densely-mapped linkage groups.

a linkage group assignment is based on appending new ssr loci to the existing ot linkage map  using map manager qtx.

b sr = segregation ratio, calculated as the quotient of o/t allele frequencies within the population.

diversity analysis
the  <dig> snp markers used for diversity analysis produced  <dig> alleles, an average of  <dig>  alleles per marker, suggesting a high frequency of allelic variation. this variation was categorized as  <dig> alternate snp alleles, and  <dig> non-snp alleles, including  <dig> insertions or deletions,  <dig> probable heterozygotes, and  <dig> null alleles. although all markers except ra c14852_ <dig> were multi-allelic, supplementary alleles were confined primarily to non-sativa species . frequent allele variants were also observed in cultivars kangaroo and ci4706- <dig>  genotypes that represent unique origins, and likely unique genetic backgrounds, within this study . indels and heterozygous genotypes were less common in other accessions.

cluster analysis separated genotypes primarily according to genome constitution, geographic origin, and genetic ancestry . diploid species were genetically distinct: a. eriantha  diverged at the first node and the a. strigosa accessions  were disjoined from the cladogram. the remaining  <dig> genotypes separated into two major clades, with much of the cluster separation correlating with ancestry. for example, cultivars ajay and maverick, which share a clade, are derived from the same breeding program, and pedigrees of both genotypes include otana, represented on a different branch within the clade. terminal clades of cultivars ogle and gem, and sun ii and assiniboia, are similarly explained: in both pairs, one genotype is prominent in the pedigree of the other . likewise, ba 13- <dig> is a genetic derivative of # <dig>  <cit> . other relationships appear to be influenced more by geographic origin. the two a. sterilis genotypes diverged; however, the accession from morocco clustered with the two moroccan accessions of a. magna. genotypes representing a unique geographic origin, such as cultivars asencao and kangaroo, tended to branch independently.

a syn. a. maroccana

b domesticated a. magna 

snp sequence validation
of the twelve primers with sequenced amplicons, seven yielded additional variations beyond what was expected from the in silico data: more than one base was polymorphic in one of the two cultivars . since the additional variations were rare and not consistent across all reads, problems might have been due to sequencing or pcr aberrations rather than actual sequence polymorphism. an alternate explanation is that the  <dig> sequencing technology, which was used to discover new oat ests, has been associated with homopolymer errors. our filtering methods, which excluded most in-del polymorphisms, may have excluded these instances when in fact they were real variants.

discussion
high-throughput snp discovery, a touchstone of modern genomics, has traditionally relied on substantial sequence data and until recently has been considered impractical for uncharacterized species, especially those with large or complex genomes. complexities in the oat genome include paralogous and orthologous gene duplication, chromosomal rearrangements, and polyploidy. to address these difficulties, we developed a strategy integrating current-generation roche  <dig> cdna sequencing and contig assembly with novel bioinformatics, allele-calling techniques, and hrm validation .

yields of rna varied by tissue type and genotype, with variation introduced by tissue morphology and partitioning of shoot/root tissue mass in developing seedlings. thus, mature embryo-derived rna is represented at a three-fold level compared to root-derived rna, with intermediate levels obtained from shoots and pistillate structures. although tissue representation in these samples is not identical, the rna ratios could allow backward extrapolation for research applications where tissue origin is a factor.

variation in total rna quantities did not appear to affect sequencing yields. tam had the least amount of rna, but the largest number of sequencing reads and greatest total contig length. however, tam was the first library to be sequenced, and was used to calibrate optimal read numbers for the remaining genotype libraries. the increased read depth and coverage of tam qualified this library as a reference genotype for sequence alignment and snp discovery.

the use of non-normalized cdna libraries resulted in substantial cost savings, allowing resources to be directed toward greater read depth and largely compensating for the tendency toward abundant transcripts. additionally, the use of non-normalized libraries retained data that would be required for transcript quantification. this information, coupled with knowledge of rna ratios derived from each tissue type, could be useful in gene expression studies, making the sequence information from these libraries valuable for a wide array of downstream research.

contigs assembled from tam reads were used as the reference assembly. since tam was one of the mapping parents used for validation, we were able to design snp assays effectively with a high probability of success. without using a reference assembly, many more candidates could have been incorporated erroneously into the initial design, including those categorized as ambiguously polymorphic. furthermore, the use of a composite reference assembly could introduce additional ambiguities, since homologous loci from different cultivars would occasionally assemble into separate contigs. alternatively, the other cultivars could be used incrementally as reference assemblies to interrogate additional loci that are absent in the first reference assembly, but this would require subsequent removal of duplicate loci. differentiation between paralogous sequences is mainly accounted for by the parameters of the assembly, which were apparently relaxed enough to exclude non-allelic sequences from individual contigs. screening low- and high-stringency assemblies for single-copy genes can help gauge the ability to successfully assemble known gene sets.

proportions of snp candidates removed during in silico snp selection provided insights into specific phases of the snp selection pipeline. within the ra, 5% of contigs were removed due to indel polymorphism, suggesting a low rate of misassembly. sequence quality was of greater significance: 25% of contigs were removed from the ra on account of base call ambiguity. when comparing alternate reads to the ra, 14% of contigs were removed due to indels; however, since indels were not relevant to this study, conservation within or between genotypes was not compared and thus the proportion based on misassembly is unknown. insufficient read depth eliminated 13% of contigs, indicating adequate depth of coverage in 87% of reads and highlighting the suitability of this technology for characterization of large and complex genomes. the greatest attrition, accounting for 55% of all in silico snps, was caused by lack of snp conservation between sequence reads of a single genotype. these ambiguities were collectively due to misassembly, which is likely to be minor based on the rate within the ra, and to sequence redundancy caused by gene duplication and subgenome homologies.

systematic differentiation of duplicate and homoeologous loci is beyond the scope of this paper and would require sequence-based analysis or comparison of expression differences within genes. however, the substantial number of snps that were eliminated due to within-genotype variation does underscore the complexity intrinsic to polyploid genomes, and the necessity to account for this complexity in snp development protocols. previous efforts in oat marker development have always led to large proportions of ambiguous markers and/or low success rates  <cit> . thus, the necessity to be selective in this work is not a surprise, but rather, an important opportunity in quality control. the recognition of subgenome homology and duplicate loci represents a fundamental challenge to in silico sequence analysis, but one which could facilitate efficient development of robust markers and establishment of tools for accurate subgenome dissection in species with large and complex genomes.

the large proportion of robust assays produced in this study, coupled with the clean placements of loci on the ot map and logical cluster resolution of the diversity panel, provide compelling evidence that the pipeline presented here is a useful method for global snp discovery. however, the snp assay validation and direct sequencing suggested that sequence polymorphism across genotypes did not consistently reflect the exact snp identified by in silico methods. all snps were expected to follow a pattern where ogle, gem and hifi contained identical alleles that differed from tam. in additional file  <dig>  it is evident that almost half of the snps used in diversity analysis did not follow this exact pattern. this probably results from a variety of reasons: there could be variation in the genotypes used for the assay, the hrm assay may occasionally identify a non-target polymorphism, and the original sequence data may contain errors. errors may also have been introduced during sequencing of the pcr amplicons, or through the preparatory process of cloning and purification  <cit> .

application of high-resolution melt analysis facilitated confirmation of informative polymorphism . amplicons not corresponding to expected genotypes were easily discriminated based on the visual interface, a feature that provided ancillary information such as amplification of more than one fragment per genotype, rate and intensity of amplification, and presence of insertions and deletions within the amplicon. in the present study, this information was used to study sequence conservation across avena genotypes. using hrm, we have seen conservation within expressed genic regions of cultivated oat germplasm, and occurrence of indels in related avena species. these results suggest that hrm is the technology of choice to study the evolutionary ancestry of snp loci.

although the primer regions were frequently conserved even across 'wild' avena species, considerable diversity in amplicon sizes occurred due to insertions and deletions within the amplified fragment. these additional alleles allowed dissection of the diversity panel, with cluster separation indicated primarily by genetic ancestry and genome similarities. unlike wheat, diploid predecessors of tetraploid and hexaploid oat have not been identified, and plasticity within genomes makes it unlikely that diploid ancestors will ever be recognized unequivocally, since extant diploids have likely diverged since oat polyploidization. however, the relationships of non-sativa genotypes within this study provide insight on the structure of genomes present in these species. the diploid species, a. strigosa  and a. eriantha  diverged from both tetraploid and hexaploid genotypes. avena eriantha clustered with a major clade, although on an independent branch; however, both a. strigosa genotypes were disjoined from the dendrogram, suggesting dissimilarity of this genome with the a genome in tetraploid and hexaploid oat species. this result corroborates previous studies, which showed more frequent chromosomal rearrangements in the a genome, and less a-genome homology between oat species of different ploidy levels  <cit> . the tetraploid a. magna species  were clustered independently, between two major clades, while a. insularis  clustered within a clade comprised of hexaploid genotypes , suggesting greater similarity of these genomes with the corresponding genomes of cultivated oat. although the two a. sterilis  accessions were separated, both clustered with other hexaploid genotypes, likewise indicating similarity of the genomes.

morphological and cytogenetic studies have suggested that a. insularis, rather than a. magna, is a probable tetraploid ancestor to cultivated oat, largely due to c-genome variations  <cit> . recent studies in a. magna have provided further evidence for a divergent c genome, using patterns of minor allele clustering to define genome origin of individual linkage groups and to establish genome relationships within avena species . given the divergence of the c genome, the sequence similarity and reassortment within the a and d genomes, and the resulting tendency to assemble composite ad contigs, it seems likely that a disproportionate number of ad snp loci were removed due to misassembly, filtering bias, or redundant loci. thus, the c genome could be overrepresented in these snp markers. in genetic map construction, this bias would result in seven more densely-populated linkage groups, an outcome which is suggested, but not confirmed, with our limited data . future work with large-scale marker development and mapping, and physical anchoring with monosomic oat hybrids, should help to resolve this question.

further validation of this marker development approach was provided by the linkage map positions of markers polymorphic in the ot population. considering the small sample size, snp markers showed remarkable coverage, mapping across  <dig> of the  <dig> existing linkage groups. additionally, the proportion of snp makers mapping to the framework provides internal evidence for mapping accuracy of the markers.

several groups of snp markers were derived from a single contig . of these, two pairs mapped to the same locus, likely representing haplotypes which differ at more than one snp. three pairs mapped to different loci on the same linkage group. although separate map positions were not predicted for these markers, independent snp loci with a shared contig origin could represent sequence duplication within the chromosome, a prevalent occurrence within the oat genome  <cit> . more predictable were groups of snps representing the same contig but mapping to different linkage groups. this may result from interlocus variation that was confounded with allelic variation in the in silico discovery process, and it underscores the need to validate all in silico-derived snps through mapping. although this adds complexity to the process, the characterization of related loci can be useful in the discovery of alternate disease-resistance alleles or epistatically-interacting genes, and may help to define homoeologous relationships between oat chromosomes. as an example, previous work has suggested association of multiallelic ssr map positions and interacting disease resistance loci as a method for identifying potential homoeologous chromosomes  <cit> . in that work, ssr alleles derived from the same primer or sequence were mapped to different linkage groups. of particular interest were two pairs of linkage groups which appeared to represent homoeologous chromosomes: ot_32_ <dig> and ot_ <dig>  and ot_ <dig> and ot_ <dig>  which contain alternate alleles of known resistance genes. similar linkage group associations were identified using groups of snp markers derived from the same contig. for example, snp loci from ra c <dig> mapped to lg_ <dig> and lg_ <dig>  linking closely to the respective alternate qtl and homoeologous thaumatin-like protein  loci  <cit> . a less direct connection was observed using a combination of ra c <dig> and ra c12516: loci from ra c <dig> mapped to ot_32_ <dig> and ot_ <dig>  and loci from ra c <dig> mapped to ot_ <dig> and ot_ <dig>  taken together, these shared contig sequences could suggest homoeologous chromosome representations from the three oat genomes. other data points potentially obscure the data, such as ra c <dig>  which mapped to ot_ <dig> as well as ot_32_ <dig> and ot_ <dig>  nonetheless, the putative correlations are compelling and warrant future research to confirm these identities and establish other possible homoeologous relationships.

CONCLUSIONS
the snp discovery and validation pipeline presented in this study has been shown to be an effective method for identification of snp markers in oat, a species with a complex and poorly-characterized genome. these markers had a high assay validation rate and proven utility in a variety of applications. in this study, we provide evidence that interrogation of snps from the same contig might allow delineation of homoeologous chromosomal relationships between genomes. additionally, interrogation of snp loci with hrm revealed a potential application for studying the evolutionary ancestry of the loci. overall, this work provides the first set of oat-based snp markers, and a pipeline for large scale development of a much-needed genomic resource. impacts of this work will be seen in areas of qtl and association mapping, and studies of genome structure and evolution, leading to the accelerated improvement of oat through marker-assisted breeding.

