BACKGROUND
array comparative genomic hybridization  is a method used to detect segmental dna copy number alterations and is widely used to discover chromosomal aberrations in cancer and other genetic diseases  <cit> . in this method, differentially labeled genomic dna samples are competitively hybridized to chromosomal targets, and the copy number balance between the two samples is reflected by their signal intensity ratio. numerous array cgh platforms exist; these vary in the type of elements present on the array and their corresponding coverage of the human genome. with the development of high resolution, genome wide arrays, tens of thousands of loci can be evaluated for copy number status, facilitating the high throughput search for genes potentially involved in pathogenesis. this has allowed the identification of discrete regions of alteration that may have been missed by traditional cytogenetic methods and has proven to be a useful platform for exploring the underlying genetic basis of cancer  <cit> .

with the increasing utilization of array cgh, it has not only become important to establish standards for data deposition, but to develop tools to facilitate public access and to ease mining of available data. currently, the national center for biotechnology information  gene expression omnibus  repository  <cit>  and european bioinformatics institute  arrayexpress  <cit>  provide storage for array cgh data, but these databases have been largely designed for gene expression microarrays. although these sites support visualization of previously analyzed gene expression profiles, there are limited tools available for direct mining and analysis of array cgh data. hence, there is a need for forums specific to array cgh data. recently, attempts have been made in making a database primarily of lower resolution array cgh data  <cit> . however, with the accumulation of high density array data generated with diverse technology, the viewing of array data has become a bioinformatics challenge, especially when the integration of multiple datasets from different platforms is required. therefore, a central database with analytical software tailored specifically for analyzing and visualizing different types of high resolution array cgh data would greatly facilitate data mining.

in this study we have created a database consisting of high-resolution, whole-genome array cgh profiles for nearly  <dig> commonly used cancer cell lines profiled on four different array platforms, which have been instrumental in biochemical and pharmacogenetic studies. moreover, we have developed a user friendly, web-based java application called the system for integrative genomic microarray analysis  for comparative analysis of multiple genomes.

RESULTS
cell-line collection
we have assembled a collection of  <dig> array cgh profiles, representing  <dig> distinct cell lines profiled on at least one of the four array cgh platforms . moreover,  <dig> different cancer tissue origins and  <dig> distinct cancer types are represented in this database, resulting in the assembly of a wide spectrum of genomes in this repository  . significantly,  <dig> of the  <dig> cgh profiles are unpublished raw data which is now made public.

main functionalities of sigma
in order to increase the utility of this collection, a significant component of sigma is the web-based application which allows for the user-friendly mining of this dataset. four major types of functionalities are offered by sigma:  interrogation of a single sample,  visualization and analysis of a single group of samples,  comparative analysis of two groups of samples, and  integration of data from multiple platforms .

visualization and interrogation of a single genome
the first function we discuss is the ability to view a single high resolution array cgh profile at multiple magnification levels. the major utility of this function is to display the underlying genomic architecture of a cell line, so that genetic features can be considered in experimental interpretation. for example, a whole genome karyogram of lung adenocarcinoma cell line h <dig> profiled on the smrt array platform . from this image, we see many changes such as the loss of the 3p arm as well as segmental changes in chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  specifically, we can select chromosome  <dig>  and view that separately, then zoom into the region of interest and visualize it in finer detail . users can then highlight or place boundary lines in this region and query for which genes are located within the region of interest.

subsequently, using the interval search option, users can retrieve the genes which are located in a desired region and have the option to query commonly used biological databases such as ncbi mim, ncbi gene, ncbi pubmed and the ucsc genome browser. for example, if we look at band 8q <dig>  , we can highlight the region and search the interval for which genes it contains. when we invoke the region search and retrieve only genes curated by refseq, we see there are  <dig> genes in the amplicon. if the user selects a particular gene, options to link out to the above mentioned biological databases become available. the utility of this function is to facilitate a direct connection from experimental findings to known, relevant information. moreover, the ability to interrogate for specific genes and regions can be done for any types of the analysis outlined .

multiple genome comparison and mining across tumor types
a common research question is to look across a series of samples with common phenotype to identify recurrent genetic changes, for example comparison of lung adenocarcinomas . with the spectrum of samples warehoused in sigma, such a query can be performed across multiple cancer types. for example, the alignment of a set of samples representing  <dig> different cancer types revealed common amplification of the myc oncogene locus , while the epidermal growth factor receptor  locus is amplified only in a subset of samples .

recurrent alterations detected in one group of samples can be compared against those in another group, for example, the comparison of lung squamous cell carcinoma  with cervical sqcc . the strategy for comparison, for example the overlay of frequency plots derived from two groups of profiles, has been described elsewhere  <cit> .

simultaneous visualization of data from multiple platforms
cross platform comparison is essential to the multi-dimensional descriptions of a genome. here, we have included a feature in sigma to allow users to view multiple platforms of data simultaneously. we use the breast cancer cell line, mcf <dig>  to illustrate this functionality. data from four different array cgh platforms were available publicly: smrt array, stanford cdna microarray, affymetrix 10k snp array and the affymetrix 100k snp array. figure 4a illustrates the cross platform display of chromosome  <dig>  while figure 4b shows the variable density of coverage by these four commonly used platforms.

integrative visualization of dna copy number and methylation
one of the novel features we have provided is the integrative visualization of copy number alterations with dna methylation status. the major premise in studying copy number alterations at the dna level is that these are the primary changes involved in driving changes in gene expression. though gene dosage variation may be responsible for expression changes, alteration in dna methylation pattern also contributes significantly to regulating gene expression. recently, methods for global methylation analysis to measure aberrant dna methylation status across tumor genomes have been developed  <cit> . wilson et al  compared methylation patterns with copy number profiles in lung cancer cells. utilizing genomic and epigenetic data from this study for the h <dig> lung cancer cell line, we illustrate a parallel display in sigma. figure  <dig> shows a large segmental copy number gain spanning 1q <dig>  to 1q <dig>  with corresponding hypomethylation, localized precisely to 1q <dig>   <cit> . significantly, both copy number gain and decreased methylation can elevate gene expression. the s <dig> calcium binding protein a <dig>  gene within this region has been previously shown to be over-expressed in lung cancer  <cit> . it is readily apparent of the value of integrative studies examining aberrant dna methylation and genomic copy number. with increased prevalence of studies of whole genome methylation, this feature will be of greater importance.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed an application for the integrative cross platform analysis of array cgh data. the sigma application facilitates consolidation and structuring of diverse sources of array cgh data into a repository that is accessible with a new easy-to-use built-in web-based analytical application. the launch version contains data for  <dig> array cgh profiles, representing cancer cell lines of over  <dig> different types of tissue. the ability of sigma to incorporate multiple array cgh platforms facilitates the archiving of array cgh data from future publications, regardless of current or future array platform used. though currently sigma's architecture facilitates the direct mining of genomic and epigenomic data, this can be easily adapted, and not limited to, high resolution genetic and gene expression surveys.

