BACKGROUND
the applications of genome-scale metabolic modelling have increased over recent years, as have the number of metabolic models available and the diversity of organisms that such reconstructions cover  <cit> . traditional approaches to analysing such models have focused on constraint-based modelling, including widely used techniques such as flux balance analysis   <cit> . fba relies upon specification of an objective function that the cell is assumed to optimise. objective functions can cover a range of cellular objectives  <cit> , such as maximisation / minimisation of atp consumption, but frequently  take the form of an assumed “biomass” function; a hypothetical reaction that mimics cell growth rate  <cit> . such a biomass function is used to account for the flow of materials that are necessary for building new cells, and is commonly required in constraint-based models even when maximising variables other than growth rate.

maximisation of biomass yield is not generally considered a valid principle in microbiology  <cit> ; however, it is commonly assumed to be the optimality criterion driving the evolution of microorganisms  <cit> . the premise is that an organism that acquires and/or redistributes resources to outgrow its competitors will be in the best position to survive  <cit> . assumption of growth rate maximisation in fba studies has led to successful predictions of the actual growth rate in a number of organisms  <cit> . such an assumption, however, is likely to be invalid for individual cell types in multicellular organisms, where cellular objectives may differ greatly both between and within tissues. the assumption of maximal rates of biomass production involves an objective at the cellular level, whereas in multicellular organisms a given cell’s objective is likely to be realised via survival at the organism level, which may not necessarily be dependent upon the growth of the cell. moreover, signals from the extracellular environment may trigger different cellular priorities and objectives. these issues have been demonstrated by the work of gille et al.  <cit> , who modelled the metabolism of human hepatocyte, indicating their objective is to preserve homeostasis of blood compounds, a process that is modulated by the extracellular availability of oxygen and other nutrients.

another concern when applying fba is the inadequacy of the biomass definition itself. typically, the assumed composition of e. coli is used as a template to define the biomass of the organism of interest  <cit> . to do this, a cell’s macromolecular composition , the metabolite content of each macromolecular class, and the biosynthetic and maintenance costs for various cellular processes are required  <cit> . not only are such numbers difficult to determine, but it is also to be expected that they would change drastically under different environmental conditions. problems associated with reliance on a biomass objective function have led to a number of studies that focus on the determination of a suitable objective function  <cit> .

this work therefore focuses on another approach, investigating the use of ‘omics data to act as a guide for the prediction of the intracellular metabolic fluxes that a given cell exhibits. a priori it may be supposed that enzymatic transcript concentrations and metabolic fluxes can be related to each other, albeit in a complex manner, since fluxes are clearly dependent on the concentrations of enzymes and/or their encoding transcripts  <cit> . drawing upon previous work  <cit> , this approach investigates how relating metabolic fluxes to enzyme-encoding gene expression levels affects the predictive power of constraint-based analysis. the hypothesis is that doing so would provide a comparable, or better, representation of intracellular fluxes than does reliance upon an assumed biomass objective alone. as stated in related work by becker et al.  <cit> , “the statement of an  objective introduces a ‘user-bias’ and such objective may not be relevant to the true physiological state.” it is the removal of this user-bias, through the application of a purely data-driven objective, that this work attempts to address.

this study involves the acquisition and analysis of absolute quantitative transcriptomics data from saccharomyces cerevisiae, and the subsequent use of these data to constrain an existing genome-scale metabolic model  <cit> . a comparison between fba results generated through this approach and those generated from applying a more traditional biomass objective is performed.

such an approach may have ramifications for the genome-scale modelling of human metabolism  <cit> , where tissue-specific microarray data are publicly available and have been exploited in the development of tissue-specific models of human metabolism by shlomi et al.  <cit> . the approach of shlomi et al. categorises numerous tissue-specific relative gene expression data sets into high, medium and low expression, with the goal of limiting the tissue-specific network to contain only those reactions for which consistent high gene expression has been observed. a disadvantage of this work is that it was performed upon a “consensus” of gene expression data, generated under a range of physiological and experimental conditions. furthermore, the data used are generated from microarrays, which provide relative expression ratios of the same gene under different conditions. microarrays are applicable to comparative studies, and as such, the data that they produce do not allow for comparison of absolute expression levels across genes, primarily due to differences in hybridisation efficiency  <cit> . in addition, microarray data is associated with a number of common problems, including cross-hybridisation issues, limited dynamic detection range, presence of background noise and the detection of transcripts being limited to sequences printed on the array  <cit> .

the approach provided here relies upon absolute gene expression data generated under the condition of interest, using rna-seq. rna-seq provides expression levels in terms of counts of expressed transcripts that can be related to transcripts per cell and thus an absolute level. therefore, the expression levels generated are comparable across the transcriptome and have been shown to be more indicative of protein concentrations than gene expression levels generated from microarrays  <cit> . by extension, rna-seq data is likely to provide a more reliable indication of enzymatic activity than that generated through relative expression techniques. furthermore, rna-seq mitigates many of the limitations inherent in the use of microarrays  <cit> .

RESULTS
the methodology involves a number of steps. specifically, these are i) providing gene-protein-reaction  relationships in the metabolic model; ii) mapping of gene expression data to individual reactions; iii) correlating gene expression data to the predicted metabolic flux; and iv) validating the metabolic flux predictions through comparison of predicted values against those determined experimentally. it is important to note that the model is not constrained with experimentally measured flux parameters. these values are subsequently used to validate the flux predictions generated solely from gene expression data. the steps involved in the method are described in detail below and summarised in figure  <dig> 

mapping gene expression data to metabolic reactions
previous approaches to applying gene-level data to metabolic maps have involved thresholding; the gene can be defined as having two states: on or off  <cit> , or three states: low, medium or high expression  <cit> . here a different approach is used, where the absolute gene expression data are used to create continuous, rather than discrete, reaction weightings.

the method is applied to the genome-scale model of yeast metabolism, yeast  <dig>  <cit> , an extension of earlier community-driven yeast metabolic reconstructions  <cit> . rna-seq data are used to constrain the reconstruction, providing an absolute measurement of gene expression that is comparable across all genes in the data set. the hypothesis is that absolute and comparable measurements of gene expression can be used to infer activity of the encoded enzymes. although it is recognised that there is overall poor correlation between gene and protein expression  <cit> , recent studies have indicated an increased correlation between mrna and protein concentrations than was reported previously  <cit> . the assumption behind the method is that gene expression levels can be used to infer metabolic fluxes with reasonable accuracy, provided that they are applied on a genome-scale, and provided that the predicted metabolic flux pattern adheres to the normal stoichiometric and thermodynamic constraints that are applied to constraint-based modelling. by applying gene expression levels on such a scale, and by adhering to such constraints, it is hoped that effects such as experimental error, differing protein translation rates, differing transcript and protein stabilities, and differing enzymatic activities, will be reduced. whilst the procedure is here applied to transcriptomics data, future work will investigate whether the method would be improved by integration with absolute proteomics data  <cit> .

the assignment of gene expression data to individual metabolic reactions is complicated by the fact that there is not a one-to-one mapping between gene and reaction. the presence of promiscuous enzymes  <cit> , isoenzymes and enzymatic complexes underscores the requirement for a careful mapping of gene expression data to metabolic reactions. details of the approach undertaken here are provided in the methods section.

from metabolic reactions to flux predictions
constraint-based analysis  <cit>  uses physicochemical constraints such as mass and charge balance, energy balance, and flux limitations to describe the potential behaviour of an organism.

the basic biochemical structure of the metabolic pathways is generally of sufficient granularity to allow deduction of the underlying network stoichiometry. in addition, the flux of each reaction through the system may be constrained through, for example, knowledge of enzyme maximal activities  or irreversibility considerations  <cit> . given a typical genome-scale metabolic model such as yeast  <dig>  at steady state these constraints may be written as:

  nv=0li≤vi≤ui 

where n is the stoichiometric matrix, v a steady state flux pattern, and li and ui the lower and upper flux bounds respectively for each reaction i.

a number of techniques have been proposed to deduce the network behaviour from this minimal set of information, including fba and extreme pathway  <cit>  or elementary mode analysis  <cit> . in particular, fba highlights the most effective and efficient paths through the network in order to optimise a particular objective function  <cit> . genome-scale reconstructions typically contain a pseudoreaction representing growth  and fba is typically used to identify a pattern of fluxes at steady state that maximise the rate of this reaction. this is seen as corresponding to maximising the rate of biomass production with respect to a nutrient of reference , with other necessary nutrients assumed to be in excess. this is unlikely to be applicable to turbidostat cultures where growth rates are maximised but where their efficiencies in terms of mass of cells per mass of glucose may be low.

in this study, the rate of biomass production is not the function that is maximised explicitly. instead, the focus is on maximising the correlation between the steady-state pattern of the predicted fluxes and the corresponding gene expression data at the biochemical level. this is achieved through minimising:

  z=∑i1σivi−di 

where the sum is taken over all reactions i for which reaction data di are available, in this case, all reactions with an associated gene. σi is the error in data point i as calculated in the mapping of gene expression data to individual reactions . thus the objective is to predict a flux that is as close as possible to the reaction estimate, weighted according to the confidence in that estimate. the function z is convex in v, and this allows the use of the powerful tools of convex programming  <cit> . convexity is normally required to solve optimisation problems involving thousands of variables and is certainly to be preferred from the point of view of computational performance. this is the reason that a possibly more natural function such as the pearson product-moment correlation coefficient is not used in its place. moreover, z may be linearised through decomposing v into components greater than, or less than, d:

  z=∑i1σidi++di−vi=di+di+−di−di+,di−≥ <dig> 

for each i. hence the fast and robust tools of linear programming  <cit>  may be utilised.

one remaining problem is that the direction of reversible reactions  is potentially arbitrary. the aim is to maximise correlation between the absolute flux and reaction data, but replacing v with |v| in the definition of z would remove its convexity. instead, an iterative process is used to assign the data to the model:

 <dig>  maximise the correlation between the initial set of irreversible reactions and the experimental data. the sum in z is taken only over irreversible reactions .

 <dig>  perform flux variability analysis   <cit>  to determine which further reactions in the network must thus be unidirectional, i.e. they cannot carry a flux in the other direction without decreasing the correlation coefficient found in point  <dig> 

 <dig>  a new larger set of irreversible reactions is defined. the cycle between fva and maximising correlation is continued until no extra irreversible reactions are found through variability analysis. as the number of irreversible reactions will never decrease, the algorithm terminates in a finite number of steps.

comparison of predicted and measured exometabolome fluxes
fluxes were predicted by following two approaches: standard fba , and maximisation of the correlation between specific metabolic fluxes and gene expression data, as described here. in the latter case, gene expression data were collected under two growth conditions: at 75% and 85% of the maximum biomass levels attainable for this strain with the utilised growth medium. in general fba problems are underdetermined, i.e. there is an infinite number of solutions satisfying the criterion of optimality. the innumerable set of these equally optimal solutions is known as the solution space and is in the shape of a multi-dimensional polytope. different algorithms have been proposed to explore the solution space of an fba problem and enumerate its edges   <cit> . the approach followed here is to identify one single solution for each fba formulation that is representative of the entire solution space. this is achieved by applying geometric fba, a method that identifies the fba solution that lies in the centre of the solution space  <cit> .

the exometabolome or “metabolic footprint” of an organism provides a quick and convenient summary of its metabolic activities, especially under unbalanced growth conditions  <cit> . the predicted exometabolome fluxes from both methods were compared against experimentally measured fluxes. the coefficient of determination r <dig> was used to test the goodness of fit of the predictions; r2 =  <dig> means a perfect match between model and data, whilst r2 =  <dig> is the value obtained by simply predicting the mean of the data for each point. thus r2 <  <dig> denotes a very poor prediction.

the results for the flux to exit of six metabolites - carbon dioxide, ethanol, glycerol, acetate, lactate and trehalose - are presented in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  these exchange fluxes were normalised according to the measured glucose uptake flux of their respective growth condition. the standard fba method of maximising growth predicts that all glucose is converted to carbon dioxide, and provides a very poor fit to the data . the best fit possible under the assumption of maximal biomass prediction is r2 =  <dig>  and r2 =  <dig> , respectively. in contrast, a good fit is found by applying the method described here to gene expression data gathered at both the 75% and 85% biomass level r2 =  <dig>  and r2 =  <dig> , respectively).

fluxes are reported in units of mmoles/hr/g dry weight , and are scaled by measured glucose uptake flux .

predicted fluxes are given for the gene expression constrained approach, introduced here, and the standard fba method that relies upon maximisation of biomass. as standard fba generates a number of feasible solutions, the “best” solution  is reported as “fitted fba”. additionally, the existing algorithms gimme  <cit>  and imat  <cit>  are applied, using the same model and gene expression data as was used to generate the gene expression constrained results.

it is recognised that the gene expression correlation method failed to predict glycerol transport at the 75% maximal biomass level, and underestimates this at the 85% maximal biomass level. furthermore, acetate exchange is underestimated under both conditions. however, the gene expression method is capable of predicting low-level exometabolic fluxes of lactate and trehalose, and it is noticed that existing methods also investigated  did not predict anything other than carbon dioxide excretion when applied to the same model and gene expression data.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, a methodology for using absolute quantitative gene expression data to predict genome-scale flux patterns has been defined. unlike standard constraint-based analysis approaches such as biomass maximisation, this method is able to provide accurate predictions of the major exometabolome fluxes in saccharomyces cerevisiae under the measured experimental conditions.

both transcriptome and exometabolome data from steady state cultures grown under specific conditions of interest are generated. the acquisition of data from defined and controlled cultures allows the direct comparison of the two data sets. the relatively easy generation of data - commercial kits were used to extract the rna from the cell - negates the need to use a “consensus” set of publicly available transcriptomics data. moreover, with calibration it allows for absolute quantification, rather than the use of relative values as typically output in microarray experiments. advancements in analytical technologies within the metabolomics field and the development of defined methodologies and tools have facilitated the generation of robust and reproducible data for systems biology studies.

the method described here does not rely on the definition, and assumed maximisation, of a biomass function that is often uncertain and necessarily depends on the specific growth conditions. it is notable that the proposed approach provides prediction of exometabolome fluxes under two growth conditions, whereas the standard fba formulation provides a single prediction that is unable to distinguish between conditions. tailoring the standard fba approach to deal with different growth conditions would require the specification of individual biomass functions for each condition. this time-consuming task requires knowledge of the cell composition and energetic requirements under the growth condition of interest. the approach described here thus provides an easier means of determining metabolic fluxes under a range of conditions than relying on the standard method of biomass maximisation.

the gene expression constraining approach can also be considered as a filter: given that the experimental data can be taken as representative of the fluxes, the random errors associated with such data should cancel out at a genome-wide level. because the fba solution needs to satisfy the steady-state assumption, the predicted fluxes must be consistent with the mass conservation of each metabolite. if the topology of the network encompasses the whole system metabolism, the noise of the data should subside in favour of the real signal. moreover it allows changes in ‘omics data from the perspective of their influence on the system as a whole to be viewed. although transcriptomics data are not necessarily representative of the protein levels, their use in metabolic constraint-based modelling provides much better predictive power than does the standard fba method. specifically, the gene expression constrained method provides good fits to the measured flux to exit data at both 75% and 85% growth level r2 =  <dig>  and r2 =  <dig>  respectively), while the standard fba method provides a much poorer fit.

typically, gene knockouts are modelled under the assumption that there is no downstream effect on gene regulation, and that there is a minimum change at the flux level   <cit> ). rather than simply making such an assumption, this work suggests a better approach would be to effect the  measurement of gene expression data after knockout, and subsequent use of this data to predict the new flux pattern. it is envisaged that the same approach could be used to retrieve flux patterns in cells under different physiological conditions, or during the progression of metabolic diseases such as cancer and diabetes. furthermore, methods that predict exometabolomic fluxes are of particular use in ‘white’ biotechnology applications  <cit> .

