BACKGROUND
cetacean tonal signals are broadly defined as narrowband, frequency modulated sounds  <cit> . such sounds are produced by both baleen whales  and toothed whales  – sister clades containing all extant whales. they are also produced by other mammals  and thus appear primitively present in the order. baleen whales produce sounds that have fundamental frequencies generally below  <dig> khz  <cit> , as do members of the sister lineage of cetacea, the hippos  <cit> . in toothed whales, in contrast, these sounds most commonly range from 5– <dig> khz  <cit> , and in some species, e.g. delphinus delphis, stenella attenuata, s. coeruleoalba, s. longirostris  <cit> lagenorhynchus albirostris  <cit> , tursiops truncatus  <cit> , fundamental frequencies can go as high as  <dig> khz in inia geoffrensis  <cit> . in delphinid toothed whales these high frequency tonal sounds, especially when complex, are often referred to as 'whistles', although within the group whistle acoustic characteristics vary enormously. several species produce both frequency modulated whistles  and simple whistles that are relatively constant in frequency   <cit>  or to few frequency modulated whistles   <cit> . in addition, whistle contour may be continuous or consist of a series of breaks and segments  <cit> . whistles may or not contain harmonics  <cit> . in delphinid species like s. longirostris  <cit>  and l. albirostris  <cit>  whistles can contain high order-harmonics. finally, whistle duration is very variable. for instance, in sousa chinensis whistles can range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  seconds  <cit>  and in tursiops truncatus from  <dig>  to  <dig>  seconds  <cit> . in delphinids, whistle frequency modulation and duration varies within species in relation to geography , and related species differ in many whistle frequency components  .

baleen whales produce a great variety of sounds, among them tonal sounds that like toothed whale 'whistles', are narrowband and frequency modulated, although typically much lower in frequency  <cit> . these tonal sounds can be produced in isolation or in combination with other sounds . in the right whale  these tonal sounds, again like 'whistles' in toothed whales, are used in a social context  <cit> . for example, in blue whales  tonal sounds are presumably used for long-distance communication  <cit> , and in right whales tonal sounds are used in combination with pulsative sounds in a sexual context  <cit> . however, in baleen whales, these tonal sounds are never referred to as whistles, but as 'calls', 'moans' or 'tones'  <cit> . nomenclature of sounds, both in toothed and baleen whales, is confusing. as stated by au   <cit>  in baleen whales "as with dolphins there is a lack of any standard nomenclature for describing emitted sounds", this frustrates comparison of sounds across taxa and obscures homologies. it remains unclear exactly what is a 'whistle', and if narrowband, frequency modulated tonal sounds of baleen whales and toothed whales are homologous at some level. one reason to question tonal sound homology across whales is that the sound production mechanisms of baleen whales and toothed whales are dramatically different. in baleen whales tonal sounds are thought to be laryngeal  <cit> , as they are in other related mammals , but in toothed whales sounds are produced by a unique and complex nasal system . this offers some support for the hypothesis that toothed whales 'whistles' are unique and different from  baleen whale tonal sounds. however, this also suggests that high frequency tonal sounds are homologous across toothed whales and such sounds in non-delphinid toothed whales should also be called whistles   <cit> . to accommodate both possibilities we do all analyses across all whales  and separately within toothed whales.

most of the work on whistles has been done with social delphinids, where they are often referred to as "social signals" and are thought to facilitate individual recognition, group cohesion, recruitment during feeding activities, and overall communication . generalizations about the function of whistles have translated into the hypothesis that whistles evolved in concert with sociality, and that the two traits are tightly correlated . herman and tavolga   <cit>  suggested that the degree of gregariousness in toothed whales seemed to be related to whistle production . more specifically, they proposed that species that live in small groups or are solitary tend not to whistle, whereas species that live in large groups frequently do. recently, podos et al.   <cit>  proposed that whistles are an innovation of social delphinids; in other words that whistles are synapomorphic for a clade within delphinidae. however, even within delphinids some social species such as cephalorhynchus spp and some species of lagenorhynchus do not whistle , which seems to contradict the dolphin hypothesis. the hypothesis was furthermore based on an assumption of the absence of whistles in river dolphins , porpoises , beaked whales  and belugas and narwhals . however, we do not believe this assumption is justified. tonal sounds from inia geoffrensis, for example, have been independently recorded in several studies  <cit> . these sounds, just like in other toothed whales, have been referred to as whistles, although they are simpler and shorter in duration, and higher in frequency than the whistles of some dolphins  <cit> . similar whistles have also been reported in another river dolphin lipotes vexillifer  and in social non-delphinid toothed whales such as some beaked whales  <cit> , and the monodontidae, belugas and narwhals . podos et al.   <cit>  concluded that the tonal sounds in these species should not be classified as 'whistles', and hence found support for the dolphin hypothesis. while we agree with podos et al. that whistle structure seems different in delphinids and non-delphinid toothed whales we believe this demonstrates the basic problem of treating broad, arbitrary, concepts as single traits in evolutionary analyses. to define whistles as social sounds produced by delphinids – a priori denying homology with tonal sounds in related taxa – and then concluding that they evolved in association with sociality in delphinidae risks circularity. in such a framework reconstructing the origin of 'whistles' on a phylogeny will simply depend on the whistle definition chosen by any given author.

to facilitate discussion, and comparability with previous research, we use the word 'whistle' for toothed whales tonal sounds, however, we do not imply that whistles are necessarily non-homologous to baleen whale tonal sounds – their homology requires further study. we use whistles as a category for some of our analyses, mainly to test the dolphin hypothesis as it was proposed. it is not very informative, however, to simply map the distribution of 'whistles' on a phylogeny . authors differ in their interpretation on the presence or absence of whistles across species, e.g. some define them in the context of a behavior that may have much more limited distribution than the sounds themselves. furthermore, even within dolphins 'whistles' can be highly variable. we thus highlight the need to focus on the various acoustic parameters  that may vary independently and have non-identical phylogenetic distributions . hence, our major focus is on such analyses which may reveal which, if any, of the characteristics of 'whistles', or tonal sounds in general, seem associated with sociality.

our understanding of tonal sound acoustic structure, diversity, and use, is growing, but the evolution of tonal sounds and their association with sociality remains highly speculative. we therefore believe we here improve upon previous studies by providing a more detailed analysis, and using novel and more detailed phylogenies than any study hitherto. we also test these hypotheses across a range of alternative phylogenies.

in sum, we here review current knowledge of both tonal sound production and social structure in cetacea, and explore the evolution of tonal sounds and the association of individual tonal sound components with sociality . taking advantage of a new species-level cetacean phylogeny  <cit>  we provide the first phylogenetic test of the hypotheses of herman and tavolga   <cit>  and podos et al.   <cit> . this study identifies large gaps in knowledge on both traits, and points to key species where future studies would be particularly valuable for enhancing our understanding of the interplay of tonal sounds and sociality.

RESULTS
testing the dolphin hypothesis
the following is presented merely to test the dolphin hypothesis as stated . under the definition of 'whistle' we use here, the optimization of whistles on the phylogeny is ambiguous . however, all of the equally most parsimonious reconstructions reject the dolphin hypothesis. the phylogeny implies that whistles either evolved independently twice, once in berardius and once in the node leading to delphinida sensu muizon   <cit> , delphinoids plus river dolphins + platanista , with secondary losses in phocoenidae and within delphinidae . alternatively whistles evolved once in the common ancestor of ziphiids plus pandelphinids and then were subsequently lost thrice in hyperoodon, phocenids and within delphinids . likewise, there are two possible optimizations of sociality under a broad concept approach. one is that sociality evolved in the common ancestor of odontoceti and was then lost secondarily twice in the riverine species . alternatively sociality may have evolved independently four times . the optimization of sociality is ambiguous on over 99% of the alternative trees examined, however, the multiple loss of sociality within cetacea seems more likely in general, given that relatives of whales are social. regardless of choice of optimizations, whistles did not originate in the lineage leading to the social dolphins, contra the dolphin hypothesis.

character optimizations
results of character optimizations led to the same conclusions across all alternative phylogenies examined , unless otherwise noted.

group sizes in cetacea  appear to have been ancestrally small, but to have gradually increased in the lineage leading to the dolphins, with a number of independent derivations of societies with hundreds of individuals and some secondary reductions in group size .

here we present some alternative optimizations of sociality under both a 'broad two and four state concept' framework simply to test the dolphin hypothesis and under a multiple component framework. we note, however, that our study offers limited insights into the evolution of sociality in cetaceans. future studies will require examining a greater number of component characters of sociality as such data becomes available, and it will require the inclusion of comparative social data also from the outgroups.

we compare three optimizations of sociality represented as a four-state character  . first, we keep polymorphic species  as such and then compare results when the 'lowest' and 'highest' social state is chosen for each polymorphic species . all three optimizations have some ambiguity, but optimizations across all trees suggest that family based groups evolved independently at least three times . the optimization of social components  is shown in additional material . group composition appears to have ancestrally been simple groups consisting only of mother and calf. segregated  and mixed groups may have evolved independently at least four times . finally, member associations appear to have evolved from simple mother and calf interactions to complex family based associations .

there appears to be a similar trend in the number of tonal sound inflection points  going from few ancestrally and increasing in the lineage leading to the dolphins . there is an inverse trend in tonal sound duration, where particularly short tonal sounds appear to be derived within the delphinids .

character regressions and correlations
under the independent contrast method the regression between group size and the mean number of inflection points was marginally significant: species with larger groups tend to produce tonal sounds with greater mean number of inflection points. group size explained approximately  <dig> % of the variation in inflection points across cetaceans . group size also significantly explained variation in the mean minimum tonal sound frequency within toothed whales . we justify using a one-tailed test based on the expectancy that low frequency sounds travel longer distances so that a priori one might expect that low frequency tended to be associated with solitary species, while species that live their entire lives in large groups need only communicate over short distances. however, given that the two tail test is non-significant we consider this hypothesis only weakly supported. regressions between group size and other acoustic parameters were not significant.

in addition, there is a significant negative relationship between tonal sound duration and absolute and mean minimum frequency both for all cetaceans  and for toothed whales . there was a significant positive relationship between tonal sound duration and complexity for all cetaceans  and for toothed whales .

changes in tonal sound complexity were significantly concentrated within social lineages in four of the five most parsimonious reconstructions when both traits were treated as two state characters  .

tests of character state associations  show that complex whistles  were positively associated with group living species  and negatively with less social species  treating social complexity as a two state character. in general there was an association between tonal sound complexity and social structure . however, the associations between individual states vary depending on how finely tonal sound and social characters are divided . for instance, when treating social complexity as a four state character but tonal complexity as a two state character we find a significant positive association between highly social species  and complex tonal sounds and a negative association between complex tonal sounds and 'solitary'  species . when both are treated as four state characters only negative associations are significant .

*significant negative associations **significant positive associations

d =  <dig>  p <  <dig> , np-value =  <dig>  nd =  <dig> social structure and tonal sound complexity 

d =  <dig>  p <  <dig>  np-value =  <dig>  nd =  <dig> social structure and tonal sound complexity 

when three component characters of sociality were analyzed we found similar significant character associations with inflection points , or restricted to trees filtered to be congruent with the alternative hypotheses of messenger and mcguire   <cit> , nikaido et al.   <cit>  or arnason et al.   <cit> , respectively . on the all-species phylogenies results significant in the main analyses were also significant across all sets of trees for all simmap analyses. the only difference between analyses was that social and whistle character states were more strongly associated on the trees constrained by the messenger and mcguire hypothesis than in the remainder . similarly, the pdap analyses results agree irrespective of phylogeny choice , except the following. group size and number of inflexion points correlate significantly except on trees constrained by the hypotheses of arnason et al.   <cit>  or nikaido et al.   <cit> , and group size and mean minimum frequency correlate except on trees constrained by the messenger and mcguire   <cit>  hypothesis. for ancestral character reconstruction under parsimony, the optimizations of the continuous characters such as group size, tonal sound frequencies, duration, and inflexion points are nearly identical across the trees considered. the optimization of whistles as a presence/absence character was ambiguous on our, and previous, phylogenetic hypotheses. however, on 70% of the filtered post-burnin trees dual origin of whistles was preferred . the optimization of sociality  was ambiguous , except on the nikaido et al.   <cit>  hypothesis which favors two origins of sociality. similarly optimizations of whistles and sociality as multistate characters varied little across trees with no impact on conclusions.

when we used the phylogenies resulting from reanalyzes of the data of messenger and mcguire   <cit> , however, significance was lost in a higher number  of the hypotheses tests  and some character optimizations changed. although this can in theory imply sensitivity to phylogenetic pattern, a simpler explanation for this finding seems to be that much of the power of the comparative tests is lost as messenger and mcguire's data  <cit>  includes only a portion of the species of our main dataset. hence we do not see a reason to discuss these 'disagreements' further.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
our results show that the interplay of tonal sounds and sociality is complicated and that studying the relationship between conglomerate characters such as 'whistles' and 'sociality' largely conceals these intricacies. under the very simple 'concept approach' the cladistic test  rejects the dolphin hypothesis stating that 'whistles' evolved as an adaptation for social communication in dolphins. whistles, as here defined, appear to be a synapomorphy of pandelphinids, or even a more inclusive group including ziphiids . therefore, the current evidence implies that whistles arose earlier in the evolutionary history of whales than presumed by podos et al.   <cit> , and whistles are furthermore present in some non-social species, and have been lost more than once within social clades. apparently then, whistles are not necessary for functional cetacean societies and social communication, and they can play some role in communication in solitary species.

our findings highlight some of the problems with evolutionary analyses of imprecise, broad concepts. even though 'whistles' do not correlate with any measure of sociality we find evidence that the evolutionary histories of sociality and tonal sounds are intertwined in the direction suggested by many authors, including podos et al.   <cit> . this is evidenced mainly by two findings.  the significant association between group size and tonal sound inflection points  whether tested using independent contrasts, concentrated changes, or character association tests; and  the association between group size and minimum tonal sound frequency . simple tonal sounds are mostly confined to species with simple societies  such as river dolphins and rorquals while tonal sound and social complexity increase in the lineage leading to delphinoidea . within that lineage reversal to simpler societies has occurred twice and each time tonal sounds have been secondarily lost , although whistle loss may represent a response to predatory pressure rather than change in social structure .

in addition, especially in toothed whales, species emitting longer tonal sounds tend to show a greater number of inflection points. these observations and tests are congruent with hypotheses stating that complex tonal sounds function as social signals for group cohesion  during social, traveling, and feeding activities  or individual recognition  .

but functionality in a social context can only explain a portion of the variation in tonal sound production and complexity. the secondary loss of tonal sounds in porpoises and the dolphin clade containing lagenorhynchus australis, l. cruciger and cephalorhynchus spp, for example, suggests these signals may sometimes be costly, for example in terms of energy production or predation risk. these odontocetes live in very fluid societies where acoustic communication is accomplished by means of rapid pulsed sounds  <cit> . one potential costs of tonal sounds is that these signals may be intercepted  by an unintended receiver  <cit> . delphinid tonal sounds are within a frequency range that is readily detected by predators like killer whales which are known to predate on many marine mammal species including these non-whistling species. furthermore, porpoises and cephalorhynchus seem to have converged upon similar morphology and biosonar systems  <cit> , both have ears tuned for high frequency sounds and produce narrowband clicks  <cit>  that are used for echolocation purposes and communication  <cit> . as emphasized by morisaka and connor   <cit>  if killer whales poorly detect these signals, then it may be beneficial for these species to use high frequency signals for social communication  <cit>  instead of tonal sounds.

in stable societies like those of physeter macrocephalus and orcinus orca, animals tend to produce group-specific sounds  whereas in fission-fusion societieslike those of tursiops truncatus and stenella frontalis, animals produce individual-specific whistles, so called "signature whistles" . signature whistles are sounds   that to date have only been found in species with fluid societies where mother and calf use them as contact calls and some animals  form coalitions  .

we found evidence for association between group size and the mean minimum frequency, as well as between mean minimum frequency and duration. given that the former was only marginally significant, we will not place much emphasis on this finding. however, if this finding will be better supported with the addition of further data it may suggest that low minimum frequency  is selected for in mostly solitary species which must communicate with other individuals over relatively greater distances than do species that live in permanent societies. it should be noted that may-collado et al.   <cit>  found a correlation between minimum frequency and body size across whales. this may explain a part of the observed pattern here, as social species are often small, but it remains to be explored if sociality and body size are correlated.

despite the possible differences in the context in which tonal sounds are produced by riverine dolphins and other delphinoids, there is no a priori reason to assume that whistles produced by these toothed whales are not homologous   <cit> , and phylogenetically their homology is supported . it has been proposed that marked deviations of inia from delphinids in scaling relationship in body size and frequency  is evidence that their sounds are produced by mechanisms different from those used by delphinoids. this is primarily based on the assumption that vertebrate scaling of vocal frequency occurs through size-dependent effects on a common vocal apparatus , thus deviations from scaling relationships might indicate an independent proximate mechanism  <cit> . however, these scaling patterns, for maximum frequency disappear once phylogenetic relationships are taken into account  <cit> .

while some cetacean societies have been studied for a long time, detailed observations are lacking for many species and it is difficult to define and compare levels of sociality across cetacean species. likewise there are many gaps in our knowledge of tonal sound production . our study highlights critical gaps in knowledge, and pinpoints key taxa whose future study could quickly enhance our understanding of the evolution of tonal sounds. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  tonal sound data would be especially valuable from kogia, ziphiids other than berardius, and from platanista and pontoporia. in a similar manner information on social structure of kogia, mesoplodon, and ziphius would help resolve the optimization of sociality.

many factors in addition to sociality have been proposed to have influenced the evolution of tonal sounds, including body size and maximum frequency scaling  <cit> , habitat  <cit> , predation  <cit> , and zoogeographical  <cit>  and phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . given that multiple factors are at work true co-evolutionary histories of any given characters could easily be masked. hence, finding significant correlations between tonal sounds and social structure is particularly interesting. for example, we find a significant, but rather weak, correlation between group size and inflexion points using the independent contrast method. one of the conspicuous outliers in this analysis is orcinus orca, a social delphinid living in relatively small groups that nevertheless produces extremely modulated whistles. thomsen et al.   <cit>  discuss these extreme modulations and suggest that whistles in killer whales serve a different function than in related dolphins. removing o. orca from the analyses increases the strength of the correlation between whistle complexity and group size . it should furthermore be noted that comparative biology is fraught with difficulty, getting enough data together for a strong hypothesis testing is typically difficult and missing data results in a loss of power. by accounting for uncertainty in phylogenetic relationships we hope to reduce the rate of type i error. further, accounting for differences in interpreting and scoring whistle and sociality data attempts to reduce type i error. it is quite possible that in an attempt to avoid type i error we are introducing an unacceptable amount of type ii errors. in other words, our ability to detect true character correlations in evolutionary history may be compromised. in this study, however, most of the results were not sensitive to choice of phylogeny or alternative scoring scenarios which adds some confidence to our conclusions.

our findings point to gaps in knowledge of both tonal sounds and social structure that need to be filled to significantly advance our understanding of their putative co-evolutionary histories. nevertheless, our results allow us to reject the simple hypothesis that 'whistles' evolved for social communication in dolphins. however, group size explains some of the variation in tonal sound frequency and frequency modulation indicating a special role for complex tonal sounds in a  social context and perhaps for low frequency, long-duration sounds in solitary species. may-collado and wartzok   <cit>  suggested that whistles in inia geoffrensis may be use to keep distance between animals rather than to stimulate social interactions. however, this hypothesis needs to be tested. future studies should focus on particularly poorly known groups of species such as riverine species, ziphiids, and kogia spp.

