BACKGROUND
for non-model species with little or no available genomic resources, transcriptome sequencing offers a cost-effective method of characterizing the gene set for a species of interest. sequencing of expressed sequence tags  can quickly and cheaply provide sequence data for a large percentage of expressed transcripts, which can then be assembled into longer transcript-representative sequences. these can then be annotated for functionality , assessed for genetic diversity  <cit> , and, if technology and sequencing depth allow, simultaneously provide a snapshot of gene expression at the time of sequencing  <cit> . these data can also provide the basis for microarray  designs that determine expression differences in experimental contexts . these applications, however, often require complete and accurate assemblies of est sequences.

transcriptome assembly efforts can be challenging, though, for biological and technical reasons. since traditional sanger sequencing was used to sample ests, several newer generation sequencing platforms provide varied options for read length and sequencing depth—both important considerations as transcripts can vary in size and abundance. assemblers used in recent transcriptome projects include seqman  <cit> , mira  <cit> , celera assembler  <cit> , cap <dig>  <cit> , and newbler  <cit> , as well as de-bruijn graph based assemblers such as velvet, oases  <cit>  and ngen  <cit> . comparisons suggest that assemblers capable of accounting for alternative splicing perform best  <cit> .

while these comparisons between assemblers  use common quality metrics, it is unclear how accurate the metrics themselves are. many metrics such as singleton and contig count, coverage, n <dig>  and overall assembly size were simply repurposed from whole-genome assembly evaluation. for example, n <dig> contig length is traditionally considered best when maximized and has been used to assess transcriptome assembly quality  <cit> ; however, this metric should not exceed the true transcript n <dig> length that is usually unknown a priori. similarly, average or median coverage statistics may relate to sequencing depth, but non-uniform expression may make comparisons between them less informative than for genome assemblies  <cit> .

annotation-based metrics represent an alternative assessment tool for transcriptome projects. after matching assembled sequences to protein sequences of a related organism, statistics such as the number of unique proteins and average percentage of protein sequences matched are reported  <cit> . associating assembled sequences with homologous proteins in this way provides a biologically relevant perspective including redundancy of assembled sequences, diversity of functions represented, and completeness  <cit> . these metrics, however, depend on the evolutionary distance of the comparison, and for non-model species often require annotation against distant relatives where orthologs may have been duplicated, lost, or undergone changes in size.

assessing quality metrics
while it is important to understand how different assembly methods and sequencing technologies perform when processing transcriptome data, we should also understand how these metrics relate to properties of the assembly process. as the quality of a transcriptome assembly improves  a good metric will reflect this change in a strong and identifiable manner.

assessing a metric for assembly quality requires objective standards of measurement, which we produce via simulating sequencing of a well understood transcript dataset from drosophila melanogaster . because we simulate sequencing, we know the source location of each read and can simulate a “perfect” assembly that correctly detects all overlaps and can correct all sequencing errors. simultaneously, we can assemble the simulated reads using a  software assembler . processing the data in this way while varying both the simulated sequencing depth and average read length, we may assume that: 

 <dig>  for a given dataset, the perfect assembly will be of higher quality than the non-perfect assembly.

 <dig>  for the perfect assemblies, increasing sequencing depth and average read length will result in more complete assemblies.

note that fact two may not hold for any non-perfect assembler as assumptions concerning the expression distribution or read length may degrade results even in the presence of increased data quantity.

any good metric for transcriptome assembly quality should be consistent with these two facts. if a metric reveals perfect assemblies to be of higher quality over all sequencing depths or read lengths, we say it is consistent over sequencing depth or read length. further, if the metric trends in a similar monotonic way over increased sequencing depth as well as read length for perfect assemblies  we say it is “fully consistent.”

while several studies have compared assembler performance for a variety of datasets  only mundry et al. have directly evaluated the quality metrics themselves  <cit>  using a similar simulation-based approach as outlined here but without varying sequencing depth or read length. studying the effects of read count and read length on assembly metrics not only provides another dimension for metric comparison, but is also informative as these are two variables largely under researchers’ control.

we note that this comparison between perfect assemblies and those produced by a commonly used assembler are not meant specifically to highlight deficiencies in the non-perfect assembly process, nor are the simulated sequencing choices meant to favor one method or sequencing technology. indeed, given the complexity, redundancy, and error characteristics of transcript sequences, no existing method could be expected to produce results on par with perfect assemblies. instead, it is precisely this necessary deficiency that we use to better understand metrics for transcriptome assembly quality.

RESULTS
simulated sequencing
we simulated sequencing from the drosophila melanogaster transcript set , which includes known alternate splice forms  as well as untranslated regions that would be sequenced by a cdna strategy . evidence suggests that true gene expression distributions are complex  <cit> ; however, it has been recognized for some time that a power-law distribution with exponent - <dig> provides an approximation  <cit> . thus, we randomly ordered transcripts, and sampled each transcript in position i with relative probability 1/i. sampling rate was also proportional to length, with longer transcripts having higher probability of selection .

as an initial scenario, we first simulated sequencing of reads of average length  <dig> bp  and varied read numbers as follows: 100k, 200k, 400k, 600k, 1m,  <dig> m,  <dig> m, and  <dig> m. similarly, holding read number constant at 600k, we varied the average read length:  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp, and  <dig> bp. in these cases, standard deviation and minimum of read length were set to 25% of average length. all reads were sequenced with a  <dig> % uniform error rate . because sequencing technologies continue to evolve, these parameters are not chosen to represent any particular technology, but rather to sample a range of read lengths likely to be prevalent in the near future . while for simulation and assembly efficiency the depths of sequencing we considered are generally lower than for current-generation technologies, we note that our non-normalized  <dig>  million simulated read dataset represents over 98% of the d. melanogaster transcript set , supporting the use of aggressive dataset pruning  <cit> .

assembly statistics
the most basic metrics for transcriptome assemblies are aggregate and concern the size of the output. these include assembly size , percentage of reads assembled into contigs, and counts of contigs and singletons.

the notions of contig and singleton are straightforward for perfect assemblies: a contig is any sequence produced by two or more overlapping reads, while singletons are the remaining isolated reads. by contrast, the assembler we compare with produces a variety of output types: first, portions of overlapping reads are assembled into “contigs” representing putative exons. groups of contigs that appear to constitute a single gene are then arranged to form “isotigs” representing putative splice variants of the gene. note that an isotig may consist of only a single contig. when this splice variant reconstruction fails, some “orphan” contigs may be unused in isotigs. thus, unique sequence in a newbler assembly is represented by unassembled singleton reads,  contigs, and isotigs. for our purposes we consider both newbler orphan contigs and isotigs as unique assembled sequence comparable to perfectly assembled contigs. we shall refer to this combined set of orphan contigs and isotigs as c-isotigs. further, we shall refer to the combined set of perfect contigs and singletons  for a single assembly as the set of unigenes.

figure  <dig> shows contig and c-isotig counts as well as percent of reads incorporated into the assemblies as sequencing depth increases. figure  <dig> also shows the aggregate size of the contigs and c-isotigs in bases, as well as the percentage of the total assemblies  present in assembled pieces. reference lines indicate the true number of transcripts and transcriptome size.

as expected for the perfect assemblies, as read coverage increased, the percentage of reads incorporated into the assembly grew to near 100%. further, the percentage of unigene bases present in contigs also grew to near 100%. although the non-perfect assembler incorporated an increasing percentage of reads in c-isotigs as sequencing depth grew, this percentage lagged that of the perfect assemblies and only reached 90% at the highest sequencing depths. as a consequence, the percentage of unigene bases in c-isotigs was small, and actually reduced slightly as the number of reads sequenced exceeded  <dig> m.

for both assembly types, the total size of assembled sequence grew to approach the true transcriptome size of  <dig> mbp, though the total size of perfectly assembled contigs was nearly twice that of assembled c-isotigs across the range of sequencing depths. while the number of c-isotigs strictly increased toward the correct number of transcripts from below, perfect contig count initially grew then decreased toward the true transcript number as contigs were joined.

figure  <dig> and table  <dig> show these same trends as read number was held at 600k and average read length was varied. results concerning percent of reads used and percent of total bases in contigs were similar for the perfect assemblies. contig count for the perfect assembly began slightly above the true transcript count, and decreased slightly as improved read lengths joined contigs.

trends for de novo transcriptome assembly metrics as sequencing depth and read length are varied. straight lines indicate monotonically increasing or decreasing trends, while curved lines indicate non-monotonic trends . metrics are considered consistent if they consistently ranked perfectly assemblies as better; fully consistent metrics are consistent metrics with similar monotonic trends by sequencing depth and read length for perfect assemblies. annotation-based metrics shown are computed in comparison to b. mori proteins. see additional file  <dig> for full results.

results for the realistic assemblies showed a reversed trend as read length increased. above a  <dig> bp average read length, the percentage of reads included in the assembly process decreased until at  <dig>  bp only 25% of reads were assembled together. further, at the  <dig>  bp read length, less than 2% of unigene bases were present in c-isotigs reflecting very large total outputs consisting almost entirely of singletons.

overall, statistics for the realistic  <dig> m read/ <dig> bp assembly were similar to those reported by ewen-campen et al. who used newbler to assemble ≈ <dig> million reads of median length  <dig> bp .

ewen-campen et al. reported their singletons to be highly redundant based on annotation, and employed a secondary cap <dig> assembly strategy for them. to assess the redundancy of singletons produced by the non-perfect assembler, we compared singleton counts by source transcript to the simulated sampling frequency. we found that for both the highest sequencing depth and longest read length assemblies, most singletons were sourced from transcripts with the highest representation. figure  <dig> shows average read usage for transcripts in these assemblies binned by probability of read selection. in both cases, reads from the rarest transcripts were more likely to be left as singletons . for the high sequencing depth assembly, read use initially decreases then increases slightly as transcripts become more abundant. for the long read length assembly, read usage is overall lower and drops significantly as abundance increases: only 4–10% of reads are assembled from the most common transcripts.

contig statistics
the next class of transcriptome assembly metrics concerns the intrinsic properties of the assembled sequences including length, coverage  and n <dig> length, defined as the shortest sequence length such that half of the total sequence output length is included in sequences that are shorter. these statistics are often computed only over the contig set , though we show below that including singletons, which frequently represent unassembled transcripts as discussed above, can significantly impact comparisons.

average and n <dig> contig lengths approached the true values from below. for the perfect assemblies, at the highest sequencing depths length statistics are approximately half of those for the original transcript set. this, combined with figure  <dig> showing that upwards of  <dig> mbp of sequence is recovered in perfect contigs, indicates that increased sequencing would largely join existing contigs rather than discover new sequence, with the exception of very rare transcripts. for both assembly types, n <dig> lengths were longer than averages and followed similar trends.

comparison between perfect contigs and c-isotigs revealed that newbler assemblies were on average longer and more highly covered. at first glance, these statistics suggest that these assemblies were of higher quality. when singletons were included and metrics were computed over all unigenes, however, we found that average length, coverage , and n <dig> lengths reflected the higher quality of perfect assemblies  and s1). for assemblies where singletons were dominant, however, the trends were not strong over read length or sequencing depth ) providing little basis for comparison. thus, it appears that while including singletons is necessary to make coverage and length statistics fully consistent metrics, doing so may result in metrics too invariant to be useful in practice.

annotation and rarefaction
assembled transcriptomes are often compared to protein datasets of related, well characterized species in an effort to assess sequencing and assembly completeness in a biological sense. blast is usually used for this purpose with the best match as determined by minimum e-value  providing the annotation  <cit> . although it is generally impossible to know how many transcripts are produced by an organism without a full genome sequence, annotation rates and percentage of proteins matched as a function of sequencing depth  are thought to speak to the percentage of all transcripts that are sequenced and assembled  <cit> .

we annotated unigenes of each assembly using blastx with a 10− <dig> cutoff against two protein databases: bombyx mori predicted proteins  and drosophila melanogaster proteins . the latter represents a comparison of no evolutionary distance, which will be useful in studying the effects of annotation against related species just as perfect assemblies inform assembly metric comparisons. because newbler assemblies for average read lengths longer than  <dig> bp produced too many singletons , we annotated c-isotigs only for these assemblies.

unique annotation counts for contigs and c-isotigs revealed increasing estimated discovery rates as sequencing depth increased ). for perfect assemblies, we also annotated contigs and singletons based on the transcripts that constituent reads were originally sourced from. for the perfect assemblies, this “true” annotation indicated that at high sequencing depths nearly 100% of transcripts were represented in contigs ). however, because estimated discovery is based on unique annotations and many transcripts and domains are similar enough to produce erroneous annotation, blast-based annotation against the d. melanogaster protein dataset suggested only a 70% discovery rate for the  <dig> m read assembly. including singletons in this analysis has a significant impact on estimated discovery rates at lower sequencing depths  and s2) but has only a marginal impact for deeper assemblies . estimated discovery rates over read lengths and as compared to b. mori followed similar trends .

total percentage of contigs annotated was relatively stable across sequencing depths: 91–94%  of perfect contigs  were annotated compared to d. melanogaster, and 60–68%  were annotated compared to b. mori. these results did not generally trend over sequencing depths, with the exception of b. mori annotated perfect contigs, where higher sequencing depth was associated with increasing annotation . varying average read lengths, 84–98%  of perfect contigs  were annotated compared to d. melanogaster, and 46–80%  were annotated compared to b. mori. trends in these percentages were positive as read lengths increased, except for annotations of c-isotigs, which initially increased in percent annotated then decreased slightly as read lengths grew above  <dig> bp on average .

figure  <dig> revealed that newbler singletons tend to represent common transcripts. nevertheless, we still expect many rare transcripts to be represented as singletons alone. to evaluate this possibility, for all sequencing depth tests and for the read length tests where reads average  <dig> bp or  <dig> bp  we computed the percentages of unique annotations present only in singletons. as expected, the number of transcripts represented only by singletons initially increased then decreased for both assembly types over sequencing depth and decreased by average read length .

as above, for perfect assemblies we can also annotate contigs and singletons based on the transcripts that consituent reads were originally sourced from. in general, for singletons, the number of these unique “true” annotations were between  <dig> × and  <dig> × higher than the number of unique blastx assigned annotations , reflecting the extent to which blast-based annotation assigns paralogous reads identical annotation .

ortholog hit ratio
in o’neil et al.  <cit> , we introduced a biologically motivated measure of transcript discovery and assembly completeness, known as the ortholog hit ratio . this measure is defined for each unigene with a blast match to a related dataset, and is computed by simply dividing the number of bases in the matched region of the contig by the length of the best-matched sequence  <cit> . the ohr measure has been used as an estimate of how much of a transcript has been assembled into a contig sequence  <cit> ; ratios close to  <dig>  suggest complete transcript assembly.

we computed average and median contig ohrs against both the b. mori and d. melanogaster protein datasets as sequencing depth increased. for both assembly types ohrs improved with sequencing depth ). average and median ohrs for c-isotigs were larger than for perfect contigs, particularly at lower sequencing depths. this mirrors the earlier result that c-isotigs were fewer but longer. ohrs were generally higher when compared to d. melanogaster.

as we increased average read length, ohr statistics increased for the perfect assemblies ). at  <dig> bp when compared to d. melanogaster, and at  <dig> bp when compared to b. mori, median ohrs became larger than average ohrs reflecting the contig joining process, bringing many ohr values closer to  <dig> . c-isotig ohrs declined with reads longer than  <dig> bp, consistent with previous results indicating that many reads are left out of the assembly process when reads are long.

as above, including singletons in the analysis improves the use of the ohr metric for assembly evaluation. when computed over contigs and c-isotigs only, c-isotig average and median ohrs were higher than for perfect contigs, whereas over all unigenes these metrics reflect the appropriate relationships and are fully consistent . due to the large number of singletons produced by the non-perfect assembler , median statistics were invariant for these assemblies over sequencing depth .

because only the matched regions of contigs are used in the ohr measure, untranslated regions on the ends of mrnas are not included. further, novel or significantly differentiated genes will lack matches, so overall the ohr measure is designed to be conservative. however, using the ohr as a measure of transcript completeness requires at least two assumptions: first, that the best match indicates an orthologous  relationship, and second that the length of orthologous sequence is conserved. while the first assumption can be alleviated by requiring strong match scores , the second assumption is more problematic. ortholog hit ratios greater than  <dig>  are not uncommon and likely indicate relative expansion of the sequenced transcript relative to the related protein . ratios less than  <dig>  could also suffer from such evolutionary inflation or deflation.

while these inflations would be impossible to detect in normal circumstances, we computed d. melanogaster unigene ohrs against both the d. melanogaster protein dataset and the more distantly related b. mori protein dataset to investigate this effect. the top panel of figure  <dig> shows distributions for the over- or under-estimate of ohr computed as b. moriohr/d. mel. ohr, which we call the “ohr error,” for perfect unigenes  given various sequencing depths. overall, we see that the ohr measure is generally conservative: few error ratios are larger than  <dig>  and many ohrs are accurate .

to determine whether these errors are inherent to the matching and scoring process, or caused by the relative expansion or contraction of transcripts, we also normalized them by dividing them by the ratio of b. mori protein length to d. melanogaster protein length. the bottom panel of figure  <dig> shows distributions of these normalized ratios: here we see that normalized ohr errors greater than  <dig>  are almost entirely absent, indicating that over-estimates in the ohr measure are almost entirely driven by relative expansion in the d. melanogaster transcripts. results varying average read length were similar .

reverse annotation
just as we can match assembled sequences to b. mori and d. melanogaster proteins , we can also do the reverse and match proteins to sequences . one common reason for annotating in both directions is to identify sequence and protein pairs that are reciprocal best hits . if a sequence and protein have a best match to each other, this is taken as stronger evidence of an orthologous relationship—that the two sequences are descended from the same ancestral locus  <cit> .

within the limits of sequence comparison, we hypothesized that higher quality assemblies should reveal more rbh relationships, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of blastx-annotated sequences. as before, we did not reverse-annotate singletons from non-perfect assemblies of reads averaging longer then  <dig> bp ; because the presense or absense of singletons may affect reverse-annotation rates of contigs as well, we report no data for these assemblies.

as hypothesized, the number of contigs with rbhs against both b. mori and d. melanogaster followed the same trends as earlier rarefaction results : rbh count increased with sequencing depth and read length, perfect assemblies result in more rbhs, and comparing to more distantly related proteins results in fewer rbhs  and s5).

because rbh counts will naturally increase as the number of annotated sequences increases, we also computed the percentage of blastx annotated contigs and c-isotigs that additionally have rbhs, revealing the degree to which increased depth and length allow for increasing rates of high-confidence orthology detection, independent of annotation. in general, percentages of annotated contigs with rbhs were lower in comparison to b. mori proteins, and percentages were higher for c-isotigs, reflecting the assembler’s production of fewer but longer c-isotigs which may have been easier to annotate and assign orthology. this trend was reversed when singletons were included: lower percentages of non-perfect unigenes had reciprocal best hits than for perfect unigenes. otherwise, rbh trends were similar when computed over unigenes  and s5). in many cases, however, rbh percentages decreased then increased with increasing sequencing depth, preventing this metric from being fully consistent.

reverse annotation of contigs also revealed those that were matched by more than one protein. these may indicate erroneous “collapse” of reads from similar transcripts into a single consensus sequence . to evaluate this type of error, which should be less prevalent in more accurate assemblies, we assigned each contig and singleton a “collapse factor” , computed simply as the number of d. melanogaster or b. mori proteins having a best match to the sequence.

average cfs over c-isotigs were higher than for perfect contigs. including singletons resulted in average cfs there were very similar between assembly types, though low sequencing depths resulted in average perfect unigene cfs being slightly than average non-perfect unigene cfs ).

finally, by summing cfs over contigs  we can compute a “reverse rarefaction,” an alternate estimate of transcript discovery based on the number of proteins matching the assemblies. table  <dig> shows that these results were similar to the earlier rarefaction results. here, however, we estimated higher discovery rates. in fact, estimated discovery rates of d. melanogaster proteins in perfect contigs and unigenes  closely reflected the true discovery rates .

discussion
by comparing the results of a perfect assembly process to those of a widely used assembler on a number of simulated datasets, we comprehensively evaluated a host of quality metrics for de novo transcriptome assemblies. our simulated sequencing process presented each assembly type with difficulties unique to transcriptome reconstruction, such as a non-uniform distribution of transcript expression and the presence of alternative splice forms. recently, a similar simulated sequencing and perfect assembly methodology was used by mundry et al. to evaluate four assemblers on a single dataset  <cit> . the results presented here are complementary: by focusing on a single commonly used assembler while varying sequencing depth and average read length, we gain a more in-depth assessment of quality metrics and their response to choice of sequencing technique.

quality metrics that truly reflect assembly accuracy should reflect the fact that perfect assemblies are by definition of the highest quality. further, good metrics should also reflect the fact that, for perfect assemblies, increasing sequencing depth or read length produce higher quality output. although we were not able to annotate singletons for assemblies where they were numerous, these were only found in three of the longest read-length assemblies and were were able to fully annotate two alternate read-length assemblies  for all metric assessments. based on corresponding trends over sequencing depth and for contigs, we do not suspect this limitation affects our conclusions.

amongst aggregate assembly statistics, we found that simple contig count was not fully consistent with these facts, but metrics influenced by singletons such as percentage of reads assembled and percentage of unigene base pairs in contigs were. similarly, metrics concerning properties of the output sequences such as average length and coverage were not reliable when computed only over contigs but were fully consistent when computed over all unigenes.

some annotation-based metrics were fully consistent when computed over both contigs and unigenes, including the number of unique reverse-annotations and the number of reciprocal best hits. other metrics we considered were never fully consistent: coefficient of variation of read count and percentages of annotated sequences that also had reciprocal best hits. two annotation-based metrics, average collapse factor and number of unique annotations, were only fully consistent when computed over contigs. this is unsurprising for the average collapse factor, which is primarily a measure of erroneous contig formation. the number of unique annotations in unigenes is inconsistent largely because the number of unique annotations in singletons increases then decreases with sequencing depth.

of the fully consistent metrics, some provided stronger signals of relative assembly quality than others. for example, although reciprocal best hit count amongst unigenes reflected correct relationships, the counts did not vary greatly over sequencing depth or read length, and counts for perfect assemblies were only slightly higher than for non-perfect assemblies  and s5). further, we noted that while including singletons was necessary to make coverage and length statistics fully consistent, doing so for non-perfect assemblies resulted in coverage and length statistics too invariant to be useful in practice. stronger metrics included base pairs and percent of base pairs in contigs, unique contig annotations, reciprocal best hit counts, and contig collapse factors. in general, annotation-based metrics appear to reflect assembly quality best when computed over contigs, while basic assembly and sequence statistics should always include singletons.

the ortholog hit ratio, our previously developed annotation-based metric  <cit> , was the exception to the above rule and should be computed over unigenes. unfortunately, due to the large number of singletons output in non-perfect assemblies, ortholog hit ratios also did not vary strongly over read length or sequencing depth. previous results, however, indicate that for assemblers outputting fewer singletons  ortholog hit ratios computed over all unigenes may nevertheless be informative  <cit> . this may also be the case for the consistent but uniform unigene metrics discussed above.

by comparing d. melanogaster unigene ohrs against both b. mori and d. melanogaster protein sets we discovered that ortholog hit ratios computed against a related species are generally conservative in estimating individual transcript assembly. when the ohr does overestimate the percentage of a transcript assembled, this is almost entirely due to relative expansions in the sequence of interest. while our simulated datasets did not include sequences such as non-coding rnas or sample contamination , comparison of annotation-based metrics against both d. melanogaster and b. mori reveals the advantages of having a complete reference for comparison.

annotation and assessment of source locations for newbler singletons revealed the difficulties encountered in assembling non-uniformly expressed transcripts. many singletons were from rare transcripts, as expected, though many more represented highly expressed transcripts. this coupled with the results above suggest that singletons should be considered a proper part of a transcriptome assembly, not only for their biological utility but also in assessing and comparing assemblers and assemblies.

we note that this study does not consider the very high sequencing depths or mated reads provided by technologies such as the illumina hiseq platform. while mated reads are expected to provide assembly benefits similar to longer reads, the connection to assembly quality is less clear and so we have not utilized this assumption as we have for read length. interestingly, under our non-normalized power-law expression model, we found that  <dig>  million reads were sufficient to sample of 98% of the true transcriptome when singletons were included. these results suggest additional difficulties for evaluation and annotation of very high coverage depth de-bruijn based assemblies. for example, while modern assemblers like trinity  <cit>  can assemble such datasets to a reasonable set of tens of thousands of contigs, significant percentages of reads frequently do not map back, resulting in tens of millions of difficult-to-interpret but potentially important ‘singletons’ .

CONCLUSIONS
transcriptome sequencing provides researchers with a powerful, cost-effective means of obtaining genetic resources. the uses of a transcriptome assembly are many, and all uses benefit from assembly accuracy. while most papers reporting or comparing transcriptome assemblies also report metrics to speak to their completeness and quality, to date it has been unclear which metrics actually reveal assembly quality in a consistent and identifiable manner. by employing a comparative assembly process using both a “perfect” and an industry-standard assembler while simultaneously varying read lengths and sequencing depths, we comprehensively evaluated a number of quality metrics. while we found some metrics to be accurate measures of assembly quality, others did not—this information will be vital to those working with transcriptomic data, and will ultimately allow researchers to produce useful, comprehensive, cost-effective, and accurate genetic resources for nearly any species of interest.

