BACKGROUND
within the past decade, rna sequencing  has supplanted microarrays as the preferred technique for gene expression analysis. a typical workflow for rna-seq analysis involves aligning reads to an annotated genome followed by estimation of gene-level and/or isoform-level expression. in many cases, this is followed by statistical identification of genes that are differentially expressed between two or more sample groups. however, rna-seq presents unique analytical challenges, and accurate and robust tools to analyze sequencing data are rapidly evolving. as a result, analysis workflows can vary widely between studies.

one initial step of rna-seq analysis is to evaluate sequence read quality, which can vary substantially based on factors related to nucleic acid library preparation  and sequencing   <cit> . for example, during library preparation, random hexamers are sometimes used as primers for double stranded cdna synthesis, which leads to biases in nucleotide composition at the beginning of reads  <cit> . a second, intrinsic problem of sequencing by synthesis is phasing: different fragments within a cluster fall out of phase with one another as a result of slight differences in the timing of polymerization. errors in phasing accumulate over time; thus, read quality tends to decrease toward the ends of sequence reads. further, errors have a tendency to co-occur, such that reads with two errors are more common than would be predicted based on a model in which errors occur independently of one another  <cit> .

in the absence of pre-processing, phasing and other sequencing errors can lead to inclusion of incorrect base calls and, consequently, to erroneous read alignment. current next generation sequencing technologies produce reads as short as  <dig> bases up to hundreds of bases; sequencing errors are less frequent in the shorter read data sets, but the proportional impact of a single incorrect base may be larger. sequencing-associated errors are aggregated into a quality score that reflects the probability that a given base has been called incorrectly. most common among these, the phred quality score  used in the illumina platforms ranges from  <dig> to  <dig>  with increasing scores corresponding to higher quality base calls; for example, a q score of  <dig> represents a  <dig> in  <dig>  chance that a base has been called incorrectly  <cit> . similar quality scores are produced with alternative sequencing platforms as well. during pre-processing, the quality score can be used to eliminate poor quality bases that typically occur at the ends of reads, in a procedure commonly referred to as “trimming”. this quality-based trimming is distinct from adapter trimming, which can be used to remove high quality internal bases matching the sequencing adapters used in library preparation  <cit> . numerous approaches to quality-based trimming exist  <cit> , all with the end result of retaining high quality internal bases while removing lower quality flanking bases.

however, as for pre-processing in general, quality-based trimming of reads is widely, but heterogeneously, applied. thus, the specific algorithms and parameters used for quality score-driven trimming are a major determinant of what portions of reads are retained for further analysis. a broad survey of the major trimming algorithms currently in use found that although trimming prior to mapping of rna-seq reads leads to a decrease in the total number of reads, it concurrently increases the proportion of the remaining reads that map, suggesting that trimming is effective in removing reads that could not be mapped to the reference genome  <cit> .

although the above study suggested that trimming is beneficial, multiple lines of evidence suggest that it can also have detrimental effects. first, while errors in the assembly of a known transcriptome decrease with increased trimming, there is a concomitant decrease in the number of matching paired reads mapped, as well as the number of orfs that can be identified  <cit> . second, the number of distinct transcripts detected through de novo assembly decreases with more stringent trimming  <cit> . finally, trimming can increase the number of false positive variant calls in genome sequencing studies  <cit> . all of these findings are consistent with increasing difficulty in unambiguously aligning shorter reads to a reference genome and/or reconstructing less total sequence into longer contiguous sequences.

the above studies have all investigated the influence of trimming on the immediately downstream steps of read alignment and transcriptome reconstruction , but it remains to be determined how trimming impacts further downstream analyses – for example, expression estimation and statistical identification of differentially expressed genes. one might expect that the specificity of read alignments could impact gene expression estimates and have vital effects on differential expression predictions. consistent with this possibility, removing the first ten bases from all reads, irrespective of quality scores, led to an approximately two percent decrease in the number of differentially expressed genes detected in the d. melanogaster larval central nervous system following neuronal knockdown of a factor involved in spliceosome assembly  <cit> . more generally, one might expect that aggressive quality-based trimming would decrease the likelihood of detecting false positives that arise from erroneous mapping due to sequencing errors, while simultaneously reducing the sensitivity of detecting differentially expressed genes, since expression estimates would have reduced precision as a consequence of less sequencing information contributing to their measurement.

here, we set out to explore the effects of quality-based trimming on gene expression analysis and report that multiple forms of bias in gene and isoform expression levels are apparent when comparing an untrimmed rna-seq data set to the same data set with trimming applied. most of this bias can be removed by imposing a minimum read length requirement following trimming, suggesting that the gains in base calling accuracy that result from aggressive trimming are offset by the detrimental effects of estimating gene expression from short reads. however, despite the ability to correct much of the short read-associated bias by imposing a minimum length filter, a subset of biased genes remains resistant to correction. thus, we caution that aggressive trimming of rna-seq data can introduce bias and unpredictability into rna-seq gene expression estimates, which can subsequently impact downstream differential expression analysis.

RESULTS
quality-based trimming of ultralow-input rna-seq data increases mappability
previous work has shown that quality-based trimming of rna-seq data can lead to greatly increased mappability of reads   <cit> . however, this increased mappability of reads remaining after trimming comes at the expense of a dramatic reduction in the absolute number of aligned reads, as a consequence of some reads failing to pass minimum quality criteria during trimming. we predicted that this loss of information would impact analyses downstream of alignment; in particular, gene expression estimation. to assess this, we first generated rna-seq data from multi-dendritic  sensory neurons from d. melanogaster larvae, which had not yet been transcriptionally characterized by rna-seq despite their frequent use as a model system for neuronal development  <cit> . this approach was selected over those based on cells grown in culture to maximize physiological relevance. in this regard, the influence of trimming on expression measurement is particularly relevant to approaches using rna-seq for systematic identification of cell type in the nervous system  <cit> . neurons were sorted to high purity using two consecutive rounds of flow cytometry  and four samples comprised of  <dig> cells each were processed by smart-seq and sequenced on a hiseq  <dig>  each sample comprised at least seven million unpaired  <dig> base reads and was of high overall quality .fig.  <dig> high quality rna-seq data generated from d. melanogaster sensory neurons. a confocal image of drosophila larval sensory neurons expressing a nuclear-targeted version of mrfp  and a membrane-targeted version of gfp . genotype: w
118
; gal4
21– <dig>  uas-mcd8-gfp/uas-red-stinger. scale bar is 100 μm. b representative flow plots of d. melanogaster neurons. plots show three progressive gates to identify rfp+ neurons, followed by two additional re-sorts with the same gates to assess purity. compensated fluorescent values are shown. c box plots generated in fastqc show average  and median  quality scores across all read positions for each of the four independent replicate samples



to assess whether trimming improved mappability of our samples, as has been reported elsewhere  <cit> , we trimmed our sensory neuron data sets with three different trimming algorithms and determined mappability. first, we evaluated solexaqa, a sliding window trimmer that offers a balanced tradeoff between mappability and the number of mapped reads  <cit> . we also evaluated trimmomatic, which was shown to achieve high mappability with less aggressive trimming  <cit> , and condetri, which demonstrated high mappability when used aggressively  <cit> . we varied the quality score threshold from  <dig>  corresponding to a  <dig> in  <dig> chance of an incorrect base, up to  <dig>  corresponding to a  <dig> in  <dig>  chance of an incorrect base – the highest confidence score assigned in illumina sequencing data. after trimming, data were aligned to the annotated d. melanogaster transcriptome using tophat <dig>  <cit> . as previously shown with another high quality rna-seq data set  <cit> , mappability increased with increasing quality requirements, but the absolute number of aligned reads decreased . thus, the impact of trimming on the mappability of the high quality reads generated from the small cell numbers employed in our study was similar to that observed from samples generated from abundant input rna  <cit> .fig.  <dig> influence of quality-based trimming on mappability. a the total number of input reads  and reads aligned to the transcriptome  from four rna-seq data sets trimmed at a range of quality scores with solexaqa. b the mappability, or number of aligned reads per total input reads per sample. input reads shorter than  <dig> bases were not included in the calculation, as these are discarded by tophat <dig> prior to alignment. error bars represent standard deviations



junction spanning reads decrease disproportionately following trimming
although trimming increases overall mappability, it can also substantially shorten many reads, depending on the aggressiveness of the trimming parameters. we reasoned that this reduction in information content might introduce one or more forms of bias during read alignment. in particular, we predicted that there would be a disproportionate bias against reads aligning to exon-exon junctions, since alignment to such sites requires sequences long enough to span both the splice donor and acceptor sides of the junction. tophat <dig> requires that reads, either singly or in combination with other reads, align for at least eight contiguous bases with no mismatches on both sides of a junction for initial junction detection, though subsequent reads may span a shorter distance and will still map to the junction  <cit> . this is in contrast to aligning to non-junction locations, which minimally requires twelve contiguous bases with no more than one mismatch. as predicted, we observe that trimming disproportionately decreases the proportion of reads mapped to exon-exon junctions. the frequency of reads aligned to junctions, as a function of the total number of reads aligned, decreases as trimming quality score threshold increases, from  <dig>  %  without trimming to  <dig>  %  at q <dig> . interestingly, this is not the case with the frequency at which junctions are detected, as the number of junctions detected per reads aligned increases with increasing quality score stringency, from  <dig>  junctions detected per thousand reads mapped without trimming  to  <dig>  junctions detected per thousand reads mapped at q <dig>  . although the reason for this is unclear, we speculate that at the read coverage depth in our data, our ability to detect junctions is not constrained by coverage even after trimming, resulting in the increased frequency of junction detection largely being driven by the decrease in the total number of aligned reads.fig.  <dig> influence of trimming on junction alignment and detection. a the average number of reads aligned to junctions per sample at a range of solexaqa quality scores. b the average frequency of reads aligned to junctions . c the average number of junctions detected per sample. d the average frequency of junction detection . for all panels, data were normalized to the untrimmed value on a per sample basis. error bars represent standard deviations



bias in expression levels estimated from untrimmed and trimmed reads
we predicted that the decreased frequency of reads aligning to junctions would change estimates of isoform expression levels, since accurate alignment of reads to junctions contributes to the assignment of reads to specific isoforms  <cit> . such bias would be expected to manifest as significantly different expression between trimmed and untrimmed samples, which we tested using cuffdiff <dig>  <cit> . we note that throughout this work we refer to bias in the sense that gene expression is different between the groups, but with limited a priori knowledge of whether the gene expression estimates based on untrimmed or trimmed reads are more accurately reflective of the true expression levels .

as predicted, the expression of many isoforms was significantly altered by quality score trimming, with hundreds of differentially expressed isoforms detected with aggressive trimming . this finding holds even if novel junction discovery, the default behavior of tophat <dig> mapping, is disabled , since only the annotated transcriptome and junctions were used for modeling by cuffdiff <dig>  because cuffdiff <dig> estimates gene-level expression as the sum of the expression of all individual isoforms  <cit> , we further predicted that in addition to isoforms, genes would exhibit expression bias following trimming. as expected, we observed a progressively increasing number of significant differentially expressed genes between our untrimmed data set and trimmed data sets with increasingly aggressive quality filtering . at the most stringent quality score, q <dig>  cuffdiff <dig> identified  <dig> genes, representing  <dig>  % of all annotated genes, biased towards higher expression in either the untrimmed or trimmed data set, suggesting that trimming can have a substantial effect on the apparent composition of a sample.fig.  <dig> isoform and gene expression levels after trimming. a comparison of the expression estimates of isoforms and genes between increasing solexaqa trimming thresholds  and the untrimmed data set. red dots represent statistically significant differential expression between data sets. b the number of significantly biased isoforms and  genes at a range of quality scores



although the junction-alignment bias described above might play a role in these differential expression estimates, other factors must contribute as well since junction bias alone was insufficient to explain all of the observed bias. for example, we found that loss of junction reads did not uni-directionally decrease expression estimates. instead, bias toward higher expression in untrimmed data was detected for some isoforms, but toward higher expression in trimmed data for others, including comparisons in which the number of junctions was held constant. low expression level was also not a primary factor driving significance—no significant genes or isoforms exhibited expression values, measured as fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads , of less than one in both the untrimmed and trimmed data sets . thus, it is likely that trimming introduces or corrects multiple sources of bias in gene expression estimation, relative to untrimmed reads, and that filtering based on expression level would not provide a means by which to eliminate this bias.

short trimmed reads are the predominant source of bias
since bias resulting from differential alignment of junction-spanning reads could not fully account for the observed differences in expression estimated from untrimmed and trimmed reads, we next hypothesized that read length might contribute to the observed bias through other mechanisms. in addition to removing reads of very low quality in their entirety, trimming also shortens reads of mixed quality to preserve only high quality bases. thus, the trimmed data sets have a distribution of read lengths as compared to the uniform read length in the untrimmed data set . we predicted that shorter reads would align to more locations than longer reads, and that this promiscuity in mapping would drive some of the observed differential expression estimates. to evaluate this, we removed all reads below a fixed length in the most heavily trimmed solexaqa data set, q40-trimmed, and compared gene expression between these data and untrimmed reads. minimum length requirements below  <dig> bases had no effect on the number of differentially expressed genes or isoforms identified by cuffdiff <dig>  which was expected since such reads fall below the default threshold for reads that tophat <dig> attempts to align. however, following length filtering using longer thresholds, much of the bias both in isoform and gene expression between untrimmed and trimmed samples was eliminated . at the highest quality score, q <dig>  the number of significantly biased genes was reduced from  <dig> to  <dig> and the number of significantly biased isoforms was reduced from  <dig> to  <dig> when the minimum read length was increased from  <dig> to  <dig>  increasing stringency beyond a minimum of length of  <dig> was not attempted because few q40-trimmed reads exceeded this length.fig.  <dig> isoform and gene expression levels after length-filtering. a the distribution of input read lengths before  and after  trimming. b comparison of the expression estimates of isoforms and genes between the untrimmed data set and the trimmed data sets with minimum read lengths required. l# specifies the minimum read length, in bases, required for inclusion. red dots represent statistically significant differential expression between data sets. c the number of significantly biased isoforms and  genes at a range of minimum read lengths



the impact of short reads on trimming-induced bias was corroborated by results from trimming with trimmomatic and condetri. rather than searching sequencing reads for the longest run of bases over a given quality, both of these trimmers search from the end of reads, such that if a stretch of high quality is encountered near one of the ends, only the bases outside of that run will be truncated. one consequence of this approach to trimming is that the retained reads are considerably longer, with very few short reads retained as compared with solexaqa . consistent with the hypothesis that read length drives bias, even fairly aggressive application of these trimmers results in considerably less bias than trimming with solexaqa, with a maximum of  <dig> biased genes with trimmomatic  and  <dig> biased genes with condetri . thus, short reads generated upon trimming are an important driver of bias in gene expression estimates, but this can be partially offset by imposing stringent minimum length filters.

finally, we note that the long reads that remain after both stringent quality-based trimming and length filtering can be mapped with high accuracy; over 97 % of 36-mers present in the d. melanogaster genome are unique. given that bias is minimized between the full, untrimmed data set and this aggressively trimmed and length filtered high confidence data set, this suggests that the full, untrimmed data set generates a more faithful representation of true gene expression estimates than those derived from aggressively trimmed data containing short reads.

additional factors contribute to gene expression bias
although imposing read length requirements counteracted bias introduced by trimming, notable differences remained between the untrimmed and the processed data, and we next sought to identify additional drivers that could account for the residual bias. we divided the genes and isoforms differentially expressed at q <dig> without length filtering into two groups—correctable and resistant—according to whether or not expression bias could be corrected by length filtering , as assessed using cuffdiff <dig> 

we assessed five parameters related to read alignment and transcript structure of the biased genes and isoforms. we hypothesized that poorly expressed genes would be more strongly impacted by promiscuous alignment of short reads than highly expressed genes, due to the proportion of inappropriately aligning reads being higher for poorly expressed genes. consistent with this prediction, the expression levels of resistant genes and correctable genes differed prior to length filtering, with the resistant genes exhibiting a median expression of  <dig> fpkm, as compared with a median expression of  <dig> fpkm among the biased genes corrected by length filtering  .fig.  <dig> correlations of gene and isoform properties with length filtering-resistant bias. a the distribution of gene expression levels  for length filtering-correctable and -resistant genes, after solexaqa trimming at q =  <dig> and prior to length filtering. b the fractional gc content of correctable and resistant isoforms. c the distribution of transcript lengths for correctable and resistant isoforms. d the distribution of the number of exons per isoform for correctable and resistant isoforms. *, p <  <dig>  following benjamini-hochberg adjustment. bars represent the mean. for clarity, not all data points are depicted. cor, correctable. res, resistant



because short reads are more likely to map to multiple locations in the genome , we next investigated how this property is associated with the observed biases. before length filtering, multi-hit reads mapped to over 99 % of detected genes, indicating that expression estimates were broadly influenced by short reads aligning to multiple locations. however, this was not the case after imposing a minimum read length requirement of  <dig> bases: after filtering, 10 % of genes resistant to bias-correction, but only  <dig>  % of correctable genes, contained any multi-hit reads . thus, mapping of non-unique short reads is rampant in aggressively trimmed data, and may continue to contribute a small portion of the residual bias even after length filtering. to more directly assess the role of multi-hits in differential expression following trimming, we repeated differential expression analysis using only uniquely mapping reads. eliminating multi-hit reads greatly reduced the number of differentially expressed genes and isoforms after trimming at q <dig> to  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . however, as would be predicted based on the low percentage of non-unique reads present after length filtering, the effect on differential expression following length filtering was minimal , suggesting that multi-hits are not the primary driver of the residual bias after length filtering, and that additional factors may play a role. although these data indicate that gene expression estimation from trimmed reads is stabilized by excluding multi-hits, others have found that allowing multi-hits increases the accuracy of expression estimates from 36-base rna-seq reads  <cit> . thus, exclusion of all multi-hits could introduce bias as well; whether this bias or that associated with promiscuous alignment of short reads is more tolerable will need to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

the ability of short reads to align to multiple locations might be influenced by the intrinsic sequence content of a given gene or isoform. specifically, we predicted that bias-correctable genes might exhibit lower sequence complexity, which would result in higher rates of multi-hit mapping, but that could be corrected by length filtering. to examine sequence complexity, we assessed entropy of isoform sequences in the two groups using markov models for  <dig> to  <dig> base pair oligonucleotides  <cit> . two of the six measures of complexity were significantly different between the correctable and resistant groups, with the correctable group exhibiting lower complexity in both cases as predicted . however, we also noted that length filtering-resistant isoforms exhibited significantly higher gc content , and that both of the significant complexity measures were also significantly correlated with gc content. this observation suggested that gc content, rather than complexity per se, might be the primary underlying factor driving resistance to correction by length filtering. notably, genes with high gc content exhibit disproportionately high expression values in rna-seq studies  <cit> , which is also consistent with our observation that fpkm is associated with resistance to bias-correction . in anticipation of this potential bias, cuffdiff <dig> was run with the optional fragment bias correction protocol  <cit>  enabled; however, as evidenced by the above findings, some gc content bias remained.

we next evaluated structural properties of transcript isoforms—specifically, isoform length and number of exons—as a source of resistance to bias-correction through length filtering. the distributions of transcript lengths were not different between the two groups  . in contrast, the number of exons, and therefore also the number of junctions, was higher in the correctable group  as compared with the resistant group   . in addition, both the frequency of junction detection and frequency of reads mapped to junctions increased with increasingly stringent length filtering . together, these data suggest that length filtering of quality-filtered data improves detection of exon-exon junctions in addition to reducing spurious multi-hit alignments.

trimming-induced differential expression is manifest in diverse analysis pipelines
although tophat <dig> and cufflinks <dig> are widely used for analyzing rna-seq data, alternative tools have been gaining broad acceptance. different tools vary in their underlying assumptions about read distribution and in their approach to handling non-uniquely mapping reads; therefore, we next examined whether the trimming-induced biases we identified are generalizable to other pipelines. most tools assess differential expression based on gene-level counts, without discrimination of isoforms; thus, we focused our analysis on differential gene expression. we implemented four additional pipelines using the read aligners star  <cit>  and rsem  <cit>  in combination with the differential analysis tools deseq <dig>  <cit>  and edger  <cit> . consistent with our tophat2/cufflinks <dig> results, significantly differentially expressed genes were detected with each additional pipeline following trimming with stringent quality parameters , albeit fewer than our original analysis identified, and these largely disappeared when a length filter was imposed . the differences in the number of differentially expressed genes between analysis tools may be due to inherent differences in how liberal or conservative the programs are in calling significant differences, as previously reported  <cit> . despite differences in the scale of the effect, all of these tools indicated that trimming affects gene expression estimates in this d. melanogaster rna-seq data set.table  <dig> differentially expressed genes detected by multiple analysis pipelines

the number of significantly differentially expressed genes detected, using  <dig> different analysis pipelines, when comparing the untrimmed data set to the same data set trimmed with solexaqa, using a quality score of  <dig> , or with a quality score of  <dig> and a minimum length requirement of  <dig> bases . de tool, differential expression tool. de genes, differentially expressed genes



trimming-induced differential expression is manifest in diverse rna-seq data sets
we next assessed whether the effects of trimming found in the d. melanogaster rna-seq data set were observed with other independently generated rna-seq data. for these analyses, we chose data sets derived from different organisms  and generated in different labs using different library preparation and sequencing protocols. these additional data sets were comprised of samples with paired  <dig> base reads; thus, we anticipated that the negative effects of trimming would be less severe since longer reads are less likely to map to multiple locations, and paired reads must map concordantly. instead, we found that trimming had a more pronounced effect on these data than on our original data . using the solexaqa/tophat2/cuffdiff <dig> pipeline, we found that 54 % of genes  in the rat sample and 78 % of genes  in the yeast sample were significantly altered in their expression when the most aggressive trimming, q <dig>  was applied. as in the d. melanogaster data set, imposing a minimum length filter of  <dig> bases substantially reduced the number of differentially expressed genes, down to 2 %  and 10 %  of all genes. we note that smaller fold changes between the trimmed and untrimmed samples were called as significantly different  in these two data sets than in the original data set, which might be due to lower variance between replicate samples and/or increased accuracy in alignments due to the use of paired reads. thus, we expect that quality-based trimming will alter gene and isoform level expression estimates across rna-seq data sets, though the extent to which estimates change will depend on characteristics specific to each data set.fig.  <dig> differential gene expression following trimming in two additional data sets. a comparison of the gene expression estimates from an rna-seq data set derived from rat samples, between solexaqa trimmed data sets and the untrimmed data set. q# specifies the quality threshold imposed. l# specifies the minimum read length, in bases, required for inclusion after q <dig> trimming. red dots represent statistically significant differential expression between data sets. b comparison of the gene expression estimates from an rna-seq data set derived from yeast samples. c the number of significantly biased genes at a range of quality scores and lengths, rat data sets. d the number of significantly biased genes at a range of quality scores and lengths, yeast data sets



aggressive trimming decreases concordance with microarray expression estimates
given that trimming causes substantial changes in gene expression estimates across multiple rna-seq data sets, we next investigated whether trimming improved or reduced the accuracy of expression estimates. as a biological standard for gene expression, we used the rat and yeast data sets described above, in which the same rna libraries were subjected to genome-wide gene expression analysis both by rna-seq and by hybridization to microarrays  <cit> . specifically, we reasoned that if trimming reduced the accuracy of rna-seq based expression estimates, we should observe decreased concordance between the rna-seq and microarray expression values in trimmed rna-seq data sets. this is precisely what we observed . in the two independent rna-seq/microarray data sets, expression estimates from untrimmed rna-seq data were most highly correlated with microarray expression estimates, though even moderately aggressive trimming, up to q <dig>  minimally reduced these correlations. by contrast, aggressive trimming led to substantially reduced correlations with microarray data. length filtering slightly improved the correlations with microarray estimates for the heavily trimmed rat data; however, length filtering of the yeast data further decreased correlations, suggesting that this additional filtering may not universally counteract trimming-induced bias. thus, by validation with an independent technique, we conclude that no or low trimming thresholds are most likely to result in the highest accuracy for rna-seq based expression estimates.table  <dig> correlations between rna-seq gene expression estimates and microarray intensities

values represent correlation coefficients between gene expression values determined by microarray data sets and rna-seq data sets that were trimmed with solexaqa with quality scores as indicated, followed by mapping and modeling with tophat <dig> and cuffdiff2



CONCLUSIONS
the data we present here provide evidence that aggressive quality-based trimming can strongly influence estimation of gene and isoform expression levels, which subsequently impacts identification of differentially expressed genes. a considerable source of the observed differences can be attributed to the alignment of shorter reads that result from trimming. imposing minimum read length requirements reverts gene expression estimates to values closer to estimates produced from untrimmed reads, suggesting that untrimmed or trimmed, length-filtered reads—the latter of which likely represent the highest quality reads within a data set—may most accurately reflect the actual library composition.

because different experiments have different goals, individual researchers must determine whether or not trimming will be beneficial for their particular application. for example, in genome sequencing or for rna-seq experiments where extremely large numbers of reads are available, modest trimming may provide benefits. further, in data sets with low average base calling quality, or in library preparation protocols that are susceptible to adapter contamination, trimming may allow the recovery of reads which would otherwise be detrimental to expression estimation. both of these attributes were more common in early rna-seq studies, so trimming may be particularly useful when re-analyzing such data. one potential improvement may be to use longer sequencing reads, such as  <dig> or  <dig> bases, so that longer reads remain after trimming low quality bases from either end, though our results demonstrate that this alone will not prevent the introduction of trimming-induced expression changes. however, we re-iterate previously voiced concerns  <cit>  that mappability should not be used as the sole criterion for performance. furthermore, our results suggest that aggressive trimming adversely affects the accuracy of expression estimates. therefore, if trimming is applied, extreme care should be used, and other measures such as length filtering should be considered in the pre-processing pipeline to minimize the introduction of unwanted bias.

