BACKGROUND
the level of methionine , the essential sulfur-containing amino acid, limits the nutritional quality of crops. met is also a fundamental metabolite in plants, since, in addition to its role as a protein constituent and its central role in the initiation of mrna translation, it is also a precursor for the synthesis of essential metabolites through its first metabolite, s-adenosyl met . due to the nutritional and metabolic importance of met, studies were performed to assess the factors that regulate its synthesis and accumulation in vegetative tissues . however, only a limited number of studies have been performed to reveal the factors regulating its synthesis and accumulation in seeds .

biochemical and genetic evidence show that met is synthesized de novo in seeds through the aspartate family pathway  as it occurs in leaves. the first committed enzyme of the met biosynthesis pathway, cystathionine γ-synthase , regulates the pathway by combining the carbon-amino skeleton  with the sulfur group   <cit>  . however, other studies performed in several plants such as arabidopsis and wheat indicate that met that was synthesized in vegetative tissues was converted to s-methyl met  and then transported from these tissues to the developing seeds. in seeds, smm is then converted back to met by the activity of homocysteine s-methyltransferase   <cit>  .

while the debate about the role of smm and aspartate pathways in met synthesis in seeds is still ongoing, two recent studies reported that seed-specific expression of feedback-insensitive mutated forms of arabidopsis cgs  in legume seeds  <cit>  lead to higher levels of met. these experiments indicate that cgs plays a major role in controlling met synthesis in legumes seeds. however, further studies are required to reveal the roles of cgs  and hmt  in seeds of other plants.

in the current study, we aimed at revealing the role of cgs in met synthesis in tobacco  seeds that belong to solanaceae. tobacco plants were selected for this study since we had used them previously as a model plant to study the regulatory role of arabidopsis cgs  in met accumulation in tobacco vegetative tissues  <cit> . two forms of atcgs were overexpressed in tobacco plants: full-length atcgs  that is feedback-sensitive to high levels of met/sam  <cit> ; and truncated atcgs  that is met/sam feedback-insensitive  <cit> . while the level of soluble met increased significantly in plants overexpressing the f-atcgs by about two-fold compared to wild-type , those overexpressing the t-atcgs showed a  <dig> -fold increase in met but significantly higher levels of met that incorporated to proteins   <cit> . tobacco plants were chosen for the study also since their capsule morphology enables us to apply met or other metabolites to the developing capsules in order to assess the effect on amino acids and primary metabolites in the developing seeds  <cit> .

in the current study, we aimed  to elucidate the role of cgs in met synthesis in tobacco seeds;  to study the role of the feedback inhibition of atcgs on met synthesis in seeds; and  to study the metabolic consequences of enhanced cgs activity in these seeds.

the metabolic consequences of increased met content have not yet been studied, and only a few studies have addressed the relationships between increased levels of other amino acids to seeds metabolism  <cit> . developing seeds are an excellent system for studying developmentally controlled metabolic regulation because during seed development, there is a massive synthesis of fatty acids, sugars and amino acids, which are converted to their storage forms: proteins, starch and oil  <cit> . the results show that high expression level of t-atcgs leads to higher total met content and affect the level of  <dig> annotated metabolites. the results imply that oxidative stress might occur in the transgenic seeds expressing this form of cgs.

RESULTS
the endogenous tobacco cgs is regulated by a high level of met
in this study, we express in tobacco seeds the feedback-sensitive form of atcgs  and its mutated form that is insensitive to met . to distinguish between the effects of these two forms of atcgs, it is important to know if the endogenous tobacco cgs  is down-regulated by a high content of met similarly to atcgs  <cit> . to determine this, tobacco seedlings  were fed with 5 mm met, or with double distilled water  as a control, and the expression level of ntcgs was measured by quantitative real-time pcr . the results  show that the level of ntcgs is sensitive to high levels of met such as atcgs and tomato cgs  <cit> , but unlike potatoes  <cit>  that belong to the solanaceae family together with tobacco and tomato.

most probably due to the major role of met in plant metabolism, we expected that similar to arabidopsis  <cit> , ntcgs would express in all tissues of the tobacco plants. thus, we assume that if a higher level of met will be found in the transgenic seeds expressing the atcgs, it will be the result of the higher activity of atcgs and less from the endogenous ntcgs.

seeds expressing atcgs do not accumulate higher levels of soluble met
to assess whether cgs expression is a rate-limiting factor of met synthesis in tobacco seeds, two forms of atcgs  were expressed under the control of the seed-specific promoter, legumin b <dig>  <cit> , to produce lf and lt plants, respectively . seeds from  <dig> kanamycin-resistant plants from each line were screened by immunoblot to determine the expression level of the two forms of atcgs . two plants showing the highest expression level for each line were self-pollinated to produce homozygous plants. seeds from t <dig> lines were used for further analysis.

the levels of soluble met were then measured in seeds of transgenic homozygous lines and wt plants. unexpectedly, the levels of met in the two sets of the transgenic seeds did not increase beyond the levels of wt seeds and were even significantly reduced . these results are unlike those reported for tobacco plants overexpressing these two forms of atcgs, which show significantly higher levels of met in their leaves  <cit> . in addition, these results also differ from those obtained from soybean and azuki bean seeds expressing the feedback-insensitive forms of atcgs, which exhibit significantly higher levels of soluble met   <cit> .

the observation that met does not accumulate in the seeds of the transgenic lines beyond wt levels can be the result of an elevation in catabolic enzymes of met. an increase in the expression of catabolic enzymes during seed development was reported in tobacco seeds expressing a key enzyme of lysine synthesis  <cit> . these seeds exhibit significantly higher lysine content compared to wt during their development; however, this triggers the expression of a lysine catabolic enzyme at a later stage of seed development, and eventually the level of lysine does not increase in the dry seeds  <cit> . we expected that if this phenomenon occurs also in the transgenic seeds expressing the two forms of atcgs, the level of met will be increased during seed development compared to wt seeds. to test this, the level of met was measured during eight stages of seed development. the results show that the levels of soluble met in the transgenic seeds are similar to those found in wt seeds during all developmental stages . this suggests that similar processes occur in the wt and the transgenic seeds during seed development, and that the low met level found in dry transgenic seeds is apparently not related to an elevation in the rate of met catabolic enzymes. however, in the future, when the sequences of the genes encoded to the two main catabolic enzymes of met, sam synthase and met γ-lyase  from tobacco will be discovered, it will be worthwhile studying if their expression levels and/or activities increase during seed development in the transgenic lines. in addition, the role of the young cycle and the methyl cycle derived from met could be studied in these seeds to gain better knowledge of these pathways when the expression level of atcgs increased in seeds.

evidence of enhanced met synthesis in transgenic seeds during seed development
the synthesis of met is connected with other amino acids such as those belonging to the aspartate family pathway . since the reduction of soluble met in the transgenic seeds was unexpected, we have measured the levels of other amino acids to define changes that occur with an increase in expression level of atcgs. the analysis revealed that in addition to met, the levels of seven amino acids: glutamine, glutamate, asparagine, serine, valine, leucine and histidine were significantly reduced in both transgenic lines. the levels of threonine, and isoleucine were reduced significantly only in transgenic lt seeds, while alanine and glycine were reduced significantly only in lf seeds. the level of proline increased significantly in lt seeds, compared to wt seeds . from these altered amino acids, eight can be considered as met-related amino acids . glutamine and glutamate serve as precursors for aspartate that donates its carbon-amino acid skeleton to met synthesis. the levels of these amino acids tend to be reduced when the content of met, as well as levels of lysine and threonine, two additional amino acids that belong to the aspartate family of amino acids , increase  <cit> . threonine competes with met for their common precursor o-phosphohomoserine , and a decrease in the levels of threonine was observed in several plants following an increase in met levels  <cit> . the branched amino acids, leucine, isoleucine and valine, are related to met since the carbon/amino skeleton of these amino acids, is generated by the catabolism of threonine and met  <cit> . indeed, their levels increased significantly when high levels of met were found in the leaves of transgenic tobacco and arabidopsis plants  <cit> . serine is the precursor of the carbon/amino skeleton for cysteine synthesis, which is the sulfur donor for met synthesis. a decrease in serine content was reported when the requirement for cysteine and met increased  <cit> . the decrease in the level of serine suggests that the level of cysteine was decreased as well. thus, an hplc analysis was performed to measure the level of cysteine. the results show that the level of cysteine decreased significantly  in lt seeds, while in lf seeds, the decrease in cysteine levels was insignificant . since cysteine is also used as a precursor for the synthesis of glutathione , and the level of gsh is limited by cysteine , the level of gsh was also determined. similarly to cysteine, the level of gsh was insignificantly altered in lf, and reduced significantly in lt compared to wt , a reduction of 22%.

the low levels of the  <dig> amino acids  in seeds of lt suggest that although we did not detect an increase in the amounts of soluble met, the flux towards met synthesis was enhanced in the transgenic seeds, causing a decrease in the content of met precursors and competitors.

to test this assumption, and to assess whether the  <dig> amino acids whose levels were reduced in lt seeds, are indeed related to met synthesis and metabolism, the receptacles of developing capsules of wt plants were fed with met. it is expected that feeding with met will reduce the flux towards met synthesis due to a reduction in the expression level of ntcgs . if this occurs, we will expect an elevation in the levels of met precursors  or met competitors  in the seeds. to test this assumption, receptacles of developing capsules  were fed with  <dig>  ml of 5 mm met, or with ddw as a control. at this stage of development, the proteins accumulate and amino acids are synthesized in the seeds  <cit> . twenty-four hours later, the seeds were collected from these capsules and the levels of free amino acids were analyzed. the values obtained for the soluble amino acids  were significantly higher in seeds obtained from the fed capsules compared to those obtained from the dry seeds . this apparently happens because at that stage of seed development, most of the amino acids are not yet incorporated into the seed-storage proteins.

the results show that the level of met increased significantly in the seeds from capsules fed with met  , indicating that met can be transported from the receptacle to the seeds. the level of aspartate, glutamate, glutamine, serine , threonine , glycine and histidine were increased significantly in the seeds fed with met . the levels of homocysteine and homoserine, intermediate metabolites of the met biosynthesis pathway , also increased significantly , suggesting that under these conditions the activity of met synthase, the last enzyme of met synthesis, and homoserine kinase, are regulating the met synthesis. in addition to these met-related amino acids, the level of lysine that belongs to the aspartate family together with met also increased significantly, while the level of tryptophan decreased significantly . the level of cysteine that was determined by hplc shows that its level increased significantly in those fed with met compared to those fed with ddw . the level of gsh also increased significantly in these seeds at an elevation of  <dig> -fold . these results, as well as those shown in figure  <dig>  suggest that a high expression of t-atcgs increases the flux of cysteine towards met synthesis in lt seeds at the expense of cysteine and its tripeptide, gsh.

the alternation in the content of cysteine and gsh in lt and in the met-fed seeds was unexpected. thus, to gain more knowledge about these changes, we studied how a high expression of t-atcgs in lt seeds affects the transcript expression level of two genes in the gsh synthesis. we also determined the transcript level of adenosine-5′-phosphosulfate-reductase, a key enzyme of the cysteine biosynthesis pathway  <cit> . none of the expression levels of these transcripts were altered between wt and lt seeds . these results suggest that the alternation in gsh content is controlled less by the transcript levels of genes involved in cysteine and gsh biosynthesis pathways, and more by the flux of cysteine towards gsh and/or met biosynthesis pathways. however, further studies are required to define the role of other factors and enzymes, as well as the role of o-acetylserine, the key metabolite that regulates the synthesis of cysteine  <cit> .

taken together, the data obtained by feeding experiments showed that the reduction of the flux towards met synthesis caused by met-feeding, led to an elevation in the levels of met precursors and its competitors. these results support the assumption that although the level of met in the transgenic seeds is relatively low, there is an enhanced flux towards met synthesis during seed development. this is more pronounced in lt than in lf seeds that are feedback-sensitive to met/sam  <cit> . however, additional studies are required to monitor directly the metabolic flux leading to met synthesis and the effect of t-atcgs expression on this flux in seeds. the results also indicate that in tobacco seeds there is a connection between high expression levels of t-atcgs to the levels of  <dig> amino acids and gsh.

lt seeds contain higher levels of total met in their proteins
the results described above suggest that there is a higher flux towards met synthesis in lt seeds. since the results described in additional file 1: figure s <dig> imply that met is converted to other metabolites in lt seeds at the same rate as it occurs in wt seeds, we assume that in lt seeds, met was used mainly to synthesize storage proteins. support of this assumption was derived from the observation that the soluble levels of the three branched amino acids that can be produced through met catabolism  <cit>  were not increased and even reduced significantly in lt seeds .

to test the assumption that in lt seeds met was used to synthesize the seed’s storage proteins, the levels of amino acids were measured after protein hydrolysis in dry seeds of wt, lf and lt. the total met content in seeds of the two lf lines did not change significantly and were even slightly reduced when compared to wt . one possible explanation for this observation is that the met content in lf seeds cannot be increased further because of the feedback inhibition regulation occurring on atcgs transcript level by sam  <cit> . moreover, since the level of soluble met was reduced significantly in lf seeds compared to wt , it also implies that the sensitivity to the feedback inhibition of atcgs  is higher than the ntcgs, hence reducing the ability of met to accumulate. to test this assumption further, the expression level of ntcgs was measured in seedlings of wt and transgenic seedlings overexpressing the atcgs  <cit> . as expected from the observation that the expression level of ntcgs is sensitive to a high level of met , its level was lower in seedlings overexpressing the f-atcgs compared to wt  . next, we also analyzed the effect of a high content of met on the expression level of atcgs and ntcgs. the results  showed that while the expression level of ntcgs was reduced by 33%, that of atcgs was reduced by 52% compared to those fed with ddw. this suggests that atcgs is more sensitive to feedback inhibition caused by a high level of met compared to ntcgs. since the sensitivity of atcgs to met is similar in the whole tissues of arabidopsis  <cit> , we expected that this is also the case for ntcgs. if this is indeed the case, the results described in figure  <dig> can explain why the level of met was reduced in lf transgenic seeds. however, further studies are required to test this assumption and to reveal why the contents of nine additional soluble amino acids  were significantly decreased in lf transgenic seeds .

the levels of amino acids were measured using gc-ms and displayed as nmol/gr dry seeds. values are representative of two independently grown sets of plants are the mean ± standard deviation of five biological repetitions of 50 mg seeds isolated from three plants per line. statistically significant changes  are identified by letters.

unlike lf, lt seeds expressing the feedback-insensitive form of atcgs  exhibit significantly higher levels of total met, which increased  <dig> to 60%, compared to wt seeds . based on the results obtained from lt, we suggest that the level of soluble met in tobacco wt seeds limits the met content that can be incorporated into proteins. similar assumptions were made in several other studies showing that higher levels of soluble cysteine, lysine, tryptophan or met in transgenic soybean seeds  <cit> , and tryptophan in rice seeds  <cit>  lead to an increase in these amino acids in the seeds’ proteins. however, the ability of the higher soluble amino acids to incorporate into proteins appears to differ between different seeds. significantly higher levels of soluble met  led to higher total met  in soybean seeds of zigongdongdou cultivar  <cit> . yet, when the soybean cultivars misuzudaizu and bert were used, it was reported that although they exhibit significantly higher levels of soluble met , the level of total met was not altered significantly  <cit> . similarly, high levels of soluble threonine  in tobacco seeds  <cit>  and high levels of cysteine in lupine seeds   <cit>  do not alter the total threonine or cysteine in the transgenic seeds  <cit> .

lt seeds have higher levels of total amino acids and proteins
in addition to the significantly higher levels of total met in lt seeds, the total levels of aspartate, glutamate and two stress-associated amino acids, proline and serine also increased significantly in lt seeds . furthermore, the levels of most other amino acids in lt seeds were increased, although insignificantly. as a result, the total amino acids content increased significantly in lt seeds by 18-21% . this elevation can explain why the levels of total soluble amino acids decrease significantly . a similar trend of higher total amino acids was also found in two transgenic soybean seeds expressing the feedback-insensitive form of atcgs, in which the level of total amino acids increased by 55% and 76%  <cit> . however, this is not a general phenomenon in other amino acids, since transgenic soybean seeds having higher levels of total tryptophan and arabidopsis seeds having a higher level of lysine did not show an increase in total amino acids levels  <cit> . this suggests that met level is a limiting factor of protein synthesis in tobacco seeds, and that when met synthesis is enhanced, most of the other soluble amino acids are able to incorporate into proteins. however, further studies are required to define the mechanism behind this phenotype and to determine if an elevation in the content of other yet unstudied amino acids can also lead to the same phenomenon.

the increase in the amount of protein-incorporated amino acids suggests that lt seeds have higher protein content. to test this possibility, the amounts of water-soluble proteins in the four samples of seeds were measured from groups of 10 mg seeds from each line. the results revealed that lt seeds have a higher content of proteins .

the effect of higher expression levels of t-atcgs on the seeds’ primary metabolites
the expression of t-atcgs leads to an elevated level of total met  and altered levels of  <dig> soluble amino acids . in order to assess whether the higher flux towards met synthesis is associated with additional changes in the levels of primary metabolites, we performed a metabolic profiling analysis using established gas chromatography–mass spectrometry   <cit> . despite the significant changes in seed metabolism that occur during seed development, little is known regarding changes to the metabolic profile of the seed during development when heterologous genes are expressed  <cit> . therefore, we were interested in studying whether a perturbation in met metabolism influences individual metabolites within the seeds.

the gc-ms analyses revealed  <dig> peaks having a significantly higher signal-to-noise value. in order to identify the chemical nature of as many peaks as possible, standards were used. in addition, the spectra of all the peaks were compared with commercially available electron mass spectrum libraries, nist and wiley. fifty-two annotated specific compounds were detected in wt and transgenic seeds , several of which appeared at more than one retention time.

when analyzing the trends of the changes to metabolites concentration in seeds by principal component analysis , the wt and lt genotypes exhibited clearly distinguishable differences, implying a relatively strong effect of the genetic manipulation on the primary metabolism of lt seeds . these results are dissimilar to those reported in arabidopsis seeds having higher levels of lysine, which show little differences from wt  <cit> . the pca analysis allowed us to define the metabolites and peaks that contributed significantly to the variance between wt and lt genotypes. thus, these metabolites and peaks were also assessed by a two-way anova.

among the  <dig> annotated metabolites, the levels of seven metabolites were significantly higher in lt compared to wt seeds: glycerol, gluconic acid, galacturonic acid, xylitol, lyxonic acid, melibiose and adenosine, while that of pantothenic acid was reduced significantly . in addition, four peaks , decreased significantly in lt seeds, while two others  increased significantly. none of the annotated metabolites are known according to the literature to be related to met. most of the compounds whose levels increased in lt are sugars or their oxidized derivatives. gluconic acid is the oxidized form of glucose, and galacturonic acid, which is the main component of pectin, is an oxidized form of galactose. xylitol and lyxonic acid  are produced from xylose by hydrogenation or mild oxidation, respectively. the higher levels of the oxidized metabolites, as well as higher levels of soluble proline , and total level of serine, which are stress induced amino acids  <cit> , imply that oxidative stress occurs during seed development of lt seeds.

in addition to these sugars and their derivatives, the level of adenosine  also increased. adenosine is known to elicit numerous physiological responses in plants  <cit> , and is required for the synthesis of the main met metabolite, sam. purines require folic acid for their synthesis, which is also necessary for the synthesis of methyl-tetrahydrofolate, the substrate for met synthase, the last enzyme of met synthesis. however, this is a putative link and further studies are required to reveal this link between met to adenosine.

while the levels of these metabolites were increased, the content of pantothenic acid  was reduced in lt seeds. pantothenic acid is the precursor of coenzyme a and is synthesized from aspartate  <cit> , the carbon/amino donor of met. thus, a decrease in soluble aspartate levels in lt seeds  might leave less aspartate available for the synthesis of pantothenic acid. another putative link between met and pantothenic acid is that they both require folate-dependent enzymes for their synthesis  <cit> . thus, when the level of met increases , less folate is available for the synthesis of pantothenic acid. however, again further studies are required to clarify these relationships.

to better understand the relationships between these metabolites and the met metabolism, the wt seeds whose developing capsules were fed with met were analyzed using the gc-ms scan method. this allowed us to detect the metabolites whose levels were altered 24 h after feeding. the results show that the levels of xylitol and melibiose increased significantly in seeds fed with met . the level of adenosine increased by 15% but was statistically insignificant. the levels of the other compounds did not change significantly compared to seeds fed with ddw. most probably, the short period of exposure to high met level is not enough to alter the contents of these metabolites in a significant way. however, this analysis strengthens the assumption that a link exists between xylitol and melibiose to high expression levels of atcgs in tobacco seeds and to higher level of met.

the level of lipids and total reducing sugars in lt seeds
the significant increase in glycerol content in lt seeds may affect lipids content, since glycerol is a precursor for triacylglycerol and may play a role in regulating oil content in seeds  <cit> . in addition, the higher level of protein in these seeds may also affect the level of lipids and starch, as was previously reported for soybean seeds  <cit> . we have used the soxhlet method to measure oil content. this analysis revealed that the oil content of lt seeds is slightly higher than that of wt, but this increase was statistically insignificant .

since the level of total amino acids in proteins had increased in lt seeds and the level of oil had decreased slightly, we also measured the level of total reducing sugars following carbohydrate hydrolysis, which represents starch content. the content of reducing sugars was slightly but significantly lower in lt seeds than in wt seeds . this suggests that the higher protein content was at the expense of starch accumulation. this decrease in total reducing sugars may also be associated with the observation that besides amino acids, most of the metabolites whose levels were altered significantly in lt seeds were sugars and their derivatives . a putative link is that the carbon skeleton of glucoses was modified to other sugars, leaving less glucose available to be incorporated into starch.

the germination rate of lt seeds is slightly reduced
the extent of the changes in the contents of cellular constituents and key metabolites, which include  <dig> annotated primary metabolites , total proteins, lipids and reducing sugars in lt seeds, may affect the seeds’ phenotype and their germination rate. thus, we compared the morphological phenotypes of wt and lt seeds and found no significant differences. the average weight of  <dig> lt seeds decreased compared to wt seeds , but this decrease was statistically insignificant. lt seeds had a lower germination rate compared to wt five days after imbibition , however, four days later, the growth of wt and lt seedlings was indistinguishable. a decrease in germination rate of soybean and arabidopsis seeds having increased levels of lysine was reported  <cit> , however, that of soybean with an increased level of threonine  <cit>  or met  <cit>  was not affected. hence, different seeds respond in different ways to a high flux or to high level of soluble amino acids. in general, the results of the current study suggest that the germination rate of tobacco seeds is relatively tolerant to the perturbations that occur when the met synthesis increases, causing significant changes to the profile of  <dig> annotated metabolites, as well as in the levels of total reducing sugars and proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
based on the results described above, we propose the following explanation for the changes that occur in tobacco seeds following the expression of atcgs: a high expression level of the met/sam feedback-insensitive form of atcgs in lt seeds, unlike the feedback-sensitive form of atcgs in lf seeds, leads to a significant increase in flux towards met synthesis. this leads to a significant increase of met synthesis, that causes a reduction to the contents of amino acids that serve as precursors for met. the increase of met synthesis enhanced the protein synthesis rate, which can utilize other soluble amino acids for incorporation into storage proteins during seed maturation. as a result, the amount of total amino acids increased , as well as the amount of total water soluble proteins . this suggests that cgs plays a role in met synthesis in tobacco seeds as was found in legumes seeds  <cit> . however, further studies are required to assess whether met can also be synthesized from smm at the latter stages of seed development, as was suggested for medicago truncatula <cit> .

in addition to our goal to assess the role of atcgs in met synthesis in seeds, we also aimed at deciphering how this manipulation cross-interacts with other primary metabolites in the seeds. the results show that the levels of  <dig> annotated primary metabolites  were altered in lt in comparison to wt seeds. these include  <dig> metabolites whose levels decreased and  <dig> metabolites whose levels increased. the results also indicate that unlike lysine metabolism, met metabolism has a relatively large impact on primary metabolites, since high lysine content affected only four metabolites connected to the tca cycle  <cit> . in general, the levels of most free amino acids were reduced in lt, while the levels of sugars and their derivates were elevated. the increase in oxidized sugars and the higher levels of total proline and serine, two amino acids that their level increase during oxidative stress  <cit> , suggest that lt seeds suffer from oxidative stress. the oxidative stress might be related to the low content of gsh, a major antioxidant compound  <cit> , in lt seeds. however, further studies are required to clarify the relations between high level of t-atcgs, low gsh and oxidative stress, during seed development.

this study provides information on the metabolic consequences of enhancing the expression level of cgs is in seeds. in addition, since the levels of total soluble proteins increase in lt seeds by 27%, the total lipid content was reduced by about 4% , and the total levels of reducing sugars, which represent starch content, was reduced significantly by  <dig> %, we also define that the high expression level of t-atcgs affects the seed’s nutritional quality.

