BACKGROUND
campylobacter jejuni, a gram-negative bacterium, is a leading cause of foodborne gastroenteritis  <cit> . in addition, c. jejuni infections are associated occasionally with serious neuropathies and other significant sequelae in humans  <cit> . historically, this bacterium has been considered fastidious, requiring microaerobic atmosphere and complex media for optimal growth under laboratory conditions. however, c. jejuni has been isolated from a variety of animals, such as poultry and cattle, as well as other ex vivo niches  <cit> , which highlight the remarkable capability of this bacterium for persistence in different environments as well as its adaptation potential. despite lacking classical stress response mechanisms  <cit> , c. jejuni has disparate traits that promote its adaptability, including a competency for natural transformation and a highly branched respiratory chain  <cit> . the latter is composed of individual respiratory proteins  that impact vital functions in c. jejuni, spanning growth and host colonization  <cit> . the rps include formate dehydrogenase, hydrogenase, fumarate reductase, nitrate and nitrite reductases, and others that facilitate the transfer of electrons , which drives respiration and, as such, energy metabolism in c. jejuni <cit> . further, whole genome expression studies and other transcriptional analyses showed that genes encoding rps were differentially expressed in response to shifts in temperature, ph, and oxygen concentration  <cit> . additionally, many rps in c. jejuni are transported via the twin-arginine translocation  system  <cit> , which is specialized in the translocation of pre-folded substrates, including cofactor containing redox proteins, across the cytoplasmic membrane. of relevant interest is the impairment of the tat function in c. jejuni, which leads to pleiotropic phenotypes, including defects in motility, biofilm formation, flagellation, resistance to oxidative stress, and chicken colonization  <cit> . these phenotypes are likely the result of multiple additive effects caused by defects in translocation of the tat substrates, including rps. taken together, these observations further suggest that rps might impact various adaptation and survival phenotypes in c. jejuni. however, beyond the aforementioned studies and the role of rps in c. jejuni’s respiration, little is known about the contributions of these proteins to the success of c. jejuni under changing environmental conditions; a property that is critical for understanding the transmission of this pathogen between environments and hosts. therefore, in this study, we describe the role of five rps that were predicted to be tat-dependent  <cit>  in c. jejuni’s motility, resistance to hydrogen peroxide  and biofilm formation under different temperature and/or oxygen conditions. we also assessed the contribution of rps to the bacterium’s in vitro interactions with intestinal epithelial cells of two important hosts . for these purposes, c. jejuni strains with deletion in five individual genes encoding essential rps subunits were used. the mutations targeted the nitrate reductase , nitrite reductase , formate dehydrogenase , hydrogenase , methylmenaquinol:fumarate reductase . it was previously shown that the deletion of these genes resulted in the loss of the catalytic functions of the associated respiratory enzymes; however, the mutants retained a generation time that was similar to that of the parental strain  <cit> . although the mutants’ role in respiration has been previously investigated, neither the impact of the cognate rps on survival phenotypes such as h2o <dig> resistance and biofilm formation nor their potential contribution to adaptation under varying temperature and oxygen conditions were analyzed. further, the potential interactions of these mutants with human and chicken intestinal cells were not characterized. here, we show that individual rps can contribute to c. jejuni’s motility, oxidative stress response , biofilm formation, and in vitro interactions with host cells. our data highlight a role for rps in c. jejuni’s adaptation to different environmental conditions as well as its in vitro interactions with intestinal cells of disparate hosts.

RESULTS
c. jejuni’s motility is considered important for effective colonization of hosts as well as chemotaxis  <cit>  and, subsequently, persistence in different niches. therefore, we investigated whether the deletion of the rps might differentially impact c. jejuni’s motility in response to different temperatures. examination under scanning electron microscopy showed that none of the mutants were defective in flagellation, regardless of the incubation temperature . further, the mutants’ motility was evaluated using  <dig> % semisolid agar as described elsewhere  <cit> . using this method, motility under anaerobic conditions could not be accurately assessed, because the zones of motility were not defined and sufficiently large for reliable measurement. this precluded the assessment of the effect of oxygen concentration on motility. however, our results show that during incubation under microaerobic conditions, Δfdha displayed significantly decreased zone of motility as compared to the wildtype, while the deletion of hydb did not impact this phenotype . alternatively, Δnapa, Δnrfa, and Δmfra exhibited significantly increased motility as compared to the wildtype . since the oxidation of formate is considered a major energy source for c. jejuni <cit> , the motility defects that are displayed by the Δfdha as compared to the other mutants and the wildtype strain can be perhaps attributed to the role of the formate dehydrogenase in energy metabolism.

res. h2o <dig> and pic indicate resistance to hydrogen peroxide and primary chicken intestinal epithelial cells, respectively. microaerobic, anaerobic, and ambient oxygen incubation conditions are abbreviated as “micro”, “ana” and “o2” respectively, while adherence, invasion and intracellular survival are abbreviated as “adh”, “inv” and “intra”. statistically significant increases or decreases  as compared to the wildtype are indicated by ↑ and ↓, respectively, while ns indicates no significant differences.

incubation at 42°c significantly increased the zone of motility for all the strains as compared to 37°c . this suggested that c. jejuni’s zone of motility was responsive to temperature, which corroborates results observed in other bacteria  <cit> . further, although the Δfdha remained defective in motility as compared to the wildtype at 42°c, its motility zone was significantly larger at 42°c as compared to 37°c . subsequently, our results suggest that the severity of the ramifications associated with an rp mutant’s impaired motility might be dependent on the temperature of a host or a niche .

during its transmission between hosts and environments, c. jejuni encounters different concentrations of oxygen that range from oxygen-limited  to ambient  conditions, which indicates that oxidative stress resistance mechanisms are essential for the success of this pathogen. in other studies, fumarate reductase, formate dehydrogenase, and hydrogenase were found to contribute to oxidative stress responses in bacteroides fragilis, desulfovibrio vulgaris, and geobacter sulfurreducens, respectively  <cit> . in c. jejuni, the genes encoding nitrate reductase were shown to be repressed in a perr  mutant and after exposure to h2o <dig> and iron, which fuel the fenton reaction and the production of hydroxyl radicals  <cit> , while mfra is oxygen regulated  <cit> . consequently, we assessed the contributions of rps to c. jejuni’s h2o <dig> resistance under different temperature and oxygen conditions using a standard diffusion assay  <cit> . our results indicated that under all incubation conditions both Δnapa and Δfdha were significantly more sensitive to h2o <dig>  while Δmfra showed more resistance to the oxidant  as compared to the wildtype. the altered susceptibility to h2o <dig> associated with different rps, suggests that disparate rps might be working collaboratively to maintain the homeostasis in c. jejuni during h2o <dig> stress. this is conceivable since in e. coli oxidized redox enzymes can lead to the formation of superoxide anions and h2o <dig> <cit> .

although the genes encoding the rps included in this study, with the exception of mfra, are known to be upregulated at 42°c  <cit> , the higher incubation temperature did not drastically alter the observed h2o <dig> resistance phenotypes for four mutants . however, Δnapa’s susceptibility was always significantly more pronounced at 37°c , but the precise reasons for this temperature associated impact and its importance  are currently not clear.

biofilm formation is an important mechanism for survival and persistence of c. jejuni in the environment  <cit> . since formate dehydrogenase and nitrite reductase have been implicated in biofilm formation of two important bacterial pathogens, staphylococcus aureus and pseudomonas aeruginosa, respectively  <cit> , we investigated the role of rps in c. jejuni’s ability to form biofilms under different environmental conditions using the crystal violet staining assay  <cit> . our results clearly show that rps can impact biofilm formation in c. jejuni. for example, Δfdha and Δnapa were significantly deficient in biofilm formation at 37°c only in a microaerobic atmosphere and under ambient oxygen, respectively, while Δnrfa and Δnapa displayed an increased biofilm formation at 37°c only in anaerobic conditions . therefore, our results also show that the impact of certain rps on the biofilm phenotype was dependent on incubation temperature and/or the oxygen concentration . for example, as compared to the wildtype, the Δmfra displayed significantly deficient and increased biofilm formation under microaerobic conditions at 37°c and 42°c, respectively . however, under anaerobic conditions, the Δmfra was only significantly impaired in biofilm formation at 42°c , while under aerobic conditions and regardless of the temperature, there were no defects in the Δmfra’s biofilms as compared to the wildtype .

the observed impact of rps on biofilm formation is likely mediated by multiple factors, including the metabolic and energy requirements that facilitate efficient growth and persistence in response to the properties of a given niche. however, our results highlight the overall importance of rps in c. jejuni’s adaptations to different niches as well as their differential contribution to promote the pathogens survival and cognate persistence via biofilm formation in disparate environments.

since rps contribute to c. jejuni survival phenotypes in a manner that was dependent on the incubation temperature and/or oxygen concentration, it was important to investigate if the deletion of rps will impact c. jejuni’s interactions with the cells of hosts that possess markedly different physiology and body temperatures. for this purpose, the interactions of the mutants with human intestinal cells  and primary chicken intestinal epithelial cells  were analyzed using the gentamicin protection assay as described elsewhere  <cit> . all cells were incubated in a tissue culture chamber  either at 37°c or 42°c corresponding to the hosts’ body temperatures. our results show that Δnrfa adhered to pic in significantly higher numbers, while Δfdha and Δhydb were significantly deficient in adherence as well as invasion of the chicken cell monolayers . while assessing intracellular survival for the mutants in pic, no cfus were retrieved for any of the strains, including the wildtype. this observation corroborated a previous study, which showed that during overnight incubation c. jejuni can escape the pic monolayers due to the bacterium's inherent mode of colonization of chicken intestinal epithelia  <cit> . specifically, van deun et al.  <cit>  showed that c. jejuni strains that invaded pic were not able to proliferate in the intracellular milieu and rapidly exited the cells, supposedly to replicate in the intestinal mucus. it was also suggested that this mode of infection  allows c. jejuni to escape mucosal clearance  <cit> . in comparison to the interaction with pic, all mutants were defective to a varying degree, albeit if not always significantly, in adherence to int- <dig> cells, while Δmfra, Δfdha and Δhydb were also impaired in their invasion potential and Δnrfa showed an increased ability for intracellular survival . notably, Δmfra that was not deficient in pic showed considerable decrease in adherence to and invasion of int- <dig> cells, while Δnrfa did not adhere to int- <dig> cells in higher numbers than the wildtype . further, Δfdha and Δhydb decreased potential for the invasion of the int- <dig> cells was not as severe as that observed in the pic . collectively, our results suggest that under our experimental conditions the rps contributed differentially to the virulent capabilities of c. jejuni. however, it should be noted that the use of in vitro systems in our experiment was meant only to assess the differential contribution of rps to disparate niches and breakdown the role of these enzymes in cell adherence and invasion and intracellular survival. therefore, extrapolations of the results to the overall outcome of in vivo colonization should be constrained. for example, it was previously shown that Δfdha and Δhydb were mildly impaired in the colonization of chickens, while Δnapa and Δnrfa were retrieved in significantly low numbers from this host  <cit> . further, the Δmfra was not deficient in the colonization of chickens  <cit> .

we further assessed the interactions of the mutants with the eukaryotic monolayers using scanning electron microscopy as described elsewhere  <cit> . as reported by eucker and konkel  <cit> , our results show that the int- <dig> cells exhibited a typical increase in surface ruffling  after the addition of the bacteria as compared to the control . however, there were no discernable differences in surface ruffling associated with the addition of the various mutants as compared to that of the wildtype. surface ruffling was not readily apparent in our pic and could not be clearly described. further, while the bacterial cell shape of Δnapa, Δnrfa, and Δmfra did not appear different from that of the wildtype, both Δfdha  and Δhydb  exhibited non-typical phenotypes as compared to the spiral shape of the wildtype cells. specifically, Δhydb formed elongated filaments that appeared to be made of multiple cells that failed in separation , which suggested that the mutant was defective in late cell division. notably, a similar phenotype was associated with impaired tat-dependent amidases of e. coli <cit> , which are essential for hydrolysis of septal peptidoglycan  <cit> . in c. jejuni, the amidase-encoding gene  lacks a tat signal peptide and is positioned upstream of the cluster that encodes the hydrogenase complex  <cit> . since some proteins can translocate via the tat system using the signal peptides of adjacent tat substrates , it is possible that the impairment of hyd  may have resulted in the failure of amidase to translocate to the periplasm  <cit> . the latter would cause the elongated phenotype observed for Δhydb cells; however, these conclusions require further experimental confirmation. in contrast, the Δfdha cells were almost spherical showing a characteristic bulging , while the precise mechanisms that lead to Δfdha’s cell morphology are still not clear. regardless, since the spiral shape of c. jejuni is important for host colonization  <cit> , we suggest that the morphology of Δhydb and Δfdha may contribute at least partially to their deficient interactions with pic and int- <dig>  respectively. further, since it is hypothesized that the spiral shape of c. jejuni may also be associated with its motility in viscous milieus  <cit> , the bulging shape of the Δfdha might also contribute to its decreased motility . in addition, it should be noted that follow-up investigations showed that the morphology of Δhydb and Δfdha was independent of their interactions with the monolayers, because the impaired shapes of the mutants were also observed during growth in muller-hinton  broth .

our analysis showed that under all tested conditions , Δnapa, Δnrfa, Δmfra, and Δfdha were not deficient in growth as compared to the wildtype . however, the Δhydb exhibited a slight but significant decrease in growth only under anaerobic conditions after  <dig> h of incubation . therefore, the phenotypes reported for the rp mutants in this study were not affected by the growth properties of the cognate strains. further, previous studies, gene organization analysis, and our complementation studies showed that the phenotypes reported in this study were not impacted by polar effects. specifically, qrt-pcr analysis showed that the transcript levels of cj <dig> and cj <dig>  genes that encode a hydrophobic protein and a hypothetical protein, respectively, and are located down-stream of the nap operon  were not affected by the cognate mutation  <cit> . a similar observation was noted for cj1356c, which encodes an integral membrane protein and is located downstream of nrfa <cit> . further, the gene directly downstream of the mfr operon, cj0440c   <cit> , and cj <dig>  which is downstream of the hyd operon are likely not affected by the deletion of mfra and hydb, respectively, as they are divergently transcribed  <cit> . the fdh genes are divided into two operons that are transcribed in the same orientation and separated by ~  <dig> nucleotides. the operon downstream of fdha contains fdhd and cj1507c   <cit> . however, the introduction of the individual native genes into the Δfdha as well as the other rps mutants resulted in the complementation of the impacted phenotypes  .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we showed that rps contribute differentially to key c. jejuni phenotypes in a manner that depends on the temperature and/or oxygen content of the environment . consequently, we conclude that these proteins partially bestow c. jejuni with its remarkable ability to adapt and survive in a variety of niches, a characteristic that is crucial for understanding this bacterium’s prevalence, persistence and success as a pathogen.

