BACKGROUND
endodontic infections are a leading cause of oro-facial pain, localized and spreading dental infections and loss of teeth. it is known that endodontic infections are the leading cause of tooth loss in western countries  <cit> . the most recent figures available indicate that about  <dig> million primary endodontic treatment procedures were performed in the u.s. in 2005- <dig>  <cit> . approximately 34% of all presenting endodontic cases have an infection with periapical lesions  <cit> . extrapolating these data to the national figure, about  <dig>  million primary endodontic infections are treated in the u.s. every year.

the etiology of endodontic infections is heterogeneous and is likely to be polymicrobial <cit> . the endodontic pathogens are most likely introduced from deep caries, and/or sulcular and periodontal bacteria. these infections are unique in that a subgroup of oral microorganisms populates a previously sterile space, are fairly protected from outside influences and cause a disease process that ranges from mild discomfort to severe, life-threatening infections. the success of endodontic treatment and the survival of the tooth are significantly reduced in cases with infection compared with treating the inflamed vital pulp  <cit> . there are profound patient and societal impact that arises from the morbidity involved and the cost of the management of non-healed cases. about 56% of all non-traumatic dental emergencies are in the form of a periapical abscesses and toothaches  <cit> . furthermore, microbial invasion of the periapical lesion and systemic circulation during pathogenesis of the disease, during treatment or during the healing phase may cause or contribute to significant systemic diseases. the infection can spread to cause mediastinitis  <cit> , fatal necrotizing fasciitis  <cit>  or brain abscess  <cit> . in  <dig>   <dig>  hospitalizations were attributed to periapical abscesses  <cit> .

due to the polymicrobial nature of the disease, a survey of the oral microbial community  is necessary to further our understanding of the infection. several studies to date have characterized the human oral microbiome  under healthy conditions to establish a baseline  oral community  <cit> . several observations have emerged from these analyses. it is clear that while only a small number of bacterial phyla  have been observed in human oral samples, diversities at the species and strain level account for the majority of the individual variations  <cit> . in other words, at a broad categorization, there are a limited number of bacterial taxa which inhabit the human oral cavity, but at a finer scale, the oral cavity appears to be colonized by a diverse and variable set of bacterial strains. this observation suggests that each individual is his or her own most suitable control for establishing his or her baseline microbiome. it has also been observed that certain taxa are prevalent in healthy human oral cavities. these include streptococcus, veillonella, granulicatella, neisseria, haemophilus, corynebacterium, rothia, actinomyces, prevotella, capnocytophaga, porphyromonas, and fusobacterium <cit> . however, it can not be ruled out that some of these genera contain opportunistic pathogens that can cause diseases in previously sterile oral sites, such as the root canal system. moreover, while some species are present in multiple oral sites, each of the sampled sites has characteristic microbiome profiles and harbors subsets of the overall oral microbiome, probably reflecting the micro-environment of each site  <cit> . another observation is that by using high-throughput next-generation sequencing technology, the species richness of oral microbiota is significantly greater than previous estimations using low coverage sampling methods  <cit> . with deeper sequence coverage, many novel species have been uncovered. sampling depth is therefore critical for gaining a more complete picture of the oral microbial community. besides the healthy oral microbiota, several studies have looked at the microbiomes of specific oral diseases. these studies demonstrated that diseased sites harbor different bacteria compared to the healthy microbiome. moreover, micro-environments can exist in diseased sites which can affect treatment efficacy  <cit> . opportunistic pathogenic genera such as fusobacteriumtreponematannerella porphyromonas and prevotella are more prevalent in diseased samples  <cit> . however, no single organism has been reported to consistently associate with specific diseases. conversely, bacteria that have been associated with oral diseases have also been observed in healthy subjects  <cit> .

endodontic infections take place in a closed, stable, relatively controlled environment that lends itself well to sampling and analysis. however, previous research that sought to analyze microbial pathogens in endodontic infections has yielded incomplete and non-conclusive data on the associations of these infections with peri-operative pain and flare-ups, swelling and systemic invasion, and persistence of disease after treatment. the most likely reasons for this lack of adequate information on microbial associations in aggressive endodontic infections are: lack of establishment of a base-line oral microbiome for the patients sampled, examination of only few selected bacteria as sole organisms in these infections, use of techniques that do not provide sufficient depth of coverage of microbial diversity present, and the examination of specific microbial taxa without consideration of the virulence genes and proteins that may be expressed.

it is believed that in patients who have primary endodontic pathosis without other oral disease, bacteria migrate from normal oral tissues to the necrotic pulp, may undergo compositional and numerical shifts and initiate periapical inflammation which is frequently associated with moderate to severe symptoms. therefore, in the same individual who does not have evidence of periodontal or other oral disease, but has evidence of primary endodontic pathosis, the changes in microbial ecology from health to disease states can be simultaneously studied. to address the shortcomings of previous studies, our study combined sampling of both diseased and non-diseased sites within the same individuals and the application of next generation high throughput sequencing to generate deep sequencing coverage. the aim of this study was to elucidate the spatial transition of microbial populations from the normal oral cavity through the infected root canal to the acute periapical abscess.

RESULTS
in this study, sampling of microbiota from healthy oral sites, as well as two endodontically diseased sites in each patient was performed, in order to study the transformation of the microbiome from health to disease. it is recognized that the oral sites may have undergone significant changes from the time of initial endodontic infection until the time of sampling, and therefore, these samples could be considered cross-sectional. however, in the absence of the ability to sample this disease at different times without treatment in patients, and inability to know with precision when infection actually begins in these cases, we reasoned that this approach would be a reasonable alternative for longitudinal or temporal sampling of endodontic infections.

dna extraction and sequencing
the measured dna concentrations from samples variedfrom  <dig> ng/ul to  <dig> ng/ul for oral samples , from  <dig> ng/ul to  <dig> ng/ul for root canal samples , and  <dig> ng/ul to  <dig> ng/ul for abscess samples  . the large variation likely reflects the amount of primary samples collected and host dna contamination. when the level of contaminant was too high, pcr amplification with broad-range 16s primers would fail and the amount of template dna has to be lowered resulting in lower amount of final products. when possible, equal molar amount of barcoded pcr products  from each sample was pooled for sequencing. in  <dig> cases , lower amounts  were pooled due to insufficient pcr amplification. in one case , no pcr products could be obtained from the primary sample. as a result,  <dig> samples were used for sequencing. in total,  <dig>  sequences, which passed the quality filters and were successfully assigned to a sample based on unique barcodes, were generated from these samples. because there were other samples sequenced in the same  <dig> sequencing run, we could not report the number of sequences belonging to this study prior to binning. however, the overall quality of the sequencing run was good with over  <dig>  high quality reads generated  and a median length of  <dig> bases  from half of a plate. the breakdown of the number of sequences in each sample is shown in table  <dig> and in additional file  <dig>  there was an average of  <dig>  reads from each of the os samples,  <dig>  reads from each of the rc samples, and  <dig>  reads from each of the as samples. while there were some coverage variations among samples, the average numbers of reads from each of the oral sites were roughly comparable. the number of reads from each sample roughly corresponds to the amount of calculated input pcr products. the abscess samples with low pcr yields also resulted in fewer reads.

an overview of the bacterial taxa in the samples
we first assign the reads to known taxa using rdp classifier, a naïve bayesian classifier based on characteristic oligonucleotide frequencies associated with each taxon, to get an overview of the taxonomic distribution of our samples  <cit> . about  <dig> % of the sequences could not be classified at the phylum level with a  <dig>  confidence threshold. blast searches of these sequences against homd database suggested that these were valid sequences that rdp classifier failed to classify  <cit> . eleven phyla were found in at least two of our samples. these were: firmicutes, bacteroidetes, fusobacteria, proteobacteria, actinobacteria, synergistetes, spirochaetes, tm <dig>  tenericutes, deinococcus-thermus, and sr <dig>  organisms from all these phyla have been previously found in oral samples  <cit> . two phyla, euryarchaeota and cyanobacteria were found in only one sample each. one and two sequences were assigned to phyla, euryarchaeota and cyanobacteria, respectively. these phyla were previously not found in oral samples. blast searches confirmed that these were mis-assignments by rdp classifier. these  <dig> sequences were dropped from further statistical analyses. figures  <dig> summarizes the distribution of the phyla in each sample. for breakdown of the different taxonomic ranks  by sample sites and by subjects, see additional file  <dig> . in all  <dig> sites, firmicutes had the highest relative abundances . the next most abundant phylum was bacteroidetes . in abscess samples, fusobacteria were also highly abundant at  <dig> %.

at the genus level, approximately 4%  of the sequences could not be classified at the  <dig>  confidence threshold. the relative abundances of different genera changed from oral samples to root canal samples to abscess samples . because the number of reads per sample was different, we first derived the relative abundances of each genus within each sample before averaging the results by site to obtain the average relative abundance of the genera by site. the most abundant genus in oral samples was streptococcus. the most abundant genera in root canals were prevotella and fusobacterium. the most abundant genus in abscess was fusobacterium. these observations match previously reported results in acute endodontic infections  <cit> , but this is the first report to clearly demonstrate the shift in microbiota in the three sites  in the same individuals at a single time point.

each individual sample, on average, contained  <dig>  known genera . the oral samples had on average  <dig>  genera . the root canal samples had on average  <dig>  genera . the abscess samples had on average  <dig>  genera . nine genera commonly detected in oral specimens  were identified in all of our samples. another common oral microorganism treponema was identified in  <dig> of  <dig> samples. because the sampling depth of each sample varies and because the variances of the abundance species and rare species are different, we calculated the relative abundance and applied arcsine transformation to the proportions in order to stabilize the variance and to allow us to use standard statistical tests on the samples  <cit> . the relative abundances and the arcsine transformed values of all of the genera for each site are listed in additional file  <dig>  using anova and paired-t-tests, we compared taxa from one site to others to identify genera that were differentially distributed in one site with respect to another. by using paired-t tests and sampling multiple sites within the same individuals, we could establish the baseline normal microbiota for each individual and use that as a reference to analyze the microbiota of diseased sites. comparing rc samples to os samples, the relative abundance of genera abiotrophiarothiastreptococcuscapnocytophaga and leptotrichiawere significantly lower in rc samples at p-value cutoff of  <dig> . comparing as samples to os samples, diaphorobacter and collinsellawere significantly over-represented in as samples. no genus was detected to be significantly different at p-value cutoff of  <dig>  when comparing rc and as. for completeness, additional file  <dig> lists all differentially distributed genera with p-values <  <dig> . it is important to note that genus level comparison may be too coarse to identify taxa that are associated with diseases since many of the above genera consist of pathogens and non-pathogens . moreover, the differentially distributed genera detected with this approach tend to be low abundance organisms. therefore, in the section below we also analyzed the differential distribution of operational taxonomic units  using 99% sequence identity as cutoff.

since rdp classifier could only classify a sequence down to the genus level, we used speciateit to further classify the genera of interest to the species level  <cit> . speciateit clusters sequences within a genus into operational taxonomic units  and compares them to reference sequences from type strains. otus that were closely related to an annotated species but distant from all other clusters were assigned to that species whereas other otus remain unnamed. given that the  <dig> pyrosequences are shorter than full-length 16s genes, care is needed to assign a sequence to a species. unlike commonly used “top blast hits” approach where a sequence is often “forced” to have an assignment, this approach allowed us to classify sequences down to the species level without over assigning more distantly related sequences to known species. first, we looked at the genera that were significantly differentially distributed in one site compared to another. the most abundant streptococcus species found in all  <dig> sites was s. mitis. other common oral species such as s. alactolyticuss. anginosuss. cristatuss. gordoniis. constellatuss. mutanss. oraliss. parasanguiniss. pneumoniaes. salivarius, and s. sanguinis, were also found in our os samples. it is worth noting that species identification of the streptococcus genus is difficult using 16s rrna gene fragment sequences and several species such as s. mitiss. pseudopneumoniae and s. pneumoniae are indistinguishable with our current approach. therefore, our approach reported the most likely species based on how well the reads clustered with the type strains of given streptococcus species. further sequence and biochemical functional characterization will be needed to confirm the identity of streptococcus species. three species of rothiar. dentocariosar. mucilaginosa and an untyped strain, were identified in most os and as samples but only in  <dig> rc samples. three species of capnocytophaga were identified, c. gingivalisc. sputigena, and an untyped strain. several leptotrichia species were found in os and as samples. the most commonly found leptotrichia species in our samples was l. wadei. others included l. buccalisl. goodfellowiil. hofstadiil. shahii, and l. trevisanii. it appears that for individuals harboring leptotrichia, several species were present at once. there is only one species of abiotrophia  known to be associated with oral samples and blast search of our sequences against the core oral database confirmed that all of them matched a. defectiva. in addition to the differentially distributed genera, for genera that have more than  <dig> combined reads from all samples, we listed the species breakdown in additional file  <dig> 

otu analyses revealed different levels of species diversity in the  <dig> sites
rdp classifier results provided us with an overview of the taxa that were present in our samples at the genus level. this approach, however, has a few limitations. first, approximately 4% of the sequences could not be assigned to a genus so they were not included in the previous analysis. second, the granularity of a named taxon is arbitrary and often based on gross morphologies, chemical tests, and arbitrary sequence similarity cutoffs so some taxa contain much more divergent organisms than others. third, the sequencing coverage is different for each sample so it is necessary to normalize the datasets before one can compare across samples. we, therefore, complimented the rdp classifier taxonomic results with operational taxonomic unit  analysis using mothur software package  <cit> . otus were constructed based on sequence similarity of the 16s rrna genes and the algorithm we used established an upper bound for the distances among all sequences within an otu.

we started with a total of  <dig>  sequences binned by samples as in the rdp analyses. after applying quality filters as specified in the methods section,  <dig>   sequences passed the initial filters. we identified  <dig>  unique sequences from the dataset. after a round of pre-clustering to remove rare sequences that were likely to have arisen from sequencing errors,  <dig>  sequence clusters were generated  <cit> . these unique sequences were further clustered at various distance cutoffs roughly corresponding to the different taxonomic ranks to produce otus. the total numbers of otus at various cutoffs were as follow:  <dig>  otus at 99% sequence identity,  <dig>  otus at 97% identity,  <dig>  otus at 95% identity and  <dig>  otus at 90% identity. rarefaction curve, which provides a standardized measure of intra-sample  diversity, allows one to compare the organismal diversity across samples. figures  <dig> shows the rarefaction curve of each sampling site. the results showed that the microbiota diversity was the highest in os samples followed by the as samples then by the rc samples, confirming the results obtained above based on known taxa. this result fits well with the hypothesis that root canal system and periapical abscess are more restricted environments than the healthy oral cavity so fewer species of bacteria are found there. however, we could not exclude the possibility that the larger sampling area in our oral sample contributed to the observed higher diversity. we sampled more widely in the oral cavity in order to demonstrate that oral cavity is the likely source of bacteria for root canal infections. based on our analysis, even at the high sampling coverage that we have achieved, we still have not reached sampling saturation  with otu clustering cutoff of 3%. the richness  in our samples was on par with previous  <dig> pyrosequencing based surveys and was significantly higher than results reported from other low resolution or low throughput molecular techniques . the simultaneous sampling of three sites in one individual undergoing root canal procedures allows direct comparison of the microbiota diversity of the normal vs. diseased oral sites. at a uniform sampling depth of  <dig> reads , we detected, on average,  <dig> otus in one individual’s os samples and  <dig> otus and  <dig> otus for rc and as samples, respectively. figures  <dig> shows the rarefaction curves of “species” diversity  for each individual. while there are some discrepancies for which the reasons are not known, the majority of the individuals also show the same species diversity pattern for the  <dig> sampling sites.

abundant otus were often found in all  <dig> sampling sites
to find out if different sampling sites share the same otus, we examined the number of shared otus between os, rc, and as samples. figures  <dig> panels a and b show the number of shared otus at 3% and 10% cutoffs . the proportions of otus shared appear to be low at both cut-offs. however, upon closer examination, the shared otus were mostly the more abundant otus while the site-specific otus were mostly the low abundance otus.  <dig> % of the sequences  belonged to otus  that were detected in all  <dig> sampling sites. when otus with fewer than  <dig> sequences  were excluded from the analysis, it became clear that most of the abundant otus were shared between two or among all three sampling sites . we therefore can conclude that site-specific otus were mostly low abundant species. it is also interesting to note that the os samples had the most site-specific otus. this result suggests that there is a continuous microbial transformation in the transition betweenthe healthy oral cavity and the diseased root canal and periapical abscess sites. the relative abundances of these shared species, however, shift from one site to another as shown in the previous section and below. taken together, these results suggest that the key species associated with diseased sites may be more rare species. alternatively, changes in relative abundance and the presence of opportunistic pathogens in restricted oral sites may contribute to the diseases.

microbiota community structures suggest that root canal and abscess samples were more similar to each other than to oral samples

to further compare the microbiota profiles of the different individuals and different sites, we performed unsupervised clustering of the  <dig> samples using jaccard dissimilarity index and yue and clayton  dissimilarity index. the jaccard index derives the dissimilarity measures based on the presence and absence of otus so it is a measure of shared community membership. the y&c index takes relative abundances of shared otus into account so it is a measure of community structure. at the  <dig>  cut-off, we did not see obvious clustering by sites or by individuals using jaccard index. when we increase the cutoff to  <dig>  and higher, we observed that some rc samples clustered together while os and as samples were intermixed . this result suggested that rc samples have more distinct taxa compared to os or as samples. this is in agreement with the observation that there are overall more shared otus between as and os samples  than between rc and os samples. using y&c index, we observed two major branches in the dendrogram . one branch contains mostly as and rc samples while the other contains mostly os and some as samples. this branching pattern was consistent regardless of the cutoff used . using parsimony  test, we also confirmed that the clustering pattern within the dendrogram is statistically significant   <cit> . to verify that as and rc microbiota profiles were more similar to each other than to the microbiota profile of os samples, we pooled the reads from same sampling sites and carried out unsupervised clustering with jaccard and y&c indices. the as and rc microbiotas cluster together and were more similar to each other than to the os samples. these results support the hypothesis that oral cavities provide the microbial sources that feed into the root canal infection sites.

certain bacterial species were associated with diseased sites
we reported the over and under-represented genera in the different sample sites above. since a genus can contain both pathogenic and non-pathogenic species, we re-examined our data at a finer resolution of otus at 1% cutoff . to examine which otus were over or under-represented in one sampling site compared to another, we used anova tests on normalized and arcsine transformed otu count data as we did with the rdp classifier results. of the  <dig> otus, only  <dig> of them were significantly different in one site compared to another at p-value <  <dig> . these  <dig> differential otus correspond to the genera bacteroides, granulicatella, collinsella, atopobium, dialister, diaphorobacter, lachnospiraceae incertae sedis, moryella, prevotella, streptococcus, veillonella, unclassified bacteroidales and unclassified clostridiales based on mothur assignments. the otus assigned to lachnospiraceae were labeled as incertae sedis  since the membership to this taxon is still in flux. using blast search against ncbi 16s microbial database, we found that this otu matched several different species in the lachnospiraceae family equally well but at relatively low sequence identity . more than one otu were assigned to prevotella, veillonella, streptococcus, and bacteroides suggesting that these species may be preferentially associated with certain sites. with the large number of otus and small sample size, even with a p-value of < <dig> , the differential otus can still occur due to chance. we therefore also looked at otus at 3% cutoff to see which of the genera observed above also show differential distributions at the more relaxed cutoff. besides dialister and collinsella, all the other genera were also found in differential otus at 3% cutoff. at 3% cutoff, an additional otu belonging to the genus fusobacterium also showed higher relative abundance in diseased samples than in oral samples . several fusobacterium otus at 1% cutoff also showed higher relative abundances in diseases samples albeit with higher p-values . many of the differential otus at 3% cutoff represented a superset of the otus at 1% cutoff so the datasets were not independent. however, some differential otus in the 1% cutoff dataset were not represented in the 3% cutoff set and vice versa. yet, they corresponded to the same genera or species. additional file  <dig> summarizes the results from the anova tests.

we searched the representative sequences of these differential otus  against the homd and ncbi 16s databases using ncbi-blast to identify the likely species designations. eight of the  <dig> otus matched known oral species with greater than 99% identity and can be reasonably assigned to these species. in these cases, both homd and ncbi blast searches returned the same species as the top hits with the second hits at significantly lower sequence identities. others , however, appear to be novel species or more divergent isolates with lower sequence similarity to known species in both ncbi and homd databases . we used the high stringency cutoffs for both otu clustering  and database matches  to achieve an overall sequence identity of 98%  in order to be reasonably certain about the species assignment. we also manually examined the blast results to ensure that there were no hits to other species at comparable similarities. the otus with positive assignments belonged to granulicatella adiacens, eubacterium yurii, prevotella melaninogenica , prevotella salivae, streptococcus mitis and atopobium rimae. other otus with lower similarity matches to the databases are also listed in additional file  <dig> for reference. while the ultimate identity of these otus need additional molecular and/or cultural isolations to verify, we report them here to facilitate future studies.

we were particularly interested in otus that were over-represented in infected root canals or periapical abscess compared to oral cavity since these may represent organisms that were associated with the infections. these include granulicatella adiacens prevotella melaninogenicaprevotella salivaestreptococcus mitisveillonella parvula related otus, a streptococcus sanguinis related otu and lachnospiraceae related otus. it’s worth noting that in all these cases, multiple otus in the same species showed the same directions of change. for example, all prevotella melaninogenica otus that were differentially distributed showed higher relative abundance in root canal and abscess samples. also, many of these organisms  have been reported as opportunistic pathogens in diseases or were associated with diseases  <cit> . the literature thus supports our ability to identify known pathogens using a 16s rrna amplicon sequencing approach, which look at the entire microbiota of each site with much higher depth coverage and much lower selection biases than previous studies. it is possible that only sub populations of these reported species are associated with diseases. therefore, it is important to follow-up the association study with more detailed genomic or pan-genomic studies to gain better understanding of these opportunistic pathogens  <cit> . our results present the necessary species identification to pursue these experiments.

certain bacterial otus were only found in systemic infection
root canal infections can lead to spreading systemic infections characterized by fever, lymphadenopathy, and /or fascial space involvement and accompanied by elevated serum cytokines and acute phase proteins. we hypothesized that certain bacteria were associated with systemic infection andthat shifts in microbiota not only reflects the microbial adaptations to different environmental niches  but the shifts may also reflect the disease progression. comparing systemic-infection samples and localized-infection samples for each sampling site using paired t-tests, we identified some otus in each site that were differentially distributed in systemic infections vs. localized infections  . because of the small sample sizes, we reported differentially distributed otus that were only found in systemic infections and were not found in localized infection samples. these typically have very low p-values from paired t-tests as expected. notably, many of these otus belong to the genera, prevotella, fusobacterium, actinomyces, veillonella, and streptococcus. further isolation and identification of these otus will be necessary to study their roles in spreading systemic infections. larger sample size will also enable us to confirm that these otus are indeed specific to systemic infections.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we obtained microbiota samples from normal and diseased oral sites from the same individuals and sequenced the 16s rrna gene fragments using a next generation high-throughput sequencing platform to obtain on average  <dig>  sequences per sample. using a variety of bioinformatics and statistical approaches, we demonstrated that the microbiotas from normal and diseased oral sites are distinct. first, the overall oral cavity microbiota was more diverse than the microbiota from infected root canals and abscesses. this is likely to be a function of the wider array of oral cavity microenvironments we sampled. second, the relative abundance of different taxa shifted from one site to another. root canal and abscess samples appeared to be dominated by anaerobic organisms as expected while oral microbiota had a mix of aerobic, facultative and anaerobic organisms. the microbiota of the root canal system and that of periapical abscess were found to be more similar to each other than to oral samples based on microbiota community structure but the observation is less clear based on community membership. however, the abundant taxa often were found across multiple sites suggesting that while micro-environments and different microbial communities exist in the mouth, bacteria can disseminate from the oral cavity, into the root canal system and the periapical abscess. we applied normalization and arcsine transformation to our taxonomic count data so standardized statistical tests could be applied to the samples. using paired t-tests, we identified known taxa and novel otus that were differentially distributed in the different sample sites.

this is the first study that we are aware of which used high-throughput next generation sequencing to compare samples from normal and diseased oral tissues from the same individuals. using novel algorithm, speciateit, and with careful manual inspection of the blast alignments and results, we were able to confidently assign some of the otus down to the specieslevel. we reported some of the known opportunistic pathogens such as g. adiacens to be associated with diseased oral sites. we also reported several novel otus, which will require further characterization, to be associated with diseased sites. while we acknowledge the limitation of using only fragments of 16s rrna gene for species assignment, we believe we have demonstrated due diligence in setting very strict criteria and by manually inspecting the blast search results from multiple databases. we found that the blast search results from different databases to be consistent as long as the query and the database hits were > 99% identical. moreover, we demonstrated that below this cutoff, search results can differ due to coverage biases of the different databases. most of the similar studies to date stopped at the genus level which is insufficient to provide the necessary information to plan the next experiments since both pathogenic and nonpathogenic species can fall within the same genus. however, we still need to caution the readers that the assignments are based on fragments of 16s genes and that pyrosequencing has higher error rates than traditional sanger sequencing. despite our effort to reduce errors by using several filters, there are most likely undetected sequencing errors in our reads. therefore, for rare species and species such as streptococcus where identification based on 16s gene is challenging, functional characterization should be performed in follow-up studies. this study, like other microbiome studies, can certainly benefit from larger sample size and time-series study design. however, the difficulty in identifying healthy patients with healthy oral cavity except for an endodontic acute infection, and for these patients not to be already on antibiotics needs to be recognized. time-series studies will provide more information on the microbiota dynamics. it is possible that shift in microbiota can occur in infected sites as the disease progresses and such shift can be very informative for prognosis and for design of treatment regiments. however, temporal study designs may place undue burden on the patients so careful design will be needed. in summary, this study provided an in-depth characterization of the microbiota of the normal oral tissues and diseased root canal sites using one individual as his or her own baseline control. functional metagenomic studies and detailed molecular analyses of some of the opportunistic pathogens identified in this study are being planned for the future.

