BACKGROUND
the mechanism of action of drugs at the biochemical level has typically been studied by investigating specific chemical properties of the drug and the biological properties of its specific target  <cit> . this is the standard paradigm in quantitative structure activity relationship  studies, where multivariate mathematical models are used for modeling the relationships between a set of physiochemical or structural properties and biological activity. in previous qsar studies, such as in the classical 3d-qsar work by cramer et al.  <cit> , values of a single biological activity measure are predicted.

however, biological responses at the cellular level are diverse and each drug typically binds to a multitude of targets in the cells and elicits a number of other off-target effects. systems-level approaches are thus needed to get a more comprehensive view of drug effects in living cells. genome-wide massively multivariate description of the cellular responses caused by the drugs, such as in the connectivity map program , requires new kinds of tools for analysis and interpretation.

chemical systems biology has emerged at the interface of systems biology and chemical biology with the goal of constructing a systems-level understanding of drug actions. systematic analysis of a network of drug effects, i.e. network pharmacology, offers great opportunities for drug design in the future  <cit> . chemical systems biology has also been used to predict drug side effects  <cit>  as well as in other types of toxicological analysis  <cit> .

here, we undertook a complementary approach, by studying the impact of a host of chemical descriptors across a large panel of drugs on the biological response profiles measured at a genome-wide scale. we linked key structural components of the drug molecules, as defined by 3d volsurf descriptors, with the consistent biological properties, as measured by microarray gene expression profiles. we developed a data-driven approach to analyze relationships between patterns of chemical descriptors of the drugs on one hand, and matching patterns in the cellular responses measured by genome-wide expression profiles, as shown in figure  <dig> 

as biological response data we used the connectivity map , which consists of gene expression measurements from three cancer cell lines  treated with over a thousand different drug molecules . these data offer a unique view to the genome-wide responses of the cells to drug treatments and has been used to find new biological links e.g. between heat shock protein inhibitors, proteasome inhibitors, and topoisomerase inhibitors  <cit> .

our key assumption is that the chemical structure as encoded in the 3d descriptors of drugs impacts on the drug response resulting in specific patterns of gene expression. furthermore, if there is any statistical relationship between the occurrence of patterns in the chemical space and the patterns in biological response space, those patterns are informative in forming hypotheses on the mechanisms of drug action. given proper controls, the statistical responses can be attributed to the specific features of the chemicals tested out of a diverse drug library. in this paper we used comprehensive but readily interpretable models for finding the statistical dependencies. we searched for distinct components that correlate the patterns in the chemical space with the biological response space. assuming linear relationships, the task reduces to canonical correlation analysis  for searching for correlated components from the two data spaces . we visualized the components in a comprehensive way to facilitate interpretation  and validate them both qualitatively and quantitatively.

canonical correlation analysis was recently used for drug side effect prediction and drug discovery by atias and sharan  <cit> . they applied cca to combine known side effect associations of drugs with  2d structure fingerprints and  bioactivity profiles of the chemicals. the cca results from both combinations were then successfully used to predict side effects for the drugs, suggesting that cca is effective in finding relevant components from heterogeneous data sources.

drugs generally act on a multitude of direct and intended targets as well as on a number of non-specific off-targets. all these targets and effects together connect to a phenotypic response. as most of these effects are still poorly understood, modelling of the structure-target-response profiles across a large drug library is an important, but challenging goal. in this study we modelled the structure-response relationships of  <dig> drug molecules directly, with cca components playing the role of unknown mechanistic processes.

the lack of information on all of the possible targets prompted us to select a particular set of chemical descriptors that allows capturing of generic response patterns. many kinds of chemical descriptors are available for characterizing chemical structures in a quantitative way. simple classical 2d fingerprints can be used to detect close analogs, but they would miss most if not all scaffold-hopping situations, where the different chemical entities give rise to similar pharmacophoric properties. fingerprints and pure pharmacophoric descriptors require clearly defined individual targets, which are not known in many cases. in the present study, we aimed to bridge the chemical and biological space by using a set of volsurf descriptors of the drugs  that are ideal for capturing both structural similarities and general chemical features, such as solubility and permeation properties . although volsurf descriptors are not thought to explain detailed structure-activity relationships, such as the binding to a single target, they offer a good overall interpretation of the molecular shape, hydrogen bonding, lipophilicity, and related properties, which are more conservative than individual binding cavities. it has also been shown that shape is a major factor when trying to find compounds with similar biological activity but dissimilar 2d structures  <cit> .

the idea of correlating chemical structures with biological expression was introduced by blower et al. in  <cit> . by combining 2d fingerprint data with biological activity profiles for the chemicals over  <dig> cancer cell lines , and with steady-state gene expression measurements from those cell lines before drug treatments, they obtained indirect relationships between chemical substructures and the gene targets. in a more recent work, cheng et al.,  <cit>  investigated correlations between the chemical structures, bioactivity profiles, and molecular targets for a set of  <dig> chemicals. this small-scale study demonstrated that combinations of biological activity and chemical structure information can provide insights into drug action mechanisms on a molecular level.

by using the direct gene expression responses to a large set of drug treatments from the connectivity map, along with comprehensive component-level decomposition of response profiles, we are able to make more direct observations on how compounds impact on cells and which features of the chemical molecules and the biological responses are correlated.

RESULTS
we analysed the  <dig> drug treatment gene expression responses of three cancer cell lines of the connectivity map, with the methods summarized in figure  <dig> and detailed in methods. the analysis decomposed the relationship between the “chemical space” and the “biological space” into components. the chemical space consists of the selected  <dig> chemical descriptors of each drug and the biological space contains gene expression responses of corresponding drugs. each component relates a characteristic statistical gene expression pattern with a pattern of the drug properties. we will call the components “cca components” as the core method is canonical correlation analysis . in this section we analyse further the identified components and the statistical relationships they discovered.

quantitative validation of functional similarity of drug components
we evaluate the biological relevance of the extracted cca components by studying the functional similarity of drugs associated with each component. in particular we measure the performance of the component model in retrieving similar drugs, as indicated by external data about their function, and compare it to retrieval based on either the biological or chemical data separately. details of the validation procedure are described in methods. the mean average precision obtained for the retrieval task on the four data sets  are plotted in figure  <dig> 

the results show that retrieval based on the chemical space, i.e. volsurf descriptors, performs clearly better than retrieval based on the biological space , indicating that the chemical information is more relevant for evaluating the functional similarity of the chemicals. the biological space encoded by gene sets performs similarly to the original gene expression, indicating that the gene sets are a sensible encoding of the biological space; information lost due to dimensionality reduction is balanced by introduction of prior biological knowledge in the form of the sets. finally, the combined space formed by the cca components shows significantly better retrieval performance than either of the data spaces separately. the results are consistent over the range of drugs considered in the retrieval task. these results show that cca is able to extract and combine relevant information about the chemical structure and biological responses of the drugs, while filtering out biologically irrelevant structural information and also biological responses unrelated to the chemical characteristics.

response components and their interpretations
we next analyze the top ten cca components having the highest significant correlations between the spaces. figure  <dig> summarizes the relationships between the volsurf descriptors and the gene sets as captured by the components. each component is divided into two subcomponents ‘a’ and ‘b’, where in the first, the compounds have positive canonical score and in the second negative . for each cca-subcomponent the  <dig> highest-scoring compounds are listed in the additional file 1: top_compounds.xls.

volsurf descriptors, unlike more typically used 2d or 3d fingerprints and pharmacophores, do not have clear structural counterparts such as fragments or functional groups. therefore, these descriptors are able to group together compounds with very dissimilar chemical structures and yet having the same type of chemical properties. this is especially important in our study since the same biological activity may not have been created because of the same biological target protein but because of another target protein in the same pathway. within a pathway, binding cavity properties may change, but general descriptors describing the size, lipophilicity, and shape are more conservative. therefore volsurf descriptors are better suited for classifying these aspects of the compounds.

in the case of the 1st and 2nd components, the selected volsurf descriptors are dominated by hydrophobicity related descriptors. the 3rd component is connected to hydrogen bonding, polar interactions, and dispersion-related descriptors. component  <dig> is also strongly connected with hydrophobicity related descriptors, besides the component is influenced by the molecular volume and surface area. components 5– <dig> are mainly connected to “pharmacophoric” descriptors that are describing distribution of strong interaction points over the molecular space. components  <dig> and  <dig> are both strongly influenced by integy-moments, describing imbalance of either hydrophobic or hydrophilic areas over the whole molecular volume. component  <dig> is mainly affected by shape and size-related parameters, and also lipophilic integy moments.

on the biological space we observe that the enriched gene sets in component  <dig> indicate a mitogenic signaling response. component  <dig> appears similar but has an additional link to cell adhesion signaling. component  <dig> in turn very directly connects to cytoskeletal regulation and cell adhesion. while there appears to be a considerable overlap between compounds in components  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  the enriched gene sets in component  <dig> show a strong link to dna damage response,  <dig> is associated with common cancer signals, and component  <dig> is associated with an anabolic response. components  <dig> and  <dig> are connected to different differentiation events. component  <dig> links to gene expression changes seen in gpcr signaling. component  <dig> links to amino acid and nitrogen metabolism.

we further extracted the significant genes in each component and performed go enrichment analysis on them. additional file 2: top_goterms.xls shows the top  <dig> significant go terms for each component while additional file 3: top_genes.xls shows the top  <dig> significantly differentially expressed genes for each.

based on the eye diagram  and lists of significant genes, gene sets, go terms, and the top  <dig> compounds, we summarize the biological and chemical patterns in table  <dig> 

the pharmacophoric enrichment analysis  was carried out over volsurf features  considered as a gold standard, and measuring enrichment of the list in a component by a hypergeometric test.

enrichment of known targets
existing drug response research relies heavily on target and pathway-based analysis. our novel approach attempts to go beyond known targets and pathways to find drug response groups in an entirely data driven way linking pharmacophoric descriptors to specific gene expression response patterns. some of the found patterns may rationally be explainable by known targets and next we analyze the discovered biological process classes , for enriched protein targets.

we collected a set of drug-protein target pairs from several drug databases ; that contains protein targets for almost half of the cmap drugs. we then did enrichment analysis of the compounds sharing common targets in each component . the common protein targets and component p-values are listed in additional file 6: target_breakdown.xls.

as expected, the analysis shows that only few subcomponents have compounds that significantly share protein targets . these are 1b, 2b, 10a and 10b. subcomponent 1b appears to be strongly driven by endogenous amine gpcr interactions. subcomponent 2b and 10a, like 3a, are driven by compounds inducing dna damage and are discussed below in more detail. subcomponent 10b is strongly influenced by glucocorticoids primarily targeting the glucocorticoid receptor, but the fact that several other ion flux modulating compounds  also link to this subcomponent argues that the corticosteroid effects are through the mineralocorticoid receptor and that the subcomponent response is driven by a selected ion flux.

the fact that other subcomponents do not significantly link to target classes in our target analysis is a strong indicator that the associations between the compounds in most components are not restricted to known primary target mechanisms and that our method allows for discovering novel, but still undefined, mechanism of action and target linkages between compounds. the evaluation of mechanisms of action that cannot be explained via known protein targets is a challenging research direction, which requires uncovering the vast hidden mechanisms that might make two seemingly non-similar compounds similar. we feel that our approach provides a step forward towards the goal of understanding drug associations extracted from the actual measurement data that could potentially provide hypotheses for unexplored polypharmacology and both target and off-target drug mechanisms.

components 3/3a – a cell stress component
we observed that in component  <dig>  the top genes and gene sets indicate mostly mitochondrial and metabolic stress-related processes. top gene sets associating with this component include many gene sets connecting to mitochondrial function . similarly, on the gene level several known cell stress genes such as pgk <dig>  pgd, and prmt <dig>  <cit>  are upregulated. a deeper look into the 3d structures of the top compounds in this component  reveals a possibility of 4– <dig> hydrogen bonds in all of the top compounds of set 3a. thus, these compounds may be able to affect proton transportation processes, which is in agreement with the biological interpretation that mitochondria act like proton pumps. as an example, figure  <dig> shows the hydrogen bond donor and acceptor regions of azacitidine and idarubicin.

to help understand how the biological variability caused by the drugs and the chemical features in component 3a compares with the intrinsic variability from one cell type to another, we visualize drug response transitions on mcf <dig> cells. thirty different breast cancer cell types are used as references in their unperturbed condition . the mcf <dig> treatments from subcomponent 3a and the thirty independent breast cancer cells are plotted in figure  <dig> using a recent multidimensional scaling method called nerv  <cit> . nerv shows these different cell instances mapped onto the 2-dimensional display such that similarities are preserved as faithfully as possible. subcomponent 3a contains many dna-damaging agents such as the dna intercalating and topoisomerase inhibitory camptothecin, daunorubicin, and mitoxantrone, the cdk inhibitors alsterpaullone, gw- <dig> and 0175029– <dig>  the cardiac glycoside lanatoside c, which at high concentrations is likely to inhibit topoisomerases  <cit>  the antimetabolite methotrexate, as well as rescinnamine, which has been suggested to induce a dna damage response without itself inducing dna damage  <cit>  and the aromatase inhibitor letrozole. the nerv plot based on the top changed genes in treated and untreated mcf <dig> cells as well as a panel of other breast cancer cell lines, shows that after treatment with these drugs, the gene expression of the luminal, er-positive mcf <dig> cells starts to resemble the basal, er-negative breast cancer types. interestingly, while mcf <dig> cells are relatively chromosomally stable, the drug-treatments make them appear like chromosomally unstable and intrinsic high dna damage cell lines such as hcc <dig> or mda-mb- <dig>  cell stress is an emerging cancer therapy target and it is interesting that a) this subcomponent including topoisomerase inhibitors, antimetabolites and cdk inhibitors induces stress-related metabolic responses in mcf <dig> cells similar to what is seen in a basal level in other, more malignant and undifferentiated breast cancer cells, and b) it raises the hypothesis that the compounds in this subcomponent could be combined with cell stress targeting compounds. this finding is strengthened by the fact that many of the top upregulated genes in the 3a subcomponent; achy, cdc <dig>  gpi, me <dig>  pmrt <dig>  p4hb, pgd, and pgk <dig> are also overexpressed in breast cancers as compared to normal tissue .

components 2b & 10a – functionally similar but gene-wise different responses
we observe that component groups 2b, 3a, and 10a share several compounds such as the dna-intercalating topoisomerase inhibitors mitoxantrone and irinotecan, the cyclin-dependent kinase  inhibitors alsterpaullone, gw- <dig> and 0175029– <dig>  and the antimetabolites methotrexate and azacitidine,  <dig> of the top  <dig> between each paired group. most of the non-overlapping compounds in each component group are not linked functionally or structurally in any obvious way, on the other hand. to verify that the components capture different phenomena despite sharing several compounds, we compute chemical composition and biological similarity matrices over all component pairs. we use the tanimoto similarity measure to compute overlap between the top  <dig> genes of each subcomponent pair; as shown in additional file 4: heatmaps.pdf, figure d. the analysis of biological similarity between these subcomponents with compound overlap  indicates that there is minimal biological and chemical sharing between any two components. almost all component pairs that are highly biologically similar have a non-significant and low chemical composition similarity, and vice versa. this is a strong indication that we have identified sets of volsurf descriptors that link to different biological responses. in some cases, several of these features can be identified in a single molecule like the etidronic acid, which is linked to both components  <dig> and  <dig>  the chemical properties of component  <dig> are connected with pharmacophoric features and component  <dig> with hydrogen bonding, while biologically the components are related to differentiation and stress response, respectively.

to get a deeper view of the underlying biological response mechanisms we explore the response patterns of the components using heatmaps. in the first heatmap, we consider the most active genes in each subcomponent and plot their expression levels across the top compounds of every subcomponent . in the figure we search for the subcomponents that have a unique expression pattern across other subcomponents in a column. components 2b and 10a show a unique structure. these seem to represent two separate aspects of dna damage response, which are connected to two separate molecular features; hydrophobicity in component 2b and shape-type volsurf descriptors in component 10a. the gene expression changes in both subcomponents are strongly linked to a dna damage and mitotic arrest response with many proto-oncogenic cell division and mitogenic signaling genes being down regulated . the same genes are commonly seen upregulated in cancers  and many of them have been and are pursued as drug targets. therefore both the components are similar on a larger biological scale, but do in fact have little gene-wise overlap.

to validate these hypotheses, we checked for reported growth inhibition for the top  <dig> chemicals in these two subcomponents in the nci/dtp in vitro cell line testing database . four compounds from 2b and  <dig> from 10a were represented in the nci <dig> datasets . almost all of these compounds were used in cmap at doses that will very effectively stop the cells from growing or kill them.

gi <dig> values  from nci/dtp are shown along with the corresponding concentrations used in the connectivity map  data. by comparing the gi <dig> and cmap values we can get an idea of expected cell killing effect of the drug in the cmap data. drugs that are expected to eventually kill the cells are shown in bold. gi <dig> and cmap concentration values are in μm scales.

* gi <dig> value at the end of the tested range.

** mean of gi <dig> values from hl <dig> and mcf <dig> cell lines.

*** value from hl <dig> cell line.

component 7b – a leukemia-specific subcomponent
based on studying the heatmaps, 7b is another interesting subcomponent: it has a dominant effect on hl <dig> as compared to mcf <dig> and pc <dig>  indicating that this subcomponent and the link between structure and gene expression may be specific for leukemic cells and leukemic-specific molecular targets.

CONCLUSIONS
we have introduced a chemical systems biology approach for analyzing the complex relationship patterns between chemical structures of drug molecules and their genome-wide responses in cells. with canonical correlation analysis, we are able to find statistical dependencies between the two data spaces in the form of correlated components. we have demonstrated quantitatively that these components are more informative about drug similarity than either chemical or biological data separately.

our approach finds the relationships in an entirely data driven way without being constrained to known target information. uncovering the detailed mechanisms of actions of a diverse library of drugs, including those not having known target classes is a major research goal. our approach provides the first step, by generating hypotheses for unexplored polypharmacology and both target and off-target drug mechanisms.

in our study, we used gene sets to introduce biological knowledge into the analysis. iorio et al.  <cit>  have recently got promising results with an alternative method of analyzing gene expression responses. it is an interesting and non-straightforward research question whether that approach can be generalized to searching for structure-response relationships.

we have also demonstrated the use of advanced visualization methods to facilitate detailed interpretation of the chemical and biological characteristics of the components. our findings show connections between the biological responses of many known drug groups to their general chemical properties . as an example of the ability of the model to discover detailed drug response mechanisms we were able to separate different dna damage responses that appear to be driven by different chemical features in compound sets having considerable overlap. subcomponents 2b, 3a, and 10a all contain classic chemotherapeutic and dna damaging agents as described in the results section. strikingly, subcomponents 2b and 10a are driven primarily by hydrophobic/lipophilic descriptors and are more similar in their biological output. they both connect to the downregulation of many proto-oncogenic and mitotic genes but notably still through almost entirely non-overlapping gene sets and genes. subcomponent 3a, on the other hand, which is connected to hydrogen bonding and hydrophilic features, connects to a very different cellular response: the turning on of many stress-induced “defense” genes. in other words, we document how within the same compound or related compounds, hydrophobic and size features drive a mitotic arrest response while hydrogen bonding and hydrophilic features drive a reparative response. this knowledge, in combination with gene expression data in the solid tumors may allow us to design and utilize the chemotherapeutic agents with the appropriate balance of hydrophilic, size and hydrogen bonding for each cancer patient to hit the correct balance between anti-growths to damage response induction for best possible efficacy.

