BACKGROUND
the quantification of gene expression allows the mechanism organising biological activity to be determined. at present, real-time rt-qpcr provides the most accurate and specific measure of gene expression, with an unsurpassed dynamic range and a high level of reproducibility.

a number of variables will contribute to the variability of gene expression measurements, such as the number and type of cells in the tissue evaluated, the method and efficiency of mrna extraction, mrna handling techniques  <cit> , mrna integrity  <cit> , method of reverse transcription  <cit>  and analytical detection chemistry method  <cit> . these inter-sample differences are addressed through the process of normalisation  <cit> , whereby the expression of an individual gene within a sample is related to that of a calibrating gene known as a reference, control or "housekeeping" gene. ideally, a reference gene is expressed at a consistent and repeatable quantity across all samples being compared, so that relative differences in gene expression can be measured with confidence. commonly used reference genes such as beta-2-microglobulin , glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase  and beta actin , are not constantly expressed across all tissue types and disease states  <cit> . thus it is widely accepted that the selection of reference genes should be established through the validation of expression stability in the tissue or cells of interest, before use.

a number of statistical algorithms exist for the optimisation of reference gene selection, such as genorm  <cit> , global pattern recognition  <cit> , bestkeeper© <cit> , equivalence tests  <cit>  and normfinder  <cit> . in each case, mathematical evaluation of expression data allows the ordering of candidate reference genes, on the basis of the relative expression stabilities. at present, no gold standard exists for the selection of reference genes, and although methods have been compared with similar results in some reports  <cit>  but not in others  <cit> , the optimal method for selections remains unknown.

the identification of new reference genes from microarray data, within a particular tissue type, has been demonstrated to provide more "stable" reference genes than those conventionally used  <cit> , as determined using stability algorithms. microarray data can be stratified on the basis of fold changes in expression  <cit> , the variance of expression  <cit>  or integrative correlations  <cit> . candidate genes can then be selected from stratified data, and frequently demonstrate expression stabilities greater than conventionally used reference genes  <cit> . however microarray data has yet to identify a new reference gene which shows consistent stability across multiple tissue or cell types, and/or disease situations. therefore a ubiquitous reference gene suitable for normalisation of gene expression of all experiments probably does not exist, but the identification of new reference genes to improve in reference gene stability is important to reduce error in rt-qpcr experiments.

in this study, we identified candidate reference genes from microarray expression profiling data generated from the evaluation of two different canine articular tissues . the relative stability of expression of each reference gene in normal and osteoarthritic canine articular tissues was determined from rt-qpcr reactions using statistical algorithmic packages. the stability of the new reference genes were compared between tissues, and related to a commonly used reference gene.

RESULTS
new reference genes
identities and putative functions of each of the new reference genes are listed in table  <dig>  although the genes selected did not localise to common pathways or functions, two of the genes coded for mitochondrial ribosomal proteins. the metrics of the candidate reference gene stability are presented in table  <dig> 

articular cartilage
all methods of stability analysis agreed in finding the new genes mrps <dig> and mrps <dig> to be stably expressed. likewise, c7orf28b and nck <dig> were determined to be the least stably expressed genes by both genorm  and normfinder . gapdh was identified as the 4th most stably expressed gene by both genorm and bestkeeper©, and the 8th most stably expressed gene by normfinder.

infrapatella fat pad
all three methods of reference gene analysis agreed on the most stably expressed reference genes, which were c7orf28b, mrps <dig> and mapk <dig>  genorm  and normfinder  agreed that the least stably expressed gene was nck <dig>  gapdh was identified as the 9th most stably expressed gene by normfinder, the 7th most stably expressed gene by genorm, and the 5th most stably expressed gene by bestkeeper©.

cranial cruciate ligament
methods did not agree on the most stably expressed genes, although all methods agreed on the five most stably expressed genes ; atic, mrps <dig>  c7orf28b, ormdl <dig> and hirp <dig>  mrps <dig> was the least stably expressed gene as determined by both normfinder  and genorm . gapdh was identified as the 7th most stably expressed gene by normfinder, the 9th most stably expressed gene by genorm, and the 8th most stably expressed gene by bestkeeper©.

synovial membrane
although bestkeeper© and normfinder agreed on the six most stably expressed genes , and nck <dig> was determined to be the least stably expressed gene by normfinder  and genorm , no further patterns of agreement in rank ordering of the expression profiles were identified. atic was identified as the most stably expressed gene by normfinder  and bestkeeper© , and the 6th most stably expressed gene by genorm.

bone
rank ordering between normfinder and genorm agreed on the seven most stably expressed  genes but not their order, and the least stably expressed gene . bestkeeper©  and normfinder  agreed on the most stably expressed gene .

comparison of reference gene performance in all tissues
using the reference gene stability value  of  <dig>  as the determinant of stable expression  <cit> , mrps <dig> was stably expressed in all five tissues, and hirp <dig> was found to be stably expressed in four tissues . gapdh was found to be unstable in all of the tissues evaluated, which is consistent with the findings of a previous study of reference genes in these tissues  <cit> . comparison of gene stability  and pairwise stability  values with a previous study of commonly used reference genes using similar tissues further illustrates how optimal reference gene stabilities, as assessed by genorm, can be achieved using the new reference genes rather than the commonly used reference genes .

no single reference gene was consistently identified as being the most stably expressed by normfinder, genorm or bestkeeper© across most tissues. there was not consistent agreement in the rank ordering, or the selection of the optimal candidates by the different methods, although agreement was generally reached on the most and least stable gene. for example bestkeeper© and normfinder always identified the same gene as being most stably expressed. when looking at rank order across all three reference gene stability programs, fat pad showed the highest correlation between methods, followed by cruciate ligament, cartilage, bone and synovium as the least consistent .

when the data for all tissues was compared together , a much clearer pattern of reference gene stability was observed. the stability metrics of the reference genes in different tissues show similar patterns across all three methods. mrps <dig> demonstrates the most consistent metric , with hirp <dig> and atic demonstrating a similarly consistent stability across all tissues. this is supported by the finding that mrps <dig> was consistently identified as being stably expressed in all tissues by genorm , as well as being ranked as one of the two most stable reference genes in four of the five tissues by genorm , and in three of the five tissues using normfinder and bestkeeper© .

comparison genes identified by different methods
identification of new reference genes using rt-qpcr methodology for gene normalisation was not successful at identifying new reference genes with increased stability. nck <dig> was determined to be the least stably expressed gene in synovium and fat pad, and one of the four least stably expressed genes in cruciate ligament and cartilage. trappc2l was not identified as being stably expressed in any tissue using the genorm algorithm, and was not ranked higher than the 8th most stably expressed gene in any tissue using the normfinder algorithm.

discussion
a number of different strategies have been employed to filter microarray data to identify new reference genes, such as selection on the co-efficient variation and level of expression  <cit> , fold changes of expression  <cit> , or integrative correlations  <cit> . we used a combination of filtering on statistical significance, fold change and coefficient of variation  to narrow the potential number of reference genes. furthermore, these criteria were applied to three different experiments, using two different data sets, to identify genes which were more likely to have generic stability across multiple tissues for diseases. genes were finally filtered on the basis of defined annotation and level of expression. in retrospect, genes should also have been selected on the basis of single transcript expression . although the two most stably expressed genes  currently have no splice variants reported, the absence of splice variants did not necessarily confer reference gene stability across multiple tissues  but should be taken into account when selecting new reference genes, as another potential indicator of instability. our filtering method was straightforward, quickly performed and easily completed by any person without a full understanding of microarray data set handling, and as such could be applied to publicly available microarray data sets for a given experiment or disease.

variability in the expression of commonly used reference genes has been recognised on the analysis of cell culture experiments  <cit>  and clinical tissue specimens  <cit> . the selection of reference genes upon their stability as determined by the mathematical assessment of their expression values is a widely accepted technique  <cit> . we identified one gene which showed stable expression across normal and diseased articular tissues , and a number of genes which demonstrated a relatively consistent stability across the majority of tissue specimens . one should bear in mind that the tissues evaluated were from the same embryological origin , and hence there may have been a tendency towards identifying a reference gene which was stable in all tissues, although this is not supported by reports of reference gene stability in different tissues  <cit> . likewise, the diseases compared in the microarray data sets were the same as those affecting the tissue samples evaluated by real-time rt-qpcr, which may further tend towards identifying reference genes whose stability was constant. therefore, although we identified one gene as being stably expressed in all tissues, we would not advocate its use as a reference gene in other tissues or diseases without assessment of its stability in the samples to be evaluated  <cit> , as the utopia of a universal reference gene suitable for all studies probably does not exist on basis of the published evidence to date.

mitochondrial ribosomal protein s <dig> is involved in mitochondrial protein synthesis. the precise function of this gene is unknown in eukaryotes, but the protein is thought to be involved in organising the 3' domain of the  <dig> s rrna in the mitochondria of prokaryotes, and thus be involved in the initiation of translation in mammalian mitochondria  <cit> . microarray data analysis indicated the mitochondrial ribosomal protein s <dig> was also stably expressed, although it was only stably expressed in two of the four tissues analysed by rt-qpcr . in a separate study, mitochondrial ribosomal protein l <dig> was one of six genes identified from microarray data obtained from different tissues and cells, as a good reference gene for real-time rt-qpcr experiments, when compared to conventional reference genes for mammary tumour expression profiling  <cit> . mitochondrial ribosomal gene expression appears to show greater stability across different tissues and thus may be less affected by tissue type or disease status, and better potential candidate reference genes for other real-time rt-qpcr experiments.

comparing the results of this study to a similar previous study of commonly used reference genes in multiple articular tissues demonstrates the increased stability of the "new" reference genes   <cit> . the selection of candidate reference genes from microarray data identified new genes which were more stably expressed and is consistent with the general outcome of previous studies using this methodology  <cit> . the normalisation of microarray data by geometric mean of three reference genes  <cit>  did not identify genes  with appropriate stability to be suitable for use as reference genes. the instability of these genes may be reflected, in part, by the greater variation identified in the triplicate repeats of each assay when compared to more genes determined as being more stably expressed such as hirp <dig> or mrps <dig>  the less stable expression of the three conventional reference genes  probably resulted in the selection of similarly "unstably" expressed reference genes from microarray data, and thus accounted for this being a futile method of trying to select reference genes, which agrees with the evaluation of these types of methodologies for the accurate normalisation of microarray data  <cit> . these genes were selected on the basis of a preliminary study of reference gene stability in canine oa tissues  <cit> , however subsequent work evaluating greater sample numbers has determined that one of these genes  demonstrates differential expression in oa cartilage  <cit>  and thus its use may have further predisposed to the selection of genes which were not stably expressed. furthermore, the conventionally used reference gene we evaluated  did not show acceptable stable expression in any of the tissues we analysed.

we used three different methods of ranking reference gene stability in each experiment. correlation co-efficient could be generated to compare methods and quantify the agreement of the rank ordering of different methods. previous studies have demonstrated that the generation of rank orders can be very similar between different methods  <cit> , but this is not always the case  <cit> . the best correlation in rank ordering was observed between genorm and bestkeeper©, across all the tissues which is unsurprising as both are generated by pairwise comparisons , although bestkeeper© and normfinder always identified the same gene as being most stably expressed. the rank order of reference gene stability was identified most consistently for fat pad, followed by cruciate ligament, cartilage, bone and least consistently for synovium.

the advantage of using a model based stability assessment is that rank ordering can be changed if co-regulated genes are included in the stability assessment procedure, as pairwise assessments will determine an increase in stability between these methods  <cit> . as we identified a number of new reference genes which have very little functional information associated with their annotation, we checked for co-regulation between the most stably expressed genes by removing one of the highest ranked genes  alternately, and re-assessing the rank ordering of reference genes stabilities. no major changes in rank ordering or reference gene stability were observed when this was performed. however, it should be noted that other factors besides gene expression pathway similarities can contribute to co-regulation. yu et al.  identified that genes targeted by similar transcription factors have complex relationships across the co-regulated genes  <cit> .  the different methods for determining reference gene stability did not necessarily agree on rank order, but were good at determining both the most and least stably expressed genes, regardless of method. the top two most stably expressed genes analysed by genorm for each tissue were then used to study cytokine gene expression in canine osteoarthritis  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the use of microarray data for the selection of reference genes allowed the identification of multiple genes demonstrating greater stability than a conventional reference gene in multiple tissues. mitochondrial ribosomal protein s <dig> is suitable for use in all the experimental conditions we analysed, and is suitable for investigation in other experiments. different methods of assessment of gene stability do not always show correlation between the rank order of gene expression stability, but they do generally agree on which genes are suitable for use to normalise gene expression experiments.

