BACKGROUND
common bean , an herbaceous annual legume, is one of the most ancient crops of the new world. like other legumes, common bean can acquire nitrogen through mutualistic symbiosis with nitrogen -fixing bacteria of the family rhizobiaceae <cit> . common bean is the most important economic variety of the genus phaseolus and is grown widely in all parts of the world. according to a recent report, over  <dig>  million metric tons were produced in the world in  <dig>  <cit> . it is the most important grain legume for direct human consumption comprising about 50% of the grain legumes consumed world-wide  <cit> . it is also the primary source of dietary protein in many developing countries <cit> .

a high-density oligonucleotide microarray is not yet available for global transcript profiling of common bean. previously, a macro array that contained a total of  <dig> -unigene sets derived from a common bean nodule cdna library was used for transcript profiling of different organs such as root, leaf, stem, and pod  <cit> . currently available is the genechip® soybean genome array . the soybean genechip contains over  <dig>  probe sets designed from soybean transcripts. additionally, the soybean genechip contains  <dig>  and  <dig>  probe sets designed from phytophthora sojae  and heterodera glycines  transcripts, respectively. common bean  is a diploid relative of soybean  and soybean is considered to be a diploidized tetraploid species . recent release of the soybean genome sequence revealed a highly duplicated soybean genome where about 75% of the genes are represented in multiple copies  <cit> . contrary to the highly duplicated soybean genome, most of the genetic markers in common bean were present as a single copy  <cit> . however, previous studies reported a significant level of colinearity in gene order among the tropical legumes such as common bean and soybean even though both genomes might have undergone extensive gene diversification and loss, and numerous chromosome rearrangements  <cit> . a previous study also suggested common bean as a reference model to study the dynamics of genome evolution and as an additional resource for gene discovery in soybean  <cit> . the close relationship between soybean and common bean suggests that the soybean genechip may be used for transcript profiling in common bean.

microarrays developed for a specific species have been used for transcript profiling of closely related species. cross-species rna hybridization  to dna microarrays has been used successfully in both animal and plant when a representative microarray platform is not available  <cit> . the assumption that underlies the validity of csh on a gene chip of a closely related species is that the level of sequence homology among genes conserved between closely related species is significant enough to enable the detection of messages by probes originally designed for their orthologs. however, caution must be taken when interpreting the csh results. notably, factors such as sequence divergence, alternative splicing, and cross-hybridization can cause spurious variation in signal intensity leading to bias in transcript profiling. such aberrant variation derived from csh result in decreased sensitivity and accuracy of measuring differential gene expression that is typically reflected by a decrease in number of genes detected and a compressed fold change difference, respectively. it is therefore necessary to find and keep truly informative probes and eliminate biased probes prior to the microarray data analysis.

microarrays spotted with cdnas or longer oligos can be used for csh studies as well. however, the genechip with 25-mer oligos has an advantage over microarrays with cdnas or longer oligos. in general, shorter oligos are more sensitive to sequence mismatch but longer oligos  tend to endure sequence mismatch during hybridization. in addition, each probe set in the genechip consists of  <dig> perfect match  probes  that target mostly the non-overlapping portion of the coding region for the corresponding target gene . the expression values of target genes  are derived from the signal intensities of those  <dig> pm probes using the signal condensing methodology such as the microarray suite   <dig>   or the robust multi-array average algorithm   <cit> . since the minimum number of probes required to produce  the expression value of a probe set is one, the putative biased probes  can be electronically masked  and only truly informative probes with good signal intensity can be used for producing the expression values of the probe sets. however, this is impossible for arrays with cdna or longer oligos where elimination of a cdna  will result in the loss of the corresponding target gene on the array.

there have been numerous efforts to optimize csh genechip data. for example, ranz et al.  <cit>  introduced a genomic dna hybridization-based method that selected conserved probes between target and non-target species. only the conserved probes selected were used for transcript profiling in non-target species. several csh studies have utilized this approach  <cit> . however, a recent study questioned the reliability of the dna hybridization-based method for selecting unbiased probes in csh studies  <cit> . wang et al.  <cit>  took a different approach to identify inter-species conserved  probe sets based on the expressed sequence tag  homology between target and non-target species. however, this approach is not suitable for species with limited est resources such as common bean. ji et al.  <cit>  developed a different optimization technique based on masking probes with poor signal intensities in a csh genechip data.

in this study, we used the soybean genechip for transcript profiling in three different organs  of both common bean and soybean. we optimized csh genechip data analysis by masking putative probes targeting interspecies variable regions. transcript profiling and qrt-pcr data suggests that the soybean genechip is a suitable cross-species platform for transcript profiling in common bean when used in combination with the masking protocol described.

RESULTS
to determine the sequence similarities between soybean and common bean and to predict the efficacy of the genechip® soybean genome array  for transcript profiling of common bean, the soybean probe set target sequences  were blasted against  <dig>  unique sequences in the common bean gene index  <cit> . a total of  <dig>  putative orthologous bean gene sequences were identified . the orthologs from the two species were on average ~89% identical at the dna sequence level . however, when  <dig>  pm soybean probe sequences  on the soybean genechip  were blasted against the common bean gene index sequences with an e-value cutoff of  <dig> , a total of  <dig>  probe sequences had hits among bean sequences. about 38% of them showed at least one base mismatch over the 16- <dig> bp alignment . these probes targeting isv regions can cause problems when using the soybean genechip for transcript profiling of common bean. in general, the effect of using a cross-species platform for global transcript profiling of a closely-related species is 1) decreased sensitivity  and 2) decreased accuracy of measuring differential gene expression .

overview of the genechip data
to evaluate the utility of the genechip® soybean genome array  for transcript profiling of common bean, we hybridized crna purified from nodule, leaf, and root of common bean and soybean, in triplicate, to the soybean genechip . to provide an overview of probe set detection call rate  for each organ in each species, we condensed the probe signal intensities for each probe set in each genechip hybridization using the mas  <dig>  http://. on average, mas  <dig>  called  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> % of the probe sets on the genechip as "present" for soybean nodule, leaf, and root, respectively. however, the present call rates for the same organs in common bean were decreased to  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> %, respectively. the significantly reduced present call rates for common bean reflects a decreased sensitivity to predict a valid transcript profile of common bean.

to explore the overall structure of the genechip data in terms of the variance components, we performed a principal component analysis  on the common bean and soybean genechip data. the first principal component accounted for  <dig> % of the total variability in the data with the two species separated along the first principal component axis . the second principal component accounted for  <dig> % of the total variability in the data with leaf tissue separated from nodule and root tissue along the second principal component axis . the results from the pca suggested that the variation between the two species is more significant than the variation among different organs. it also suggested that the leaf tissue had a more distinct gene expression pattern compared to nodule and root tissue. nodule and root tissue shared similar gene expression patterns. the large variation between the two species  may have been caused by the significantly decreased hybridization signal intensity for common bean compared to that for soybean. the shorter distance between leaf and nodule  along the second principal component axis in common bean compared to that of soybean suggested a decreased accuracy of measuring differential gene expression in common bean csh genechip data compared to that of soybean.

masking probes targeting inter-species variable  regions
as an initial step to optimize the common bean csh genechip data, we used a series of hybridization signal intensity thresholds  to mask probes with signals below the threshold. for each common bean tissue sample, three biological replicates were collected producing a total of  <dig> data points per probe . for a particular probe , all data points were kept if three or more signals were above the signal intensity threshold. otherwise, all  <dig> signals were masked . next, the signal intensities of retained probes were quantile-normalized and condensed into probe set expression values by rma  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the hybridization patterns for a hypothetical probe set . among the  <dig> pm probes in a probe set,  <dig> probes with more than  <dig> signals  above the masking signal intensity threshold  were kept for producing the probe set expression value for each replicate in each tissue type by rma. however,  <dig> probes  with less than  <dig> signals above the masking signal intensity threshold were masked and not included for rma . as expected, the number of probes retained decreased rapidly  while the number of probe sets retained decreased gradually  as signal intensity threshold increased from zero to  <dig> .

in a previous study, ji et al.  <cit>  developed a masking protocol to selectively mask probes with poor signal intensity in a probe set putatively targeting isv regions of the probe set target sequence in the csh genechip data. to evaluate whether masking improved accuracy of measuring differential gene expression, it was hypothesized that different organs  of humans and non-human mammals have similar gene expression patterns. after masking low intensity probes in the csh microarray data, ji et al.  <cit>  found an improved correlation for ln values between human and mouse genechip data. these authors concluded that comparisons of gene expression patterns in defined tissues of related species could be used to optimize csh studies involving other mammals or plants. in another previous study, yang et al.  <cit>  conducted transcript profiling using the medicago genechip® with elongating stem  and post-elongation stem  internodes from alfalfa genotypes  <dig> and  <dig> that differ in stem cell wall concentrations of cellulose and lignin. to optimize the alfalfa csh genechip data, yang et al.  <cit>  developed a protocol to mask probes with poor signal intensity in a probe set putatively targeting isv regions of the probe set target sequence. the masking protocol developed was based on the assumption that the ratio of gene expression in es and pes internodes  of alfalfa is very similar to that measured in tissues of medicago truncatula. yang et al.  <cit>  selected a masking signal intensity threshold that maximized the number of differentially expressed genes  commonly selected in both species while maintaining a high correlation coefficient of the pes/es ratio of commonly selected genes between two species. by employing the masking protocol before the csh genechip data analysis, the problems associated with transcript profiling in alfalfa stems using the medicago genechip as a csh platform were mitigated  <cit> .

the masking protocol employed in this study is based on the assumption that the overall gene expression pattern for common bean nodule and leaf tissue is very similar to that measured in the same tissue of soybean  <cit> . in this study, soybean genechip data for nodule and leaf tissue was analyzed in parallel with the common bean csh genechip data masked by a series of signal intensity thresholds to select a masking signal intensity threshold that could optimize both sensitivity and accuracy of measuring differential gene expression. to evaluate the effect of masking on sensitivity, we identified genes  with at least a 2-fold difference in expression between soybean leaf and nodule. next, we identified genes with at least a 2-fold difference in expression between common bean leaf and nodule after masking with each signal intensity threshold. differentially expressed genes  commonly identified in both soybean and common bean were referred to as "commonly-selected genes" . the number of commonly-selected genes increased  as the signal intensity threshold increased to a value of  <dig>  this reflected an increase in detection sensitivity . to evaluate the effect of masking on accuracy of measuring differential gene expression, we examined the correlation of the nodule/leaf signal ratio for the commonly-selected genes between two species as the signal intensity threshold was increased. the pearson correlation coefficient of the nodule/leaf ratio between soybean and common bean increased from  <dig>  to  <dig>  as the signal intensity threshold increased to a value of  <dig>  this reflected an increase in accuracy of measuring differential gene expression . the number of commonly-selected genes and the calculated pearson correlation coefficient significantly declined at signal intensity thresholds above  <dig> 

although the highest number of commonly-selected genes was achieved with a signal intensity threshold of  <dig>  the pearson correlation coefficient of the nodule/leaf ratio between soybean and common bean was reduced . however, with a signal intensity threshold of  <dig> the highest correlation was achieved, with over  <dig>  probe sets  retained . in addition, over 96% of the soybean probe sets were retained with a signal intensity threshold  <dig> . on the basis of these results, we decided to use a signal intensity threshold of  <dig> for masking biased probes targeting isv regions. the use of this masking threshold significantly improved sensitivity  while maintaining a high level of accuracy of measuring differential gene expression .

the effect of masking biased probes of the common bean csh genechip data with a signal intensity threshold of  <dig> is shown in figure  <dig>  overall, masking isv regions increased the signal intensity of the common bean probe sets . figure 1b shows the effect of masking biased probes with a signal intensity threshold of  <dig> on the overall structure of the genechip data. the pca data that was generated after masking showed a similar pattern as the one generated before masking, i.e. soybean and common bean genechip data sets were separated along the first principal component axis and the second principal component axis separated leaf from nodule and root .  interestingly, the first principal component generated after masking accounted for  <dig> % of the total variability in the genechip data . this is a significant reduction from the  <dig> % prior to masking . additionally, after masking the second principal component accounted for  <dig> % of the total variability in the genechip data, a significant increase from  <dig> % prior to masking . the reduced overall variability between the two species and increased variability among different tissues of these species suggested increased accuracy of measuring differential gene expression in common bean csh genechip data after masking with the signal intensity threshold of  <dig> 

to test the effectiveness of the masking strategy employed in this study for flagging probes targeting the isv regions, we examined the homology between soybean probe targets  and common bean est sequences using the blastn program. a signal intensity threshold of  <dig> was also used for this examination. a total of  <dig>  out of  <dig>  soybean probes retained with a signal intensity threshold of  <dig> had common bean est hits. a total of  <dig>  out of  <dig>  soybean probes masked with the signal intensity threshold of  <dig> also had common bean est hits. interestingly, the average number of mismatched bases between the soybean probe target sequences and common bean ests for the masked probes was over twice the number of the retained probes . this result verifies the effectiveness of the masking strategy applied in this study for flagging putative biased probes targeting isv regions. although these results provide support for the validity of the masking methodology used in this study, caution needs to be exercised in interpreting the data. the comparison is based on the limited number of common bean est sequences that are currently available in the public database. another factor to consider in the interpreting these results is the observation that location of a sequence mismatch can influence the degree of probe hybridization. only sequence mismatches located near the center of a probe can affect target hybridization and probes often can endure mismatches located near the ends. thus, the number of mismatches per probe cannot absolutely reflect probe target hybridization efficiency in a csh study. in addition, the masking protocol used in this study is only an optimization tool, not an absolute solution for correcting bias in the csh genechip data. for example, intensity-based masking protocol can be biased toward abundant transcripts. it could over-mask probes as well even though the masking signal intensity threshold determined the maximized number of commonly-selected genes in both species while maintaining a high correlation coefficient for the nodule/leaf ratio of commonly-selected genes between the two species. thus, for the candidate genes selected for downstream experiments, such as functional characterization, it is important to validate the csh genechip data using other techniques such as qrt-pcr.

effect of masking on detection of differentially-expressed genes
we used an anova  with an additional cutoff of a 2-fold ratio in a pair-wise comparison  to identify genes that were differentially expressed within taxa among three different organs of soybean  and common bean . the venn diagram in figure  <dig> shows the number of differentially expressed genes identified. masking biased probes using a signal intensity threshold of  <dig> increased the number of differentially-expressed genes identified in common bean by  <dig> -fold . over 90% of the genes originally identified before masking were also identified after masking with an additional  <dig>  newly identified genes . we estimate that the  <dig> genes identified prior to masking, but not included after masking, might have been putative false positives;  <dig>  genes newly detected after masking might have been putative false negatives caused by isv regions in the original genechip data .

validation of masking protocol by qrt-pcr with  <dig> randomly selected genes
to independently validate the masking protocol employed and the genechip data produced in this study, we performed qrt-pcr of  <dig> genes randomly selected from a list of genes identified before and after masking . among the  <dig> genes selected for validation,  <dig> were detected only before masking,  <dig> were detected both before and after masking, and  <dig> were detected only after masking. we plotted ΔΔct values obtained from the qrt-pcr data  against log <dig> ratio values from the genechip data from both before  and after  masking  . a previous study showed that the ΔΔct value from qrt-pcr is linear to the log gene expression ratio between two samples  <cit> . the results showed a positive linear relationship between the ΔΔct value from qrt-pcr and the log ratio both before and after masking . masking slightly increased the pearson correlation coefficient  from  <dig>  to  <dig>  .

overview of the transcript profiles in common bean and soybean
probe sets on the soybean genechip were functionally classified using the mapman gene functional classification system  <cit>  . we performed a fisher's exact test to identify functional classes over- or under-represented among differentially expressed genes in each species. with a given number of genes in each class, the fisher's exact test examines whether the number of genes in each class occurred only by chance . we identified numerous functional class over- or under-represented among genes up- or down-regulated in nodule compared to leaf and root tissue in common bean and soybean . gene functional class over-representation analysis revealed differences in transcript enrichment patterns between common bean and soybean. for example, fermentation and bzip transcription factor family classes were over-represented among genes up-regulated in soybean but not in common bean nodules. on the other hand, brassinosteroid biosynthesis genes  were significantly overrepresented among genes up-regulated in common bean but not in soybean nodules. a previous study involving common bean est analysis also suggested a unique gene expression pattern in common bean nodules compared to nodules of other legume species such as medicago truncatula and soybean  <cit> . contrary to differences in transcript functional class representation in nodules of soybean and common bean, we also found many functional classes that were over-represented in both. for example, the purine biosynthesis class was significantly over-represented among genes up-regulated in both soybean and common bean nodules .

purine pathway genes: marker genes up-regulated in both common bean and soybean nodules
in rhizobia-infected nodules of tropical legumes such as soybean and common bean, nitrogen  fixed by bacterial nitrogenase in the form of nh <dig> or nh4+ is assimilated by host plants initially through the amide  pathway. subsequent steps involve the purine pathway which yields inosine monophosphate  followed by the formations of ureides . in these legumes, ureides synthesized in the nodules are loaded into the xylem, transported to the leaves, and used as a major source of n in the leaves. thus, up-regulation of genes for the purine pathway enzymes in nodules compared to other organs is the most significant feature of the symbiosis in ureide-forming legumes  <cit> . the purine pathway involves  <dig> enzymatic steps with nine genes to synthesize imp from phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate    <cit> . these purine pathway genes are excellent marker genes for validating transcript profiling data involving nodule-specific or nodule-preferential gene expression. a mapman overview of the purine biosynthesis pathway shows genes preferentially expressed in nodule  versus leaf  in common bean  and soybean . in general, identical genes for enzymes in each step of the purine pathway were up-regulated in both common bean and soybean nodules. however, even after masking, decreased sensitivity and accuracy of measuring differential gene expression could still be observed in the common bean data. the results also show that common bean and soybean used different gene family members to catalyze steps in the purine pathway. for example, gma. <dig> .s1_at, formylglycinamide ribonucleotide amidotransferase , and gmaaffx. <dig> .s1_at, aminoimidazolecarboximide ribonucleotide transformylase , were up-regulated in common bean but not in soybean nodules . to further test the validity of our csh genechip data, we measured the expression of  <dig> purine-ureide pathway genes using qrt-pcr . among the  <dig> purine-ureide pathway genes selected for qrt-pcr validation,  <dig> were detected both before and after masking and  <dig> were detected only after masking. the qrt-pcr results revealed that all of the purine-ureide pathway genes examined in common bean were significantly up-regulated in nodule relative to leaf tissue. this suggests a significantly increased detection power  after masking  . in addition, masking increased the pearson correlation coefficient  between the ΔΔct value from the qrt-pcr and the log ratio value from the csh genechip data from - <dig>  to  <dig>  . these pearson correlation coefficient values produced before and after masking are significantly lower than those shown in figure  <dig>  this is because all of the purine-ureide pathway genes examined were up-regulated in nodules compared to leaf tissue within a narrow range of the expression ratio  . overall, the increased positive correlation between the two data sets after masking indicates the increase in accuracy of measuring differential gene expression obtained using the masking protocol.

 <dig> + indicates genes that were detected as differentially-expressed among three different organs after an anova  using the common bean csh genechip data with no masking or after masking with a signal intensity threshold of  <dig> 

 <dig> log <dig>  value obtained from the common bean csh genechip data with no masking or after masking with a signal intensity threshold of  <dig> 

 <dig> ΔΔct =  -  from qrt-pcr data. ct18s rrna values were stable in the organs examined and were used to normalize the data.

masked probe frequency analysis reveals highly-conserved and highly-divergent gene families between soybean and common bean
the identification of functionally conserved orthologs between species is important because the information obtained for the orthologs in one species, such as soybean, can be readily transferred to the improvement of relative crop species such as common bean. the identification of highly-divergent  genes especially the ones with adaptive divergence between species are also important to better understand the underlying genetic and evolutionary mechanisms. we identified highly-conserved and highly-divergent gene classes between soybean and common bean based on csh of common bean crnas to the soybean genechip. using the masking data obtained in this study we classified the soybean probe sets based on the number of probes retained in each probe set. a total of  <dig>  soybean probe sets with  <dig> or  <dig>  probes retained were classified as a "highly-conserved" group. a total of  <dig>  soybean probe sets with only  <dig> or  <dig> probes retained were classified as a "hyper-variable" group. we did not include the soybean probe sets with all eleven probes masked because those probe sets could be interrogating genes not only with very high sequence variation between the two species but also with low transcript abundance .

to validate the classification made based on the number of probes retained per probe set, we examined the sequence homology between soybean probe set target sequences  and the common bean gene index sequences  for each class. a total of  <dig>  highly-conserved and  <dig>  hyper-variable class probe sets had hits after searching against common bean sequences by the blastn program with an e-value cutoff of 1e- <dig>  the average number of mismatched nucleotides between two species for the highly-conserved and the hyper-variable group was  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. a significantly increased number of nucleotide mismatches for the hyper-variable group compared to the highly-conserved group validates our classification strategy.

we performed a fisher's exact test with bonferroni correction  to identify functional classes over- or under-represented in highly conserved and hyper-variable groups . the functional classes over-represented in highly-conserved groups included photosynthesis, protein degradation, and transport classes . interestingly, the "regulation of the transcription" class  was significantly under-represented among the highly-conserved group . the functional classes over-represented in the hyper-variable group included flavonoid metabolism, biotic stress responsive, and myb transcription factors . this suggests that the genes for basic cellular functions and metabolisms could be highly conserved between soybean and common bean but there also exists rapidly-evolving classes especially those needed for adaption to the environment. it is widely accepted that orthologous genes in two different species generally  retain the same function, especially when the function is essential to evolutionary fitness  <cit> . in addition, the conservation of multiple genes with the same functional class between soybean and common bean observed in this study is consistent with previous reports from other species. such consistency suggests that conservation at the level of complexes and/or pathways is essential for viability  <cit> .

a previous study in arabidopsis showed that rapidly evolving genes under positive selective pressure are more likely to be associated with adaptive divergence between species  <cit> . in our study, flavonoid metabolism and biotic stress response classes were over-represented among the "hyper-variable" group. these two classes are clearly adaptive in nature. flavonoids protect plants from microbes and insects  <cit>  and the hyper-variable biotic stress responsive class contains numerous disease resistance  genes. among the hyper-variable biotic stress responsive class of genes, the toll/interleukin- <dig> receptors, nucleotide binding sites, and leucine-rich repeat  family of r genes were highly abundant. the nbs-lrr- containing r gene superfamily is one of the largest  and most diverse gene families in plants  <cit> . the highly divergent  and adaptive nature of the r genes can be explained by the high variability in the amino acid sequence of the lrr domain that determines r specificity  <cit> .

the myb transcription factor class was significantly overrepresented among the "hyper-variable" group as well . these transcription factors are involved in various pivotal physiological and developmental processes in plants  <cit> . a previous study that performed a thorough gene expression analysis involving the myb family reported that most of the arabidopsis myb genes were responsive to one or multiples types of hormones and stress treatments  <cit> . the myb super family is one of the largest gene families in arabidopsis with  <dig> genes  <cit> . amplified gene families after multiple gene duplications, like myb transcription factors, often evolve new biological functions making them highly adaptive in nature.

CONCLUSIONS
the genechip® soybean genome array is a suitable platform for transcript profiling in common bean. however, data optimization by masking biased probes is necessary to improve sensitivity and accuracy of measuring differential gene expression of the csh genechip data. in addition to transcript profiling, csh genechip data in combination with masking can be used for comparative ecological and/or evolutionary genomics study. this approach could also be an excellent tool for the preliminary examination of diversity patterns between species before high-throughput sequencing. the masking strategy employed in this study can be applied to any species and will assist in answering more fundamental questions such as: 1) phenotypic effects of candidate gene sequence divergence and gene expression patterns, 2) the roles of gene duplication, 3) the relative importance of cis- and trans-acting mutations, and 4) gene expression vs. structural changes for future adaptation.

