BACKGROUND
thousands of genes are compactly encoded in bacterial genomes and orchestrate life activities, such as dna duplication, rna transcription and protein translation. the genes need to be well organized in the genome for effective regulation of different biological processes. bacterial genes are not randomly distributed on the genomic sequence, but organized in sequential functional units called operons  <cit> . the genes in an operon tend to be co-expressed  <cit>  and their protein products have higher probability to interact with each other  <cit> . operons participating in the same biological pathway or regulon  are also close to each other on the genome sequence and present in one or multiple clusters  <cit> . however, numerous large regulons exist comprising multiple clustered operons that are separated distantly on the genome sequence. the organization of these long-range regulons has been suggested to be related with the three-dimensional packing of the chromosome, but this remains to be examined  <cit> .

in the past decade, the chromosome conformation capture  technique and its derivatives, such as 4c, 5c, hi-c, and tcc  <cit> , have been developed to detect dna–dna interactions to infer the chromosome spatial organization. the application of this technique in eukaryotes resulted in the interpretation of contact patterns between regulatory elements in the 3d space  <cit>  and provided substantial information about the principles of chromosomal organization  <cit> . however, the application of 3c techniques in prokaryotes is still in its infancy  <cit> . recently, cagliero and co-workers determined the chromosome conformation for escherichia coli growing at the exponential  and starvation  phases using the genome conformation capture  technique  <cit> . in this study, we attempted to use these valuable datasets to investigate the spatial features of bacterial genome organization.

RESULTS
renormalization and profile of the gcc data
we renormalized the gcc datasets using the following steps. first, high-quality reads were mapped onto the reference genome  using bowtie <dig>   <cit> . the resulting contact counts were further refined by setting the contact distance threshold between the contact fragments to remove self-ligation, non-ligation and random breaks . the noise was removed by setting a minimum required contact number through controlling the false discovery rate . we divided the genome into 10-kilobase  bins to derive the dna interaction information  <cit> . at  <dig> kb resolution,  <dig> % of the operons and  <dig> % of the genes were inside  the bins. considering that the uneven distribution of the restriction enzyme sites  can bias the interaction frequencies, we normalized the interaction frequencies by dividing the number of hhal ress for each bin to remove this bias   <cit> .

in the genomic interaction profile of the gcc dataset, highly interacting dna regions can be characterized by the peaks  in the genomic interaction profile of the gcc dataset. using the software macs <dig>   <cit> , we identified the peaks from the mapping results obtained by bowtie <dig> . totally, there are  <dig> peaks for l and s phases, with  <dig> peaks shared,  <dig> specific for the l phase and  <dig> specific for the s phase . the gene functions in these peak regions were examined using a cluster of orthologous groups  functional classification scheme  and it was found that the peak regions for the l phase were enriched with genes of function j , e , and h , and the peak regions for the s phase were enriched with the genes of function e , p , and c . as a result, these specific gene functions could be interpreted in terms of the physiological states of the two cellular phases. that is, in the l phase, larger amounts of biomass are required for cell growth and proliferation, which require the coordination of the protein translation and biogenesis genes. in the s phase, the transport pathways are highly coordinated as cells struggle to remain alive.figure  <dig> 
the igv display of reads mapping for exponential  phase and starvation  phases. the “distribution” tracks show the density of mapped reads along the genome, visualized by integrative genome viewer integration . the “peaks” tracks show a high mapping frequency of reads to a particular region . red and blue represent the l phase and s phase, respectively. as shown to the right of this figure, the region of the selected peak  is shown as an example . the middle section of the peak illustrates the pileup signal in the top track.
the peak numbers identified by the program macs.  <dig> peaks are specific for the l phase;  <dig> peaks are specific for the s phase;  <dig> peaks are shared by both phases.
the proportions of cog functional categories in the highly interacting dna fragments. the proportions of cog functional categories for the e. coli genes in the highly interacting dna fragments, measured in the l  and s  phases. the codes for the cog functions are presented below the pie charts. percentages given in the pie chart were calculated including categories r and s, and only values ≥5% are shown.



spatial features for e. coli genome organization
by considering the individual operons in each dna bin, the interaction frequencies between operons were derived from the interaction information of dna fragments, and their connections to the operon organization were investigated. the interaction frequencies between operon pairs within a regulon were calculated and compared with those of randomly sampled operon pairs with similar sequence distances , excluding  <dig> interaction counts. the interaction frequency of an operon pair belonging to the same regulon was significantly higher than that of a random pair for both the l and s phases . furthermore, the remote operon pairs, whose sequences were separated by at least  <dig> operons, were also compared with random samples . notably, these remote operons still showed higher interaction frequencies than the randomly sampled operon pairs  from the entire e. coli genome. this finding indicated that the dna interaction-based genome architecture does contribute to the organization of operons into regulons. it also explains the frequent occurrence of the large regulons composed of multiple operons that are sequentially far from each other, thus confirming the suggested functions of 3d chromosome packing on the global organization of operons  <cit> . we also found a similar phenomenon for genes in biological pathways. the interaction frequency between gene pairs in the same biological pathway was significantly higher than that of gene pairs obtained randomly from the genome for both phases . this phenomenon was observed not only in the overall gene pairs, but also in the remote gene pairs with sequence separation of at least  <dig> genes. taken together, the results suggested that not only operons in a regulon but also genes in a biological pathway were likely to co-localize in the 3d e. coli genome.

to examine the spatial features for e. coli genome organization quantitatively, the c value was defined based on the dna interaction frequency to measure the organizational compactness of the 3d genome at two levels: the compactness of regulons in terms of the interaction between operon pairs, and the compactness of biological pathways in terms of the interaction between gene pairs. a lower c value indicated that the operons/genes are more spread out and less compact in the 3d space globally.

to determine if the actual genome organization in the 3d space is coordinated compared with random arrangements, the genome was randomly shuffled  in different degrees , following a procedure similar to that previously reported  <cit> . we compared the arrangement of operons and genes in the real and randomly reshuffled e. coli genomes for both the overall operon/gene pairs and remote ones with sequence separation of at least  <dig> operons/genes of distance in l and s phases . the results showed that the current genomic arrangement of overall operons in genomes had higher c values  than the vast majority of the values in the reshuffled genomes , in both phases . moreover, the higher the percentage of randomly reshuffled operons, the larger the decrease in the c value of the resulting rearranged genome. the relatively high c value for the actual genome arrangement indicated that the actual arrangement of the operons in the regulons in the real genome was more compact than that in the randomly reshuffled genomes. furthermore, if only the remote operon pairs  were considered, this relation persisted . this result indicated that the compactness of the real genome was not just a consequence of the interaction between linearly close operons, but reflects the compactness of e. coli genome organization in the 3d space. meanwhile, the gene arrangement in the biological pathways showed a similar trend. the actual genomic arrangement of the biological pathways had higher c values  than the vast majority of those with different extents of reshuffling , for both the overall and remote gene pairs .figure  <dig> 
distributions of c  values calculated for the actual and reshuffled genomes. in each panel, the x-axis represents the c values of the genome in different conditions ; the y-axis is the density. both the “overall” and “remote” operon/gene pairs in the regulons/biological pathways are illustrated respectively, where “remote” means an operon/gene pair whose sequences are separated by at least  <dig> operons/genes in between on the genome sequence. the black vertical dash line shows the c value for the actual arrangement  of the overall/remote operons in regulons for the l phase / and s phase / or the overall/remote genes in the biological pathways for the l phase / and s phase /. the  <dig> colored curves in each panel show the distributions of the corresponding c values for the randomly reshuffled genomes at different percentages , respectively. each colored curve was calculated using  <dig>  random permutations of the current arrangement of the considered unit  in the genome.



implications for e. coli biology
the qualitative and quantitative results both indicated that the previously reported organization principle of e. coli genome on the linear sequence  <cit>  could be extended to the 3d space. the non-random organization of the linear genome has several effects. for example, neighboring genes on the genome have higher probability of co-expression and their protein products tend to form protein–protein interactions   <cit> . here, we investigated if these effects persist in the 3d space.

we compared the pearson correlation coefficients  of expression levels between the highly interacting gene pairs and randomly sampled gene pairs, using the wilcoxon rank sum tests. the remote  gene pairs with the highest interaction frequency showed a significantly higher co-expression than the five datasets of randomly sampled remote gene pairs, for l  and s  phases . the results suggested the co-expression of genes separated by a long distance on the genome sequence but close to each other in the 3d space.figure  <dig> 
co-expression of the remote interacting gene pairs in the l phase  and s phase . the top 10% highest interacting remote gene pairs , which are located at a distance of at least  <dig> kb from each other, are compared with the five datasets of randomly sampled remote gene pairs . p-values were calculated using the wilcoxon rank sum test to compare “real” and “random” data.



to investigate the effect of 3d genome organization on ppi, we compared the ppi occurrence in gene pairs with different levels of dna interaction frequency. figure  <dig> shows that the quartile-based division has higher numbers of ppis in the highly interacting gene pairs for both phases, with  <dig> / <dig>  ppi per million dna-interacting gene pairs in the 1st quartile level and  <dig> / <dig>  ppi per million dna-interacting gene pairs in the 4th quartile level, in the l/s phases . the increasing trend of the column bar height from left to right indicates a positive correlation between the dna interaction frequency and corresponding ppi frequency of their protein products. this correlation denotes that the proteins encoded by the gene pairs of high dna interaction in the 3d space have higher probability of forming a ppi. this finding illustrates the connection between the 3d genome organization and bacterial ppi formation.figure  <dig> 
ppi numbers observed in gene pairs with different dna-interaction levels. the x-axis shows the first, second, third and fourth quartiles of the dna-interaction frequency  between gene pairs. “non-contact” represents the gene pairs with no interaction information. the y-axis represents the observed ppi number per million dna-interacting gene pairs. the corresponding p-values calculated using the wilcoxon rank sum test are listed in additional file 1: table s <dig> 



for bacteria, the processes of transcription, translation, and ppi formation cannot be entirely separated because they lack a nuclear membrane. thus, the connections observed in this study among the spatial dna interactions, gene co-expression and protein interactions were partially interpretable in terms of cellular structure. these connections reflect the global genome organization features and the unity of transcription and its downstream processes for e. coli in the 3d space, which supports the notion of transcription factory which was modeled for all genomes  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, starting from the gcc data for e. coli  <cit> , the present analysis revealed certain spatial features of the e. coli genome organization: i) the operons/genes are not randomly distributed in the 3d space, but are constrained by regulons/bio-pathways to maximize spatial compactness; ii) the genes close to each other in the 3d space  exhibit trends of co-expression and formation of ppis. these findings are helpful in elucidating the fundamental biology of bacteria, and support the concept of transcription factory.

