BACKGROUND
after genome sequencing, genome annotation is critical to denote and demarcate the functional elements in the genome  and to link these genomic elements to biological function . structural annotation of newly sequenced genomes begins during the final stages of genome assembly with electronic prediction of open reading frames   <cit> . sequencing consortiums typically release these predicted genes and their translated products into public databases, where they account for the majority of data for the newly sequenced species  <cit>  and are critical for high-throughput wet lab functional genomics  experiments  <cit> . the ncbi non-redundant protein database  and the uniprot archive  do not directly provide functional annotation for these predicted orfs. the highly curated uniprot knowledgebase  database  <cit>  displays functional annotation from the european bioinformatics institute gene ontology annotation  project  <cit> , but does not include predicted gene products until there is experimental evidence for their in vivo expression. thus, despite being critical for functional genomics experiments, most data from a newly sequenced genome does not have even preliminary functional annotation. this problem is exacerbated as other public resources such as ensembl  <cit> . entrez gene  <cit>  and affymetrix netaffx  <cit>  use data from uniprotkb or the ebi-goa project as their functional annotation source.

go has become the de facto standard for functional annotation  <cit> . annotations are attributed to sources  and to the type of evidence used to make the association . many of the evidence codes describe direct species-specific experimental evidence such as "inferred from direct assay" , "physical interaction" , "mutant phenotype"  or "genetic interaction" . other evidence codes refer to indirect lines of evidence such as functional motifs and structural or sequence similarity. however, by definition, there can be no direct experimental evidence available for determining the function of predicted gene products. instead, adding go annotations based upon indirect evidence such as "inferred from electronic annotation"  or "inferred from structural/sequence similarity"  provide the first significant and valuable increases in the breadth of annotations for functional modelling.

although most go annotations for newly sequenced species are the iea-based annotations provided by the ebi-goa project  <cit> , these iea annotations do not initially include the gene products predicted during sequence assembly. moreover, while iea annotations are based on functional motifs and sequences, the most rigorous way of assigning function when there is no direct experimental evidence available, is based on strict orthology. orthology is one of the central concepts of comparative genome analysis. by definition orthologs are genes or proteins in two or more species that share significant similarity, and are thought to have diverged from a common ancestral gene that existed in their last common ancestor  <cit> . since orthologous pairs have minimum level of evolutionary separation between them, they are more likely to retain a common function. determination of orthology relations assists knowledge transfer between species and can be used to improve both structural and functional annotation in organisms that have less annotation.

a number of ortholog prediction methods and search tools are available  <cit> . however, the number of proteins from one species that is considered to be part of the same orthologous group varies from one method to another due to different algorithms employed and species included in the methods  <cit> . for example, homologene  <cit>  does orthology analyses by comparing protein sequences using the blastp tool and then matching the sequences using phylogenetic trees built from sequence similarity and synteny, where possible. ensembl  <cit>  first uses blastp and the smith-waterman algorithm to identify putative orthologs by reciprocal blast analysis and synteny evidence. inparanoid  <cit>  is based on pairwise similarity scores and it detects best-best hits between sequences from two different species to form the main orthologous group to which other sequences  are added only if they are closely related. treefam   <cit>  uses phylogeny based on ensembl datasets and clusters genes  from multiple organisms into groups that are all descended from a single ancestor gene. in order to obtain good coverage and reliable predicted orthologs, various methods should be integrated  <cit> .

comparative genome analysis also requires standardized nomenclature. by identifying orthologs of experimentally supported proteins, standardized nomenclature can be added. committees for standardized nomenclature exist for human and mouse gene and gene products  <cit>  and chicken researchers have followed suit  <cit>  and will use human nomenclature for orthologous chicken genes.

in this work we analysed nine chicken tissues using a three-stage combined high throughput proteomics and computational biology approach to derive "expressed protein sequence tags"  to improve structural annotation by experimentally supporting the in vivo expression of computationally predicted chicken proteins  <cit> . we then used orthology to add standardized gene nomenclature and go annotations .

RESULTS
identification of predicted proteins
in total, we identified  <dig>  proteins from the analyzed tissues , corresponding to 51% of the chicken predicted proteins in ncbi . in doing so, we also obtained data about the tissue expression patterns of these proteins . by setting p ≤  <dig>  as a threshold for peptide identification we were able to identify  <dig>  peptides that had scores above the threshold in the real database and  <dig> in the reversed database, giving a peptide false discovery rate  of  <dig> % on the real database. the protein fdr was 1%, equivalent to  <dig> proteins from this dataset. this fdr is better than recently reported rates  <cit>  and although  <dig>   of the protein identifications in this study were based on single-peptide matches, the low fdr provides a high degree of confidence in these identifications. in other studies, nearly 98% of proteins identified by a single peptide match have been predicted to be correctly identified  <cit> . moreover, 44% of the single-peptide matches were identified independently in more than one tissue, providing further evidence for their in vivo expression. interestingly, we identified  <dig> proteins that were only electronically predicted or hypothetical translations in human.

not surprisingly, more predicted proteins were identified by mass spectrometry when differential detergent fractionation  was used as the method for protein isolation, as previously reported  <cit> . this means that muscle and brain tissues, two tissues which would normally be expected to have the highest number of identified proteins, had the fewest predicted proteins . we found that 52% of the identified proteins were expressed in more than one tissue , and their independent identification in multiple tissues lends validity to their in vivo expression in chicken. the protein identification and mass spectrometry data has been submitted to the proteomic identifications database , accession numbers 1621– <dig>   <dig> &  <dig> 

id mapping
one of the most time consuming tasks in high-throughput experiments is navigating among different database identifiers. to assist researchers with their data analysis and facilitate data sharing we mapped all identified proteins to uniparc, ipi , entrez gene and ensembl identifiers . only 80% of the identified proteins were mapped to ensembl ids. this may be because ensembl has a different gene prediction method  <cit>  to that of ncbi and not all of the ncbi predicted proteins are represented in ensembl.

ortholog identification
we identified human or mouse orthologs for 77%  of the identified chicken predicted proteins  and 86% of these orthologs are predicted by more than one ortholog prediction method . since each of these tools use different methods for ortholog prediction, orthologs predicted by more than one method are more likely to be accurately predicted.

standardized nomenclature
the use of standardized nomenclature facilitates comparative biology and aids modelling of functional genomics data. we assigned  <dig>   chicken predicted proteins with hgnc  gene nomenclature committee) approved gene symbols and names based on their human or mouse orthologs . although it has been agreed to base chicken gene nomenclature on human nomenclature guidelines  <cit>  it is only relatively recently that there has been a concerted effort to provide standardized nomenclature for chicken genes, and the majority of chicken gene products are not named according to standardized nomenclature guidelines. we have assigned standardized nomenclature to chicken genes on a large scale as part of a high-throughput experimental annotation effort.

functional annotation
to functionally annotate the predicted proteins we mapped them to the go annotations for human and mouse orthologs that are based on direct experimental evidence codes . we go annotated  <dig>   chicken predicted proteins with  <dig>  associations. these go annotations are summarized based on cellular component , molecular function  and biological process . these go annotations represent an increase of 8% over the current chicken go annotations  and a doubling of chicken non-iea annotations. these go annotations are publicly available via the agbase database  <cit>  and will enter the pipeline to be submitted to the ebi-goa project.

discussion
here we demonstrate a combined approach to provide experimental-based structural annotations and functional annotations based on orthology. the workflow we have developed relies on using proteomics to survey a range of tissues from the species of interest. newer structural annotation pipelines include the use of ests and mrna in their computational models. we are proposing an analogous method that would include experimental support at the protein level while providing information that can be used to improve structural annotation in the species being studied, provide information to improve annotation in other species and be used to improve open reading frame prediction algorithms. in addition, providing information about tissue specificity and preliminary functional information based on sequence analysis will facilitate analysis of future functional genomics studies.

the chicken genome was sequenced because of its importance as a non-mammalian vertebrate model, its use as a biomedical model to study embryology and  <cit>  development and its agricultural importance. a major step that follows after genome sequencing is structural and functional annotation . when we began the work described in this manuscript only 53% of chicken proteins were known to be expressed in vivo, with the remainder being electronically predicted using in silico methods. moreover, only 52% of chicken gene products had any go annotations and, although genes predicted during genome assembly may be the bulk of the data for a newly sequenced species, these predicted gene products are not automatically assigned any go annotation.

the parameters we have used in this study provide strong support for protein expression in vivo. in particular, the parameter deltacn is a measure of specificity of the match within the database used and a deltacn value  <dig>  ensures that a peptide is distinctly different from other peptides within the same database. however, a single peptide match to a predicted protein does not necessarily provide evidence that the annotation for the entire open reading frame is accurate; this can only be confirmed by accumulating more mass spectra data and accounting for the detectable peptides within the genome  <cit> . while some of the predicted proteins we identified were identified on the basis of a single peptide, 44% of these proteins were expressed in more than one tissue, providing additional evidence for their in vivo expression. in a typical proteomics experiment 20–67%-of proteins are identified by a single peptide match  <cit> . calculation of false discovery rate has been used to validate peptide or proteins identifications  <cit> , including proteins identified by a single peptide match. in one study, 90% of the proteins identified by a single peptide were validated by immunoassay detection  <cit> .

by analysis of multiple tissues we maximize the number of predicted proteins identified and provide tissue expression data for these identified proteins. also, identifying predicted proteins in more than one experiment  provides additional confidence that the predicted protein is expressed in vivo. in addition,  <dig> proteins were only electronically predicted or hypothetical translations in human. identifying these proteins in chicken is additional information to support, not only the expression of these proteins in chicken but also in human based on orthology.

the least number of proteins were identified from the muscle and brain tissues. however, this does not necessarily reflect the biological complexity of these tissues but is more likely a reflection of the different protein extraction method used for these two tissues and amount of sample analyzed.

in addition to providing experimental support for the in vivo expression of chicken predicted proteins, we used strict 1: <dig> orthology with human and mouse genes to provide the identified proteins with standardized gene nomenclature based on established nomenclature guidelines and functional annotations based on the best available data. since by definition predicted proteins have no direct experimental evidence, assignation of go annotation for these proteins can be done using either iea or iss. while iea is provided for a large range of organisms by the ebi-goa project, this annotation effort does not include predicted proteins and iea annotations tend to be broad descriptions of function . the most rigorous way to assign function in the absence of direct experimental evidence is by strict orthology.

orthologs are genes in different species that evolved from a common ancestral gene by speciation. orthologs are, by definition, more likely to share functional similarity  <cit>  and orthology can be used to reliably infer function to their co-orthologs. we determined chicken orthologous genes that pair with human and mouse genes. since there is no a 'gold standard' method for orthologs identification  <cit> , we integrated different published orthology identification methods that could possibly increase the breadth of orthologs identified. we were able to identify human or mouse orthologs for 77% of the identified chicken proteins. this figure, however, is better than the number that could have been obtained when using only one method . for example from the total number of identified chicken predicted proteins , only 71%, 57%, 57% and 23% could have been identified by homologene, inparanoid, ensembl and treefam, respectively. each of these methods use different procedures and orthologs identified by more than one method have been reported to be more consistent and reliable  <cit> .

in addition to the experimentally supported predicted proteins that have human or mouse orthologs, there are a further  <dig>  predicted proteins that we identified in this study. we are in the process of providing go functional annotation for these proteins based on sequence similarity to other go annotated gene products and functional motifs and domains and this information will be also be made publicly available.

standardized nomenclature is becoming increasingly important with the large amounts of data released by sequencing projects, gene expression microarrays and proteomics. this information will facilitate comparative and functional genomics studies in both avians and mammals. moreover, assigning functional annotation based on orthology is more robust than using sequence similarity alone  <cit> . this is because the higher level of functional conservation between orthologous proteins makes orthology highly relevant for protein function prediction. thus our 8% increase in chicken go annotated proteins is a significant improvement.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate the value of proteomics to experimentally support the in-vivo expression of electronically predicted proteins of a newly sequenced genome. we assigned standardized nomenclature and go functional annotations for these newly confirmed proteins. the approach we have developed facilitates comparative and functional genomics studies and may be applied to improve the annotations of a diverse range of newly sequenced genomes.

