BACKGROUND
the phosphoproteome is a window into key biological processes, such as gene expression and cell growth, that are mediated by kinase and phosphatase activities  <cit> . there is widespread interest in mediators of phosphorylation as therapeutic targets  <cit> . studies of specific phosphorylation pathways are being supplemented with measurements from the developing field of phosphoproteomics  <cit> , indicating that around one third of proteins may be phosphorylated in a given cellular snapshot  <cit> . a number of general databases are being developed to collate these data, such as phospho.elm   <cit> , the phosphorylation site database  <cit> , and phosphosite  <cit> . some resources are linked to certain streams of data, such as plant phosphorylation  and specific phosphoproteome experiments . other databases, such as dbptm  <cit> , collect phosphorylations along with other post-translational modifications.

phosphorylation site databases serve as a reference for construction of methods aimed at sequence-based prediction of phosphorylation sites. a range of machine-learning techniques have been used, including neural networks , hidden markov models , support vector machines , bayesian decision theory , and other forms of sequence profile analysis . such predictors perform particularly well when kinase specificities are taken into account  <cit> , or when species-dependence is included  <cit> . experimental studies of phosphorylation in yeast are consistent with strong preferences of kinases for specific substrates, but also indicate that predictions based on phosphorylation site patterns can lead to substantial over-prediction, and the conclusion that many sequences may not be accessible and that other regions may be involved in substrate recognition  <cit> . the current set of phosphorylation site databases and prediction servers has been recently reviewed  <cit> .

whilst it is clear that amino acid sequence and kinase-specific features play key roles in many phosphorylations, a number of studies have also looked at 3d structural encoding of features around phosphorylation sites. local structure around phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated sites was used, in the form of contact maps, to train a neural network  <cit> . an algorithm to predict local structural segments from sequence has been used to enhance prediction accuracy for phosphorylation sites  <cit> . a database of 3d structures of protein phosphorylation sites has been developed, including structural annotation of the phospho.elm database . it has been noticed that the amino acid sequence properties around phosphorylation sites are similar to those of intrinsically disordered protein regions, and this information used to construct a prediction algorithm, disphos  <cit> . further work has demonstrated that intrinsic disorder is a characteristic of partners that bind 14-3- <dig> proteins  <cit> , and that it may be a general feature of linear motifs that determine protein-protein interactions  <cit> . a survey of proteins for which structures are known in the phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated forms found that the effect of phosphorylation is mediated in many of these cases by conformational change, and by alteration of interfacial properties in some others  <cit> .

charge interactions have been investigated around subsets of phosphorylation sites, in phosphopeptide binding systems  <cit> , at interfaces mediated by phosphorylated sites in general  <cit> , and around activation loops containing phosphorylation sites  <cit> . in all of these cases, favourable charge-charge interactions were identified at the phosphorylated sites. for the phosphopeptide binding systems this is the major feature in a prediction tool  <cit> , whilst complementary charge interactions drive the successful modelling of changes in activation loop conformation  <cit> .

model peptide studies have shown that phosphorylation stabilises α-helix formation when located at the amino terminus  <cit> , consistent with calculations and the location of phosphate or sulphate ions in crystal structures  <cit> . other work has highlighted the strength of non-covalent interactions that can be mediated by phosphorylated groups, salt-bridging in a model peptide  <cit> , or mediating protein-protein interactions  <cit> . calculations have been used to estimate the relative strengths of hydrogen bonds that involve phosphorylated amino acid sidechains  <cit> . we have previously used finite difference poisson-boltzmann  calculations of charge interactions in studies of peptide phosphorylation  <cit> . the current study uses phosphorylated proteins in the structural database to address the question of whether phosphorylation sites can be distinguished in terms of charge interactions, relative to their non-phosphorylated counterparts within the same proteins. we find a subset of stabilised phosphorylated sites, many of which are within kinases, and for which the favourable interaction is derived largely from interactions with basic sidechains. when studied in the context protein structures that are not phosphorylated at these sites, an indication of favourable interactions  can be recovered by analysing the charge environment beyond the nearest neighbours. in an extension to phosphorylation sites from the phospho.elm database  <cit>  that can be structurally annotated, we find that these do not have as large a signal indicative of conformational change as those from the structural database. on the other hand, the phospho.elm sites are more buried on average than the set derived from phosphorylated protein structures. there is also an interesting difference in the distributions of patch polarity around phospho.elm sites and background sites.

RESULTS
phosphorylated proteins in the structural database
we examined the effect of replacing single protein chains with biological units . the results are similar to those for the single chains , but with greater separation of the phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated sets, indicative of some phosphate-mediated stabilisation between protein chains. figure 4b shows an example, where the binding of phosphorylated serotonin n-acetyltransferase and isoform ζ of 14-3- <dig>  1ib <dig>  <cit> , is analagous to the phosphopeptide binding complexes, in which charge interactions were observed to be a key feature of binding  <cit> . the majority of these systems were excluded through the use of a minimum polypeptide length of  <dig> amino acids. other examples of stabilisation between protein chains also relate to segments that would be unstructured in the absence of phosphorylation: β-catenin repeat interactions with both e-cadherin, 1i7w  <cit> , and phosphorylated apc, 1v <dig>  <cit> , and the forkhead-associated domain of ki <dig> with a phosphorylated fragment of human nucleolar protein, 2aff  <cit> .

many of the structures studied show little stabilisation, or show destabilisation, in our estimate of charge-charge interactions. in a few instances, small overall interaction results from near cancelling of stabilising and destabilising contributions, as at the phosphorylated active site of phosphoglucomutase, 1vkl  <cit> , with opposing contributions from a metal ion and its ligands. in a larger number of cases, the surrounding charge interactions are generally small. some of these at least may be indicative of phosphorylation mediating differences in the formation of higher order structures or complexes that are not included in the current analysis. examples are the surface properties and fibre formation in pilin, 2pil  <cit> , and the phosphorylation of nucleotide-binding domain  <dig> and potential interactions with other components of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator, 1r0z  <cit> . as more structures become available for complexes, and using comparative models built on protein-protein interaction templates  <cit> , a more thorough study of the extent to which phosphorylation mediates interfacial properties will be possible.

for the pdb set, non-redundant at 25% sequence identity, and using a threshold interaction of - <dig> kj/mole, the current method gives  of , compared with  for netphos  <cit>  and  for disphos  <cit> , using the default thresholds.

phosphorylation sites in phospho.elm
a scheme was employed to structurally annotate phosphorylated sequences contained in the phospho.elm dataset . figure 5a shows that little separation is apparent between the phosphorylated sites and other ser, thr, tyr locations in the same set. proteins identified in this structural annotation are generally non-phosphorylated. considering possible structural adaptation to phosphorylation, the most simple to model would be movement of sidechains on a fixed backbone framework. thus, in the absence of the negative charge of a phosphorylated group binding to a basic patch, an alternative acidic sidechain could occupy a similar location. in order to test whether this simple picture would aid distinction of phospho-acceptor sites, we calculated interactions with positively-charged residues only. again no separation is apparent . in terms of , the current method, using the - <dig> kj/mole threshold, gives , compared with  for netphos  <cit>  and  for disphos  <cit> . these results emphasise how poorly the present charge-based algorithm performs for the phospho.elm set, in contrast to the pdb set, leading us to consider other features that could mediate the effects of phosphorylation.

solvent accessibility of phosphorylation sites could be an important factor, although conformational change will again play a role. figure 5b shows that phosphorylated sites in the pdb set that is non-redundant at 25% sequence identity, are on average more accessible than the control set. interestingly, phosphorylated sites from the structurally annotated phospho.elm set appear to be more buried, on average, than do those from the 25% pdb set. both sets of calculations displayed in figure 5b were made with single protein chains, rather than biological units, and should therefore be comparable.

we examined some of the most buried sites in the structurally annotated phospho.elm dataset. in order to probe the burial in more detail, a burial depth was calculated from exterior solvent , for the least solvent accessible sites . this is a grid-based method, with a  <dig> Å burial simply due to van der waals radius, and about +/-  <dig>  Å due to the grid spacing. we find that many sites lie at a burial depth of around  <dig> Å, effectively at the exterior surface. even at larger burial depth, we find sites with some solvent accessibility, i.e. solvent pockets within a protein. of particular interest are the sites that are most buried, according to our algorithm, with least accessibility. amongst such sites, at zero calculated solvent accessibility, we see known examples of phosphorylation control of function, e.g. y <dig> in cyclin-dependent kinase, 1unl, shown in figure  <dig>   <cit> ; y <dig> in the adipocyte lipid-binding protein, 1a <dig>   <cit> ; and s <dig> in human plasmin, 1bml,  <cit> . in each of these cases the structure from our annotation procedure is inconsistent with phosphorylation , indicative of conformational change. although the effects of phosphorylation in these phospho.elm entries are generally well-characterised, this work demonstrates the possibility for prediction of conformational change in less well-studied examples, such as those emerging from mass spectrometry data.

phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated structures
potential peaks around phospho-acceptor sites
since mainchain conformational change plays a role in some phosphorylations, we adapted previous work that studied electrostatic potential values on a solvent accessible shell  <cit> . in this case we are looking for the most favourable interacting site  within a given radius of each site . figure  <dig> shows this analysis for the non-phosphorylated coordinate sets of the previous section, at three radii. at  <dig> Å radius, the interaction values are generally favourable and there is little separation between the real and background sets, since the large search radius links all ser, thr, tyr sites to favourable patches for charge interaction. of more interest are the smaller radii. some separation is apparent at  <dig> Å radius, which increases at  <dig> Å radius, and is largely associated with the proteins  that underpin separation in earlier figures . the procedure of electrostatic peak finding within a sphere around a phospho-acceptor site, but for non-phosphorylated molecules, largely recovers the result of calculations with phosphorylated coordinate sets. this occurs without knowledge of the loops that undergo conformational change. the method could therefore aid identification of such regions, and allied with simulation methods  <cit> , provide structural models for conformational change that is coupled to phosphorylation.

the same, patch-based, calculation was made for the  <dig> members of the phospho.elm set that could be structurally annotated . separation of the ser, thr, tyr phos from non-phos sets is small at both the radii shown.

the patch search method appears able to identify some regions that are susceptible to phosphorylation/charge-driven conformational change, and will be studied in more detail in future work, both with conformationally characterised systems and with high-throughput proteomics data. however, there also many proteins for which charge-charge effects are not clearly apparent in transducing phosphorylation activity, particularly in the phospho.elm set. in some cases, it is possible that low solvent accessibility is important , and in others complexation may play a role. in a preliminary analysis of this last factor, we calculated the non-polar percentage of asa in patches around phos and non-phos sites for the structurally annotated phospho.elm dataset . the distributions are different, with a bimodal shape for the phos sites and more unimodal for the non-phos subset. it is not clear at this stage what underpins this difference, but one possibility is that the effects of phosphorylation for many of these proteins could be mediated via interfacial regions in protein-protein interactions.

CONCLUSIONS
we have studied the charge environments around phospho-acceptor sites in phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated protein structures, and extended the study to structurally annotated sites in phospho.elm. our results show that only a subset of phosphorylated structures  appear to be making use of particularly favourable charge interactions at the site of phosphorylation, when considered in the context of biological unit. several of these examples are protein kinases with phosphorylated activation loops. when non-phosphorylated structures are studied, much of the signal of excess favourable charge interactions relative to a control set is lost, consistent with a degree of conformational change . we introduce a simple algorithm, using the charge/electrostatic potential neighbourhood, to recover the signal for non-phosphorylated structures. this method has the potential to aid studies of conformational change associated with phosphorylation, since it predicts the target area for phosphate binding. the result is consistent with molecular simulations in which charge interaction was seen to be the key factor in establishing an anchor point for phosphorylated residues  <cit> .

for a set of phosphorylated sites structurally annotated from phospho.elm, we find little signal for charge stabilisation around phospho-acceptor sites, even when the neighbourhood algorithm is applied. this result suggests that any phosphorylation-induced conformational change is relatively complex or that the effects of phosphorylation are mediated in other ways, for many of the phospho.elm proteins. we find indirect evidence in both of these directions. the phospho.elm set has a tendency towards buried sites , possibly indicative of substantial conformational change. a preliminary analysis of patch surface polarity in the phospho.elm set shows a different distribution for phos sites relative to non-phos sites, suggesting that complexation could play a role i.e. where phosphorylation alters the propensity for forming an interface.

further work will study phosphorylation sites in the context of protein-protein interaction databases . there are also issues of detailed modelling, such as inclusion of phosphate group torsion angles, emphasising phosphate interactions with mainchain groups, and adding asp and his sidechains as acceptors. our longer term aims are to probe molecular mechanisms by which phosphorylation mediates biological effects, and improve predictive algorithms that are based on sequence properties, using for example kinase specificity or disorder  <cit> . the issue of disorder is of particular interest since our structural annotation of phospho.elm loses many phosphorylated sites as unstructured regions within known folds. it will be of interest to extend our patch algorithm to such examples, given that we also find examples in the structural database where sites that are ordered when phosphorylated, are unstructured when non-phosphorylated.

