BACKGROUND
how much should any organism grow? how much should it reproduce? these fundamental questions are tightly related. increased growth brings larger size. larger size typically brings greater reproductive rates and survivorship  <cit> . thus, investment in growth represents investment in future reproduction  <cit> . however, investment in growth theoretically diverts resources from current reproduction, resulting in an allocation trade-off. theory indicates that this trade-off is strongly influenced by extrinsic mortality  . here, i perform what i believe to be the first clear test of whether extrinsic mortality drives among-species differences in allocation to growth and reproduction. this was possible by using a study system recently identified  <cit>  as being particularly suitable for comparative examination of adaptation: several parasitic castrator species—the individuals of which infect and take over the bodies of the same host species—and their uninfected host.

extrinsic mortality should affect the trade-off between growth and reproduction because increased mortality means a smaller chance of surviving long enough to experience the reproductive gains of having grown to a larger size  <cit> . thus, greater adult mortality should select for less growth and a greater reproductive effort . conversely, lower mortality should select for more growth and a lower reproductive effort. this theory applies to species that continue to grow after maturation . it also applies to those that cease growth after maturation , with the emphasis being on how mortality influences growth before maturation. the few clear empirical examinations of whether extrinsic mortality influences allocation to growth and reproduction in nature have been cross-population intraspecific studies . there is little or no data available to allow a clear cross-species examination of this hypothesis, at least partly due to the difficulties of acquiring the necessary information on extrinsic mortality.

parasitic castrators may facilitate investigation of such difficult to test questions. an important feature of parasitic castrators is that a single castrator takes over a host's body and then uses that body for the castrator's sole benefit. a parasitic castrator infection typically completely and permanently blocks host reproduction, replacing host reproductive tissues with parasite tissues  <cit> . thus, the castrated host is dead concerning its fitness, its reproductive value reduced to zero  <cit> . however, the castrator can potentially operate the stolen host body for years  <cit> . further, parasitic castrators manipulate the physiology of stolen host bodies, for instance by secreting hormones and by modulating gene expression . these factors—particularly the castrated host's zero residual reproductive value in conjunction with the castrator's manipulation of the stolen host physiology—lead to the realization that selection will operate on parasitic castrators, not on reproductively dead hosts, regarding adaptive resource allocation of the stolen host bodies  <cit> .

situations where multiple parasitic castrator species specialize on the same host species should enable powerful analyses concerning optimal allocation schemes  <cit> . such diverse parasitic castrator guilds provide a group of species lacking many confounds that can characterize both intraspecific and interspecific comparative studies. each species lives in the same environment, at the same time. further removing confounds, each species uses the same physiological machinery  for growth and survival. another advantage is that castrator-infected and uninfected hosts can compete for the same resources . thus, the direct effect of parasitic castrator-driven mortality on optimal allocation strategies may not be confounded by the indirect effect of increasing resources, as can occur when predator-driven mortality reduces prey population density and frees up resources . importantly, despite being similar in many essential ways, the parasitic castrator species can differ from each other and from uninfected hosts regarding factors influencing their reproductive expectations  <cit> . therefore, selection may generate allocation schemes that vary not only between infected and uninfected hosts, but also among different castrator species parasitizing the same host species. such interspecific variation would provide material very useful for comparative analysis.

a parasitic castrator-host system with many species that differ in important and quantifiable factors influencing extrinsic mortality is the california horn snail, cerithidea californica, and its suite of parasitic castrator trematodes. shortly after infection, a trematode reproductively kills the snail by castrating it. the trematode stages  clonally replicate and shortly begin producing free-swimming offspring , for many seasons, over many years  <cit> . not only do trematodes reproductively kill hosts, but the trematode species also kill each other  <cit> . dominant trematode species kill subordinate species when they both infect the same horn snail  <cit> . interspecific dominance occurs in a predictable, hierarchical way, and is largely determined via interactions between the individual, clonal parthenitae that compose a single species' infection mass  <cit> . the trematode species vary in the level of extrinsic mortality caused by dominant species  <cit> . the degree of this extrinsic mortality is based upon the likelihood of encountering a dominant species, which is jointly determined by a species' dominance rank and its spatial distribution within estuaries  <cit> . for instance, a subordinate species could experience low mortality if it tends to occur in areas lacking dominant species. despite varying extrinsic mortality risk from dominant trematodes, the background extrinsic mortality of the different infected and uninfected snails  appears to be relatively constant  <cit> . because we can estimate the "differential mortality" caused by castration or death by dominant trematodes  <cit> , this group of species provides a system very amenable to studying how extrinsic mortality influences optimal allocation to growth and reproduction.

here, i present data and analyses examining how extrinsic mortality influences allocation to growth and reproduction for eight trematode parasitic castrator species and their uninfected host, the california horn snail. the backbone of this study is growth and infection information from  <dig>  snails, recaptured from a wide range of field growing conditions. i estimated reproductive effort for these trematode species using published information on parasite/host tissue ratios  combined with the new growth data. i calculated differential extrinsic mortality  using information on the trematode species' dominance hierarchy and infection prevalences at the study sites. recognizing that a trematode takes over the host body, i generally refer to snails castrated by a trematode species simply as that trematode species. as predicted, across species, growth allocation decreased with increasing mortality, while reproductive effort increased. further, most parasitic castrator species grew more than did uninfected hosts—reflecting their average longer life expectancies. thus, these findings support a fundamental element of life history theory, which itself provides a simple explanation for cases of "gigantism" induced by parasitic castrator infection.

RESULTS
variation in growth
growth rates varied among snails infected by different trematode species and uninfected snails . the two most extensively sampled trematode species  were also the fastest and slowest growing trematodes. the fastest growing trematode  grew up to three times faster than uninfected snails, while the slowest growing trematode  grew about the same as uninfected male snails. overall, most trematode species grew faster than uninfected snails. this appears not to be an artifact of trematodes disproportionately infecting faster-growing snails . the effects of species on growth rates appeared to be consistent among wetlands .

athe model used a log-link, a poisson error distribution, and an overdispersion parameter of  <dig> . brackets indicate nested effects.

b"species" indicates species of trematode parasitic castrator and male or female uninfected snail hosts.

growth also varied with size and, for small, uninfected snails, with gender. for all species, the smallest individuals grew fastest . consistent with previous work  <cit> , uninfected females grew faster than uninfected males at small sizes, after which they rapidly converged with males . trematodes increased growth of infected small males far more than they did females . thus, gender differences in growth were generally not detectable for infected snails . the effects of gender on growth rates also appeared to be consistent among wetlands .

variation in extrinsic mortality
the differential mortality also varied across trematode species and uninfected snails, ranging from - <dig> % to  <dig> % individuals lost to death by dominant trematodes, or lost to castration for uninfected snails . the small negative mortality values represent potential facilitation, when species occur in mixed-species infections more often than expected by chance  <cit> . uninfected males appeared slightly more susceptible to trematode infection than were females .

growth versus extrinsic mortality
does the quantified differential mortality explain the observed differences in species' growth? as predicted, total growth allocation decreased with increasing differential mortality . this negative correlation occurred across trematode species and both genders of uninfected snails . an analysis using phylogenetically independent contrasts also found a negative association, confirming that taxonomic confounds did not drive the negative relationship between growth and mortality . uninfected snails fit into the pattern observed across trematode species . however, the negative relationship between growth allocation and mortality did not depend on the inclusion of uninfected snails. the result was also strong and significant after excluding uninfected males and females from the analysis using species as data points , and from the analysis using phylogenetically independent contrasts . the case was similar upon exclusion of the two trematode species, 'stic' and 'renc', least adequately sampled at smaller sizes .

trematodes and uninfected snails did not appear to respond plastically to local differential mortality risk. there was no evidence that mean individual growth systematically varied across sites with mortality risk for any of the trematodes or both sexes of uninfected snails . this does not rule out the existence of any plastic responses, but that any possible responses are not responsible for the documented association between species-level differences in growth rates and differential mortality.

reproductive effort & gonadosomatic indices versus extrinsic mortality
opposite to growth, relative reproductive allocation strongly increased with increasing differential extrinsic mortality . this was true using the eight parasitic castrators and both sexes of uninfected hosts as independent data , and when using phylogenetically independent contrasts . importantly, the two-step randomization test ensured that this relationship was not a spurious artifact driven by the observed cross-species growth rate variation . as for the relationship between growth and mortality, uninfected snails also fit into the pattern describing the trematode species concerning the relationship between reproductive allocation and mortality. here too, these results were robust to the exclusion of uninfected snails. the correlation was still strongly significantly positive when i excluded uninfected snails from the analysis using species as data points  or phylogenetically independent contrasts . the positive association was also clear when excluding the two trematode species least adequately sampled at small sizes, 'renc' and 'stic' .

the gonadosomatic indices for these species did not correlate with relative reproductive allocation , or with differential mortality .

discussion
this study provides perhaps the first direct empirical evidence that varying levels of extrinsic mortality across species drive adaptive interspecific differences in allocation to growth and reproduction. to my knowledge, all previous, substantial examinations of cross-species relationships between mortality and growth and reproduction  were unable to discern whether mortality was extrinsic or intrinsic. therefore, it is impossible to determine directionality in previous studies. mortality may have influenced optimal allocation, or it could have been the outcome of optimal allocation . the current study examined allocation for several species, with estimates of a clear, extrinsic source of mortality. the trematode parasitic castrator species  whose individuals were more likely to die from dominant species allocated less to growth and more to reproduction than did species with greater life expectancies. interestingly, both genders of uninfected snails fit into the patterns observed among the parasitic castrator species, allocating as much to growth and to reproduction as expected given their probability of reproductive death . because the data further indicate that the species did not plastically respond to local levels of risk, the consistent species differences in allocation patterns appear to result from adaptation to different selective regimes—specifically, different overall levels of extrinsic mortality.

the findings also buttress the perspective outlined in the introduction regarding how to consider adaptation of parasitically castrated and uninfected hosts. except for seemingly rare systems where parasitic castrator infections die with appreciable frequency and the host recuperates , a castrated host's reproductive value is zero. therefore, with respect to fitness of castrated host bodies, selection will not act on host populations, but on the parasitic castrator populations . hence, parasitic castrators are truly 'body snatchers'. to understand uninfected host resource allocation, we apply basic life history principles to uninfected hosts. to understand resource allocation of parasitically castrated hosts, we apply the same principles to the castrators, not to their reproductively dead hosts. supporting this point of view, in this study, castrated hosts allocated resources in the direction predicted by applying theory to the parasitic castrators, not the hosts. this perspective may help clarify future empirical and theoretical work addressing parasitic castration.

a general methodological implication of this study comes from the surprising finding that the species' gonadosomatic indices did not correlate with their relative reproductive allocation indices. the relative reproductive allocation index directly factored in variation in allocation to growth. it should therefore more accurately indicate reproductive effort than should the completely static gonadosomatic index. indeed, the relationship between extrinsic mortality and reproductive effort was only apparent when using the relative reproductive allocation index. the apparent inadequacy of the gonadosomatic index to compare reproductive efforts of these species may partly explain the inconsistent relationship between that index and dominance rank documented in hechinger et al.  <cit> . more broadly, the incongruence between the two indices suggests researchers must take extra caution when using the gonadosomatic index in comparative estimates of reproductive effort for organisms with indeterminate growth, or any species where allocation to somatic tissues may strongly vary.

an interesting issue arises regarding possible differences in overall productivity between uninfected and infected snails. despite having a high relative reproductive allocation , it is striking that uninfected snails had among the lowest gonadosomatic indices and the lowest growth rates. thus, compared to the average trematode species operating stolen host bodies, uninfected snails may allocate absolutely less to both direct reproductive output and to growth. if so, this may reflect advantages of trematode clonal reproduction compared to the sexual dioecy of uninfected snails. future work should detail the entire energy budgets  for parasitic castrator species and their uninfected hosts to more fully understand absolute and relative species differences in resource allocation. such work should also factor in offspring survivorship, for which there is coarse evidence that it influences optimal allocation schemes of trematode parasitic castrators  <cit> .

the growth findings here also directly bear on an issue that has long interested students of parasitic castrator systems. for decades, researchers have noted that parasitic castrators—particularly trematodes in snails—can cause gigantism, increasing growth of infected hosts relative to uninfected hosts . however, gigantism was not detected in the first three studies that directly quantified growth for long-lived marine snails infected and uninfected by trematode parasitic castrators  <cit> . this lack of detecting gigantism led to the development of conceptual theory explaining why gigantism should not occur in long-lived host species . this theory relied on postulated differences in the allocation schemes of host species with different longevities and on parasitic castrator constraints on energy use. however, the results presented here, along with those of miura et al.  <cit>  on a single trematode species, clearly indicate that trematode parasitic castrators can cause gigantism in long-lived marine snails. some workers have postulated that gigantism might be adaptive for the parasitic castrators, by increasing fecundity or survivorship . however, it appears there has never been an explanation for why uninfected hosts would not also benefit from growing larger. the perspective and findings of this paper provide a simple potential answer: uninfected hosts would not benefit from growing larger because they will not live as long. higher extrinsic mortality for uninfected hosts compared to parasitic castrators can select for a lower allocation to growth for uninfected hosts compared to the amount allocated by parasitic castrators. minchella  <cit>  did predict that gigantism would tend to occur for longer-lived host species, but for a different reason. he hypothesized gigantism was adaptive for the host, by increasing the probability of outliving the castrator infection. this seems unlikely to provide a general explanation, given that long-lived hosts do not generally outlive infection  <cit> . if gigantism is comparatively frequent in longer-lived host species, it may be because the longevity of such hosts makes more possible the differential life expectancies necessary to select for detectably different allocation schemes between parasitic castrators and uninfected hosts.

the finding that trematodes generally increased growth appears to contradict previous work on the same system. sousa  <cit>  reported that some trematode species  did not affect growth, and that some slightly stunted growth. it is possible that growth was different  <dig> years ago in the northern part of the california horn snail's range, where and when sousa's work was carried out. however, it is also possible that trematodes did increase growth in sousa's study, but that this went undetected due to methodological artifacts arising from the overdispersed growth characterizing these species. first, for overdispersed data, lower sample sizes underestimate the mean  <cit> . therefore, in sousa  <cit> , the relatively low sample sizes for individual trematode species compared to uninfected snails may have yielded underestimates of growth for trematode species. additionally, the application of standard ancova to overdispersed data could have also contributed to misleading conclusions. ongoing studies of california horn snail growth in northern populations will help to clarify these conflicting results. in another study, lafferty  <cit>  quantified growth for snails infected by a single trematode species  and for uninfected snails. he reported that 'euha' grew slower than uninfected snails. in the current study, 'euha' grew more slowly than did uninfected females, but at a rate similar to uninfected males. because lafferty pooled males and females in his uninfected class, uninfected snails would have grown faster on average than did 'euha'-infected snails. therefore, lafferty's findings are not contradictory but are expected given the data presented here.

instead of using dominance rank as a proxy, this study directly estimated field rates of differential extrinsic mortality based on the probability of being killed by dominant species. this turned out to be important because there was a lack of complete correspondence between dominance rank and extrinsic mortality. two subordinate trematode species experienced the lowest levels of extrinsic mortality. one of these species  suffered relatively low differential mortality because it appears to tolerate co-infection with some low- and mid-ranking species, consequently occurring relatively frequently in mixed-species infections. species such as 'renc' appear to gain at least a partial refuge from co-infecting trematodes by using a different tissue site within the infected hosts than that used by most of the trematode species   <cit> . the low differential mortality for the other subordinate species  occurred because the bulk of its population recruited to areas in the estuaries where dominants did not occur, driving the lack of being killed by dominants. this is interesting, because the typical situation for guilds of trematode parasitic castrators is for spatial and temporal covariance in species' distributions to increase overall levels of competitive loss  <cit> . future ecological study will examine whether certain species typically gain spatial refugia, despite this not being the overriding case in these guilds. it may also be important to conduct the research over broader spatial scales to increase the likelihood of detecting such refugia.

multiple infections by the same trematode species can occur naturally in other larval trematode-snail systems . such multi-clone infections may have occurred undetected in this study. theory predicts that increased frequency of multi-clone infections, and the resulting increase in intraspecific competition, can select for greater parasite reproductive effort . for the species in this study, there is no data on the extent of intraspecific competition. however, one would predict that the relative importance of intraspecific competition would be greater for those species with a lower risk of mortality from dominant species. if increased intraspecific competition selects for increased reproduction at the expense of growth, it would diminish the effects observed in the current study. however, the relationships of growth and reproduction with mortality caused by interspecific antagonism were all strong . nevertheless, there was some unexplained variation, part of which might be explained by differences in the nature of the intraspecific interactions characterizing these parasitic castrators.

CONCLUSIONS
broadly, this study illustrates that speciose guilds of parasitic castrators  may allow uniquely powerful comparative tests concerning the forces promoting adaptive evolution. previous work has shown that trematode parasitic castrators can affect the life history of their uninfected hosts . for example, cross-population work  <cit>  has documented that increased extrinsic mortality  may select for hosts that mature at smaller sizes, a pattern first documented for the california horn snail  <cit> . speciose parasitic castrator guilds readily allow us to go further than single-species studies. many species  live in the same environment and use the same physiological machinery for growth and survival. however, these same species differ in important, quantifiable elements of life history. therefore, we may gain unique insight concerning the evolution of allocation strategies by examining uninfected and parasitically castrated hosts simultaneously and relative to one another, particularly when there are several species of parasitic castrators in the assemblage  <cit> . the specific findings of this report support the idea that extrinsic mortality influences allocation to growth and reproduction in a way that contributes to the diversity of life histories that we see across species in nature.

