BACKGROUND
celiac disease  is a chronic, small intestinal, immune-mediated disease driven by dietary wheat gluten and related prolamins in rye and barley  <cit> . disease hallmarks are varying degrees of villous atrophy, crypt hyperplasia, intraepithelial lymphocyte infiltrates and serum auto-antibodies  <cit> . although the hellenic physician artaeus the cappadocianin already described cd symptoms in the second century ad  <cit> , it was not until the 1940s when the link to dietary prolamins was established by the dutch pediatrician dicke  <cit> . the current definition of cd is based on the 14th international cd symposium in  <dig> which led to ’the oslo definitions for celiac disease and related terms’, published by ludvigsson et al. in  <dig>  <cit> . despite all efforts to describe and understand disease mechanisms, there is still lack of appropriate treatment. a stringent, life-long gluten free diet  is the only option, favoring abatement of symptoms and improvement of intestinal barrier function in most cd patients. some potential treatment agents are already in preclinical and clinical phases, for example glutenase alv <dig>  <cit>   or tight junction regulator larazotide acetate at- <dig>  <cit>  . another potential approach for cd treatment could be the blocking of toxic dietary peptides by antibodies or fragments thereof, which was the objective of this study.

wheat gluten peptides, subdivided dependent on solubility in watery alcohols into soluble gliadins and insoluble glutenins, represent a heterogeneous mix of proteins of different molecular weights  <cit> . peptic, tryptic digests of the gliadin fraction, termed pt-gliadin, mimic the peptide fraction entering the duodenum after gastric digestion. pt-gliadin is a commonly chosen model antigen for studying cd  and served therefore as immunogen for chicken in this study. we produced pt-gliadin reactive chicken yolk antibodies  and used immunized chicken as source for the production of recombinant antibody fragments in the single-chain format. chicken igy represents the avian equivalent to mammalian igg, though igy has many advantages considering human applications: igy exerts no mammalian complement activation, rheumatoid factor interaction or cross-reactivity with mammalian igg  <cit> . igy can be easily purified from yolks of immunized chicken by precipitation  <cit>  or chromatography methods  <cit> . in principle, igy can be administered orally in enteric coated form  <cit> . chicken igy is described for different diagnostic and therapeutic applications , including anti-gliadin igy for cd treatment  <cit> . however, we consider the use of yolk igy inefficient for clinical large scale production. thus our goal was to engineer igy fragments in a recombinant format, which can be expressed in escherichia coli  in soluble form and offers a scalable production process. in this study we report the cloning and selection of an avian single-chain fragment variable  directed against pt-gliadin. we present data demonstrating the in vitro potential of scfv in targeting pt-gliadin and natural flour digests. we observed comparable binding characteristics for scfv and polyclonal yolk igy.

methods
preparation of pt-gliadin
pt-gliadin was prepared from wheat gliadin  according to previously described methods  <cit>  with some adjustments. briefly, 10 g gliadin  was subjected to 40 ml 20 mm sodium acetate buffer, ph  <dig> . 800 μl immobilized pepsin , washed three times with sodium acetate buffer according to manufacturer’s instruction, was added to the gliadin-buffer mixture. peptic digest was performed by overnight incubation at 37 °c with agitation at 350 rpm. pepsin was separated by centrifugation at  <dig> x g for 2 min and aspiration of the supernatant. pepsin was regenerated and stored according to manufacturer’s instruction. the supernatant was adjusted to ph  <dig> with 1 n naoh. 800 μl immobilized trypsin , washed three times with 20 mm ammonium hydrogen carbonate according to manufacturer’s instruction, was added to the gliadin digest. tryptic digest was performed by overnight incubation at 37 °c with agitation. the volume was adjusted with ammonium hydrogen carbonate to 45 ml and the mixture incubated for further 3 h at 37 °c. trypsin was separated by centrifugation at  <dig> x g for 2 min and aspiration of the supernatant. trypsin was regenerated and stored according to manufacturer’s instruction. the supernatant  was filtrated through fluted and subsequently through  <dig>  μm syringe filters. total protein content was measured by bca test  and pt-gliadin was lyophilized to equal protein amounts  and stored at 4 °c. when needed, pt-gliadin was resuspended in 1 ml sterile tris buffered saline  and total protein content was confirmed by bca measurement. for the immunization of chicken, pt-gliadin was resuspended in 10 % acetic acid.

preparation of flour digests
100 mg nacl  and 160 mg pepsin were dissolved in 25 ml h2o, ph was adjusted to  <dig>  with 1 m hcl and volume was adjusted to 50 ml with h2o. this solution mimics gastric digestion and is referred to as simulated gastric fluid  according to united states pharmacopoeia .

barley  and amaranth  grains were grinded with mortar and pestle and 1 g of the grist was subjected to 5 ml sgf according to the protocol for flours described below. wheat flour , khorasan wheat flour , rye flour , rice flour , and corn flour  were subjected directly to sgf: 5 ml sgf was added to 1 g flour or grist and incubated for 1 h at 37 °c with agitation at 350 rpm. pepsin was separated by centrifugation at  <dig>  x g for 4 min and aspiration of the supernatant. pepsin was regenerated and stored according to manufacturer’s instructions. supernatant  was adjusted to ph  <dig> with 1 n naoh and the end volume was adjusted to 8 ml.

immunization of laying hens
brown laying hens, gallus gallus domesticus tetra sl, were raised on a gluten free diet from day  <dig> after hatching. hens were primary immunized at an age of eight weeks by injecting a mixture of 250 μg pt-gliadin  and adjuvant into the pectoral muscle. booster immunizations were given in intervals of three to four weeks. blood samples were drawn pre and in weekly intervals after immunization and stored in 10 % edta at – 20 °c until analysis. all animal procedures followed the institutional laboratory animal research guidelines and were approved by the state veterinary and food administration of the slovak republic.

anti-pt-gliadin-igy
 <dig> eggs collected from various immunized chicken housed in the same facility were pooled to an igy batch. igy fraction was precipitated from egg yolks according to a previously developed in-house method: yolks were separated from egg white and mixed with the 9-fold amount of deionized h2o with respect to yolk weight. 3 ml caprylic acid, ph  <dig>  , per egg yolk was added drop-wise and the solution stirred for 1 h. solution was filtered through fluted filter and washed with 30 ml deionized-h2o per egg yolk. filter cake was discarded and the ph of the solution was adjusted to  <dig>  with 1 n naoh. 20 %  pre-chilled ethanol  was added slowly under constant stirring at 400 rpm . solution was precipitated over night in centrifuge beakers at −10 °c, followed by a centrifugation step at 0 °c and  <dig>  x g for 30 min. supernatant was discarded, pellet was dissolved in 15 ml phosphate buffer saline  and stored at −20 °c until use. 12 ml of the resuspended solution was subjected to 12 ml 10 mm phosphate buffer supplemented with 100 mm nacl.  <dig>  %  polyethylene glycol  <dig>  was added and mixture stirred at 400 rpm for 30 min at room temperature. solution was centrifuged at  <dig>  x g for 10 min and the supernatant was filtered through a fluted filter. 12 %  fresh peg  <dig> was added and the mixture stirred at 400 rpm for 1 h at room temperature. solution was centrifuged at  <dig>  x g for 10 min. the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in a total volume of 12 ml 10 mm phosphate buffer supplemented with 100 mm nacl. 12 %  fresh peg  <dig> was added and the mixture stirred at 400 rpm for 1 h at room temperature. solution was centrifuged at  <dig>  x g for 10 min. the supernatant was discarded and the centrifugation step, discarding the supernatant, repeated twice. the pellet containing the purified igy fraction was resuspended in tbs and stored at 4 °c until use.

cloning strategy for the generation of chicken scfvs
10– <dig> days after the third immunization, chicken with confirmed blood titer were sacrificed. spleens were harvested and merged through a 100 μm nylon cell strainer  with 10 ml sterile phosphate buffered saline . 10 ml sterile ficoll solution  was pipetted underneath the cell suspension and tubes were centrifuged at  <dig> x g for 20 min for the formation of a density gradient. the interphase, containing mononuclear cells  was isolated, and the remaining gradient discarded. mononuclear cells were washed with 1 ml fresh pbs, mixed be inverting the tube and centrifuged at  <dig> x g for 5 min. supernatant was discarded and the washing step was repeated twice. washed cells were diluted in pbs to a concentration of  <dig> x 10^ <dig> cells/ml and afterward subjected to magnetic beads , pre-coated with pt-gliadin according to manufacturer’s instructions. 25 μl of pre-coated beads were washed according to protocol and added to 1 ml cell suspension. suspension was incubated at 4 °c with end-over-end tilting for 20 min. suspension was placed on a magnetic stand for 2 min, supernatant was discarded. beads bound cells were washed six times with fresh, sterile pbs. pbs was discarded and beads bound cells were resuspended in 1 ml pbs. beads bound cells were subjected immediately to total rna extraction using reliaprep™ rna cell miniprep system from promega according to manufacturer’s instruction. beads were separated magnetically prior to loading of the suspension on the rna capturing mini column. rna quantity was analyzed by nanodrop 2000c spectrophotometer . complementary dna  was synthesized from ~1 μg total rna using random hexameric primers  and superscript®iii first-strand synthesis system  according to manufacturer’s instructions. cdna was amplified using a set of specific primers for chicken vh  and vl  gene regions. gel purified pcr products were subjected to a second pcr reaction, to introduce a peptide linker  sequence  <cit>  and restriction sites:

vh gene products were amplified with primer sets to introduce ncoi/bamhi sites . vl gene products were amplified with primer sets to insert bglii and noti sites . vh and vl re-amplification products were directly used for cloning into pcr®  <dig>  by topo cloning  according to manufacturer’s recommendation. 50 μl of chemically competent escherichia coli  one shot® top <dig>  were transformed with  <dig>  μl of topo vh or vl cloning products, respectively. bacterial clones were grown overnight in 2 ml lb broth  supplemented with 50 μg/ml ampicillin at 225 rpm at room temperature. plasmid dna from overnight cultures was isolated using pure yield™ plasmid mini prep system from promega. plasmid dna was subjected to sequencing using m13_rev sequencing primer  at microsynth ag, vienna, austria. sequencing analysis ensured the correct insertion of vh/vl cloning products; at least four clones per plate were analyzed. to generate separate chicken vh and vl libraries, topo vh or vl cultures were scraped off the plates and transferred to 100 ml fresh lb broth  each. library cultures were incubated overnight at 225 rpm and 37 °c. plasmid dna of vh and vl library cultures was isolated with pure yield™ plasmid midiprep system from promega. dna concentration was quantified photometrical . vh plasmid dna  was subjected to digestion with ncoi and bamhi , while vl plasmid dna was digested with noti and bglii . the plasmid vector pet28a was digested with ncoi and noti, followed by dephopsphorylation with alkaline phoshatase . restriction digests were separated by preparative  <dig>  % agarose gels and vh and vl bands isolated from the gel with sterile scalpels and purified using qiaex ii gel extraction kit . a 3-way ligation of vh and vl fragments and pet28a expression vector  was performed to generate full-length scfvs: e. coli one shot® bl <dig>  were transformed with the ligation products. as quality control, at least four clones per plate were cultivated overnight as mentioned above and analyzed by sequencing with pet28a_seq forward  and reverse  primers, to ensure the insertion of correct full-length scfvs in-frame with the c-terminal hexahistidine tag.

soluble expression of his6-tagged-scfvs in e. coli bl <dig> 
individual bacterial clones were cultivated in lb supplemented with 25 μg/ml of kanamycin  with agitation at 225 rpm over night at room temperature. the next day, fresh lb medium  was inoculated with 1/ <dig> volume of overnight culture. expression cultures were cultivated at room temperature with agitation at 225 rpm until optical density  <dig> reached  <dig>  –  <dig> . protein expression was induced by the addition of 1 mm sterile isopropyl ß-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside  to expression cultures. at selected time points pre- and post induction, cell pellets were harvested by centrifugation at  <dig> x g for 20 min. supernatants were discarded and cell pellets stored frozen at −80 °c until cellular lysis. cell pellets were lysed with qproteome™ bacterial protein prep kit from qiagen according to manufacturer’s instruction. the soluble supernatants, referred to as crude extracts, were stored at −20 °c.

purification of anti-pt-gliadin scfv
small-scale purification of bacterial crude extracts was performed using ni-nta-spin columns  according to manufacturer’s instructions. eluates were buffer exchanged in tbs using zeba spin desalting columns  according to manufacturer’s instructions. purified proteins were stored at −20 °c. for large scale expression, scfv was cultivated in lb supplemented with 25 μg/ml of kanamycin in lab fermenter scale . protein expression was induced with 1 mm iptg and cell pellets were harvested 4–5 h post induction by centrifugation at  <dig> x g for 20 min. cell pellets were resuspended in 10 mm imidazole buffer . solution was treated three times for 30 s with an ultra-turaxx on ice. solution was homogenized for 5 min 15 s at 100–150 mpa on ice . homogenizates, containing soluble scfv, were purified by immobilized metal affinity chromatography  with hitrap talon crude columns  and imidazole  using an äkta purifier . imac eluates were further purified by size-exclusion-chromatography  using an äkta purifier . pooled eluates were buffer exchanged into tbs via spin columns  and stored at −20 °c. scfv of size-exclusion chromatography purity grade was used directly for elisa and western blot characterization methods.

plate coating
for comparison of pt-gliadin and different grain digests, 96-well plates  were coated with 100 μl/well of pt-gliadin dilution ranges ; or digests of wheat, khorasan wheat , rye, barley, corn, rice and amaranth flours . for all other elisa experiments, 96-well plates were coated with constant concentrations . plates were coated with antigens diluted in 20 mm na2co <dig> buffer, ph  <dig>  over night at 4 °c. plates were blocked with 300 μl per well of 1 %  peg  <dig> in 20 mm na2co <dig> for 1 h. control plates were treated in the same way with the exception that antigen was omitted. plates were dried and stored at room temperature in a dry atmosphere.

direct elisa
all sample and antibody dilutions were performed in tbst buffer  tween 20) supplemented with 1 %  bsa : edta-plasma samples of pre-immune and immunized chicken were diluted 1000-fold. igy or scfv  were diluted to  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  31 ng/ml.

samples were added in triplicates  to coated and control wells. plates were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with agitation at 350 rpm. plates were washed four times with 300 μl per well of tbst. 100 μl per well of goat anti-chicken-igg -hrp antibody  was added at a 1: <dig> dilution. plates were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with agitation at 350 rpm. plates were washed four times with 300 μl per well of tbst. 100 μl pre-mixed tetramethybenzidine  substrate  was added per well and developing color reaction was stopped with 50 μl of 2 n h2so <dig>  absorbance was measured at 450 nm in a micro plate reader .

for screening of scfv candidates, bacterial crude extracts were diluted 10-fold and 50 μl per well was subjected to coated and control wells, respectively. plates were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with agitation at 350 rpm. mouse anti-penta-his antibody  was diluted 250-fold and 50 ng per well was added to the crude extract dilutions. plates were incubated at 350 rpm for 2 h at room temperature. plates were washed four times with tbst. goat anti-mouse-igg -hrp antibody  was diluted 1000-fold and 100 ng per well was added. plates were incubated at 350 rpm for  <dig>  h at room temperature. plates were washed four times with 300 μl per well tbst and elisa was developed as mentioned above.

competitive elisa
all sample and antibody dilutions were performed in tbst buffer supplemented with 1 %  bsa.

50 μl per well of anti-pt-gliadin igy at concentrations of ~  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 3200 μg/ml were added in triplicates to coated or control wells. plates were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with agitation at 350 rpm. 50 μl of scfv was added per well in a ~  <dig>   concentration. plates were incubated for 40 min at room temperature with agitation at 350 rpm. plates were washed four times with 300 μl per well tbst. 100 μl per well of mouse anti-penta-his antibody was added at a 1: <dig> dilution. plates were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with agitation at 350 rpm and washed four times with 300 μl per well tbst. 100 μl per well of goat anti-mouse-igg-hrp was added in a 1: <dig> dilution and plates were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with agitation at 350 rpm. plates were washed four times with tbst. elisa was developed according to direct elisa.

western blot
30 μg per lane crude bacterial extracts were separated by sds-page  using ei9001-xcell ii mini-cell . proteins were electrophoretically transferred  to activated  <dig>  μm pvdf membranes . unlike otherwise noted, all following incubation steps were performed at room temperature with agitation at 350 rpm: membranes were blocked with 3 %  skim milk powder  in tbs for 1 h. membranes were incubated simultaneously with mouse-anti-penta-his antibody  at a 1: <dig> dilution and mouse-anti-hsp <dig>  at a 1: <dig> dilution in tbst supplemented with 1 % milk powder for 1 h. membranes were washed twice for 10 min with tbst, followed by incubation in anti-mouse-igg-hrp  at a 1: <dig> dilution in tbst supplemented with 1 % milk powder for 1 h. membranes were washed once in tbst and once in tbs. immunoreactivity was assessed by incubating membranes in western blot substrate  using the ecl chemiluminescence western blot system .

10 μg per lane pt-gliadin/ wheat flour digest or 50 μg per lane digests of wheat, khorasan wheat , rye, barley, corn rice and amaranth were separated by sds-page, transferred to pvdf membranes and blotted as described above. membranes were incubated over night at +4 °c with scfv  at a 1: <dig> dilution , or 1: <dig> dilution  or igy at a 1: <dig> dilution  in tbst supplemented with 1 %  milk powder. membranes were washed twice for 10 min with tbst two times followed by an incubation in goat anti-chicken-igg-hrp antibody  at a 1: <dig> dilution in tbst supplemented with 1 % milk powder for 1 h. membranes were washed once in tbst and once in tbs. western blot was developed as described above.

data evaluation & statistical analysis
elisa data was analyzed using graphpad prism  <dig> software. unlike otherwise noted, data represent mean values of triplicates with standard error of the mean  shown as error bars. for determination of mean affinity constants, direct elisa data was analyzed by 3-parameter curve-fit nonlinear regression, od <dig> values were derived for each particular antigen coating concentration. the final mean affinity constant represents the mean value  of  <dig> different calculations:  <dig> calculated affinity constants at antigen coating ratio of 2;  <dig> calculated affinity constants at antigen coating ratio of  <dig>  each single calculation of affinity constant was performed according to the following equation: kaff = / <dig>   <cit>  for coating with two antigen concentrations t and t and od <dig> values at concentration t and t; n = t/t and corresponds to antigen coating ratio.

RESULTS
production of pt-gliadin reactive chicken igy
we previously developed an in-house method for the purification of igy from yolks of immunized chicken, which is based on caprylic acid precipitation and subsequent peg-purification. the resulting polyclonal yolk igy was tested for binding to pt-gliadin by elisa. we were able to demonstrate concentration -dependent binding of chicken igy to pt-gliadin . yolk igy served as our control for characterization of pt-gliadin reactive scfv.fig.  <dig> igy binds to pt-gliadin in a concentration -dependent manner. purified yolk igy was diluted in indicated concentrations and binding to pt-gliadin was tested by elisa as described in methods. data shown are od  values and represent mean values  of triplicates



production and selection of pt-gliadin reactive scfv
for the production of pt-gliadin reactive scfvs, we relied on chicken which were immunized three times and showed a respectable antibody blood titer . chicken were sacrificed 10– <dig> days after the third immunization. splenic lymphocyte fractions were harvested by ficoll gradient centrifugation and mononuclear cells were subjected to magnetic beads previously coated with pt-gliadin. this step was applied to enrich antigen specific b lymphocytes which bind to pt-gliadin, coated on beads. rna of beads-bound cells was extracted and cdna was synthesized. chicken vh and vl genes were first amplified by pcr with specific primer pairs, followed by amplification in a second pcr step to introduce the linker sequence and sites for restriction digestion. these engineered vh and vl fragments were then ligated into plasmid vectors to generate vh and vl libraries, respectively. vh and vl fragments were excised from the plasmids and ligated into the prokaryotic expression vector pet28a, which provides a c-terminal hexahistidine tag . screening  revealed that the majority of clones carried correct scfvs . soluble protein expression overtime was assessed by western blot . scfvs are soluble expressed in e. coli with increasing target protein concentration over time. the harvesting time point was set to 4– <dig> h post induction for screening of pt-gliadin reactive scfvs.fig.  <dig> anti-pt-gliadin edta-plasma titer of gluten-free raised chicken. edta-plasma from naïve control chicken and chicken one week after primary, 1st or 2nd booster immunization was analyzed by elisa as described in methods. data shown are od  values of three individual chicken displayed as mean values  of triplicate measurements

fig.  <dig> schematic view of scfv fragment cloned into the expression vector pet28a . vh and vl fragments assemble to full-length scfv in between the linker peptide and are ligated into pet28a  vector, which provides a c-terminal hexahistidine tag

fig.  <dig> expression time course of scfv which is soluble expressed in e. coli bl21/ . crude extracts  from indicated time points before/after induction with 1 mm iptg were separated by sds-page and blotted on pvdf membranes. western blot was performed as described in methods. the upper lane shows target protein expression, the lower lane  represents the loading control. mock represents the negative control . experiment shown is representative for at least three repeated experiments



crude extracts of up to  <dig> individual bacterial clones were tested for reactivity to pt-gliadin by elisa. several crude extracts showed reactivity to pt-gliadin . screening and protein alignment of these pt-gliadin reactive scfvs revealed an enriched scfv motif. this scfv candidate was selected and further characterized in this study.fig.  <dig> elisa based testing of scfv candidates for reactivity to pt-gliadin. bacterial crude extracts expressing candidate scfvs were tested for antigen binding by elisa as described in methods. samples were diluted 10-fold in tbs supplemented with  <dig>  % tween and 1 % bsa. mock represents the negative control . data shown are od  levels and represent mean values  of duplicates



purified scfv candidate detects pt-gliadin and peptic digested common whole wheat flour in vitro
scfv candidate was purified to homogeneity by immobilized metal affinity and subsequent size-exclusion chromatography. purified scfv showed concentration -dependent binding to pt-gliadin as expected . binding reached approximate equilibrium after 3 h of incubation time with scfv . we questioned whether scfv would also detect natural wheat antigens, mimicking the real-life situation. common whole-wheat flour was subjected to gastric digestion in form of “simulated gastric fluid” , to resemble the protein portion that enters the upper intestinal duodenum after stomach passage. gastric digested wheat flour, denoted as “wheat flour digest”, was coated onto 96-elisa plates analogous to pt-gliadin. direct elisa testing revealed concentration -dependent, specific binding of scfv , reaching approximate equilibrium after 3 h incubation time . furthermore, scfv detects pt-gliadin and wheat flour digest under non-reducing and reducing conditions in western blot, revealing similar binding patterns compared to igy .fig.  <dig> purified scfv detects pt-gliadin and natural wheat flour digest. a. scfv binds to pt-gliadin in a concentration -dependent manner. purified scfv was diluted in indicated concentrations and binding was assessed by elisa as described in methods. data shown are od  values and represent mean values  of triplicates. b. purified scfv binds to natural wheat flour digest in a concentration -dependent manner. purified scfv was diluted in indicated concentrations and binding was assessed by elisa as described in methods. data shown are od  values and represent mean values  of triplicates. c. scfv binding reaches approximate equilibrium after 3 h incubation time. two single chain concentrations  were incubated for indicated time and binding to . pt-gliadin or . wheat flour digest was assessed by elisa as described in methods. data shown represent od  values at different incubation times compared to the od  value after 3 h . mean values  of triplicates are shown

fig.  <dig> purified scfv detects pt-gliadin and natural wheat flour digest comparable to igy. pt-gliadin or wheat flour digest  were separated under reducing  or non-reducing  conditions on a 12 % bis-tris gel and blotted on activated pvdf membranes. western blot was performed as described in methods, using purified scfv in 1: <dig>  or igy in 1: <dig>  dilutions. control represents a blot treated in the same way, but where primary antibody was omitted. experiment shown is representative for at least three repeated experiments



polyclonal anti-pt-gliadin-igy competitively displaces scfv - evidence of a common epitope
since scfv exerts comparable binding properties to igy, we hypothesized that they might have a common epitope. to address this theory, we developed a competitive elisa assay, which allows specific detection of scfv via hexahistidine tag. for competition, igy dilution range was pre-incubated for 60 min on coated antigen . then, scfv was added at constant concentration and bound scfv was detected by anti-penta-his antibody. igy competitively displaces scfv to a high extent  from pt-gliadin coated plates  and almost fully  displaces scfv from coated natural wheat flour . this data clearly argue for a common binding epitope between polyclonal igy and monoclonal scfv, which is accessible in pt-gliadin and in digested natural wheat flour in vitro.fig.  <dig> igy competes with scfv for antigen binding sites. a. igy competitively displaces scfv from pt-gliadin coated plates. competitive elisa was performed with a 60 min pre-incubation with anti-pt-gliadin igy at indicated concentrations followed by addition of anti-pt-gliadin-scfv at a concentration of ~  <dig>   for 40 min. detection was performed with anti penta-his antibody, as it detects specifically the his-tag labelled scfv but does not react with igy. elisa principle is described in methods. data shown are od  values and represent mean values  of triplicates. b. igy competitively displaces scfv from wheat flour digest coated plates. competitive elisa was performed as described in a and methods. data shown are od  values and represent mean values  of triplicates



scfv detects gluten-containing grain digests, including common wheat, khorasan wheat and rye
as we had been able to demonstrate concentration -dependent, specific binding of scfv to pt-gliadin and wheat flour digest, we wanted to assess scfv reactivity to other grains. digests of common bread wheat, khorasan wheat, rye, barley, corn, rice and amaranth were coated in four protein concentrations onto 96-well elisa plates. four scfv concentrations in the range of 10–10000 ng/ml were subjected to the four antigen-coating concentrations by elisa, and sigmoid binding curves were analyzed by graph pad prism software. as kinetic binding experiments revealed that approximate equilibrium was reached after a 3 h incubation period with scfv , the incubation time for binding studies was adjusted to this incubation time. sigmoid binding curves for pt-gliadin, wheat digest and khorasan wheat digest were comparable , indicating that wheat prolamins are successfully targeted by scfv. accordingly, scfv detected rye digest  to a lower extent than wheat digest. notably, scfv did not react with barley , gluten-free grains like corn  and rice , or pseudo-grains like amaranth . elisa data were further supported by western blot results, demonstrating scfv binding to pt-gliadin, wheat flour digest, khorasan wheat flour digest and to a lesser degree to rye. on the contrary, scfv exerts no binding towards barley, corn, rice or amaranth . based on data of sigmoid binding curves, we wanted to calculate rough affinity constants for binding of scfv to pt-gliadin and flour digests. for the calculation we relied on a method for the assessment of mean affinity constants  by direct elisa, first described by loomans et al. in  <dig>  <cit> : affinity constants were calculated based on the scfv concentration at od <dig> of each sigmoid antigen curve. four scfv concentrations subjected to four antigen-coating concentrations allow three affinity calculations for an antigen coating ratio of two and one for an antigen coating ratio of eight. mean affinity constants, shown in table  <dig>  represent the mean of four calculated affinity calculations per antigen. scfv targets pt-gliadin, common and khorasan wheat digest with kaff mean values in the high nanomolar range;  <dig>   x 107 m- <dig>   <dig>   x 107 m- <dig> and  <dig>   x 107 m-1; respectively.fig.  <dig> scfv binds to digests of gluten-rich grains, but not to gluten-free grains or pseudo grains. scfv was diluted to  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  ng/ml and binding to various grain digests was assessed by elisa as described in methods. data shown were analyzed by 3-parameter curve-fit nonlinear regression using graph pad prism  <dig> software and are od values  representing the mean  of triplicates. scfv detects pt-gliadin , common bread wheat , khorasan wheat  and to lower degree rye . scfv does not react with barley , corn , or rice . scfv does not detect the pseudo grain amaranth . please note the axis break in e, f, g and h, which was introduced to demonstrate that od <dig> does not exceed  <dig>  and represents background signal

fig.  <dig> scfv detects gluten-rich grain digests in western blot. pt-gliadin  or different flour digests  were separated under reducing conditions on a 12 % bis-tris gel and blotted on activated pvdf membranes. western blot was performed as described in methods, using purified scfv in a 1: <dig>  dilution. control represents a blot treated in the same way, but where primary antibody was omitted. experiment shown is representative for at least two repeated experiments

data were analyzed by 3-parameter curve-fit nonlinear regression  as described in methods. mean affinity constants  are shown



discussion
cd affects approximately 1 % of the population worldwide  <cit> , with rising incidence in certain geographic areas explainable by environmental and life style factors  <cit> .

much research contributed in solving the puzzle of celiac disease, which is known today as a multi-factorial interplay of innate and adaptive immunity. in short, dietary derived prolamins termed ‘gluten’ break intestinal epithelial barrier and enter the lamina propria, where they provoke adverse reactions accomplished both by innate and adaptive immune cells. the only treatment option for cd remains the gfd which, though successful in most patients, is associated with substantial social burden, higher nutritional costs and compliance problems  <cit> . in some patients, however, even after long-term adherence to gfd, cd symptoms and clinical manifestations remain . overall, there is urgent need for therapeutic regimes complementing or replacing the gfd.

in this study, we present an avian scfv, selected from a chicken gene library, which targets pt-gliadin and natural flour digests of wheat and rye. scfv was expressed successful in soluble form in e. coli, purified to homogeneity and characterized by biochemical methods. we could demonstrate concentration -dependent specific binding of scfv to pt-gliadin with binding affinities in the high nanomolar range. scfv showed similar binding patterns to pt-gliadin and wheat flour digest compared to polyclonal igy, purified from yolks of immunized chicken. we designed a competitive elisa experiment to demonstrate displacement of scfv by igy, which argues for a common epitope between scfv and igy. cd is provoked by dietary prolamins of the triticeaen grass tribe, including wheat gliadin, rye secalin and barley hordein. strictly speaking, gliadin denotes the prolamin fraction of wheat. when referring to toxic celiac entities, however, the term gluten is used synonymously for noxious prolamins of different grain origin. by subjecting equal amounts of different whole grain flours to gastric digestion , we were able to directly compare binding of scfv to different cereal grains high or devoid of gluten. scfv shows comparable binding to common wheat flour and khorasan wheat flour digests. khorasan wheat , traded as kamut, is considered an ancient relative of modern durum wheat   <cit> . previously, it was assumed that ancient wheat strains like khorasan are devoid or low of celiac toxicity compared to modern industrial strains. recent studies demonstrate the lack of difference between the toxicity of traditional and modern strains and recommend the total exclusion of all wheat varieties  <cit> . our observation, that scfv targets both, common bread wheat  and khorasan wheat , supports this view. triticum aestivum is the predominantly used wheat species in the modern industrialized world, especially since its high protein content favors baking properties. it harbors the most immunogenic celiac toxins  <cit> , though homologous toxic peptides can be found in rye and barley. accordingly, scfv detected rye to a lesser extent than common or khorasan wheat. notably, scfv failed to detect barley digest in our setting. most studies assessing celiac toxicity are focusing on wheat gluten or digests thereof  <cit> , though immune reactivity to rye and barley was readily demonstrated in the past  <cit>  and is reflected by the susceptibility of cd patients to these grain species. a recent study investigated significant differences in hordein spectra of different barley varieties, rendering malting barleys  less immunogenic than wild barleys   <cit> . in our experimental setting, six-rowed barley , a representative of the h. vulgare species, was used. to our knowledge, degree of celiac toxicity has not been investigated explicitly for this barley subspecies so far. overall, we assume that our scfv detects celiac noxious peptides present in substantial amounts in wheat and rye, but in quantities below the detection limit in barley. another possibility is that the epitope targeted by scfv is present in wheat and rye digests, but absent or not accessible in barley digests. rice and corn represent natural gluten-free grains and are essential part of the gfd  <cit> . conclusively, scfv shows no reactivity towards these grain species. recently, pseudo grains like amaranth, buckwheat and quinoa have entered the stage  <cit> . they resemble grains though they belong biologically to a distinct group, and therefore represent a welcome dietary alternative for cd patients. as expected, scfv showed no reactivity to amaranth digest. in summary, we were able to soluble express a scfv in e. coli, which exerts specific binding towards pt-gliadin and gluten-containing wheat and rye digests, known to be noxious in terms of cd.

CONCLUSIONS
we have successfully cloned and selected a scfv specific for noxious cd peptides. it has shown in vitro binding potential to pt-gliadin and digests of gluten-containing grains, but exerts no reactivity to gluten-free grains and pseudo grains. we think that scfv can be of benefit for future cd treatment regimes.

competing interests

sciotec diagnostic technologies holds a patent for the use of igy and fragments thereof in cd therapy, which relates to this work. am is patent inventor, as well as founder and former chief scientific officer of sciotec diagnostic technologies gmbh. when this study was conducted, am was associate and external consultant of the company. vs was employed as phd student and ff was employed as head of r&d at sciotec diagnostic technologies when this study was conducted. other authors have none competing interests to declare.

authors’ contributions

vs planned the project, the experimental set-up and performed most of the lab work as well as data analysis. the manuscript was written by vs and critically reviewed by hh, am, mh and ff. mh performed the chicken immunization procedure, animal handling, and supported the methodology of gaining specific chicken cdna. mh constantly supervised the project of vs, contributed to experimental design and data evaluation. primer design was performed by ik, who constantly supported the project progress. cloning strategy was developed by hh who contributed in experimental design and critically evaluated data and project progress. ff set up an in-house chromatography based purification method for scfvs, performed parts of the lab work and data evaluation. am contributed to experimental design and data evaluation. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

