BACKGROUND
most flowering plants depend primarily on animals for sexual reproduction, offering edible or non-edible rewards to their pollen vectors  <cit> . however, some “deceptive flowers” offer no rewards  <cit> . it is estimated that deceptive pollination systems occur in at least  <dig> extant angiosperm species but at least two thirds of these species are in the family orchidaceae  <cit> .

several hypotheses, including perceptual exploitation of pollinator cognitive/sensory bias and floral mimicry, have been proposed to understand the evolutionary pattern and mechanism of floral deception  <cit> . recent studies indicate that pollinator perceptions and preferences for certain visual and olfactory cues are much older than some angiosperm lineages that currently offer these cues  <cit> , and that pollination systems shifted numerous times between floral deception and rewards within a tribe or a genus  <cit> . hobbhahn et al.  <cit>  even suggested that the transition from no-reward to nectar rewards is not necessarily accompanied by visible morphological changes but only subcellular modifications in the genus disa. such observations have contributed much to our understanding on evolutionary patterns of floral deception; however, few efforts try to establish the evolutionary process of floral deception, and there is still little knowledge about these  <cit> .

brood-site mimicry is dependent on deceiving female insects seeking an oviposition site. this pollination system evolved independently in several unrelated angiosperm lineages including the araceae, aristolochiaceae, asclepiadaceae and orchidaceae  <cit> . beetles and flies that typically oviposit on carrion, dung or the fruiting bodies of fungi are duped into laying eggs on a plant  <cit> . it is estimated that  <dig> genera of deceptive orchids, including epipactis and paphiopedilum, produce flowers with this mode of deceit  <cit> .

recent results indicate that epipactis veratrifolia fools aphidophagous hoverflies by visual and olfactory floral signals  <cit> . ivri & dafni  <cit>  suggested that the black callus-like swellings on the hypochile of the labellum mimic the aphids that are found infrequently on the vegetative organs of the same species. stökl et al.  <cit>  found that flowers of e. veratrifolia also mimicked an aphid alarm pheromone by producing α- and β-pinene, β-myrcene, and β-phellandrene.

our preliminary field investigation in the eastern himalayas from  <dig> to  <dig> revealed that inflorescences of e. veratrifolia along the banks of the salween river were often parasitized heavily by aphids both while in bud and during blooming. these aphids were similar in shape and color to the orchid’s anther caps. we also observed that hoverflies visited the flowers and removed the pollinaria. 

using e. veratrifolia as a model, this study attempts i) to define interactions among the orchids, aphids and predatory hoverflies; ii) to understand the evolution of floral deception in e. veratrifolia.

RESULTS
pollinators, eggs and larvae
the flowers of e. veratrifolia were visited primarily by females representing three species in the family, syrphidae: eupeodes corollae, episyrphus baleatus and one unidentified species. during  <dig> observation hours, we recorded  <dig> visits by eupeodes corollae , episyrphus baleatus  and the unidentified species . floral visitation usually peaked between 15: <dig> and 17: <dig>  most syrphid species were observed carrying pollinaria on the dorsum of their thoraces. the most important pollinator appeared to be eupeodes corollae based on its relative abundance and the high proportion of individuals carrying pollinaria.

a total of  <dig> syrphid flights between flowers were recorded, including multiple visits to flowers on the same inflorescence by the same female. more than half of the recorded specimens of eupeodes corollae carried 1– <dig> pollinaria . specifically, e. corollae flew to a flower, hovered, then landed on the epichile of the labellum . we observed probing activity by some flies on the two transparent calli and the black calli on the hypochile of the labellum . visitation behavior by e. baleatus was similar. the transfer of pollinia fragments to the receptive stigma occurred when a pollinarium-bearing insect crawled toward the hypochile, located under the column, and then backed out. backing out also transferred a fresh pollinarium to the pollinator’s dorsum.

the number of hoverfly eggs on each flower ranged from 0– <dig>  during the first field survey , five out of the  <dig> sampled budding inflorescences had  <dig> eggs in ten populations . in contrast,  <dig> out of the  <dig> blooming inflorescences  had a total of  <dig> hoverfly eggs. during the second survey , hoverfly eggs were found on  <dig> out of the  <dig> sampled blooming inflorescences , with a total of  <dig> eggs. egg deposition rates differed significantly among the three types of inflorescences sampled . the number of eggs per inflorescence was not significantly different between flowering inflorescences in march  and april .

we observed three instar stages of hoverfly maggots in all three orchid populations  but third instar maggots were rare . we also observed maggots preying on aphids . by the third instar, maggots crawled freely among inflorescences, presumably to search for prey. maggots pupated following the third instar but these pupae dropped to the ground and we were unable to recover them.

aphid observation
inflorescences, flower buds and flowers of epipactis veratrifolia were infested with aphids. morphological characteristics and dna barcoding identified the aphids as aulacorthum solani. this species was present on inflorescences in all  <dig> orchid populations. wingless females gave birth to live young  and colonies were concentrated on flower buds and scapes . individual aphids were also found on open flowers , but not on plants in a vegetative state.

the frequency of aphid infestation was not significantly different among the three types of inflorescences observed across  <dig> populations , including budding inflorescences , march-flowering inflorescences , and april-flowering inflorescences . there was also no significant difference in the occurrence of aphids on flowers open in march compared with flower buds . in contrast, the number of aphids per parasitized inflorescence was significantly different among the three types of inflorescences . budding inflorescences had an average of  <dig>  aphids, whereas there were  <dig>  in march-flowering inflorescences, and  <dig>  in april-flowering inflorescences.

breeding system of orchids
the bagged control flowers failed to produce fruit. fruit set in hand-pollinated self- and cross-pollination flowers was  <dig> % and 100% . the fruit set of open, insect-pollinated flowers was  <dig> % ±  <dig>   in  <dig> and differed significantly among the nine orchid populations  .
epipactis veratrifolia 
in 2011

in 2012

volatile composition of flowers vs. aphids and floral nectar
five volatiles were detected using gc-ms in headspace collections of flowers of e.veratrifolia: α-pinene , β-pinene , limonene , eucalyptol , and trace amounts of p-cymene . the surface extracts from aphids  contained α-pinene , β-pinene , p-cymene , limonene , and eucalyptol  .
epipactis veratrifolia
;  surface extract of specimens of 
aulacorthum solani.


no nectar was found in any of the inflorescences sampled, nor could we detect nectar droplets using light microscopy.

bioassay experiments and reflectance
the synthetic odor mixture triggered eight approaches by hoverflies to budding inflorescences. three of these flies contacted buds. in contrast, only one fly approached the control inflorescences and it did not make contact .

the spectral peak of both the anther cap and the aphid bodies began at  <dig> nm .

phylogenetic structure and evolution of pollination systems of epipactis
phylogenetic analyses of the combined, three-region dna sequence generated a highly resolved and well-supported lineage. the genus epipactis was monophyletic with strong support  =  <dig> , bootstrap  = 100) with cephalanthera as the immediate outgroup. section arthrochilium was paraphyletic with sect epipactis deeply nested within it . section epipactis was monophyletic with strong support  with  <dig> species forming a polytomy sister group to e. purpurata. epipactis veratrifolia and e. flava  formed their own clade as a sister group to the remaining  <dig> species of epipactis.

according to previous pollination studies on epipactis and the phylogenetic relationships , the ancestral reconstruction suggested that pollination by  hoverflies is likely ancestral in epipactis. the aphidophagous-hoverfly pollination system is restricted currently to sect. arthrochilium  based on incomplete sampling of the genus.

although the pollination system of epipactis flava is unknown, it is the sister species of e. veratrifolia and shares the same floral presentation  <cit> . most of the self-pollinating  species in sect. epipactis were not included in this molecular analysis; however, sect. epipactis was deeply embedded in sect. arthrochilium and derived in epipactis. we did not have samples of the hoverfly pollinated, e. gigantea, however, it is considered as identical in floral traits to as e. royleana <cit> . we believe these three factors are likely to have little effect on our results.

discussion
biological interactions between pollinators and orchids
biological interactions among orchids, their pollinators, and their parasites in the eastern himalayas  were subdivided into two different life stages: budding stage vs. the open flower stage. during the budding stage, large numbers of aphids infested some inflorescences  but few hoverfly maggots were present on their buds. in contrast, during the open flower stage, after the majority of aphids were consumed by the earlier- hatched hoverfly maggots, the inflorescences were now covered in fresh hoverfly eggs laid by much later- arriving females.

although the eastern himalayas  are located far from the mediterranean basin , e. veratrifolia is pollinated by aphidophagous hoverflies in both regions. however, we observed striking variation among these populations, including type of floral rewards, natural fruit set, pollinator biological interactions and the components of floral volatiles . specifically, flowers offer a small amount of nectar as rewards to pollinators in mb whereas in the eh, flowers offer live aphids as rewards to some pollinators. our results indicate that populations of e. veratrifolia in the eh could only offer a declining number of aphids to the larvae of its pollinators because the majority of these larvae hatched after the flowers opened. it seems likely that most larvae hatching on blooming inflorescences must have starved to death as first instar maggots could not crawl very far to find aphids. therefore, the interaction between the orchid and the hoverfly in eh is partly mutualistic.
e. veratrifolia
in the eastern himalayas and israel . + = character present; - = character absent

floral mimicry
insects discriminated colors based on wavelength differences of spectral peaks  <cit> , and an increasing number of studies indicate that visual signal may dominate a pollinator’s choice of a flower at short distances  <cit> . our results suggest that e. veratrifolia flowers may mimic two common aphid colors, green and black , throughout its range. in israel, for example, hypochile of flowers of e. veratrifolia are ornamented with black callus-like swellings and are believed to mimic native black aphids  <cit> . our results on reflectance and the anther cap removal experiment indicated that the green anther cap might also mimic green aphids as caps have a similar appearance to a. solani in both color and shape . however, further studies should confirm this.

pollination system evolution in epipactis
the ancestral reconstruction suggested that species pollinated by hoverflies are the basal group in epipactis, and e. veratrifolia and e. flava are sister groups to the remaining of epipactis. this suggests that the pollination system incorporating live aphids, predatory maggots and winged hoverflies may be ancestral within epipactis . thus far, this is the only epipactis species shown to offer live aphids to its pollinators in bud and in flower as aphids are not directly involved in tritrophic biological interactions in mb . based on these results, we suggest that this tritrophic interaction  may represent an intermediate stage between plant-predator mutualism, or indirect defense ,) and floral deception.

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that biological interactions between the orchid  and their syrphid pollinators  in the eastern himalayas are partly mutualistic. the tritrophic interaction  may be ancestral within epipactis and may be an intermediate stage between plant-predator mutualism  and floral deception. we propose a hypothesis that a fully deceptive mode of pollination may evolve directly from mutualistic or partially mutualistic systems that maintained the fidelity of the original pollinator even though rewards were lost.

