BACKGROUND
perinatal asphyxia  is a major cause of neonatal mortality and is still the 2nd largest cause of death among neonates worldwide  <cit> . survivors often suffer permanent neurological deficits, such as motor disabilities, learning and cognitive problems  <cit> . the only evidence-based therapeutic strategy for treating term asphyxiated infants currently available is post-asphyctic hypothermia. however, only a subset of patients benefit from this strategy. therefore, there is an urgent need to develop additional neuroprotective strategies that may, whether or not combined with hypothermia, provide an even better neurological outcome  <cit> .

several experimental pharmacologic therapeutic strategies were developed to prevent deleterious effects of perinatal asphyxia, such as the anti-oxidant allopurinol which should reduce free radical damage, and blockage of nmda-receptors with magnesium which should prevent excitotoxicity. although results in animal models seemed promising, clinical studies have not yet reached a favorable outcome with these treatments  <cit> .

a different promising approach is studying endogenous brain protection provided by the physiological phenomenon of preconditioning. it was first described in the brain in  <dig> with a report of prolonged survival in rats who underwent brief anoxia before a second anoxia period  <cit> . the primary sublethal hypoxic-ischemic event is called the preconditioning stimulus, and exposure to such a stimulus induces endogenous neuroprotective mechanisms  <cit> . however, the underlying mechanisms governing this phenomenon have not been fully elucidated yet. insight into these mechanisms could provide us with directions for future neuroprotective strategies. it has been suggested that genomic reprogramming can explain a large part of these mechanisms and genome-wide microarray technology provides an excellent tool to investigate this neuroprotective reprogramming in experimental models  <cit> .

so far, several studies have investigated large scale gene expression with microarray technology after preconditioning in the newborn or adult brain  <cit> . however, different experimental paradigms were used and, considering that no paradigm incorporated the fetal-to-neonatal transition, none of these truly resembles the global impact of pa and unique physiological mechanisms specific to the time of birth are missed.

here we present a whole-genome microarray study in a previously validated model where we combine a global pa insult at the time of birth, with fetal asphyctic  preconditioning on embryonic day  <dig> . in this experimental model we have previously shown that for animals subjected to pa, fa preconditioning results in better survival, no abnormal apoptosis in the brain at p <dig>  and no abnormal behavior in adults  <cit> . furthermore, in a previous microarray study we were able to characterize whole-genome gene expression in fa animals, 96 hours after preconditioning which is just before birth  <cit> . now, we aim to investigate the short- and long-term genomic response to pa, and perinatal asphyxia when preceded by fetal preconditioning . we hypothesize that the fapa animals show a neuroprotective gene expression pattern different from control and pa animals. furthermore, we chose to take our microarray data-analysis beyond the single-gene approach, and subjected our data to pathway analysis in order to derive results with maximum biological relevance  <cit> .

RESULTS
fetal preconditioning protects against abnormal apoptosis in dg
figure  <dig> depicts representative photomicrographs of the cleaved caspase- <dig> staining. we observed no difference in activated caspase- <dig> signal intensity the ca <dig> hippocampal region in p <dig> animals. however, in the dentate gyrus  we observed a significant difference in activated caspase- <dig> signal intensity with one-way anova , and post-hoc bonferroni tests showed an increase of activated caspase- <dig> signal intensity in the pa group compared to the control animals . no significant difference was observed for the preconditioned fapa group, indicating functional fetal preconditioning.

whole genome expression profiling
whole-genome microarray technology was used to evaluate differential gene expression in animals that underwent fa, pa, or fapa compared to controls,  <dig> and 96 hours after birth. results are depicted in a venn diagram in figure  <dig>  at 6 hours after birth we found the majority of differentially regulated genes in the fapa group , then in the fa group , and finally in the pa group . at 96 hours after birth we see a different picture with the majority of differentially regulated genes in the fa group , then in the fapa group , and finally in the pa group . the percentage of transcripts that are regulated in two  or all three  experimental groups is minimal, which leads us to conclude that the transcriptional phenotype of these groups is unique.

in order to derive the neuroprotective mechanisms that are active in the preconditioned brain and accomplish a better outcome when subjected to asphyxia, studying the effect of pa and fapa will be most valuable. therefore, we will focus our results on further evaluation of the pa and fapa group.

effect of asphyxia on gene expression
gene expression analysis with the bioconductor limma package yielded  <dig> transcripts that were differentially expressed in pa animals compared to control 6 hours after perinatal asphyxia with a p-value < <dig> , and fold changes ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . we found  <dig> transcripts that were upregulated, and  <dig> transcripts that were downregulated 6 hours after pa.differentially expressed transcripts were grouped according to their biological function . after asphyxia alone there is a marked upregulation of transcripts involved in the cellular stress response . also, many upregulated transcripts are related to cell signaling pathways . furthermore, most differentially expressed transcripts have their function in the cell nucleus with the majority of these transcripts downregulated .

among the genes that were exclusively regulated in the pa experimental group 6 hours after birth is the coiled-coil domain containing  <dig>  which was downregulated after pa and known to be specifically required for p53-mediated apoptosis after dna damage  <cit> .

 <dig> hours after pa the number of differentially expressed transcripts was decreased to  <dig>  with a p-value < <dig>  and fold changes ranging from  <dig> - <dig>  . we found  <dig> transcripts that were upregulated, and  <dig> transcripts that were downregulated 96 hours after pa. differentially expressed transcripts were grouped according to their biological function . the majority of upregulated transcripts has their function in the cell nucleus , while the majority of downregulated transcripts is involved in cell signaling  and cellular stress . interestingly, among the genes related to cellular stress that were downregulated,  <dig> were exclusively regulated in the pa group . moreover, the direction of transcriptional regulation 96 hours after pa is opposite to our findings 6 hours after pa for the following categories: “cell nucleus”, “cell signaling”, and “cellular stress”.

effect of asphyxia on gene expression in preconditioned animals
with whole-genome microarray 6 hours after pa we found  <dig> transcripts that were differentially expressed in fapa animals compared to control, with a p-value <  <dig> , and fold changes ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . with  <dig> transcripts the majority of differentially expressed transcripts were upregulated. there were  <dig> downregulated transcripts in fapa animals 6 hours after pa. an overview of differentially expressed transcripts grouped to biological function can be found in figure 3b. the majority of upregulated transcripts have a function in the cell nucleus  or are involved in cell signaling . furthermore, we found that many upregulated transcripts play a role in cellular stress  and metabolism .

among the transcripts that were exclusively regulated in fapa animals 6 hours after pa there were many genes with their function in the cell nucleus. interestingly, several of these are histone deacetylases  which are enzymes known to remove acetyl groups from histone tails allowing the chromatin to wrap the dna more tightly and thereby repress gene expression  <cit> . another group of genes exclusively regulated in fapa animals is related to the extracellular matrix and possibly the blood-brain barrier more specifically: integrins, neurexophilin and embigin.

 <dig> hours after pa the number of differentially expressed transcripts in preconditioned animals with a p-value < <dig>  was decreased to  <dig>  and fold changes ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . there were  <dig> upregulated transcripts and  <dig> downregulated transcripts. an overview of differentially expressed transcripts grouped to biological function can be found in figure 3d. the majority of differentially transcripts were involved in cell signaling  or has a function in the cell nucleus . among the genes exclusively regulated in fapa animals are  <dig> transcripts related to mitochondrial function , which were all downregulated. furthermore, we observed that at 96 hours after birth the transcripts with a function in ubiquitination pathway are exclusively regulated in fapa animals.

validation of microarray results with rt-qpcr
both on 6 hours and 96 hours after birth we randomly chose  <dig> transcripts with a significant result in microarray analysis for technical validation with rt-qpcr . we observed greater fold changes with rt-qpcr compared to microarray results which is a common finding  <cit> .

.

at 6 hours after birth we observed upregulation of fkbp <dig> in fapa compared to pa with qpcr  and similarly with microarray. an upregulation in fapa compared to control was observed for arid5b  which is consistent with microarray findings. similarly, upregulation in fapa compared to pa was observed for hspb <dig>  which is consistent with microarray findings. downregulation of pa compared to control and was found for cma <dig> with qpcr  similar to microarray results. the upregulation in fapa compared to control for hspb <dig>  and upregulation in fapa compared to pa for cma <dig> could not be confirmed with qpcr.

at 96 hours after birth we observed downregulation in pa compared to control for nkiras <dig> and rdh <dig> with qpcr  which is consistent with microarray results. downregulation in fapa compared to control was found for bloc1s <dig> and sc <dig> , similar to what we observed with the microarray. furthermore, we confirmed downregulation of sc <dig> in fapa compared to pa with qpcr .

changes in biological pathways: gene set enrichment analysis
in order to derive results with maximum biological relevance we decided to subject our data to a pathway based approach. the method we used was gene set enrichment analysis  for which the entire data set was ranked according to moderate t-statistics.

at 6 hours after birth we observed significant enrichment of  <dig> gene sets which can be found in table  <dig>  the kegg pathway ‘protein processing in endoplasmatic reticulum’ was upregulated in both pa and fapa animals compared to control. another gene set related to the endoplasmatic reticulum  is the kegg pathway ‘n-glycan biosynthesis’ which is only upregulated in the fapa group. n-glycans are very important for proper protein folding in the er, they have binding residues for chaperone proteins, and they are known to be upregulated in the unfolded protein response  <cit> . this unfolded protein response has also been demonstrated shortly after transient global ischemia  <cit> . furthermore, we observed upregulation of the kegg pathway ‘aminoacyl-trna biosynthesis’ in the fapa group. similarly, a study of ischemia preconditioning in the rat retina found upregulation of genes with aminoacyl-trna synthetase activity  <cit> . finally, in fapa animals we observed upregulation of the krüppel associated box  domain which is present in many zinc finger transcription factors and has been shown to be effective repressors of transcription  <cit> . one gene set is downregulated 6 h after birth in fapa and this is the kegg pathway ‘steroid biosynthesis’. interestingly, steroid administration has previously been shown to aggravate neonatal hypoxic-ischemic brain injury  <cit> . similarly, a drug that suppresses steroid biosynthesis was shown to prevent excitotoxic injury in cortical neurons  <cit> .

significantly enriched gene sets found with gsea using the fdr q-value < <dig>  as cut-off for significance. nes = normalized enrichment score. fdr q-value = false discovery rate method of correction for multiple testing. .

at 96 hours after birth we found  <dig> gene sets that were significantly regulated in one or both experimental groups when compared to controls. two gene sets involved in mitochondrial respiration, and more specifically the electron transport chain, were downregulated in both pa and fapa animals. when looking at the leading edge analysis of these gene sets we observed that this downregulation mainly involves mitochondrial complex i  and iv  specific enzymes. this inhibition of mitochondrial complex i and iv, irrespective of ischemic preconditioning, was previously shown in global ischemia in adult rats  <cit> . furthermore, we also observed genes involved in mitochrondrial complex ii , mitochondrial complex iii  and mitochondrial complex v  within both of the downregulated gene sets. downregulation of these mitochondrial respiratory complexes can be beneficial following cerebral hypoxia-ischemia because they are the main source of reactive oxygen species  in reperfusion  <cit> . only in the pa group we observed downregulation of three go terms related to neurotransmitters and synaptic transmission. furthermore, the kegg pathways ‘calcium signaling pathway’, ‘salivary secretion’, and ‘purine metabolism’ are exclusively downregulated in pa animals and contain genes that have a function in cellular signaling such as adenylate cyclase, calmodulin, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase, atpase, protein kinase a, and protein kinase c.

exclusively in fapa animals we observed a downregulation of the kegg pathway ‘ribosome’ which includes many ribosomal proteins and an ubiquitin residue. a previous study observed abnormal protein aggregation in transient cerebral ischemia resulting in irreversible destruction of protein synthesis machinery. interestingly, this abnormal protein aggregation was prevented in preconditioned animals, and the downregulation of ribosomal gene expression we observed here could explain this phenomenon  <cit> . finally, exclusively in fapa we observed upregulation of the ‘trypsin’ gene set which includes many different proteases, mainly serine proteases.

discussion
here we present the first whole-genome expression data in neonatal brain tissue after pa and pa preceded by fetal preconditioning . following pa, we observed a gene expression pattern in preconditioned animals that differs significantly from control and pa animals.

from univariate to pathway analysis
we chose to take our microarray data analysis beyond the single-gene approach in order to derive results with maximum biological relevance. analyzing microarray results is typically done by comparing genes on a gene-by-gene basis and assessing if these genes are differentially expressed between experimental groups. using this univariate approach the focus is on the genes that show the largest difference in expression between the experimental groups. however, there are some vital limitations to this approach. most importantly univariate analysis assumes that all genes act independently of one another, and this is not the case in cell biology. it is well known that biological processes often affect sets of genes that act simultaneously. therefore, a small increase in all genes that belong to a certain pathway is likely to be more biologically relevant then a high increase in a single gene in that pathway  <cit> . in addition, with pathway analysis added to the standard analysis of microarray data it is likely that we will find better overlap in results when different studies are investigating the same model  <cit> . there are many different methods available to conduct pathway analysis with microarray data. we chose gene set enrichment analysis  in favor of a singular enrichment analysis , such as david, because gsea does not require any pre-selection of genes and thereby avoids arbitrary factors needed for pre-selection. moreover, because gsea uses all information obtained in a microarray experiment it is best suited to allow genes with minimal changes to contribute to the enrichment analysis  <cit> .

interestingly, gsea results revealed a similar, but more extensive perspective than our limma analysis results. both indicate that the most upregulated genes were involved in processes within the cell nucleus, and that the most downregulated genes were involved in signal transduction and synaptic transmission. however, gsea provided more information on the pathways that are involved.

differential mrna expression
when comparing the number of differentially expressed transcripts among the different experimental groups we notice that the fa group has the largest number of differentially expressed transcripts. this was surprising since in previous studies, where we performed behavioral tests at 6 months of age, fa animals score similar to control  <cit> . however, a study of focal ischemic preconditioning in adult mice had similar results with the largest number of differentially regulated transcript in the preconditioning only group  <cit> .

for a further description of the data we chose to focus on the pa and fapa experimental groups because both underwent the injurious pa and our aim was to show how the fapa animals differ in their response to hypoxia-ischemia in order to derive the neuroprotective mechanisms that are in place after fetal preconditioning. the differential gene expression pattern in fapa animals is a result of preconditioning-induced gene expression and pa-induced gene expression; moreover, preconditioning can also prevent the upregulation of certain pa-induced genes.

interestingly, when we look at our results 96 hours after birth we observe that still over a hundred transcripts are differentially expressed in both pa and fapa groups. this suggests that the transcriptional response to pa and fetal preconditioning is a durable one.

finally, we need to be aware that it is mrna expression we are investigating and although this can give great insight into cellular biology, gene expression does not necessarily translate into protein expression. we need to consider the facts that ischemia can both decrease protein production  <cit> , and that hypoxic conditions can increase the stability of mrna for specific transcripts which could lead to false positives  <cit> .

cellular stress response is different in preconditioned animals
interestingly, when comparing genes that are exclusively expressed in respectively the pa and fapa groups 6 hours after birth we observe that fapa animals show clearly more differentially expressed transcripts  related to cellular stress. exclusively in pa animals we observe an upregulation of several genes known to be induced by oxidative stress such as coiled-coil domain-containing  <dig>  which plays a role in p- <dig> mediated apoptosis after dna damage, and sequestosome  <dig>  which is an ubiquitin binding protein involved in oxidative stress and autophagy. in both groups we see upregulation of metallothionein 2a  which is thought to protect cytosolic creatine kinases against stress by oxidants  <cit> . although we see an upregulation of transcripts related to the antioxidant thioredoxin  in both groups, the activation of antioxidants is clearly more pronounced in the fapa group. we observed upregulation of antioxidants such as selenoproteins, glutathione s-transferase, and thioredoxin-related transmembrane protein  in fapa animals 6 hours after birth. moreover, we observe an upregulation of nf-kappab inhibitor epsilon  in fapa animals. nfkbie is known to trap nfkb in the cytoplasm to prevent it from activating genes in the nucleus  <cit> . activation of the alpha subtype of nf-kappab inhibitors has been proposed to be modulated by nitric oxide and was shown reduce neuronal damage following focal cerebral ischemia  <cit> . similarly, treatment with palmitoylethanolamide in transient ischemia was shown to inhibit degradation of the alpha subtype of nf-kappab inhibitors and convey neuroprotection  <cit> . although the epsilon subtype of nf-kappab inhibitors  has not been studied in cerebral ischemia, our data together with previous studies for different inhibitor of nf-kappab subtypes suggest it could be a promising target for further study.

the importance of ubiquitination and proteolysis
at 6 h after birth we see an upregulation of  <dig> transcripts related to ubiquitination in both groups, but these are not the same. in the pa group we observe upregulation of fbxo <dig> and psma <dig>  while in fapa animals we observe upregulation of fbxo <dig> and fbxo <dig>  these transcripts mainly belong to the f-box family which is a crucial component of the skp, cullin, f-box containing complex  which besides it role in ubiquitination has an important role in cell cycle progression. interestingly, at 96 h after birth genes related to ubiquitination are exclusively regulated in fapa group . there is increasing evidence for the crucial importance of ubiquitination and subsequent proteolysis in oxidative stress and ischemia  <cit> . still, experimental evidence can seem contradicting when in a model of isoflurane preconditioning neuroprotection is accompanied by attenuation of ubiquitin-conjugated protein aggregates  <cit> , and in a different study intravenous treatment with ubiquitin was found to be neuroprotective  <cit> . congruently with the upregulation of ubiquitin related transcripts in the fapa group, we observed upregulated of transcripts involved in proteolysis and similarly with gsea we observed significant upregulation of a gene set  that comprises many proteases. proteases are the effectors of proteolysis and therefore protein degradation. ischemia leads to er stress and protein misfolding. furthermore ischemia is known to damage protein degradation pathways which altogether results in aggregation of unfolded proteins, translational arrest and ultimately cell death. our findings of upregulated proteases in the preconditioned group are consistent with findings in ischemic postconditioning where an increased proteasome activity was found, as well as the observation that ischemic tolerance is blocked by proteasome inhibitors  <cit> .

involvement of epigenetic mechanisms
we observed a striking number of differentially regulated transcripts with a function in the cell nucleus. the majority of transcripts related to the cell nucleus are regulated 6 hours after birth in fapa. here, we observe an upregulation of  <dig> transcripts, while  <dig> are downregulated. many of these belong to the zinc finger family of transcription factors which were once considered function exclusively as sequence-specific dna-binding motifs but are increasingly known for other functions such as their protein binding abilities  <cit> . the induction of zinc fingers in cerebral ischemia has been previously described but unfortunately their role in ischemia or neuroprotection has not been studied  <cit> . besides differential regulation of zinc fingers we observe differential expression of several histone deacetylases  exclusively in the preconditioned fapa group. hdacs are enzymes that have the ability to remove acetyl groups from histones thereby repressing gene expression  <cit> . this suggests that there might be epigenetic mechanisms involved in preconditioning-induced neuroprotection, which is consistent with our findings in prenatal brain 96 hours after fetal preconditioning alone  <cit> . similarly, in a recent review epigenetic changes were suggested to be the ‘master switch’ for activating neuroprotective pathways after preconditioning  <cit> . even though there is growing evidence for a role of epigenetic mechanisms in neuroprotection, the evidence today is contradictory regarding the mechanisms of action. for example, different types of hdac family members seem to exert different functions in mediating neuroprotection, and may cause different responses in different cell types. additionally, we need to keep in mind that besides their ability to modulate chromatin, hdacs can also exhibit non-histone effects such as acetylation of transcription factors  <cit> . furthermore, besides the ability to modify proteins, such as histones and transcription factors, it is important to realize that hdacs themselves can be modified posttranslationally  <cit> .

another finding that indicates the involvement of epigenetic mechanisms is the upregulation of the krab-box protein domain which is found with gsea exclusively in fapa animals 6 hours after birth . we have already mentioned how the krab domain is an effective gene repressor but it is the ability to induce reversible heterochromatization which clearly links it to epigenetic mechanisms. similarly, the krab domain has been shown to induce de novo promoter methylation, albeit irreversible gene silencing, when generated in the first few days of mouse development  <cit> .

altogether, our results lend support for more in-depth research of epigenetic mechanisms involved in neuroprotection.

CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first to investigate whole-genome transcription in the neonatal brain after pa alone and when preceded by fetal asphyctic preconditioning.

after perinatal asphyxia alone we found that the majority of differently regulated transcripts were upregulated in the early phase. a great deal of these upregulated transcripts is involved in the cellular stress response and cell signaling, which makes our findings consistent previous microarray research where different model approaches were used, and at the same time lends validity to previous findings . in addition we describe several genes and pathways, such as ubiquitination and proteolysis, which were not previously linked to preconditioning and/or neuroprotection.

finally, we found that the majority of upregulated genes in preconditioned animals have a function in the cell nucleus, including several epigenetic players such as hdacs, which suggests that epigenetic mechanisms play a role in preconditioning-induced neuroprotection.

