BACKGROUND
acute myocardial infarction is among the most prominent causes of death in the western world. it is commonly caused by the formation of a pathologic clot that results in obstructing the blood flow to heart tissues. staphylokinase , a 136-amino acid protein from certain lysogenic staphylococcus aureus strains, is a plasminogen activator and a promising blood clot-dissolving agent with clinical potency that is at least as good as tpa  <cit> . sak does not bind directly to fibrin, it can bind indirectly through the fibrin binding of plasmin by forming a 1: <dig> stoichiometric sak-plasmin complex. the resulting sak-plasmin complex can then function as the plasminogen activator to convert plasminogen to plasmin for clot lysis  <cit> . although staphylokianse  is among the most promising blood dissolving agents, it is far from ideal. recently, some studies have reported that, sak could not mediate early reperfusion in 38% of treated patients and thrombolytic therapy employing staphylokinase is limited by rethrombosis of the very arteries being opened, which follows in a small but significant number of patients  <cit> . development of more potent and faster-acting thrombolytic agents that can speed up the clot lysis process and have a lower rethrombosis rate would be desirable.

now it is well known that platelets play a pivotal role in arterial thrombosis. platelet-rich rather than fibrin-rich thrombosis was found to be responsible for many acute complications of angioplasty  <cit> . meanwhile, studies indicated that the reformed secondary clots are usually platelet-rich after thrombolytic therapy  <cit> . hence, it is interesting to hypothesize that the clot lysis efficacy of sak can be enhanced by the application of the manipulated version of sak that simultaneously targeted dissolve the platelet-rich clot and inhibit the reformation of blood clots by preventing platelets aggregation.

on activated platelets, the binding of surface glycoprotein gpiib/iiia to fibrinogen mediates platelet aggregation  <cit> . gpiib/iiia receptor antagonist, such as arg-gly-asp  peptide had been proved to have obvious antiplatelet activity in thrombus formation experiments  <cit> . in order to improve the thrombolytic potential of sak, as well as to introduce the antiplatelet activities, the mutant of sak has been constructed. we substituted k <dig> with arg to constitute a rgd motif, resulting in a novel sak variant, designated as rgd-sak, which was supposed to be recognized by the activated gpiib/iiia on the surface of platelet membrane. however, it is not very clear whether the engineered mutant obtain the hypothesized effects. in this study, this mutant rgd-sak was constructed and over-expressed in e coli. biochemical properties, platelet-targeted thrombolysis, and antiplatelet aggregation of the purified target protein were determined.

RESULTS
construction, expression and purification of rgd-sak
using pcr-mediated site-directed mutagenesis, the sak variant rgd-sak was constructed with arg in place of k <dig>  and the desired mutant was identified by dna sequencing . after temperature induction, rgd-sak was over-expressed due to the temperature inducible pl and pr promoter in the expression vector ply- <dig>  sds-page showed that the target protein was expressed after  <dig>  h of induction and reached peak after  <dig>  h . the protein was isolated by homogenization and purified by sequential chromatography through sp-sepharose, sephadex g- <dig>  and q-sepharose . high purity protein was obtained . western blot  revealed that the rgd-sak protein had a similar antigen binding capacity to sak. using known concentrations of pure sak as the standard, the yield per liter culture of purified rgd-sak was estimated to be  <dig>  g and more than 60% was recovered in purification.

physicochemical and biological characterization of purified rgd-sak
to analyse the homogeneity of the puried rgd-sak, rp-hplc analysis was performed and purity analysis gave a single symmetrical peak with a purity > 98%. no significant peaks of impurities were observed at the rp-hplc spectrum . molecular mass spectrometric determination showed that the mono-protonated rgd-sak molecule had a molecular weight of  <dig>  kda , which agreed very well with the apparent molecular mass .

to explore the structure of rgd-sak, the purified sample was subjected to both n-terminal sequencing by the edman degradation procedure and far-uv cd spectrum analysis. sequencing of the first fifteen amino acid residues from the rgd-sak  matched exactly with the mature sak sequence. analysis of the far-ultraviolet cd spectra  showed that sak comprised  <dig> % α-helix,  <dig> % β-sheet,  <dig> % turns and random coils while rgd-sak comprised  <dig> % α-helix,  <dig> % β-sheet,  <dig> % turns and random coils. these results revealed that the secondary structure of the two proteins were very similar and suggested that the substitution of k35with arg did not change the secondary structure of sak significantly.

the produced rgd-sak was evaluated for safety and fibrinolytic potencies. the purified, sterilized preparations were found to contain low endoxin levels , which accorded with the clinical injection grade, and were devoid of acute toxicity in mice after intravenous bolus injection at a dose of  <dig> mg per mice in groups of  <dig> mice. fibrinolytic activity of rgd-sak was also determined on the fibrin plate . comparing with the standard sak, the fibrinolytic activity of rgd-sak was  <dig>  iu/mg, which was at least equal to or slightly higher than sak. the result revealed that the introduction of rgd sequence into sak had not altered its fibrinolytic activity. the plasminogen activation rate  was also examined. in mixtures of plasminogen with an equimolar sak, the active site, as monitored with the chromogenic substrate s- <dig>  is rapidly exposed. using this formed sak-plasmin complex, the kinetic parameters for the activation of plasminogen were determined. lineweaver-burk analysis of the hydrolysis of s- <dig> by plasmin-sak or plasmin-rgd-sak indicated that the kcat/km values are comparable , revealing that rgd-sak has sak-like plasminogen activation property.

data obtained from three experiments.

fibrin and platelet binding assay
to assess the fibrin binding ability of rgd-sak, elisa experiments with immobilized fibrin were performed. the results  showed that a weak fibrin binding occurred to both sak and rgd-sak, which showed no significantly statistic difference at a final concentration of  <dig> nm. in contrast, to examine the possible platelet-targeted binding ability of rgd-sak due to the presence of rgd sequence, the in vitro platelet binding assay was performed. data showed that the platelet-targeted binding quantity of rgd-sak was much higher than that of sak at various examined concentrations . elisa for platelet binding also indicated that rgd-sak could bind the active platelet in a dose dependent manner. as shown in the same figure, sak almost had no platelet-binding activity.

fibrin clot and platelet-rich clot lysis assay
the efficiency of fibrin clot lysis was investigated on the elisa plates by calculating the time required for 50% fibrin clot lysis . data showed  that the fibrinolytic efficiencies of the two proteins on the fibrin clot were not significantly different at various examined concentrations, consistent with their similar fibrinolysis activity assayed on fibrin plate. to examine whether the enhanced active platelet binding ability by rgd-sak would lead to a faster clot lysis, we carried out platelet-rich clot lysis experiments which partially simulate the physiology situation. the time required for 50% platelet-rich clot lysis  by sak  was obviously longer  than that by rgd-sak  at the final concentration of  <dig> nm . the differences in t50% values between sak and rgd-sak were also dramatic  at the lower concentrations . the results in table  <dig> indicated that in comparison with sak, the t50% of rgd-sak was shortened by  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  folds respectively at the corresponding concentrations . the degree of thrombolysis by different amounts of sak and rgd-sak was also determined graphically from plots of clot lysis versus the concentration of corresponding protein. equieffective concentrations of test compound  determined from plots of clot lysis at  <dig> hours versus the concentration were  <dig> ±  <dig>  nm for sak,  <dig> ±  <dig>  nm for rgd-sak, which were not statistically different in this system . 50% thrombolysis c <dig> in  <dig> hours required  <dig> ±  <dig>  nm of sak and  <dig> ±  <dig>  nm of rgd-sak, as determined by interpolation, thus the thrombolytic effect of rgd-sak in this system was about  <dig>  times shorter than that of sak .

the activity of rgd-sak or sak was comparable in fibrin clot lysis assay at various corresponding concentrations.t50% was significantly shortened for each corresponding concentration . results shown represent means ± sd from  <dig> clots for each concentration of sak or rgd-sak. c <dig> of fibrin clot lysis was not significantly different between sak and rgd-sak, while c <dig> of platelet-rich clot lysis caused by sak was much higher than that of rgd-sak .

antiplatelet aggregation assay
it is predicted from the molecular design that the bifunctional rgd-sak not only possesses the fibrinolytic activity, but may also inhibit the platelet aggregation. this was testified by the antiplatelet aggregation assay in vitro . a significantly higher inhibitory effect of rgd-sak on platelet aggregation stimulated by adp  or collagen  or thrombin  was obtained compared with that of sak, which had negligible effect on platelet aggregation. the dose dependent inhibition of human platelet aggregation by rgd-sak was also indicated . the inhibitory effect of rgd-sak was comparable to rgd-peptide alone.

discussion
in this study, we report the construction and evaluation of a new class of bifunctional proteins consisting of two functional modules, rgd and sak. to develop the novel sak variant designated rgd-sak with platelet-targeted thrombolytic and antiplatelet aggregation activity, k <dig> in sak was substituted with arg to constitute a rgd motif, which was testified to be recognized by the activated gpiib/iiia. as three-dimensional structures of sak and its ternary complex with μpg  have been resolved  <cit> , various attempts to manipulate and optimize the structure and function of sak have been reported  <cit> . one of them is to construct a targeted thrombolytic agent. in some research, the arg-gly-asp  peptide was constructed in the sak due to its affinity with gpiib/iiia on the membrane of activated platelets. however, the anticipated targeting effect to platelet-rich clots was either partially or completely lost in some studies, likely attributed to the positioning of rgd, which should not be blocked by unfavorable spatial structure or be cleaved off during the plasminogen activation process  <cit> . by analysing the molecular modeling of the mutants, our previous study  <cit>  suggested that loop  <dig> in sak would be a rational introducing site for rgd. research  <cit>  found that the secondary structure sheet  <dig>  of sak can be connected with sheet  <dig>  by loop  <dig>  where the inserted rgd motif is supposed to be exposed on the solvent accessible surface of the sak molecule and thus may allow access to the intergrin receptors. in addition, loop  <dig> is far from the active cleft in the sak ternary complex  <cit> , hence the mutation may have little effect on the sak complex activity.

for biochemical and biological analysis of rgd-sak, a convenient and effective method was developed to express and purify the target protein, which also provided an empirical basis for the establishment of standard operating procedure  for further large scale production. compared with the conventional induction by iptg   <cit> , the temperature inducible expression under the control of pl and pr promoter in rgd-sak expression is more feasible and cost-saving for fermentation. by optimizing fermentation condition, e.g. bacteria density and induction time, rgd-sak was present in intracellular soluble state instead of inclusion body as reported previously  <cit> , which is highly desirable for further purification. to obtain the highly purified and endotoxin-free protein, the cytosolic fractions after homogenization were subjected to cation chromatography and gel filtration to separate rgd-sak, followed by anion chromatography to eliminate endoxin. the safety evaluation experiments testified that the highly purified, sterilized preparations contained low endotoxin levels, and were devoid of acute toxicity, which is safe and suitable for a more detailed clinical investigation.

biochemical analysis indicated that rgd-sak maintained the similar structure and the fibrinolytic function of sak. the uniform n terminal sequence and similar cd spectrum suggested that these two molecules had similar structure. the measurement with fibrin plate and fibrin clot respectively revealed that the fibrinolytic activity of rgd-sak was at least equal to that of sak. the study further revealed that rgd-sak can form a 1: <dig> rgd-sak-plasmin complex which displayed an amidolytic activity comparable with that of the native sak-plasmin binary complex. the similar catalytic efficiencies determined by kcat/km of rgd-sak in comparison with sak revealed that the specific plasiminogen activating potential of the mutant remained almost intact. these above results indicated that the rgd existence in sak would not disrupt the structure and the fibrinolytic function of sak.

the platelet binding experiment indicated that rgd-sak could bind the activated platelet in a dose dependent manner and with a higher affinity than sak, which has weak ability to bind the platelet. in the platelet-rich clot lysis assay, the t50% values for rgd-sak were significantly shortened. analysis of these t50% values revealed a significant increase in platelet-rich clot lysis rate by rgd-sak compared with sak. our data also demonstrated that rgd-sak did not lead to enhanced fibrin clot lysis under in vitro conditions in comparison with sak, which was correlated with their similar ability to bind the fibrin clots. by interpolation of the data of clot lysis assay, the c <dig> of the two proteins was similar in fibrin-rich clot while the c <dig> of rgd-sak in platelet-rich clot was much shorter than equalmole sak. these results suggested that rgd-sak can target to the platelet-rich clots due to the direct selective binding to the activated platelets but not to fibrin which is also an important constituent of platelet-rich clots. based on these results, we can conclude that rgd-sak can accumulate on the platelet surface and thus enrich the thrombolytic activity at the site of the thrombus. hence, it is possible that rgd-sak would be directly targeted to thrombus in vivo because of their high affinities to platelets, which can therefore lyse the platelet-rich clots more efficiently than sak due to the increased local concentration on the thrombus. in addition, it would be interesting to consider that the platelets themselves can suppress clot lysis by mechanical cross-linking, promotion of clot stability as well as release of fibrinolytic inhibitors  <cit> . some recent in vivo studies  <cit>  revealed that fibrinolysis can be accelerated by conjunctive use of anti-gp iib/iiia antibody. hence, these findings imply that the rgd-sak may accelerate lysis of platelet-rich clots via diverse mechanisms in vivo. finally, it should be noted that a retarded renal clearance of rgd-sak can also be expected due to its high affinities to the activated platelets and thus the resulting prolongated duration of action would allow use of low doses and/or less frequent administration of the agent. therefore, if less rgd-sak is required to achieve the same degree of clot lysis as sak, the risk for side effects could also be minimized. we will further test the speculation by pharmacological and pharmacokinetic studies in vivo.

the use of rgd peptide as a platelet-targeted domain in the design of sak mutant offers rgd-sak another potential advantage of antiplatelet aggregation. it is well known that aggregation of blood platelets plays a pivotal role in the formation of thrombus and the rgd peptide is a component of ligands recognizing platelet intergrins  <cit> . therefore, the protein containing rgd has the potential ability to inhibit platelet aggregation and thus to be used in the prevention of arterial rethrombosis. in the antiplatelet aggregation assay in vitro, we have shown that the addition of the rgd sequence to sak resulted in acquisition of the ability to prevent platelet aggregation. in the present study, the rgd-sak had obvious inhibitory effects on different inducers -induced platelet aggregation in a dose dependent manner, while the sak had almost no effect on platelet aggregation. meanwhile, the efficiency of antiplatelet aggregation by rgd-sak was comparable with that of rgd sequence alone. for adp, collagen and thrombin are the most powerful physiological inducers of platelet aggregation after arterial injury and during rethrombosis, so the present data indicated that rgd-sak possessed the ability to block platelet aggregation and hence should be more effective than sak in preventing the formation of rethrmobosis after successful thrombolytic therapy, which would also be worthy of further research in vivo. noticeably, for the thrombolysis and rethrombosis in vivo is a complex process, thrombin was also found to be closely related to this action. so, it's very interesting to speculate that the addition of antithrombin functional element to sak may also accelerate the successful lysis of the thrombus as well as the protection against rethrombosis. recently such a protein has been synthesized by szemraj et al.  <cit> , which cued in us that fusion antithrombin element with rgd-sak may form a even more potent and faster thrombolytic agent with anti-rethrombosis properties than sak. we will further manipulate and screen the rational sak mutant on the purpose in the future.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the present study established the large scale expression and preparative purification method for rgd-sak. the results of the in vitro study revealed that the purified mutant of sak possessed the bifunction to target platelet-rich clots and to block platelets aggregation, and thus may be a more potent clot-dissolving agent for thrombolytic therapy compared with sak.

