BACKGROUND
the ability to survive and overcome stress allows non-typhoidal salmonella pathogens to be isolated from a diverse range of environments. specific serovars of s. enterica, including salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium, are of particular concern to medicine and industry because they cause a significant proportion of foodborne disease worldwide. there has been a controversial suggestion that infection by salmonella may subsequently cause an increase in mortality for up to one year  <cit> , and it is clear that we need to improve our understanding of the behaviour of this pathogen.

experiments that tracked the spread of salmonella from the farm and within food processing facilities have provided a direct link between bacterial biofilms and the contamination of the resulting food products  <cit> . surface-associated growth, termed biofilm growth, has been shown to promote the survival of salmonella when exposed to limited nutrient availability, heat, acidic ph, low temperatures and antimicrobials  <cit> . salmonella cells attach and grow on a variety of abiotic and biotic surfaces, and remain viable for many weeks. indeed, the number of outbreaks of salmonellosis caused by microbial growth on the surfaces of raw fruits and vegetables has increased dramatically in recent years  <cit> . this type of persistence of salmonella in the food chain has become a major health concern, because the detachment of viable cells from a biofilm can cause subsequent contamination of foods during processing.

the profound consequences of biofilm formation in both nature and disease have led to increased efforts to define the characteristics that make biofilm cells physiologically distinct from planktonic  cells, and to identify the properties of microorganisms during surface-associated growth. cells within a biofilm are heterogeneous, can grow at different rates, and resist antimicrobial treatments  <cit> . additionally, clusters of biofilm cells are typically encased in a bacterial-derived extracellular matrix that is thought to provide adhesion and strength, as well as act as a physical barrier against the diffusion of antimicrobials  <cit> . s. typhimurium biofilms can form on abiotic surfaces  and biotic surfaces ; in many strains, the bacterial cells are associated with an extracellular matrix composed of curli  and cellulose  <cit> . recent work has shown that strains exhibiting the rdar  morphotype, expressing curli and cellulose, are involved in colonisation but do not contribute to the persistence of salmonella on food processing surfaces  <cit> . s. typhimurium also displays a swarming phenotype, a specialised motility that enables hyperflagellated bacteria to efficiently colonise surfaces and requires a combination of the chemotaxis, lps synthesis, type iii secretion and iron metabolism systems  <cit> .

biofilms have previously been studied with transcriptomic, proteomic and in vivo expression technology-based approaches for bacterial species, such as e. coli and pseudomonas  <cit> . a large number of genes or proteins that are differentially regulated during biofilm development have been identified. few studies have focused on the global response of salmonella under environmental conditions relevant to food processing, where bacteria may encounter hydrodynamic stress and nutrient limitation  <cit> . two studies have used a proteomic approach to identify s. enteritidis proteins that are differentially regulated during biofilm growth in response to disinfectant and to different fluid flow rates  <cit> . however, the physiological and regulatory processes involved in the growth and persistence of salmonella biofilms remain unclear. we have used a combination of physiological, transcriptomic and proteomic approaches to address this problem in s. typhimurium.

RESULTS
growth of salmonella biofilms
the biofilm phenotype of salmonella isolates is known to vary significantly depending on the strain, nutrient source, temperature and other factors  <cit> . because salmonella can encounter hydrodynamic environments at several stages in food processing  <cit> , we assessed the biofilm forming capacity of s. typhimurium sl <dig> on glass in a flowing system. we found that sl <dig> produced substantially thicker biofilms in colonising factor antigen  medium at 25°c, when compared to growth at 37°c, or growth in rich nutrient media , brain heart infusion or m <dig> minimal media supplemented with glucose, sucrose or glycerol . cfa medium has been previously shown to promote biofilm growth of s. typhimurium  <cit> .

sl <dig> biofilms were then grown in a modified batch system for  <dig> h  using silicone rubber tubing as a substratum for growth, as this surface permitted the isolation of sufficient quantities of mature biofilm and planktonic cells for proteomic and transcriptomic analyses . the tubing was positioned vertically to avoid the isolation of bacterial aggregates following sedimentation. the ph of the medium effluent showed no detectable change  throughout the experiment. influent samples were collected aseptically throughout the experiment showing that the number of cells increased from  <dig> ×  <dig> cfu ml- <dig>  to  <dig> ×  <dig> cfa ml- <dig> . no pellicle formation was observed in the influent flask during the  <dig> h experiment. to determine if the cells within a mature  <dig> h biofilm were metabolically active, an analogous biofilm grown in a glass flow cell was stained with live/dead baclight. images captured at ten random fields of view along the glass surface confirmed that more than 95% of the bacterial cells were alive after  <dig> h of growth . taken together, these experiments established that biofilms of sl <dig> continued to accumulate biomass on glass for at least  <dig> h, and that the majority of these cells were viable.

the global gene expression profile of salmonella biofilm
the transcriptome of mature s. typhimurium biofilm  was compared to its planktonic counterpart  in three independent biological experiments. capillary gel electrophoresis was used to confirm that the rna obtained from the  <dig> h biofilm and planktonic samples was of good quality prior to labelling . the transcriptomic data from the three biological replicates were statistically filtered and data are only presented for genes that showed significant changes in every replicate.

the transcriptomic data showed that a total of  <dig> genes were differentially expressed  in biofilms compared with  <dig> h planktonic cultures, and  <dig> of these genes  displayed more than a 2-fold change in expression. these included  <dig> genes that were up-regulated in biofilm  and  <dig> down-regulated genes . we noted that almost half of these genes were of hypothetical or unknown function. all differentially expressed genes were catalogued according to functional categories and were predominantly involved in cell motility, amino acid metabolism, stress response, outer membrane function and virulence . figure 2a shows a subset of up-regulated genes that correspond to cellular processes previously implicated in biofilm growth  and figure 2b shows a subset of genes specific to type iii secretion. the complete transcriptomic data sets are presented in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  and the key findings are discussed below.

in e. coli, cell surface structures such as fimbriae have been shown to be required for the initial colonisation of abiotic and biotic surfaces and the establishment of well-established biofilms  <cit> . in mature biofilms of s. typhimurium, several genes required for bacterial attachment and motility were up-regulated, including csgb and csga that encode the curlin fimbrial subunits . the extracellular matrix of s. typhimurium biofilms is composed of curli, along with cellulose, colanic acid and other polymers, depending on nutrient availability  <cit> . under the conditions used in this study, biofilm cells showed increased expression of one gene, bcse, required for cellulose biosynthesis. genes involved in flagellar biosynthesis, assembly and regulation were up-regulated by up to 7-fold . genes required for motility and chemotaxis were also up-regulated in s. typhimurium biofilms, including motab, chea, chey, cher  and tsr. other cell-surface associated genes that were highly expressed in the biofilm included those encoding the major outer membrane protein ompx , a regulator of lps o-chain length wzzb, the om lipoprotein blc, the membrane bound lipid phosphotase pgpb and  <dig> genes of hypothetical cell envelope function.

gradients in oxygen concentration have been experimentally demonstrated within biofilm clusters  <cit> . consistent with this, several genes that sense or respond to oxygen availability were up-regulated in flowing biofilm, including aer  and fnr  <cit> . cyo genes encode the cytochrome o ubiquinol oxidase subunits of the aerobic respiratory chain, and are regulated by the master flagellar regulator  <cit> . the cyo genes were more highly expressed in the biofilm suggesting that the environment of the biofilm was aerobic. furthermore, several genes known to be repressed by aerobiosis were down-regulated in the biofilm, including genes of the fumarate , hydrogenase  <dig> , cytochrome o  and dicarboxylate  operons . while biofilms are reported to be spatially heterogeneous in terms of oxygen levels, our results are consistent with some penetration of oxygen into cell clusters in a flowing environment, as suggested by xu et al.,  <cit> . this may reflect the high oxygen permeability of the silicone surface used for growing our biofilms  <cit> .

the precise growth phase of bacteria within the interior of a biofilm cell cluster has not been established, although several groups have reported slow growth rates, presumably due to nutrient limitation  <cit> . specific operons involved in translation  were down-regulated in biofilms of s. typhimurium when compared to planktonic cells, suggesting that slower growth occurred in the attached population . transcriptomic comparisons with planktonic cells that were isolated at earlier time points of the experiment , indicated that mature biofilm cells were most similar to a stationary phase planktonic population . this observation is consistent with findings from studies in e. coli where biofilms cells have similarities to bacteria in stationary phase  <cit> .

global gene regulators respond to environmental conditions, including nutrient limitation, oxygen availability and osmotic stress, and control a wide range of adaptive physiological and regulatory circuits. several genes that encode global gene regulators were up-regulated in flowing biofilms of s. typhimurium, including csra  and ihfa, confirming previous studies in well-established biofilms of salmonella or e. coli  <cit> . other regulatory genes that respond to starvation conditions, including rpoh, cbpa and phoh, were up-regulated during biofilm growth . rpos , the sigma factor that activates genes under growth arresting conditions, was highly expressed in both biofilm and planktonic populations. we observed that more than 25% of the s. typhimurium rpos regulon  <cit>  was up-regulated in biofilm cells .

following three days of growth, biofilms of s. typhimurium showed up-regulation of genes that respond to oxidative stress , heat shock , dna replication and repair , cell envelope stress  and a putative stress-related gene  when compared to planktonic cells. a possible role for msra, reca, pspb and the cytoplasmic clp protease in biofilm development of gram-negative species has been previously reported  <cit> . at least  <dig> genes that were up-regulated during biofilm growth of s. typhimurium have a role in the osmotic stress and acid tolerance responses of e. coli  <cit> , including tref, tala, poxb, osmcy, hima, dps and aceb .

amino acid synthesis is energetically expensive for the cell but essential for protein production, nitrogen transfer and osmotic protection  <cit> . we identified genes involved in alanine  and glutamine/glutamate  metabolism and transport that were more highly expressed in the biofilm . we were intrigued to discover that the biosynthetic genes of the trp operon were over-expressed in well-established biofilms of s. typhimurium . these genes are required from the initial steps of tryptophan synthesis  to the transfer of indole to tryptophan  <cit> . additionally, there was a strong biofilm-dependent induction of mtr, a tryptophan-specific transporter . recent studies reported the induction of tryptophan biosynthesis genes during early biofilm formation in e. coli, followed by repression of this operon at later time points  <cit> .

a. genes which passed the statistical filtering . expression values are expressed as fold-induction comparing expression in biofilm cells to planktonic cells.

expression profiles indicated that virulence genes located within salmonella pathogenicity island  <dig>  and the serotype-specific s. typhimurium plasmid  were not differentially expressed during biofilm growth. however, more than  <dig> genes belonging to the ssr, ssa and sse operons of spi <dig>  were down-regulated by up to 100-fold in the biofilm ; spi <dig> encodes a type iii secretion system that is required for intracellular survival in host phagocytes  <cit> . this prompted us to monitor the level of spi <dig> expression observed in our cfa media-based experiments at 25°c compared with growth in lb at a higher temperature . surprisingly, our transcriptomic data showed that spi <dig> was expressed at a significantly higher level in planktonic cfa cultures grown at 25°c than at mid-log phase in lb at 37°c. this suggests that the cfa media contains a factor that induces spi <dig> expression, even at this low temperature . the only spi <dig> gene observed to be up-regulated in biofilm was orf <dig>  which encodes a putative transmembrane protein of unknown function and does not contribute to s. typhimurium virulence   <cit> . in addition, sopb, a spi5-encoded phosphatase required for invasion of epithelial cells  <cit> , was up-regulated in salmonella biofilm.

surface-associated growth of s. typhimurium leads to changes in protein expression
to expand our analysis from the transcriptomic to the proteomic level, and to identify biofilm-regulated proteins, total protein extracts from biofilm and planktonic populations of s. typhimurium were compared using 2-d page. samples from the same flowing biofilm system were used for the proteomic and the transcriptomic experiments. a representative example of the biofilm and planktonic proteome with over  <dig> detected proteins spots per gel is shown in figure 3ab. direct comparison of protein spots showed that the levels of at least  <dig> proteins remained similar in both populations. however, the expression of  <dig> proteins was altered , with the expression of  <dig> proteins increasing and  <dig> proteins decreasing during surface-associated growth compared to planktonic culture. at least  <dig> proteins were only detected in the biofilm samples, and not in planktonic culture.

identification of differentially regulated and unique proteins
fifty protein spots that showed differential expression between biofilm and planktonic gels, as well as spots detected as unique to either mode of growth , were selected and analysed by maldi-tof mass spectrometry . these spots were specifically chosen as they were abundant and clearly separated from other spots, to facilitate unambiguously identification by ms. forty-four proteins were successfully identified, and we discovered that the majority of proteins that were unique or highly expressed in the biofilm corresponded to the same functional groups identified by transcriptomic analyses. these included proteins involved in cell motility, amino acid and carbohydrate metabolism, as well as proteins of unassigned function . in fact, 45% of the  <dig> up-regulated proteins corresponded to genes identified as differentially expressed at the transcriptional level . a common theme emerged relating to cell motility, with the up-regulation of three external flagellar proteins flgk , flgl and flid  that are involved in the later stages of flagellar assembly. flgk and flgl were up-regulated in the biofilm compared to planktonic growth and flid was only detected in the biofilm samples. our transcriptomic analysis showed an increase in the expression of flic in the biofilm, but this protein was not identified in the 2-d analysis. to confirm the biofilm-dependent regulation of proteins involved in late flagellar assembly, we performed a western blot. as shown in figure 3d, flic protein was  <dig> -fold more abundant in biofilm cells when compared with a planktonic culture.

a. proteins identified by maldi-tof mass spectrometry and peptide mass fingerprinting . proteins up-regulated in the biofilm that show the same pattern of expression at the transcriptional level .

two periplasmic transport proteins were up-regulated in biofilm, namely dppa , a dipeptide-binding protein and argt , which transports arginine, lysine and orthinine. proteomic analysis of s. typhimurium biofilm cells also showed differential expression of ansb, trea and gale which are involved in asparagine metabolism, trehalose degradation and the conversion of udp-galactose and udp-glucose . the remaining proteins that were unique or more highly expressed during biofilm growth were of unknown function . the putative periplasmic protein ygge, which is highly conserved in enterobacteriaceae and has been shown to possess immunogenic properties in edwardsiella ictaluri  <cit> , was also more abundant  during biofilm growth .

targeted deletion of biofilm-regulated genes
to investigate the function of genes shown to be differentially expressed in s. typhimurium biofilm, eight targeted gene deletions were constructed . genes that showed a biofilm-specific pattern of expression were selected for chromosomal mutation, including mtr, yhfg, ybay and genes of the trp operon . disruption of trpe, which encodes anthranilate synthase component i, was chosen because four genes of the tryptophan operon were highly up-regulated during biofilm growth and the product of trpe catalyses the first reaction of the tryptophan pathway with trpd . moreover, trpe is the most important enzyme of this pathway from a regulatory point of view, as it is subject to feedback inhibition by tryptophan  <cit> . the other four genes were selected on the basis that they were they most highly expressed  or repressed  in the biofilm, or because they were previously implicated in biofilms of e. coli   <cit> . to test whether the chromosomal deletions altered the fitness of the strains, the growth patterns of each mutant were analysed over  <dig> h in cfa and lb medium. no significant differences were observed in the planktonic growth rate of each mutant compared to the sl <dig> parental strain .

to determine whether the deletion of these genes altered biofilm formation, each strain was tested for its ability to attach to polystyrene in a static biofilm assay. as shown in figure 4a, the Δtrpe mutant formed significantly less biofilm  than the parental strain after  <dig> h, showing that anthranilate synthase is required for biofilm formation. similarly, biofilm growth of Δstm <dig> was significantly reduced . none of the other mutations affected growth of biofilms.

to determine whether the Δtrpe mutant also had a biofilm defect on a hydrophilic glass surface, biofilm formation was compared to wt sl <dig> in a once-through glass flow cell system. the attachment of Δtrpe was monitored by light microscopy for  <dig> h and these results confirmed that the mutant formed reduced levels of biofilm . although Δtrpe cells did transiently attach and form small microcolonies on glass, they failed to grow and to form thick cell clusters on the flow cell surface, resulting in 3-fold less of the surface being covered with biofilm compared with the wt strain . the biofilm forming capacity of the Δstm <dig> mutant was also reduced on glass when compared to wt sl <dig> in one independent experiment .

inactivation of ssra and rpos alters biofilm formation in s. typhimurium
our transcriptomic analysis revealed that genes of the spi <dig> type  <dig> secretion system were differentially expressed  during biofilm growth. spi <dig> repression is activated by the two-component regulatory systems ssrab and phop/q and in response to high levels of phosphate and mg2+, however this repression during biofilm growth has not been previously reported  <cit> . to determine the effect of spi <dig> gene expression on salmonella biofilm formation, the ability of a Δssra deletion mutant to attach to polystyrene was compared to wt sl <dig>  the same Δssra strain has been used to identify the ssra regulon of s. typhimurium  <cit> . a Δorf <dig> deletion mutant was also tested as this was the only spi2-associated gene that was up-regulated in the biofilm. no significant differences were observed in the planktonic growth rates of Δssra or Δorf <dig> compared to the sl <dig> parental strain . deletion of ssra caused more than a 40% decrease in attachment after  <dig> h and  <dig> h of growth, and this was restored to wt levels by complementation with a low copy plasmid encoding ssrab . the Δorf <dig> mutant did not show a significant defect in biofilm formation. to further examine the effect of spi <dig> expression and its impact on biofilm formation, we over-expressed ssrab from an arabinose-inducible plasmid . these results showed that increased spi <dig> expression significantly reduced biofilm formation in s. typhimurium.

transcriptomic comparison of biofilm and planktonic cells showed that rpos was highly expressed in both populations, and that several rpos-activated genes showed biofilm-specific patterns of expression. to determine the impact of rpos expression on biofilm growth, we tested the fitness of a Δrpos mutant compared to wt sl <dig> and its ability to colonise polystyrene . we found that inactivation of rpos significantly reduced the ability of s. typhimurium to form a biofilm .

phenotypic characteristics of s. typhimurium deletion mutants
the biofilm-forming capacity of s. typhimurium strains has been linked to the expression of curli and cellulose production  <cit> . likewise, the ability of e. coli to colonise and grow on surfaces has been shown to require flagella and rpos  <cit> . because of the importance of these cellular functions for biofilm formation, we examined whether the mutant strains showed alterations in swimming motility, rpos activity or the ability to bind calcofluor and congo red  dye, compared with the wt strain . all deletion mutants showed the same pattern of flagellar-mediated motility as wt sl <dig>  indicating that the reduced biofilm formation observed in Δtrpe, Δstm <dig> or Δssra did not reflect a motility defect. when rpos activity was examined indirectly by assessment of kate-encoded catalase production, all of the mutants showed the same rpos-positive phenotype as the wt sl <dig> strain.

a. biofilm formation is based on attachment under static conditions after  <dig> and  <dig> h of growth in cfa medium at 25°c. symbols:  = wt biofilm growth;  = severely reduced attachment.

b. rpos activity as defined by catalase activity in the semi-quantitative assay as described by zambrano et al.,  <cit> .

c. calcofluor binding was assessed following growth of sl <dig> and mutant strains at  <dig> and 37°c on cfa agar supplemented with fluorescent brightener  <dig>  fluorescence levels are reported as low  or high  as compared to a cellulose-deficient rpos mutant .

d. colony colour was reported as dark red , red , or white  with dark red indicating wt eps production. colony morphology was assessed as rough  or smooth  following overnight growth on cfa agar supplemented with cr dye at  <dig> and 37°c. colony morphology of wt sl <dig> and mutant strains were compared to strain positive  and negative  for the rdar morphotype.

calcofluor has previously been used to detect cellulose-producing strains of s. typhimurium as this dye binds polysaccharides with  <dig> β-glucopyranosyl units and fluoresces under uv light  <cit>  to assess cellulose production, we grew each strain on cfa calcofluor agar at  <dig> and 37°c and compared them to wt sl <dig> and the cellulose-deficient rpos mutant  <cit> . six of the strains that were positive for biofilm formation on cfa  fluoresced brightly at 25°c. in contrast, three of the mutants  that exhibited impaired levels of biofilm formation showed lower levels of calcofluor binding at 25°c, suggesting reduced levels of cellulose production . the Δorf <dig> mutant also showed lower levels of binding to calcofluor but was not impaired in biofilm formation. experiments to monitor cellulose production at 37°c showed that Δssra, Δssra/pssrab and Δorf <dig> fluoresced more brightly than any other strain, suggesting a temperature-dependent production of cellulose in these spi <dig> deletion strains.

co-expression of genes specific to eps, curli and cellulose production results in the rdar colony morphotype in s. typhimurium  <cit> . this morphotype is characterised by the binding of cr dye and the formation of red, dry and rugose spreading colonies. in strains not expressing curli and cellulose, a conventional smooth white colony is observed. we analysed the appearance of each strain on cfa-cr agar at 25°and 37°c compared to strains positive  and negative  for the rdar morphotype  <cit> . incubation at 25°c resulted in sl <dig> and most of the mutants producing the rdar morphotype . three strains  showed altered morphology  at 25°c. however, the smooth phenotype disappeared when Δtrpe and Δstm <dig> were grown on cr at 37°c. these results indicate that chromosomal deletion of trpe, stm <dig>  conferred temperature-dependent changes in eps production, which were only apparent at 25°c. we noted that the Δtrpe and Δrpos mutants showed a reduced ability to colonise polystyrene at 25°c, the same temperature at which a smooth or white colony phenotype was produced.

previous work showed that the tnaa gene, encoding for tryptophanase, was required for e. coli biofilm formation on abiotic surfaces and human pneumocytes, and speculated that tnaa may modulate ph changes during attachment  <cit> . since the tnaa gene is not present in s. typhimurium, we investigated whether the Δtrpe and Δstm <dig> mutants, which showed reduced colonisation of abiotic surfaces and cellulose production, also showed altered levels of adherence or invasion of epithelial cells. we found that the Δstm <dig> mutant was 9-times less adherent and 4-times less invasive than its parental strain , however salmonella derivatives lacking the trpe gene did not show a significant difference in adherence and invasion compared to wt sl <dig> 

a role for aromatic amino acids in salmonella biofilm growth
our data showed that inactivation of the tryptophan biosynthetic pathway altered the biofilm-forming capacity and eps production by s. typhimurium. to investigate the impact of amino acid availability on surface attachment, sl <dig> was grown in cfa broth supplemented with different concentrations of aromatic and non-aromatic amino acids. biofilm formation was determined after  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> h of growth and compared to non-supplemented medium. casamino acids, the main constituent of cfa medium, have been used in nutritional studies to determine bacterial growth requirements for peptides and amino acids  <cit> . supplementation with non-aromatic amino acids did not alter the attachment of s. typhimurium to polystyrene , whilst a significant increase in biofilm formation occurred in the presence of aromatic amino acids . this positive effect was noted even after  <dig> h of incubation, where the addition of all aromatic compounds, apart from tryptophan, significantly increased the number of adherent cells from  <dig> to 15-fold when compared with non-supplemented medium . similar positive effects on biofilm formation were observed after  <dig> h, with the greatest increase noted in wells containing indole . interestingly, supplementation with tryptophan had significant effects on surface associated growth at the later stages of biofilm development . the addition of all aromatic amino acids significantly enhanced biofilm formation after  <dig> h of incubation, compared with non-supplemented cfa .

tryptophan and indole rescue the biofilm defect of the Δtrpe mutant
to determine whether the phenotypes associated with the Δtrpe mutation were the direct result of cells being unable to synthesise or take up sufficient tryptophan or indole, the effect of these aromatic compounds on biofilm formation by Δtrpe was investigated . again, biofilm formation by the Δtrpe strain was significantly reduced, when compared to sl <dig> . the addition of tryptophan to the Δtrpe mutant significantly increased biofilm formation, compared to growth in cfa alone . in fact, the addition of  <dig>  mm tryptophan completely restored the ability of the Δtrpe strain to form a wt level of biofilm. biofilm development by the Δtrpe strain was significantly higher after supplementation with indole, compared to growth in cfa alone . the highest concentration of indole  completely restored the ability of the Δtrpe strain to form a biofilm on polystyrene. these findings are strikingly different to the situation for e. coli where exogenous indole reduces biofilm formation  <cit> .

discussion
it is clear that the ability of s. typhimurium to grow as a biofilm on foods and processing surfaces represents an important survival strategy  <cit> . we found that both nutrients and temperature had a profound effect on the attachment of s. typhimurium sl <dig>  in this study biofilms were grown at 25°c, resulting in extensive colonisation of abiotic surfaces. our finding that 95% of cells remain viable within established sessile communities of s. typhimurium confirms that biofilms represent a potential reservoir for infection.

we used transcriptomic and proteomic approaches to analyze the changes that occur in s. typhimurium in response to biofilm growth in the type of low nutrient, hydrodynamic environment that can be found during the processing of chickens  <cit> . transcriptomic analysis revealed the differential expression  of about 10% of s. typhimurium genes during biofilm growth. the  <dig> genes that were significantly up-regulated during biofilm growth included several genes previously implicated in biofilm development of s. typhimurium, including curli, cellulose and genes required for motility  <cit> , confirming the link between gene expression and gene function in our experiment. although the value of whole genome studies for the comparison of heterogeneous biofilms has been a subject of debate, transcriptomic approaches have provided great insight into e. coli biofilm biology  <cit> . prior to undertaking this study, the technical and biological reproducibility of a microarray-based approach for comparison of biofilm and planktonic s. typhimurium cells was shown to be robust  <cit> .

previous transcriptomic studies in other bacterial species showed that biofilm growth results in differential regulation of between 1% to  <dig> % of the bacterial genome. while genetic variation between the organisms studied thus far may account for a proportion of these differences, we believe that the wide disparities between the proportions of biofilm-regulated genes reflect different experimental approaches. for example, cells were harvested at different times from different growth media and dissimilar model systems were used to cultivate the biofilm cells. such technical differences greatly impact upon gene expression, and therefore the identification of biofilm-regulated genes, complicating the comparison of transcriptomic data between studies  <cit> . a critique of the experimental approaches used to study biofilms has recently been presented  <cit> .

proteomic analysis identified  <dig> proteins that were up-regulated in the biofilm, and 45% of these corresponded to genes that were differentially expressed at the transcriptional level. proteins required for late flagellar assembly were up-regulated in biofilms, when compared to planktonic cells. proteomic profiling of p. putida identified the same pattern of up-regulation of flagellar genes within mature biofilms  <cit> . in s. enteritidis, thirty-two proteins were identified that showed differential expression in biofilms when compared to planktonic cultures  <cit> , including down-regulation of flagellar proteins and different patterns of expression of argt and crr which are at variance with our study. the differing planktonic populations used for comparison may explain these conflicting reports  <cit> . it remains unclear whether flagella expression is limited to initial surface attachment or if it allows bacteria to move in and around the biofilm cell clusters and colonise new areas during the later stages of biofilm development  <cit> .

unlike the proteomic approaches, transcriptomic studies have given several consistent messages; four studies comparing transcriptomic profiles of biofilm and planktonic-grown e. coli reported that biofilm growth leads to the up-regulation of genes involved in cell surface structures, amino acid metabolism, stress responses and anaerobic respiration  <cit> . our data suggest that mature biofilms of s. typhimurium and e. coli involve similar physiological modifications, supporting the hypothesis that some adaptations required for biofilm growth and survival are conserved between bacterial species.

our analysis showed that many of the rpos -activated genes were up-regulated, suggesting that this regulon is important for the survival of salmonella cells within the complex biofilm environment. similar observations were made in e. coli biofilms  <cit> , and rpos is known to regulate the genes involved in curli and cellulose production  <cit> . we used an rpos-deficient mutant to confirm that rpos plays a crucial role in mature biofilms of s. typhimurium.

previous transcriptomic analysis of e. coli cells showed that many biofilm-regulated genes were of unknown function  <cit> . we found the same to be true in mature s. typhimurium biofilms, with more than half of the differentially expressed genes having only putative or unknown function. interestingly, seven of these genes, including ydci, yebe and ycep, were also up-regulated in e. coli biofilms and the deletion of ycep has been shown to impair biofilm formation  <cit> .

to identify genes that were directly involved in biofilm growth, we mutated the five uncharacterised genes that were most highly up- and down-regulated. our results suggest that stm <dig>  a putative inner membrane protein, is required for biofilm growth in s. typhimurium sl <dig>  little is known about the function of stm <dig> except that it shows significant homology to putative transmembrane regulators in s. typhi and 25% amino acid identity to toxr of vibrio cholerae . interestingly, the Δstm <dig> mutant was 9-times less adherent and 4-times less invasive in epithelial cells than its parental strain, raising the possibility that expression of stm <dig> could be directly or indirectly involved in efficient penetration of the gastrointestinal epithelial cell lining.

the transcriptomic analysis revealed that genes involved in amino acid metabolism were up-regulated during biofilm growth, particularly tryptophan biosynthesis genes. the requirement for tryptophan was confirmed at the phenotypic level by showing that a trpe mutant formed significantly lower levels of biofilm. domka and colleagues  <cit>  reported that tryptophan biosynthesis only occurred during early e. coli biofilm formation  in lb medium and that repression of the trp operon was required during the later stages, suggesting that low intracellular levels of indole are required for biofilm development. this was confirmed by repression of the indole uptake gene  and up-regulation of indole efflux genes  in e. coli  <cit> . such observations were consistent with earlier work showing that the absence of the regulatory ycep protein increased biofilm formation in e. coli by repressing genes that control indole transport into the cell and that a trpe mutation showed increased biofilm formation  <cit> . we have reported several similarities between our data and biofilm-specific regulation in e. coli, but our findings suggest major differences in tryptophan metabolism between salmonella and e. coli biofilms. we have shown that tryptophan biosynthesis plays a role at the late stages of biofilm development in s. typhimurium, and that mtr and ycep are both up-regulated in the mature biofilm. the precise function of tryptophan and indole during biofilm formation of e. coli remains to be completely elucidated. it is clear that the tryptophanase  operon that converts tryptophan to indole is required for biofilm formation in e. coli and other indole-producing bacteria  <cit> .

our data showed that exogenous tryptophan or indole restore the ability of the s. typhimurium trpe mutant to form a biofilm. moreover, both tryptophan and indole increased the biofilm-forming capacity of wt sl1344; in fact, low levels of indole increased attachment at all of the time points tested. we speculate that the highest concentration of indole  used in this study is not biologically relevant, and imposes stress on the cell. while there are no other published reports on the effect of indole concentration upon biofilm formation in s. typhimurium, lower levels of exogenous indole  induced biofilm formation in e. coli, while higher levels of exogenous indole  caused indole toxicity and decreased bacteria growth  <cit> . taken together, these results suggest that in the absence of tryptophan, indole activates genes or pathways that contribute to biofilm formation.

several reports have shown that indole acts as a signalling molecule in e. coli to: 1) prepare cells for a nutrient-poor environment and increase catabolism of amino acids, 2) up-regulate genes that encode drug exporters  to increase bacterial tolerance to toxic compounds, 3) increase bacterial adherence to surfaces, and 4) delay cell division  <cit> . all of these functions would be beneficial to cells within a well-established biofilm. indole has recently been shown to act as an interspecies signal that controls biofilm formation by acting on oxygenases of bacteria that do not synthesise this molecule at temperatures below 30°c  <cit> . it is possible that we have observed a similar cell signalling phenomena in salmonella. several gram-negative bacterial biofilms have been shown to secrete the amino acid valine that may play a role in signalling or function as a protective osmolyte  <cit> . further functional analysis of biofilms grown in the presence of exogenous tryptophan  should provide insights into the role of these molecules in s. typhimurium.

microbial biofilms are inherently more resistant to host defences and antimicrobials than planktonic cells, but it is not known what proportion of this phenotype is due to bacterial factors such as the expression of virulence proteins, or external environmental influences such as the diffusion of nutrients or oxygen, or slow growth rate. in this study, we report that mature biofilm growth in s. typhimurium leads to significant down-regulation  of certain virulence genes located in spi <dig>  we confirmed the link between spi <dig> expression and biofilm growth by showing that the spi2-deficient Δssra strain formed significantly less biofilm than the parental strain, and that complementation with ssrab effectively restored attachment. we discovered that over-expression of spi <dig> led to a significant reduction in bacterial attachment by the wt strain. these data show that both increased and decreased expression of spi <dig> interferes with biofilm formation. it is not clear how a ttss impacts upon biofilm formation, but we note that it has been reported that an extracellular molecule  can interfere with the ttss-mediated attachment of shigella flexneri to mammalian cells  <cit> . by analogy, we speculate that aberrant expression of the spi <dig> ttss apparatus compromises the ability of salmonella to form biofilm, perhaps by affecting the presentation of cell surface factors such as curli.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that biofilm growth of s. typhimurium involves processes that include amino acid metabolism, motility, and virulence. three proteins, trpe, stm <dig> and ssra, play a role in biofilm formation by s. typhimurium. we have discovered that tryptophan metabolism is required for effective biofilm formation in our experimental system. the unexpected link between spi <dig> expression and biofilm promises to be a fertile area for salmonella research in the future. further characterization of the mutations that led to a reduction in biofilm growth is ongoing and we are examining temporal expression within the biofilm using a gfp reporter system. we are now comparing s. typhimurium biofilms grown in dissimilar model systems to identify the core genes that are required for survival of this pathogen on different surfaces.

