BACKGROUND
in traditional dogma, bacteria have one chromosome and a number of smaller dna entities, like plasmids, which are propagated across generations unlinked to the chromosome. however, when bacteria have two chromosomes, are they permanently paired or do these physical entities recombine frequently relative to genes on these chromosomes? since  <dig>  it has been known that some gamma proteobacteria have two chromosomes  <cit> . this followed discoveries that various other proteobacteria, namely alpha proteobacteria  <cit>  and beta proteobacteria  <cit> , could have multiple chromosomes as well. an initial debate occurred over whether the second vibrio chromosome was really a 'chromosome' or whether it was merely a 'megaplasmid'  <cit> . the arguments for considering the second replicon a chromosome centered on its considerable size, essential gene content  <cit>  and consistent stoichiometry. we can now add to that a unique replication machinery  <cit>  that operates independently but in a coordinated fashion  <cit>  with synchronous termination and thus consistent stoichiometry  <cit> . it is now accepted that most, perhaps all, vibrionaceae  have two chromosomes  <cit> .

genome analysis of the vibrios rapidly uncovers variation even among closely related strains. not only do the genome sizes differ widely  <cit> , but even among conserved genes, there is incongruity among the inferred phylogenies. this is the well-accepted signature of horizontal gene transfer and homologous recombination. gene organization also differs among sequenced strains, indicating large-scale genetic mobility. individual genes and entire operons may be mobile among vibrio  <cit> . in particular, chromosome ii varies widely in size and organization  <cit> . further, many vibrio carry  plasmids. though it may seem unusual to expect as large a quantity of dna to be transferred as an entire chromosome, there is evidence that vibrio have experienced a transfer on that magnitude even recently: the putative v. vulnificus hybridization leading to biotype  <dig> involves very large quantities of dna being transferred among v. vulnificus strains to create a hybrid strain almost evenly split in contributions from biotypes  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . however, the hybridization event involves loci from both chromosomes being transferred and appears to have preserved their associations with those chromosomes. as such, it does not appear to have been an exchange of chromosomal partners, but it raises the possibility that chromosomal exchange may have been an evolutionary mechanism within the vibrionaceae.

the function of a second chromosome, and of multi-chromosomality in general, has been the subject of speculation  <cit> . that many of the genes on the vibrio chromosome ii have specific environmental functions has been noted, and the role of the second chromosome in habitat adaptation has been tested experimentally  <cit> . xu et al demonstrated that when v. cholera was grown in an animal host  a general shift in gene expression favored up-regulation of genes on the second chromosome relative to the gene expression profiles in exponential growth in vitro. this experimental data paired with the gross similarities among the chromosome i from all sequenced vibrio and the great diversity of chromosome ii, suggests that the second chromosome represents a collection of accessory elements and might be mobilized wholesale leading to a complete shift in habitat or niche  <cit> .

'vibrio phylogenies' that are built using mlsa or single-copy conserved genes typically use genes located on chromosome i  <cit>  with the exception of intra-specific typing schemes for pathogens  <cit> . this is a side-effect of choosing stable, conserved, essential, single copy genes. however, it provides little assurance of representing the history of the entire genome given that chromosome ii is excluded from the analyses.

given the high degree of mobility vibrio genetic elements are presumed to have, it is possible that the two chromosomes have distinct and conflicting histories. there are currently  <dig> completely assembled vibrio genomes available in the public databases and over  <dig> partially sequenced genomes. we explored these genomes to construct phylogenies for each of the two chromosomes using three approaches. first, single copy genes from each chromosome were assembled en suite and a phylogeny for each chromosome was inferred from these concatenated sequences. second, the organization and gene content at the origins of replication of each chromosome  were studied. third, the genes from near the two chromosomal origins of replication were studied and their phylogenies estimated individually.

RESULTS
chromosome phylogenies
the inferred phylogenies for the two chromosomes are congruent  and contain the expected major features, such as photobacterium being basal to the vibrionaceae and v. fisheri forming the next most basal clade. there are no unexpected sister taxa. the results of this analysis are compatible with published multi-locus analyses. however, instead of using  <dig> or  <dig> genes commonly used in mlsa, this analysis included  <dig> genes from chromosome i and  <dig> from chromosome ii. these single copy genes include a range of functions including metabolism, information processing, flagellar structure and cytoskeletal components; as such, they represent sampling points from various pathways and genomic sections from around the entire genome. the concatenation of these well conserved genes provides a shared signal for the chromosomes as a whole, despite only composing a small fraction of the entire genome. the genes included in the analysis are listed under additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  the chromosome i tree is easily rooted by the various other genomes included in the analysis. all of these other clades fell together along accepted taxonomic lines. the most closely related strains in the tree are the v. cholerae strains; that clade is effectively unresolved because the internal distances are too short. the chromosome ii tree cannot be rooted in the same manner as chromosome i because there is no obviously available outgroup: the chromosome ii of p. atlantica is not homologous to the chromosome ii of the vibrionaceae being analyzed. however, rooting it identically by using the information from the chromosome i tree preserves the branching order of each tree. thus, the 'mean field' approximation for the phylogeny of the two chromosomes is congruent at the species level. there is insufficient resolution among v. cholerae strains and too few members of other species to make inferences at a finer phylogenetic scale.

origin of replication organization
the second method of analysis, studying the gene organization at the origins of replication , supported the finding that the two chromosomes share a single phylogeny at the species level. this method of analysis was more advantageously applied to chromosome ii than chromosome i: gene order in the region immediately surrounding the chromosome i origin appears too highly conserved between species to provide robust data on its phylogeny . however, gene content is informative in that region suggesting that the species largely conform to the expected clustering even though the tree is not well supported . the difficulties are caused by a paucity of organizational changes that differentiate species at orii - such as the inversion of three genes that sets apart the v. fisheri. frequently, a change is unique to a sequenced strain and not shared by other members of its species. this can be extraordinarily disruptive of a distance estimate if the number of unique differences is large. in particular, at least three obvious saltations in the gene content introduce spikes of noise. in v. cholerae b <dig>  an apparently mobile genetic region has imposed itself very close to the origin of replication. these  <dig> genes, almost as large as the region to be compared, interrupt an otherwise absolutely conserved region shared by the other vibrio cholerae. a  <dig> gene region in photobacterium sp. ska <dig> contains several transposon and transposase genes. similarly,  <dig> gene region in vibrio splendidus med <dig> interrupts an otherwise conserved region with a number of secretory system genes; it lacks apparent mobility elements which would explain its origin. among the photobacteria, the flanking regions sometimes differ dramatically, as well, which disturbs the phylogeny with a very long branch, and the vibrio cholerae appear to have inverted the entire region - but this would not impact a gene content analysis.

gene presence/absence data is more informative in the regions surrounding the origin of chromosome ii, even though across the breadth of the vibrionaceae, the areas adjacent to the origin of replication have been relocated to such an extent that it is not practical to reconstruct their movement from as few genomes as are currently available. this is not unexpected, given how thoroughly shuffled chromosome ii is relative to chromosome i  <cit> ; see also additional file  <dig> to explore the global rearrangement of chromosome ii. within a relatively short distance of the origin, however, genes can be reliably identified as orthologous and used in a presence/absence analysis. the origin was extended in each direction by  <dig> kb. as described in the methods, a gene presence/absence tree was constructed and this led to a distance tree entirely consistent with the mean-field approximation across chromosomes i and ii .

origin of replication genes
the phylogenies estimated for each of the gene families near the origin support the estimations derived from the two chromosomes overall. this third method of analysis led thus to the same conclusion as the other two. table  <dig> lists the genes studied at each origin, focusing on their gene phylogeny, while table  <dig> specifies the longer annotation names for the genes used in table  <dig> and the type of data  used to create the trees. the genes within the ori regions are naturally subject to horizontal gene transfer and mutational noise, like all other genes. two of them are too conserved or too noisy to present a clear phylogenetic signal over the vibrionales. in these cases, alrt  and bootstrap support are lacking across the entire tree . many other trees have limited support for individual clades. clades with less than  <dig>  alrt  <cit>  support or less than 70% bootstrap support were reduced to polytomies. in addition, the long branch of v. cholerae sometimes distorts other elements in the tree. in 8/ <dig> trees from chromosome i and 2/ <dig> trees derived from chromosome ii, removing the cholera clade from the tree also restored a topology consistent with the mean-field tree in the other portions of the tree where previously it had been inconsistent with the hypothesis . finally, one clade  was reliably monophyletic but presented numerous permutations in its internal structure. at orii 9/ <dig> genes presented diverse variants in this clade; at oriii, 3/ <dig> genes presented variability within this clade. ignoring this variation, 16/ <dig> genes from chromosome i and 10/ <dig> genes from chromosome ii confirm the chromosomal phylogenies inferred by the above methods . finally, the remaining two genes on chromosome i lead to inferences that conflict with the others by placing v. splendidus in the v. fischeri clade . genes in orii show more variation in phylogeny but fewer genes are available for study in oriii.

conditionally consistent 
uninformative 
partial 
scrambled 
other issues  
all the genes analyzed are listed. the first column represents whether the estimated phylogeny was consistent with the hypothesized chromosome phylogeny , inconsistent with the hypothesized phylogeny, or simply uninformative. the second column indicates whether all strains were represented for this locus and the third whether there were any clades outside the cholera clade at which the tree was a polytomy because of an uninformative or unsupported node. the fourth column includes cases in which v. splendidus is out of place in the tree  or where the v. parahaemolyticus/v. alginolyticus clade is not the same as in the consensus tree .

the genes surrounding the origins of replication otherwise identified by short names are described by their longer annotation names. in addition, the data  used to create the trees is listed. this relates to the degree of conservation in the data; more conserved sequences require dna trees to provide signal, less conserved sequences require aa trees to avoid excessive noise.

CONCLUSIONS
rampant horizontal gene transfer and plasmid exchange might create doubt as to the fidelity of paired chromosomes to one another. further, this genetic mobility can create serious difficulties for anyone reconstructing a phylogeny for something as large as a chromosome, just as they do for someone inferring organismal and species phylogenies. here, these difficulties have been overcome by using a range of methods that operate at different temporal and genetic scales. at the smallest scale, a number of individual gene phylogenies were reconstructed. at an intermediate scale, the gene content of a conserved region was used to infer a phylogeny. at the largest scale, concatenation of predominantly chromosome specific genes  provided an estimate of the history of the whole chromosome. in each case, the observed patterns were consistent - though, while many individual genes do not present a conflicting individual history, they may not support the hypothesis for lack of signal.

this congruence between the whole of the chromosome and the origin of replication suggests that the region around the origin of replication is either too large to relocate or is difficult to transfer because of its specific function. individual genes in this region may experience horizontal gene transfer - witness the inclusion of a mobile genetic region in v. cholerae b <dig>  individual genes also appear amenable to transfer, deletion and insertion.

more than being able to create a relative history for each chromosome, it appears that since the origin of the two chromosomes in the ancestral vibrio, they have continued as a pair. this suggests that they have also followed the cell itself; that we have a consistent phylogeny for the vibrio species themselves - at least, the ones included in this analysis. further genome sequencing would allow a similar analysis to provide the 'definitive' phylogeny of the vibrio, but at much greater effort per strain than for mlsa  <cit> . mlsa schemes currently devised provide a mean field estimate of the phylogeny of chromosome i; thus, as they are expanded to include increasing numbers of genes, those phylogenies are expected to agree with the phylogenies derived from studying the origins of replication. this suggests several genes that might be used in an mlsa of the vibrionaceae, including alpha, dnan, and yidc from chromosome  <dig> and para <dig> and glup from chromosome  <dig>  these genes have potential primer sequences that are hypothetically capable of creating phylogenetic trees with the highest resolution and consistent signal so that they are comparable to the trees found in this study. it is a pleasing conclusion that separate mlsa schemes will not have to be executed for each chromosome independently.

