BACKGROUND
plants and animals have evolved a great diversity of sexual systems that range from the extremes of obligatory self-fertilisation to complete outcrossing. transitions between these sexual systems have long fascinated biologists due to the impacts they have on key parameters such as inbreeding depression, genetic diversity, population structure, genome structure and the evolutionary potential of species  <cit> . transitions between sexual systems often present tradeoffs between short and long term selective advantages and can have significant connotations for the long-term viability of species. for example, selection for reproductive assurance and colonisation advantage due to mate limitation during range expansions, or as a result of high population turnover in metapopulations, can drive transitions to self-fertilisation strategies  <cit> . these transitions occur despite the deleterious effects of self-fertilisation, which include inbreeding depression, reduction in effective recombination rates and reduction in effective population size  <cit> .

transitions to androdioecy  – a sexual system where males and hermaphrodites co-occur in varying frequencies in populations, with different levels of self-fertilisation and outcrossing – are extremely rare in plants and animals  <cit> . in animals, ad has only been described in five groups, rhabditid nematodes, the killifish kryptolebias marmoratus and three crustacean groups; barnacles, a genus of clam shrimps eulimnadia, and in the order notostraca, the tadpole shrimps  <cit> . ad can evolve either through the invasion of males into hermaphrodite only populations, as in barnacles  <cit> , or through the replacement of females with hermaphrodites in gonochoric populations , as in the plants mercurialis annua <cit>  and datisca glomerata <cit> . as models to describe the evolution and maintenance of ad only predict its evolution under stringent conditions, ad has historically been considered an unstable, transitional sexual system between gonochorism and hermaphroditism   <cit> . this view is borne out by the scarcity of ad in nature  <cit> , although recent research in the branchiopod eulimnadia has revealed an unexpected stability of androdioecy  <cit> .

notostraca, or tadpole shrimps, is a small order of branchiopod crustaceans characterised by a high level of morphological stasis. fossils dating back as far as the triassic are almost indistinguishable from contemporary species leading them to be referred to as ‘living fossils’  <cit> . in contrast, notostraca has diverse sexual systems, including gonochorism, self-fertile hermaphroditism and ad, with variation occurring on both an interspecific and intraspecific level  <cit> . remarkably, ad is found in species from both notostracan genera, triops and lepidurus, suggesting that transitions in reproductive system might have evolved repeatedly in the order. despite this, the evolutionary history of reproductive systems in notostraca is unknown due to the lack of a resolved phylogeny  <cit> , and the poor knowledge of the diversity of the group, partly due to the widespread presence of cryptic species  <cit> . gonochorism has been hypothesized to be the ancestral state in the group, and the evolution of self-fertile hermaphroditism and ad has been linked to reproductive assurance in the context of range expansions, possibly after glacial retreat  <cit> , although this has never been explicitly tested.

here we combine newly generated and genbank sequence data to assess notostraca taxonomic diversity, identifying considerable cryptic diversity, and employ a multigene phylogenetic approach to create a well-supported, global phylogeny of notostraca. information on sexual system was compiled and maximum parsimony  and model-based maximum likelihood  character mapping approaches were used on the phylogeny to investigate sexual system evolution across the order. we also tested the hypothesis that reproductive assurance has driven the evolution of self-fertilisation across notostraca  <cit> . taxa found at higher latitudes are likely to have experienced bouts of colonisation during post glacial range expansions, which would select for ad/hermaphroditism. we therefore compared the latitudes that ad/hermaphroditic and gonochoric taxa are found using a phylogenetic t-test. our analyses reveal high levels of reproductive lability with frequent transitions occurring to and from androdioecy. furthermore, this flexibility is conserved across notostraca, and may have been maintained for at least  <dig> million years. additionally, ad/hermaphroditic taxa are found at significantly higher latitudes than gonochoric ones suggesting that colonisation advantage through reproductive assurance is likely to be involved in transitions between sexual systems in notostraca.

RESULTS
delimitation of significant taxonomic units
notostraca is known to contain cryptic species complexes e.g.  <cit>  so we first used a cytochrome oxidase subunit one –based barcoding approach to identify significant taxonomic units  for inclusion in our phylogeny prior to the multigene analysis. including available genbank data and  <dig> newly generated sequences for this study,  <dig> notostraca coi sequences were aligned. we applied a generalized mixed yule coalescent  model to identify independently evolving clusters in our coi dataset, which correspond to stus. the gmyc model identified  <dig> stus . uncorrected mean genetic distances in coi between stus ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> %. four notostraca lineages did not have coi data available, but are represented by other genes used in our multigene phylogenetic analysis; t. gadensis, t. cf. granarius , l. bilobatus and l. cryptus. as the species status of these lineages has been confirmed in regional studies of cryptic diversity in notostraca  <cit>  they were included as additional stus for the multigene phylogenetic analysis. in total we recognise  <dig> stus within notostraca.

notostracan phylogeny
phylogeny, based on a concatenated supermatrix of  <dig> sequences  from three mitochondrial genes and four nuclear genes for  <dig> stus, was inferred by ml and bayesian markov-chain monte carlo methods. both methods of phylogenetic reconstruction gave congruent topologies, with most branches having high levels of support . the two recognised notostracan genera, triops and lepidurus, formed highly supported clades. within triops, four main monophyletic lineages with a strong geographic association  were highly supported. the analysis supported a close relationship between the t. australiensis complex  and the t. longicaudatus complex , and a sister relationship of these with the t. granarius complex . the t. cancriformis/mauritanicus complex  appears as the sister group to the rest of triops. within lepidurus, l. lubbocki , and l. apus sensu stricto  have long branches and are sister species to the rest of lepidurus. four north american species  <cit> l. packardi, l. cryptus, l. bilobatus and l. lemmoni, with narrowly endemic, mostly allopatric distributions in western north america, form a well supported group. l. arcticus, a circumpolar species from arctic and subarctic regions, forms a sister relationship with a clade containing l. couesii, which forms a widely distributed species complex.


sexual system assignment
our literature review identified sexual system data for  <dig> stus;  <dig> of these have at least one barcoded population . in the few cases where an stu does not have a barcode sequence for the same population for which sexual system data is derived  these species have been well studied, no further cryptic diversity has been identified and the populations used for sexual system inference fall inside known species ranges . we found two polymorphic stus; t. cancriformis and t. cf. longicaudatus sp. <dig>  which include both androdioecious and gonochoric populations, and four androdioecious stus; t. newberryi, t. cf. australiensis sp. b, l. apus  and l. arcticus . sex ratio of populations assigned ad ranged from 0% to 27% males. in addition, either histological data or reproduction in isolation data, or both, confirmed the presence of anatomical hermaphrodites. fourteen taxa were considered gonochoric on the basis of histology, lack of reproduction in isolation and sex ratio. the quality and quantity of information on sexual system was heterogeneous amongst gonochoric taxa, with actual sex ratios tending to be underreported and histological studies lacking for many taxa. eight taxa could not be assigned to a sexual system due to an absence of data or equivocal sex ratio.


sex ratio , ability of ovisac bearing individuals to reproduce in isolation and the presence or absence of ovotestis in ovisac bearing individuals is shown. see table s <dig> for detailed information.

* depending on population. ** only in populations where sex ratio is < 30%. *** reported gonochoric with even sex ratio, exact numbers not given.

sexual system evolution
mp reconstruction of ancestral character states infers that gonochorism is the ancestral state of notostraca . furthermore, ad appears to have multiple origins in notostraca having evolved three times in triops and twice in lepidurus. sexual system is highly flexible across notostraca and varies even between closely related species  or shows intraspecific variation . model based ml methods showed that a two-parameter model, which allows distinct transition rates for ad to gonochorism and from gonochorism to ad, was a significantly better fit for the data than a model where both transitions have an equal rate , or models where transitions were restricted to one direction, either from gonochorism to ad or ad to gonochorism, indicating that in notostraca changes in sexual system could be bidirectional. overall, the ml model suggests that transition rates between sexual systems were high and in particular, transitions from ad to gonochorism were more than three times higher than transitions from gonochorism to ad. this result is in striking contrast to the mp results which suggested repeated evolution in the opposite direction, to ad from gonochorism. this indicates that, once evolved, ad may be unstable and likely to revert back to gonochorism. the high rates of change across the order meant that, unlike for the mp analysis where a minimum number of transitions is inferred, ancestral sexual systems for all nodes were equally likely to be either gonochoric or ad. virtually identical results were achieved using an ultrametric phylogeny constructed in beast v <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  with a lognormal relaxed molecular clock both from the full dataset and with a reduced dataset containing only the mitochondrial genes coi, 12s and 16s .


models of transitions in sexual system across the best scoring ml estimation of notostraca phylogeny compared using the ml implementation of bayesmultistate. lnl = log-likelihood of model, qga = transition rate from gonochorism to androdioecy, qag = transition rate from androdioecy to gonochorism, p = p-value for d with  <dig> degree of freedom comparing the restricted models to the unrestricted model.

testing the reproductive assurance hypothesis
the mean latitude of stus where ad is found was significantly higher than for gonochoric ones  with an average latitude of  <dig>  compared to  <dig> . ml value for λ was estimated to be  <dig>  and its inclusion significantly improved the likelihood of the model  indicating that the latitude of stus has moderate phylogenetic signal.

discussion
sexual system evolution
our analyses reveal that sexual system is a highly labile trait within notostraca. the rare sexual system ad has evolved multiple times in both notostracan genera, with mp indicating at least five independent origins across the whole group . this lability is also supported by the model based ml analysis which infers high transition rates between sexual systems. unlike the mp analysis, the ml analysis did not resolve the ancestral sexual system for any nodes. this suggests that mp may give an oversimplified reconstruction of the evolutionary history of sexual system in notostraca and highlights the importance of incorporating branch lengths in ancestral state reconstructions  <cit> . the ml analysis also contrasts with mp by inferring that transitions between gonochorism and ad can occur in both directions as is the case for pedunculate barnacles  <cit> , rather than in a unidirectional manner as implied by mp. as there are no known biological constraints to transitions between sexual systems in either direction there is no reason to discredit the model of sexual system evolution inferred by either method. for example, a transition from ad to gonochorism could occur as a result of selection for outcrossing over selfing, followed by the loss of testis lobes in hermaphrodites. in conclusion, although it is not possible to infer the history of sexual system change in notostraca with current data or methods of ancestral state reconstruction, our results do display a consistent pattern of high lability of sexual system across notostraca.

although flexibility in sexual system has previously been shown in t. cancriformis, where a recent transition from gonochorism to androdioecy has occurred  <cit> , our results demonstrate that reproductive flexibility is a general feature of notostraca as a whole. given the age of the order – well-preserved notostracan fossils date back to the carboniferous  <cit>  and triops and lepidurus are known from the permian and triassic  <cit> , dating the split in the two genera to at least ~ <dig> million years ago – it can be inferred that reproductive lability has been maintained for at least  <dig> million years within tadpole shrimps and may have aided their long term evolutionary persistence. such lability of sexual system in notostraca contrasts strongly with the dynamics of sexual system evolution in the clam shrimps of the genus eulimnadia, the other branchiopod crustacean where ad is found. in eulimnadia, ad evolved once and has persisted for at least  <dig> million years, passing through many speciation events  <cit> . the contrast in sexual system evolution between both taxa is striking considering that tadpole shrimps and clam shrimps inhabit similar ecological niches  <cit> , in some cases occupying the same pool  <cit> , and have similar life histories, producing long-lived dormant cysts that survive during adverse periods and also provide the dispersal stage  <cit> . they also have a similar genetic mechanism of sex determination where males are recessive to hermaphrodites in ad populations  <cit> . finally, in both groups, hermaphrodites are morphologically derived from obligatory outcrossing females, and can either self-fertilise or outcross with males but, unlike in plants or barnacles, are unable to fertilise each other  <cit> . within branchiopoda therefore, superficially similar ecological backgrounds and genetic mechanisms of sex determination have resulted in two very different, but equally unusual, evolutionary outcomes for sexual system; stable and conserved in eulimnadia and labile and dynamic in notostraca. in contrast, the flexibility of sexual system in notostracans resembles that of barnacles, where ad has evolved on several occasions in response to mate limitation, although in this system ad has evolved from a hermaphroditic ancestor rather than a gonochoric one  <cit> . modelling has explained the persistence of ad in eulimnadia and highlights the importance of the presence of males for limiting inbreeding depression and that a proportion of progeny produced by selfing – those that are homogametic – have reduced fitness due to the expression of sex-linked genetic load  <cit> . in notostraca, however, these key parameters, along with other factors that contribute to the evolution and maintenance of ad, such as male-hermaphrodite encounter rates and fecundity, have not been investigated. further research is therefore required to ascertain whether the dynamics of sexual system evolution in notostraca necessitate the re-evaluation of current models for the evolution of ad in animals. a lack of phylogenetic signal regarding sexual systems in notostraca suggests that switches in sexual system occur in response to ecological factors. notostraca share similarities in life history with many plants  <cit> , particularly those that exist in highly dynamic metapopulations, where colonisation of new habitats is a key feature of survival causing selection for reproductive assurance  <cit> . in many cases selection for reproductive assurance has caused a breakdown in plant self-incompatibility systems and the evolution of self-fertile hermaphrodites, which make optimal pioneer genotypes  <cit> . if reproductive assurance drives the evolution of self-fertile hermaphroditism and hence ad in notostraca, as has been hypothesised  <cit> , we would expect ad stus to occur in areas which have recently become available for colonisation. these predictions appear to be met in t. cancriformis, where hermaphroditic and androdioecious populations occur in previously glaciated areas whereas known gonochoric populations occur in what were previously unglaciated refugia  <cit> . furthermore, our results support the reproductive assurance hypothesis for the whole of notostraca as our phylogenetically informed analysis reveals that ad notostracan stus occur at significantly higher latitudes than gonochoric ones. these tests indicate that ad stus occur in areas where habitat disruption through glacial cycles is more likely, providing further support for the role of colonisation advantage and reproductive assurance in a metapopulation as drivers for the evolution of ad.

highly fluctuating population densities, which result in mate limitation, could also provide an advantage to lineages containing hermaphrodites through reproductive assurance  <cit> . in the case of branchiopoda, the role of low population densities and mate limitation in the evolution of sexual systems is still poorly understood  <cit> . ephemeral ponds are often very small  <cit>  with strong inter-annual fluctuations in branchiopod population density  <cit> , which could provide a context in which self-fertilising hermaphrodites would enjoy an increased fitness relative to females, driving the evolution of ad. further research on notostraca species distribution, genetic diversity, metapopulation dynamics and phylogeography will help to understand the underlying factors behind changes in sexual systems in this group.

taxonomic implications of notostracan phylogeny
our results resolve the phylogenetic relationships of notostraca, supporting the previously disputed  <cit>  monophyly of triops. although the four main lineages in triops coincide with the four species recognised by longhurst  <cit>  in the last revision of notostraca, our analyses support previous work revealing that each of these lineages is made up of cryptic species. each main lineage has maintained a remarkably stable, mostly allopatric geographic distribution . in lepidurus, l. lubbocki was found to be the sister species to the rest of the genus and as suggested by mantovani et al.  <cit>  full species status is warranted. further cryptic diversity was also identified in the l. couesii complex and given that the type locality for l. couesii is in n america  <cit>  and the level of divergence with apulian  and sardinian lineages, we propose these latter lineages are new species. overall, although highlighting the need for further research into notostraca taxonomic diversity, our phylogeny represents an excellent framework for the study of evolutionary processes within the order.

CONCLUSIONS
our analyses show that sexual systems are extremely flexible in notostraca, with repeated switches between gonochorism and androdioecy possibly driven by postglacial range expansions. this unconstrained, labile pattern, strongly contrasts with the single origin of androdioecy in the genus eulimnadia despite the similarity of their habitats and life histories and resembles the pattern found in barnacles. despite the idiosyncratic evolution in these crustacean taxa, reproductive assurance in the face of fluctuating population sizes, habitat turnover or climate changes, appears to be a recurrent theme in the evolution of androdioecy. flexibility in sexual system evolution has been maintained throughout the evolutionary history of notostraca  and given the extreme morphological and life history conservatism in the group, could have facilitated their evolutionary persistence.

