BACKGROUND
gene expression profiling of rna extracted from peripheral blood is an informative method used to identify biomarkers, examine disease states, and investigate immune responses. however, the relatively high proportion of globin messenger rna present in total rna extracted from whole blood can reduce the efficacy of the microarray assay by interfering with the detection of less abundant gene transcripts  <cit> . furthermore, it has been observed that, when compared with a leukocyte isolation protocol, rna isolated directly from whole blood is associated with increased noise and reduced sensitivity in the gene expression assay  <cit>  .

common laboratory practice often includes fractionation of whole blood components prior to rna extraction. the process allows for the removal of the red blood cells from whole blood isolations and facilitates the study of more homogeneous cell populations. depending on the fractionation method selected, partial or complete removal of reticulocytes, the primary source of globin rna, may be achieved. despite the obstacle posed by globin rna contamination, however, there are compelling reasons to study gene expression from whole blood rather than from subpopulations such as neutrophils. first, to capture expression profiles that accurately reflect the transcriptome at time of blood collection and to minimize sample handling artifacts, it is preferable to avoid additional processing steps as some degree of cell activation is inevitable during cell fractionation. second, even when fractionation steps are performed, α and β globin mrna transcripts are often the most abundant transcripts present in total rna extracted from leukocyte-enriched populations  <cit>  and the fractionation itself can contribute to increases in sample-to-sample variability in the microarray assay  <cit> . third, there are a myriad of populations within whole blood: neutrophils, t cells, b cells, nk cells, monocytes, eosinophils, basophils, dendritic cells, and subsets for each of the above. while some studies may require analysis of individual cell types, if all these populations can be studied together, the cost savings is substantial. finally, working with whole blood saves time and, if specimens are being collected at multiple study sites, the methodology facilitates a uniformity that is diminished with each additional step in the processing of the blood.

several commercially available methods for reducing the impact of globin rna transcripts in the microarray expression assay have been developed. one approach involves the removal of α and β globin rnas from total rna by selective hybridization and magnetic bead separation  <cit>  prior to amplification and labeling of microarray targets. the ambion globinclear kit utilizes this pre-labeling method of globin transcript depletion. using a different approach, affymetrix and preanalytix have developed a protocol in which α- and β-globin mrna mrnas are selectively blocked during the cdna synthesis step of the microarray target preparation protocol with a mixture of peptide nucleic acids  complementary to globin transcripts. recently, a third method has been released by nugen technologies that does not directly reduce globin rna transcripts but rather uses a proprietary technology to produce a single-stranded cdna microarray target  <cit> . the cdna targets might be less prone to the cross-hybridization artifacts seen with crna targets  <cit> , thus reducing the impact of highly abundant transcripts present in the target and increasing assay sensitivity  <cit> .

each method has been demonstrated to produce array data in which an increased number of non-globin gene transcripts are detected  <cit> , and debey et al <cit>  have shown that another globin rna reduction method also improves microarray performance with whole blood samples. currently, however, there is limited information available directly comparing these methods or examining the accuracy of microarray profiles generated using the individual methods. in this study we examine the sensitivity, reproducibility and concordance of microarray data produced by targets generated from globin rna-depleted and non-depleted total rna using two different target labeling methods: the affymetrix one-cycle target labeling  protocol and the nugen ovation protocol. quantitative rt-pcr of total blood rna was used to generate an independent measure of mrna levels from genes of the human nf-κb signaling pathway in order to evaluate the accuracy of the microarray results. the results of this study allow us to identify optimal methods for preparing microarray targets from blood rna for expression analysis. in addition we compare expression profiles of fresh and frozen whole blood samples collected in paxgene tubes to assess the impact freezing may have on expression profiling.

RESULTS
rna isolated directly from whole blood and processed using standard target preparation methods produces gene expression profiles with increased noise and reduced sensitivity compared with total rna isolated after various leukocyte isolation protocols. however, the advantages of profiling gene expression from whole blood are compelling: 1) cell fractionation steps that may artifactually alter gene expression patterns are avoided; 2) easy and rapid isolation of rna from whole blood facilitates clinical studies; 3) even rare subpopulations of cells such as dendritic cells or eosinophils remain included in the transcriptome; and 4) costs are vastly reduced. to increase assay sensitivity and reproducibility when profiling rna extracted from whole blood, it is necessary to employ a method to reduce the impact of highly abundant globin mrnas on target hybridization with the microarray. in this study, four methods for rna preparation and labeling were examined to determine which protocol produced the most sensitive and reproducible results when blood rna isolated from paxgene tubes was used as input. in addition, since the option to freeze a whole blood sample allows samples to be collected over time and at different study sites prior to processing, the effects of freezing blood samples were examined by comparing data generated from both fresh and frozen specimens. freezing blood samples after collection has the advantage of allowing batching of samples for rna extraction and simplifying the blood collection protocol for multicenter studies.

methods summary
blood samples were collected from healthy, human donors in paxgene tubes; rna was isolated either on day of collection or after freezing and storage. four different methods of microarray target preparation for whole blood rna samples were examined . three of the methods used total rna extracted from whole blood as the starting sample for mrna amplification and target labeling: affymetrix one-cycle target labeling ; affymetrix one-cycle target labeling with globin pnas added during cdna synthesis ; and nugen ovation system v <dig> . in the other method tested, total rna was treated with ambion globinclear to reduce globin transcripts prior to labeling with the affymetrix one-cycle labeling protocol . the affymetrix one-cycle target labeling protocol produces biotin-labeled, amplified crna; the nugen protocol produces biotin-labeled, amplified cdna targets.

input rna and target quality assessment
the quality of total rna prepared from fresh and frozen paxgene tubes and from globinclear-treated rna was assessed using standard uv spectrophotometry and by examining electropherogram images generated with the agilent bioanalyzer. input rna was of high quality for both fresh and frozen samples  with a slight reduction in average quality metrics for globinclear-treated samples . reductions in rin scores after globinclear treatment of whole blood rna were also observed by liu et al.  <cit> . each amplified target was assessed for crna or cdna quality by examining electropherogram images and for yield using uv spectrophotometry. results are summarized in figure  <dig>  for targets generated with method  <dig>  the traces display a sharp peak characteristic of highly abundant globin crna. this peak is reduced in crna targets produced with methods  <dig>  and  <dig> . the absence of the globin rna-associated peak in targets produced following globinclear treatment or with globin rna blockage by pna oligos during cdna synthesis is consistent with the results reported by liu et al <cit>  in their study evaluating these methods. the bioanalyzer trace of targets produced with method  <dig>  displays a pattern characteristic of mild rna degradation ; this may be a result of the extra handling steps required by the globinclear treatment. the cdna trace for method  <dig>  targets does not show a discrete peak, suggesting that globin rna amplification may also be reduced with this method.

using recommended rna inputs for each method, average crna target yield ranged from  <dig> μg to  <dig> μg. the average yield with method  <dig>  using rna from either fresh or frozen paxgene tubes is typical of yields obtained in our laboratory with this method. we speculate that the high yields for method  <dig>  relative to the other affymetrix one-cycle target labeling methods are, at least partially, the result of the higher input rna amount  required by the method  <dig> protocol. the globinclear-treated rna produced the lowest crna yields with the affymetrix one-cycle labeling protocol, as has been observed previously with this method  <cit> . the nugen method generated an average cdna target yield of  <dig>  μg from an rna input of  <dig> ng, which is within the reported yield range for this assay. target yields for all methods tested in this study were sufficient for performing microarray analysis.

array hybridization performance
targets produced with each labeling method were hybridized with the genechip human focus array. target amounts and array processing steps were performed according to the manufacturers' recommendations for the labeling method and the array format. overall performance in the array assay was examined in three ways: 1) individual array performance metrics ; 2) data visualization for assessment of data distribution and variation; and 3) correlation of detected transcripts among targets generated with each method.

array performance metrics  indicate that labeling method  <dig>  produced targets with the highest transcript detection efficiency  among the methods tested. the next most sensitive result was seen with method  <dig> . background levels were similar among the targets produced with the three methods utilizing the affymetrix one-cycle cdna/ivt labeling protocol. the laboratory standard method of target preparation  demonstrates that lowest transcript detection when used with whole blood rna. the nugen ovation labeling method produced lower overall signal and lower background on the arrays. actin 3'/5' ratios measured with this method are 5– <dig> fold higher than with the other labeling methods. this pattern is consistent with previous reports describing the ovation system  <cit>  and, taken together with the low gapdh ratios produced with this method, is not likely to represent poor quality rna or targets. only one microarray assay was flagged for poor performance in this study: sample a, method  <dig> . 

microarray targets prepared from donors a, c, and d were hybridized to the genechip human focus array. overall performance values determined with unscaled mas  <dig>  analysis of each array are listed. bold font indicates metric values that fall below empirical quality control standards established in our laboratory. all arrays passed post-hybridization visual inspection. *average values for method  <dig> do not include sample a which was flagged as a low performance outlier.

examination of probe cell intensity distributions prior to normalization shows that overall signal distribution patterns  varied with the labeling method. within-method variation is low across methods, with the exception of method  <dig>  which showed somewhat greater variation than the other methods. probe cell intensity range, however, is notably different among methods, with method  <dig>  showing the greatest range and method  <dig>  the lowest. because of the large differences in detection sensitivity and gene expression patterns among the four labeling methods, likely due to differences in globin transcript levels and target nucleic acid types , we applied model-based normalization algorithms to within-method array data as well as across the entire data set. following gene summarization and mas scaling  or rma quantile normalization , within-method variation is not pronounced for any of the labeling methods, although, method  <dig> showed a compressed probe set signal intensity range compared to the other labeling methods. interestingly, in this study, the sample-to-sample variation observed with method  <dig>  is reduced compared with other microarray studies in our laboratory using this method with rna extracted from whole blood or ficoll-hypaque-isolated pbmcs. possible explanations for the reduced variation in the present study include 1) use of highly standardized blood collection and rna processing protocols, with all target labeling performed in a single batch, 2) low number of independent samples in this study is insufficient to detect typical variation, 3) blood samples were only collected from healthy donors. this latter possibility is consistent with the report of whitney et al  <cit>  in which a reduced variation in gene expression patterns in blood from healthy individuals compared to patients with bacterial infection was observed.

sample-to-sample variation was also examined by measuring similarity among expression profiles from different donor samples processed with the same target preparation method. a high within-method correlation  was measured for methods  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> . method  <dig>  again showed somewhat poorer performance .

comparison of globin transcript detection
we assessed the extent of globin transcript depletion in the microarray assay with each labeling method by examining α- and β-globin mrna signal intensities normalized to actin mrna signal. all of the globin mrna depletion methods resulted in decreased α- and β-globin mrna transcript measurements relative to method  <dig>  targets. method  <dig>  generated targets that showed the greatest reduction in globin mrnas . interestingly, methods  <dig>  and  <dig>  also resulted in reduced hybridization signal with γ globin mrna probe sets on the affymetrix arrays, but method  <dig>  showed no reduction in these signals relative to the standard method  <dig>  results.

quantitative rt-pcr validation
expression levels of a panel of  <dig> genes from the nf-κb pathway plus  <dig> housekeeping genes were measured by quantitative rt-pcr using total rna from two of the individuals profiled in the microarray component of this study. the nf-κb pathway was chosen because of biological interest to study authors and high overlap of panel genes with genes represented on the human focus array. rna prepared from both frozen and unfrozen paxgene tubes was analyzed for each donor. all of the genes measured in the rt-pcr assay were scored as present in the microarray profiles produced with targets from one or more of the methods examined in this study.

comparison of the rt-pcr data with array profiles for  <dig> matched genes demonstrated that method  <dig>  produced expression data that most closely correlates with the rt-pcr results, with an average pearson correlation of  <dig>  . surprisingly, despite the presence of abundant levels of globin transcripts, the targets produced by the one-cycle cdna synthesis protocol with affymetrix ivt , show the next highest correlation with the rt-pcr results. in their comparison of differential gene expression results, barker et al  <cit>  reported that cdna targets prepared with the ovation v <dig> method more closely tracked with quantitative rt-pcr measurements than crna targets prepared with the traditional one-cycle cdna/ivt method . it is difficult to interpret the significance of this observation in the context of our results as rna source, study design, pcr primer selection rationale, and analysis methodology differ significantly between the two studies. however, taken together, the results may indicate that absolute measurements of gene expression and relative measurements of differential gene expression may not be co-ordinately affected by a particular target preparation method.

correlation of rt-pcr and microarray expression measurements for  <dig> genes of the nf-κb pathway is shown: Δc values for rt-pcr and scaled, mas  <dig>  gene level signals for microarray data. the pearson product moment correlation coefficient is reported for each target-labeling method examined in this study. rna samples from donors c and d were prepared from either fresh or frozen paxgene tubes.

cross-method comparison of expression profiles
differences among transcriptome profiles generated with each method were examined to assess concordance among methods. transcriptome patterns were identified for each labeling method by filtering for probe sets with a minimum detection p-value of  <dig>  in at least  <dig> of the  <dig> within-method array assays using gene level expression data generated with mas  <dig> . overlap among these transcript lists for method  <dig> , method  <dig>  and method  <dig>  is illustrated in the venn diagram in figure  <dig>  by far, the majority of transcripts detected with any one method were also detected by each of the other globin-signal reduction methods . however, over  <dig> probe sets were only detected with two of the methods and both methods  <dig>  and  <dig>  uniquely detected a few hundred additional transcripts. most transcripts detected with method  <dig>  were included in the set of transcripts detected with method  <dig>  ; only  <dig> probe sets met the detection filtering criteria exclusively in method  <dig>  samples, all of which were associated with low probe set signal intensities. it is likely that at least some of the low signal probe sets scored as present with a single target preparation method represent false positives or low abundance transcripts at the borderline for detection. only method  <dig>  had a significant portion of uniquely detected transcripts with probe set signal intensities above the lowest quartile of detected transcript intensities.

overall, the vast majority of gene transcripts detected with each method were also detected by the other three methods. the highest expression concordance was observed between methods  <dig>  and  <dig> . the globin pnas_affymetrix method and the no depletion_nugen method each detect a significant number of gene transcripts  not detected by any of the other methods tested in this study. four of the transcripts detected with only one labeling method  correspond to genes whose transcription was confirmed in the quantitative rt-pcr analysis. this observation suggests that both the no depletion_nugen and the globin pnas_affymetrix method produce microarray data that accurately measures gene expression not detected by the other methods.

impact of freezing whole blood in paxgene tubes
microarry performance of rna extracted from blood collected in paxgene tubes immediately following a  <dig> hr room temperature incubation or after a  <dig> hr incubation and freezing at -80°c was compared. correlation between array data from fresh and frozen paxgene preparations from each donor was high across all samples prepared with methods  <dig> ,  <dig>  or  <dig> , with the exception of donor a using method  <dig>  where one of the microarray assays underperformed . method  <dig>  resulted in fresh and frozen sample correlations that were somewhat reduced compared to the other target labeling methods. comparison of the quantitative pcr results of fresh and frozen blood preparations from donors c and d demonstrated a similar high level of correlation .

pearson correlation coefficients for each within-method comparison are reported. microarray data was analyzed and scaled with mas  <dig> .

our results indicate that freezing blood collected in paxgene tubes prior to rna extraction has little impact on the rna profiles measured in the microarray assay. this observation is consistent with the report of ovstebo et al <cit>  in which the expression profile of  <dig> mrnas assessed with rt-pcr analysis was not altered by freezing paxgene tubes prior to rna extraction.

microarray assay reproducibility
given the overall similarity in fresh and frozen sample pairs as measured in both the microarray and rt-pcr analyses, we elected to use the fresh/frozen pairs for each donor to examine array assay reproducibility among the different assay methods. method  <dig>  showed the highest reproducibility in paired donor samples . reproducibility was also high with methods  <dig>  and  <dig>  , but slightly reduced with method  <dig>  .

CONCLUSIONS
removing globin transcripts from crna hybridization targets prepared from whole blood samples results in increased sensitivity in microarray expression profiles. sensitivity is also increased when cdna hybridization targets prepared from undepleted rna are used instead of crna targets. all of the methods tested in this study generate highly reproducible data, except when total rna is pre-treated to remove globin transcripts . comparison of microarray gene level signals with real-time pcr data suggests that the globin pnas_affymetrix method produces the most accurate microarray results, although, all methods produce data that correlate well with the rt-pcr measurements. performance results for each method are summarized in table  <dig> 

before selecting a protocol for use in an expression profiling study of whole blood, however, several factors must be considered.

method  <dig>  affymetrix one-cycle target labeling protocol with no globin rna depletion produces reliable data but sensitivity is low
advantages
this method required relatively low rna amounts and did not require any additional processing steps. overall, correlation to real-time pcr data was second only to the globin pnas_affymetrix method .

considerations
it has been well reported that performing microarray profiling of rna extracted from whole blood using this method without modification results in less sensitive data with high levels of sample-to-sample variability  <cit> . in the present study the use of this method with whole blood samples resulted in the lowest transcript detection of all the methods tested.

method  <dig>  affymetrix one-cycle target labeling protocol with globin pnas generates sensitive and reproducible 
