BACKGROUND
host genetics shapes the composition of the gut microbiome . the mechanisms by which this occurs are not completely understood, but could include immune regulation, host digestive enzyme production, and cell surface antigen presentation. one such antigen that may play a role is encoded by abo and is classically known as the major red blood cell histocompatibility molecule for blood transfusions. abo and other blood group antigens are not only found on the surface of red blood cells, but are also secreted from mucosal tissues in individuals with an intact fut <dig> gene . in secretors, blood group antigens expressed in the gut interact with certain members of the microbiota. for example, h. pylori tethers itself to the mucosal lining using blood group antigens  <cit>  and bacteria from stool express enzymes that degrade abo to provide an energy source . therefore, host genetic variation in both abo and fut <dig> may have broad effects on microbiome composition.

additionally, abo and fut <dig> variants are risk factors for a number of different diseases, including crohn’s disease  <cit> , aids  <cit> , type  <dig> diabetes  <cit> , and infectious diseases . the etiology underlying many of these associations is unknown, but evidence points towards a role of the gut microbiome. for example, the intestinal microbiome was found to vary by both crohn’s disease status and fut <dig> genotype  <cit> . furthermore, metagenomes from individuals discordant for fut <dig> genotype revealed differences in gene content related to energy metabolism  <cit> . disease status for both aids  and type  <dig> diabetes  are associated with gut microbial composition differences between cases and controls. finally, microbiome composition affects susceptibility and disease progression for infectious diseases, including norovirus infection  <cit> , influenza  <cit> , and cholera  <cit>  – all diseases for which abo or secretor status are risk factors. therefore, an open question is whether host genetic variation in abo and fut <dig> mediates disease risk through the gut microbiome and which taxa are key players in this process.

results from two recent studies lend support to this hypothesis. microbiome composition differed according to secretor status in a cohort of  <dig> individuals from finland  <cit> . the microbiomes of non-secretors were more diverse overall; however, non-secretors contained significantly more species of bifidobacteria than secretors. in a follow up study examining abo status only in secretors, b and ab individuals clustered separately from a and o individuals in ordination analysis of total microbiome composition  <cit> . while these studies provide proof of principle that genetic variation in abo and fut <dig> can be associated with microbiome composition, the methods employed in these studies have limited resolution. it is unclear which bacteria drive the observed patterns and whether those are the same taxa that are associated with risk for diseases linked to abo or fut <dig> variation.

here, we sought to determine if abo antigen and secretor phenotypes were associated with gut microbiome composition in a panel of  <dig> individuals as part of the united kingdom adult twin health registry  cohort, where comprehensive microbiome, disease, and genotype data are available  <cit> . we examined broad community composition using ordination techniques and diversity measurements, presence/absence or relative abundance of individual bacterial taxa using linear mixed models, and we applied classification techniques to jointly model taxa in relation to abo or secretor status. contrary to previous findings, we do not observe robust associations of the gut microbiome to abo or secretor status.

RESULTS
community composition not significantly associated to abo or secretor status
we first sought to determine whether there were broad compositional differences in the microbiome associated either with abo status, secretor status, or abo status in secreting individuals only . in a recent study, individuals with b alleles clustered separately from a and o individuals in redundancy analysis of microbiome composition, as determined by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis   <cit> . we applied several ordination approaches, but were unable to recapitulate those findings. first, we ran principal coordinate analysis using three beta-diversity metrics: unweighted unifrac distance , weighted unifrac distance, and bray-curtis dissimilarity . none of the top  <dig> principal coordinates  from any diversity metric tested were significantly associated with either abo status or secretor status .table  <dig> abo and secretor phenotypes in the twinsuk dataset


fig.  <dig> neither abo or secretor status associated with broad compositional differences of the gut microbiota in the twinsuk. none of the top  <dig> principal coordinates  from principal coordinate analysis of unweighted unifrac distance are significantly associated with either abo or secretor status. the first two pcs are shown, colored by abo status  and secretor status . c discriminant analysis of pca  is largely unsuccessful at predicting abo or secretor status from microbiome data. the mean accuracy from 5-fold cross validation is plotted for abo status, secretor status, and abo status only in secreting individuals . significance was determined by comparing the accuracy of each test to the accuracies of permuted data, which took into account twin relationships . significance codes: p ≤  <dig>  = *, not significant = ns




additionally, we applied principal components analysis  to both i) covariate-corrected, transformed relative abundance data for  <dig> operational taxonomic units  present in at least 50% of individuals and ii) presence/absence data for all otus. again, none of the top  <dig> principal components for each analysis were significantly associated with either abo status or secretor status .

finally, we applied discriminant analysis of principal components  to microbiome data  <cit> . this method was originally designed for analyzing structure in large genotype datasets, where pca reduces data dimensionality and then discriminant analysis identifies the components that have high inter-group variability. here, we use it to determine if microbiome composition can reliably distinguish individuals based on of their secretor or abo status . we ran dapc using a 5-fold cross validation scheme to determine the accuracy of group classification. to assess significance,  <dig> permutations of abo or secretor status across individuals were run to generate a distribution of accuracies expected by chance, while controlling for twin relationships in the data . dapc was not successful at predicting either secretor status  or abo status in secretors . prediction for abo status in all individuals was marginally significant when compared to permuted data ; however, accuracy was low . through pcoa, pca, and dapc we fail to find evidence that there are broad compositional differences between individuals based on abo status, secretor status, or abo status in only secreting individuals.

microbiome diversity not associated with abo or secretor status
while abo or secretor status may not determine overall microbiome composition consistently across individuals, they may be associated with differences in microbial diversity. a previous study reported evidence of this, where non-secreting individuals had higher species richness than secreting individuals  <cit> . in the twinsuk dataset, linear mixed models were employed to model alpha diversity as a function of abo status, secretor status, or abo status in secreting individuals only  considering five different diversity metrics: faith’s phylogenic diversity, number of observed otus, the chao <dig> richness estimator, the gini index, and the shannon diversity index. no alpha diversity metric significantly differed by abo status, secretor status, or by abo status only in secretor, even before applying a correction for multiple testing .fig.  <dig> microbiome diversity does not significantly differ by abo or secretor status. within sample diversity  is not significantly different  across the abo groups in all individuals , secretors versus non-secretors , or across abo groups in only secreting individuals . d microbiomes are more similar for siblings versus pairs of unrelated individuals, as measured by unweighted unifrac distance. additionally, pairs of monozygotic twins have significantly more similar microbiomes than dizygotic twins. however, microbiomes of pairs of individuals concordant for either abo or secretor status are not more similar than for pairs of individuals who are discordant. this holds true when all individuals in the dataset are considered  or when only one individual from each twin pair is examined . the total number of pairs of individual within each boxplot is indicated with “n = “. significance codes: p ≤  <dig>  = *, p ≤  <dig>  = **, p ≤  <dig>  = ***, p ≤  <dig>  = ****, not significant = ns




when the effect of secretor status on diversity is examined within each abo class individually, non-secreting ab individuals generally have higher diversity and evenness than secreting individuals, but non-secreting b individuals have lower diversity and evenness than secretors . all of the significant within class comparisons involve expression of at least one b allele; however, the direction of effect differs between secretors and non-secretors across comparisons. it is also important to note that the ab and b classes represent the two smallest abo blood groups in the dataset, and therefore may be more susceptible to noise . therefore, while there may be differences in diversity of the gut microbiome by secretor status in individuals that express b alleles, we do not find evidence to suggest that diversity differs consistently either due to secretor status or by an individual’s abo antigen expression.

if abo or secretor status influences the composition of the microbiome, we might expect that individuals concordant for either status would have more similar microbiomes than discordant individuals. to determine if this was the case, we compared average pairwise beta-diversity stratified by concordance for abo or secretor status using three different diversity metrics. we considered two beta-diversity metrics that incorporate bacterial phylogenic information  and one that does not . a previous study using twins from the same cohort demonstrated that pairs of twins have more similar microbiomes than pairs of unrelated individuals on average  <cit> . additionally, monozygotic twins have more similar microbiomes than dizygotic twins, pointing to a role for host genetics in determining gut microbiome composition. first, we recapitulate these results in this expanded dataset, which includes  <dig> pairs of twins. pairs of twins have significantly lower beta-diversity than pairs of unrelated individuals for all beta-diversity metrics considered . additionally, pairs of monozygotic  twins have significantly lower beta-diversity than pairs of dizygotic  twins .

next, we stratified beta-diversity by concordance for either abo or secretor status. no significant differences exist for any metric examined . first, we categorized all pairs of individuals as either concordant or discordant for abo or secretor status, including all twin pairs. however, twins on average have more similar microbiomes due to shared environment and genetics, and are more likely to have concordant abo or fut <dig> genotypes. to ensure that including twin pairs did not introduce bias, one twin from each twin pair was eliminated and the analysis was repeated. again, no significant differences in beta-diversity were evident between individuals either concordant or discordant for abo or secretor status. therefore, not only do we fail to find evidence that overall microbiome diversity differs by abo or secretor status, but we also do not find evidence that individuals who share the same genotypes at these loci have more similar microbiomes than individuals who do not.

relative abundance or presence/absence of individual bacterial taxa not associated with abo or secretor status
the above analyses aimed to identify fairly broad compositional changes in the microbiome. while these are not apparent in our dataset, relative abundances of individual bacterial taxa may differ according to abo or secretor status. bifidobacteria species in particular have been observed to differ in individuals according to their secretor status  <cit>  and also in breast-fed infants according to their mother’s secretor status  <cit> . we set out to test whether we could identify whether bifidobacteria or other bacterial taxa differ in relative abundance or presence/absence according to abo or secretor status.

to identify common taxa that are differentially abundant according to abo or secretor status, we implemented linear mixed models that include terms to account for the relatedness of twin pairs . we considered nine different models in total. we started with models that included terms for either abo status or secretor status. additionally, we considered models where individuals possessing b alleles were contrasted to other abo groups, as previous studies observed broad microbial composition differences between b individuals and others  <cit> . finally, we also tested for association using models that only consider abo status in secretors or that include an interaction term between abo and secretor status.

three otus were differentially abundant across abo groups, according to two of the nine models tested at a moderate q-value threshold . otu  <dig>  which is from the family ruminococcaceae, has higher relative abundance in a and b secreting individuals than ab or o secretors . this same otu is also differentially abundant in the model considering an interaction effect between abo and secretor status . two additional otus were differentially abundant according to model  <dig>  including another otu from the family ruminococcaceae  and one from the family lachnospiraceae . in the models above, q-values were calculated across all taxa tested within each model separately. if all comparisons are considered, no q-value surpasses a lenient q ≤  <dig>  threshold. therefore, there is not strong evidence to support the hypothesis that relative abundances of common bacterial taxa are associated with either abo or secretor status.fig.  <dig> the relative abundances of several firmicutes otus differ in secreting individuals. a qq-plot displaying the expected –log <dig> compared to the –log <dig> for all taxa tested in linear mixed models  <dig>  and  <dig> . model  <dig> identified taxa differentially abundant across the four abo classes in secreting individuals only while model  <dig> incorporated interaction terms between abo groups and secretor status. all differentially abundant taxa passing a significance threshold of q ≤  <dig>  are indicated with larger point sizes and the distributions of covariate-corrected, transformed relative abundances of those taxa are displayed in 




additionally, we modified this analysis in order to control for ancestry by including the top five principal components  computed using genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism  data as covariates in each of the nine models . results were largely robust with respect to the inclusion of pcs, with high correlation of p-values between analyses for each of the nine models . this was to be expected, as self-reported ancestry for a subset of the cohort revealed a largely homogenous population . therefore, differences in ancestry within the population are not masking more subtle genetic effects.

in addition to testing relative abundance differences across abo or secretor groups, we also tested whether certain otus were more commonly observed in some abo or secretor groups than others by examining presence/absence across individuals. to do so, chi-squared tests of independence were applied to any otu that was present in at least 10% of individuals , considering abo status, secretor status, or abo status in only secreting individuals. presence/absence was not significantly different across abo status groups for any of the  <dig> otus tested at a lenient q-value threshold . the presence and absence of two otus varied significantly according to secretor status , including otu  <dig> from order clostridiales and otu  <dig> from genus bifidobacterium, which were both more common in non-secretors than secretors. additionally, presence of otus  <dig>  and  <dig>  varied by abo status in secreting individuals. however, relative abundances of these four otus are very low in the dataset , calling into question whether these are true biological results or if they are spurious results due to low sampling of rare species during sequencing.

in previous studies, bifidobacterium species varied according to secretor status. abundance varied in stool not only in accordance with an individual’s secretor status  <cit> , but also in breastfed infants, when stratified by their mother’s secretor status  <cit> . we did not observe significant associations of any otus belonging to the genus bifidobacterium or the collapsed genus bifidobacterium ; however, recent studies suggest a potential confounder may exist. bifidobacterium relative abundance has been associated with variants near the lactase gene   <cit> , which encodes for an enzyme that breaks down lactose to galactose and glucose in the small intestine. derived mutations in enhancer regions near the lactase gene confer a lactase persistence phenotype, where individuals are able to degrade lactose into adulthood  <cit> . the mechanism underlying the association between host variation near lct and bifidobacterium relative abundance is not understood, however, this association is evident in the twinsuk cohort  <cit> . therefore, it may be important to account for this confounder in analysis in order to identify differences in bifidobacterial content across abo or secretor status groups. unlike many other studies involving microbiome cohorts, the individuals in this study have genome-wide variant data available and we can take this potential confounder into account.

to take variation near lct into account, the relative abundances of bifidobacterial taxa were modeled including a fixed effect term for rs <dig>  a snp near lct that was associated with bifidobacterial relative abundance in a larger cohort of the uk twins  <cit> . linear mixed models were used to examine whether bifidobacterial relative abundance varied by abo status, secretor status, or abo status in secretors while taking into account host genetic variation at this locus. significant associations of bacterial relative abundance with abo or secretor status were not detected for any of the common taxa examined, which included  <dig> otus belonging to genus bifidobacterium and the collapsed taxonomic relative abundances for genus bifidobacterium, family bifidobacteriaceae, and order bifidobacteriales . therefore, we find no evidence that bifidobacterial relative abundance differs according to abo or secretor status in our dataset, even after taking into account the potential confounding effect of host genetic variation in lct.

joint modeling approaches fail to identify bacteria predictive of abo or secretor status
large-scale microbiome composition, diversity, and relative abundance differences between abo or secretor classes are not apparent in our dataset. however, there may be subtle differences across multiple bacterial taxa that are predictive of abo or secretor status. these differences may be dwarfed by broader compositional patterns in pcoa and their effect sizes may be too small to detect via linear models with our sample size. however, machine-learning techniques may be able to identify these predictive taxa in combination. therefore, we ran two different machine-learning techniques to identify bacterial taxa predictive of abo or secretor status.

first, we applied random forests to the microbiome data. the random forest approach identifies collections of variables  that accurately predict classes of a dependent variable . the random forests algorithm was benchmarked as achieving the best performance of several classifiers when applied to microbiome data  <cit> , and it has been used successfully to identify gut taxa predictive age  <cit> , individuals within a family  <cit> , and future crohn’s disease severity  <cit> . here, we applied random forests to all the relative abundances of otus present in at least 50% of individuals using two strategies. first, trees were built using data from all individuals. for all models, the out-of-bag  error rates were high , and individuals classified consistently to the most common classes in the dataset . uneven group sizes can lead to random forests favoring the majority classes  <cit> , and this is potentially an issue in our dataset, where there are many more a and o individuals than ab or b  and many more secretors than non-secretors .

to combat this issue we employed a second strategy. group sizes were down-sampled during random forests to the smallest group size, so that each class was equally represented during model building. although classification was less skewed towards the common groups using this procedure, the error rates remained high . therefore, the random forests method was unable to identify sets of bacterial taxa that in combination could predict abo or secretor status in our dataset.

our random forests models only included the relative abundances of otus present in at least half of the individuals in our dataset. however, methodology has recently been developed for multi-group classification of sparse data, of which gut microbiome data is a prime example. multi-group sparse discriminant analysis  estimates canonical vectors directly from sparse data in the case where there are many more variables than subjects  <cit> . here we use it to identify taxa in the gut microbiome predictive of abo status, secretor status, or abo status in secreting individuals only. we applied the algorithm to two different bacterial datasets for each abo/secretor status comparison. first, we input all common bacterial otus and collapsed taxa to build the model. in addition, we built models that included all otus that were present in at least 10% of individuals in the study. in all cases, the accuracy of classification was poor, similar to the accuracies observed for the random forests method . mgsda identified features predictive of abo status for certain models . for example, the same three otus showing differential relative abundance according to abo and secretor phenotypes through linear mixed model  <dig> were predictive of abo status in secreting individuals through mgsda . that being said, the low overall classification accuracy of these models indicates that these bacteria are not strongly predictive of abo or secretor status, either individually or when considered in combination.

results recapitulated in “healthy” individuals
abo antigen and secretor status are known risk factors for a number of diseases, many of which have also been associated with microbiome composition in the gut. therefore, the inclusion of both healthy and potentially diseased individuals may pose a problem, as purely genetic associations between the microbiome and abo or secretor status may be masked by larger microbiome shifts due to disease. full medical histories are unavailable for our subjects; therefore we used body mass index  as a proxy for health, as obesity has comorbidities with a number of other diseases. we repeated the following analyses using a “healthy” subset of our cohort ), and found our results from the full dataset were recapitulated: principal coordinates analysis, discriminant analysis of pca, alpha diversity characterizations, beta-diversity characterizations, and linear mixed models of common taxa .

discussion
in this study, we do not find evidence that either abo antigen or secretor phenotypes are associated with overall fecal microbial community composition, diversity, or the relative abundances of individual bacterial taxa in a large panel of  <dig> individuals from the uk. we aimed to be exhaustive in our methodology, ensuring that our results were not driven by choice of one particular statistical approach or metric. to that end, we examined multiple different ordination methods, diversity metrics, tests of differential relative abundance, and machine learning algorithms. additionally, one strength of the twinsuk cohort is the availability of genome-wide genotype data, which allowed us to adjust for genetic confounders that might obscure our ability to detect associations. even when lenient multiple testing thresholds are applied, we are unable to replicate previous findings linking host genetic variation in abo and fut <dig> to gut microbial composition  <cit> .

while associations between abo and fut <dig> with the microbiome were not apparent in our dataset, there are a number of caveats that are important to consider. first, although our sample size is more than  <dig> times larger than previous studies  <cit> , we cannot exclude minor effects and may have insufficient power to detect taxa that show only slight differential relative abundances between groups. additionally, when examining the relative abundances of individual bacteria, we eliminated any taxa present in fewer than 10% of individuals in our cohort. it is possible that very rare taxa may be able to distinguish abo or secretor status, particularly if they are more abundant in classes for which we had smaller sample size . whether taxa with small relative abundance differences between classes or that are very rare have broader biological implications remains an open question.

additionally, environmental context may prove to be important in determining whether an individual’s abo or secretor status influences microbiome composition. the individuals included in our study consist of mostly adult, female twins living in uk . the gut microbiome changes with age  <cit> , and the average age of our dataset is older than the previous studies   <cit> . differences in physiology, diet, or activity level between age groups may lead to microbiome composition differences that swamp out signals of association with abo or fut <dig> 

another environmental variable that may be important to consider is diet. inter-individual differences in diet profoundly influence gut microbiome composition  <cit> . individuals in our study provided samples without any dietary restriction or guidelines, and diet likely varied widely across the cohort. notably, a strong diet by genotype interaction has been observed in humanized mouse models examining the effect of secretor status on gut microbial composition  <cit> . in this model, both microbial evenness and the relative abundances of several taxa differed between secreting and non-secreting mice on a standard chow diet. however, those differences were eliminated when mice were switched to a diet low in complex polysaccharides but high in simple glucose. therefore, dietary variation in our study potentially masks the effect secretor status may play in determining gut microbiome composition.

finally, the effects of abo or secretor status may be more prominent in a disease context, where host physiology and overall microbiome composition is altered. for example, a genotype by disease interaction was observed for the association of secretor status and crohn’s disease to gut microbial composition in a panel of both healthy and diseased individuals  <cit> . in general, disease status appeared to play a larger role in determining gut microbial composition than fut <dig> genotype, however, modeling both disease and secretor status together explained a larger proportion of inter-individual variation than either alone. this suggests that secretor status plays a role in determining microbiome in certain contexts. our results were robust when considering only individuals within a healthy bmi range  and when factoring in ancestry. however, our dataset included individuals of a wide range of ages, eating uncontrolled diets, and who may not all be healthy – all of which may mask any association of abo and secretor status to gut microbial composition.

CONCLUSIONS
caveats aside, it is clear from our analysis of this large cohort that abo and secretor status do not appear to be major drivers of microbiome composition differences across individuals. bacterial relative abundance may differ between these groups to a small degree or may become more apparent when environmental factors such as age and diet are controlled. in addition, microbiome perturbation in disease may reveal an effect of abo or secretor status. regardless, these results do not support previous observations of the role of abo or secretor status in determining microbiome composition in the gut outside of disease contexts. as the field moves forward identifying more diseases, anthropomorphic traits, and genotypes as being associated with microbiome composition, it will be important to ensure previous observations are robust by validating in large, well-powered cohorts. by doing so, the microbiome field can avoid some of the pitfalls observed from early candidate gene studies, where a myriad of associations were published that were never replicated.

