BACKGROUND
this brief report is about the research discipline of developmental biology, rather than being about the development of any specific organism. it applies a scientific method of analysis to resolve two incompatible but widely held assumptions about the structure and development of the field, specifically the way that attention is focussed on different organisms. the results shed new light on how developmental biologists collectively organize their research.

both assumptions concern developmental biologists' choice of experimental subject, a key aspect of the structure of any science. it is generally acknowledged that most developmental biology research is performed on a small number of organisms that are genetically tractable, easily manipulated, or relevant to human biomedicine. the organisms are often referred to as 'model organisms', with the term 'model' being used to signify universality of developmental mechanisms within a broad taxonomic group  <cit> , even though this has been argued to be a misuse of the word 'model'  <cit> . examples include the mouse mus musculis, the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster and the worm caenorhabditis elegans. the extent to which it is sensible to concentrate so much research effort on a limited number of species continues to be a matter for debate  <cit> , but there is a strong consensus that these 'model' organisms are easily identifiable as such and that a clear division exists between the attention paid to them and to any other species  <cit> . one recent commentary in science, for example, likened the hegemony of "this handful of organisms to the security council of the united nations because, among the world's multitude of organisms, they garner most of the attention of researchers and dictate the distribution of most of the biomedical research funds that are not targeted to specific diseases"  <cit> .

developmental biologists choose their organisms according to a number of criteria that include rapid development, uniformity of between individuals, ease of surgical manipulation, ease of genetic manipulation, suitability for teaching and, for clinically-orientated researchers, potential relevance to human congenital disease <cit> . the choice of organisms has also been historically contingent on such things as forceful personalities, imperial exploration, the chance appearance of a mutation, and good culture methods having been established for purposes irrelevant to developmental biology   <cit> . while popular models certainly have advantages in terms of ease of husbandry or breeding, many other possible species and genera might have been used instead. the reason generally given for some organisms having become established as 'models' is that the investment already made in understanding them made them more attractive as experimental subjects than related creatures about which nothing was known; in genetics particularly, there is also the effect that probability of particular mutations being discovered scales with the total number of animals that are being bred worldwide  <cit> . the years of investment in, for example, drosophila genetics, caenorhabditis lineage studies and mouse reproductive technology has made these animals much easier to use for the next step of research than their close relatives would be, and each new step of research has made them yet more attractive. the presence of experienced phd supervisors who already specialize in one organism may also steer the careers of their students in that direction. the popularity of the organisms might therefore have grown according to the principle of "the rich get richer" .

these two assumptions –  that there is a sharp distinction between the attention paid to 'model organisms' and to others, and  that creatures become 'model organisms' because attention already paid to them makes them more attractive for future attention – are, however, unlikely to be simultaneously true. many physical, technological and socio-economic systems feature the matthew prinicple, new entities being most likely to attach to the most dominant existing entities in a process usually called 'preferential attachment'. already highly-linked websites attract more new links than less-linked websites do, airports with many onward connections are most attractive to airlines choosing new routes, and the richest people are able to become richer by investing their existing wealth  <cit> . all of these cases are relatively well-understood and modelled. in none, though, does the process of preferential attachment produce a sharp distinction between entities at the top of the distribution  and the rest. instead, the distribution of connections, wealth etc. follows a continuous power law that is scale-free, its shape being identical across the distribution  <cit> .

to resolve this apparent contradiction, i have examined the literature of developmental biology to discover how attention is really divided between different species. the data show no evidence of a distinction between 'model' and other organisms but instead approximate to a continuous power law. this argues against there being any empirically-defensible division between 'model organisms' and others. detailed examination of the interest in different organisms at different times shows, however, that the power law does not arise through a simple process of preferential attachment in which interest in any organism at one time can be predicted accurately from interest in it at a past time.

RESULTS
the  <dig> developmental papers published in the five years combined  focused on a total of  <dig> genera that ranged from acetabularia to zea. two genera, mus and drosophila, accounted for two fifths of papers published, and these two plus gallus, xenopus, brachydanio, rattus and caenorhabditis together accounted for more than two thirds of all papers. this statistic probably accounts for the widespread, subjective perception that there is a special group of model organisms. there was, on the other hand, a large number of genera such as lumbriculus, each of which individually received little attention. the rarer species usually appeared in their own right and not just as comparison organisms in papers concentrating on another organism. the great majority of papers focused on one organism only; in  <dig>  for example, only  <dig> of  <dig> papers studied more than one organism, and this ratio is typical of all years studied.

a linear plot of the number of papers focusing on an organism, versus the rank of that organism, illustrates the extent to which attention is and has been focused on comparatively few genera . a zipf plot  of the same data, however, shows that the trend of the data approximates to a scale-free smooth power law, incidence = 2031·rank- <dig>   with no obvious discontinuities. a linear regression analysis of log vs log yields a correlation coefficient to this power law trend of r =  <dig> . analysis of the frequency distibution of the data using the lotka program  <cit> , which assesses goodness of fit of data to a power law by a kolmogorov-smirnov test designed for the purpose, yielded a maximum deviation of  <dig> ; the critical value for p =  <dig>  is  <dig> , so the fit of the data to a power law can be accepted at p <  <dig> .

plots of the individual years  show a broadly similar pattern for each year, the different displacements of the different years' points from the origin reflecting the different total numbers of papers . the trends of data for individual years  are not quite as smooth as those of the grand total, as might be expected with smaller data sets. the small irregularities in these annual curves do not occur in the same places in each year, however, which argues against any steady pattern of deviation from the power law and explains why the grand total  is smoother. in any case, the fit of the data of each individual year to its own power law is confirmed at p <  <dig>  by the kolmogarov-smirnov test in the lotka program  <cit> . inclusion of the evo-devo data for  <dig> makes no significant difference to the  <dig> power-law curve.

if the widely-held assumption about the existence of 'model organisms' were true, one would not expect a smooth, scale-free distribution. there might be, for example, a relatvely flat line, high on the y axis, for the few 'model organisms' and then a steep drop to a relatively flat line low on the y axis for the rest. in fact, there is no discontinuity but instead a remarkably good approximation to a smooth power law . there is therefore no empirical justification for dividing the organisms studied by developmental biologists into 'model organisms' and others without invoking some arbitrary and subjective cut-off, such as 'those that account for more than 2/ <dig> of the literature'. that is the first main conclusion of this paper.

it is interesting to note that such a distribution of attention to different organisms is not restricted to developmental biology. bacteriology is another subject in which studies are made of a number of different organisms. fig  <dig> shows a zipf plot of the attention given to different microorganisms by bacteriologists publishing in the journal of bacteriology in  <dig>  again, the data approximate to a power law .

power law distributions often arise by mechanisms of preferential attachment, as seems to be the case in accumulation of fiscal wealth or the accumulation of connections in a computing or transport network  <cit> . the discovery of a power law in the distribution of researchers' attention to different organisms seems, at first sight, to support a mechanism of preferential attachment in which the more research attention an organism has attracted, the more attractive it becomes to future researchers  <cit> . this idea can be tested by study of the changing attention being paid to individual organisms through time; in a mechanism of preferential attachment, attention being paid one year should be predictable from the attention paid in a previous year. to avoid the problem of trying to analyse historical trends of organisms that appeared in papers only once or twice in the five years under study , the changing fortunes of only the 'top ten' organisms  were plotted. the changing year-by-year values and cumulative totals are shown in fig  <dig>  it is clear that some organisms gain attention more quickly than others, and the attention given to others even declines resulting in lines crossing each other. in particular, drosophila and brachydanio show rapid period of expansion that cross the lines of previously-established organisms, possible because of the 'opening up' effect of large-scale gene screens performed on these organisms by one or two specialist labs. in a simple mechanism of preferential attachment, in which the probability of a new paper focusing on a particular organism is proportional to the number of papers that have already focused on that organism, lines should not cross. the power law distribution of attention to different organisms cannot therefore be explained by simple mechanism of preferential attachment. that is the second main conclusion of this paper.

it may not, on reflection, be that surprising that the attention focused on different organisms cannot be explained entirely by a simple process of preferential attachment. in  <dig>  well before the alleged era of 'model organisms'  <cit> , august krogh suggested that, for most biological problems, there will be an organism that is ideal for study of that problem  <cit> . this has become known as the "krogh principle"  <cit> . if the krogh principle still holds true, the statistics of organism choice will follow the statistics of problem choice. research interest in a scientific problem might grow by preferential attachment, but this can last only until the problem has been solved; at that point, attachments to the problem cease and researchers will publish papers about different problems. some will choose these problems with no organism bias, while others will feel attached by investment in one organism  to choose another problem for which the same organism is suitable. overall, there are therefore likely to be several processes of attachment and detachment operating at the same time, each with its own focus and range of time-scales, which can account for interest in some organisms rising while that in others falls.

that smooth power-law distributions can be maintained under circumstances that involve multiple complex processes is known for other systems. in economics, for example, the distribution of wealth among individuals was shown to approximate to a power law in  <dig>  <cit>  and in  <dig>  <cit>  despite the fact that the wealth-holding individuals will have been completely replaced over that 103-year period and the mechanisms regulating the fortunes even of families will have been very complex through the wars, booms and slumps of the 20th century.

the main finding of this report – that research interest in organisms approximates to a smooth power law and there is no empirical evidence for the existence of a set of 'model organisms' – may not remain true. the sponsors of large-scale genomics and database projects initially targeted whole-genome sequencing to a limited number of organisms  and support organizations echoed this concentration of resources. the mesh term policy of the national library of medicine  is an example, in which some types of record are given for proteins only if they come from one of  <dig> listed organisms  <cit> . if policy were to continue to concentrate genomic and bioinformatics resources on just these organisms, then eventually even the krogh principle would repeatedly direct researchers to these because these resources will give an informatic advantage to them, even if they are awkward in other ways. if, however, the rate at which genomes can be sequenced continues to increase at its current rate  it may be feasible for the genomes of very large numbers of organisms to be sequenced quickly and easily. indeed, this is already happening for prokaryotes, for which over  <dig> genomic sequences are now available. in that case, the smooth power-law will probably remain, and a balanced study of biology will not be eclipsed by over-concentration on just a few creatures.

CONCLUSIONS
research interest in organisms approximates to a smooth power law and there is no empirical evidence for the existence of a set of 'model organisms'.

