BACKGROUND
non-invasive detection of intracellular o <dig> is of particular importance since it is one of the key metabolites of obligate and facultative aerobic organisms. cellular o <dig> is a prominent indicator for oxygen-dependent metabolic activities, such as aerobic respiration or oxygen dependent synthesis and degradation of cellular components  <cit> . in addition, various biological, pathological and biotechnological processes are controlled by o <dig> limitation, including biofilm formation and host-pathogen interactions  <cit> , hypoxia induced inflammatory processes  <cit> , tumor pathophysiology  <cit>  as well as microbial fermentation processes used for bioremediation and the production of food, feed and biofuels  <cit> .

to date, different minimally invasive fluorescence and phosphorescence based o2-sensitive probes have been developed for imaging molecular oxygen in cells and tissues. among them, platinum-porphyrin dyes are widely used for analyzing hypoxia-induced responses of mammalian cells  <cit> . alternatively, the green fluorescent protein  and its variants can be applied as genetically encoded intracellular probes that are specifically expressed and can be selectively targeted within defined cells and tissues. in this context, at least two 'passive' gfp-based oxygen sensors have been developed for estimating intracellular oxygen levels in e. coli. here, gfp was applied as a reporter protein expressed under control of oxygen-responsive e. coli promoters  <cit> . additionally, oxygen sensitive photoactivation of gfp-mediated red fluorescence was applied for in vivo imaging of oxygen in mammalian cells and organs  <cit> .

remarkably, molecular oxygen can currently not be analyzed in vivo by genetically encoded fret-based biosensors, although these biosensors constitute one of the most widespread classes of fluorescent molecular probes used for the non-invasive quantitative analysis of intracellular compounds including ca2+, zn2+, cl-, ph, h2o <dig>  atp, maltose, sucrose, ribose and glucose  <cit> . with respect to oxygen sensing, however, gfp-like proteins, which are commonly used as donor and acceptor domains of fret biosensors, exhibit a major drawback: their autocatalytic chromophore synthesis strictly depends on the presence of molecular oxygen  <cit>  and thus the fluorescence signal intensity basically does not reflect the amount of synthesized reporter protein  <cit> . therefore, gfp and its color variants can not solely be used as fluorescent biosensor domains for accurate o <dig> determination.

recently, we developed a novel class of fluorescent proteins which carry flavin mononucleotide  as chromophore  <cit> . in contrast to gfp-like fps, the fluorescence signal of these fmn-based fluorescent proteins  is independent of cellular oxygen and thus fbfp can be used as quantitative in vivo real-time reporter protein under aerobic as well as anaerobic conditions  <cit> . here, we report the construction and application of the first genetically encoded fret-based biosensor for oxygen named flubo which consists of the oxygen-insensitive fbfp donor domain and the hypoxia-sensitive enhanced yellow fluorescent protein  acceptor domain. we further show that its fret efficiency dynamically responds to changing o <dig> values in living bacterial cells.

RESULTS
construction and in vitro characterization of flubo
the in vivo fluorescence of yfp, in contrast to fbfp, strictly depends on intracellular oxygen  <cit> . this observation prompted us to test if a yfp-fbfp fusion can be used as a ratiometric fret-based biosensor for self-referenced determination of molecular oxygen levels in living cells. the canonical intramolecular fret-based biosensors are generally fusion proteins consisting of two fluorescent domains with different chromophores that show spectral overlap between the absorption wavelengths of the acceptor domain and the emission wavelengths of the donor domain  <cit> . therefore, we constructed a recombinant gene  encoding the oxygen biosensor which consists of the n-terminal yfp acceptor domain and the c-terminal fbfp donor domain interconnected by a small peptide linker with a thrombin protease cleavage site. since the enhanced cyan fp  has most widely been used together with yfp in a tandem fret biosensor design  <cit> , we initially tested whether cfp can be functionally substituted by fbfp as the fret donor domain. for that purpose, yfp and fbfp as well as the yfp-fbfp fusion protein were separately expressed, purified and their spectral characteristics were analyzed. figure 1b shows the absorption and emission spectra of fbfp and yfp, respectively. fbfp exhibited its typical absorption spectrum ranging from near uv to blue light with λmax at  <dig> nm, which is characteristic for the fmn chromophore  <cit> . as required for suitable fret pairs, the fluorescence emission spectrum of fbfp  substantially overlaps with the yfp absorption spectrum  whereas the emission peaks of fbfp and yfp are sufficiently separated . to minimize direct excitation of the acceptor at the donor excitation wavelength, two-dimensional wavelength scans of fbfp and yfp have been carried out. as demonstrated in figure 1c, an excitation wavelength of  <dig> nm results in a bright fbfp fluorescence and a very low excitation of yfp fluorescence. beside its spectral characteristics, the quantum yield  of fbfp  <cit>   resembles that of cfp  <cit>   indicating that fbfp may be suitable as a fret donor for yfp.

fret is a phenomenon of nonradiative energy transfer between the chromophores of the donor and acceptor domain, which can be observed either by a change of  ratio of fluorescence intensities emitted by each domain or  lifetime of donor fluorescence. efficient intramolecular fret thus results in a decrease of donor fluorescence intensity and of excited-state lifetime. to demonstrate that the yfp-fbfp fusion protein forms a functional fret pair we first analyzed its fluorescence properties in vitro. fluorescence emission spectra  of fbfp, yfp and flubo, respectively, recorded with an excitation wavelength of  <dig> nm clearly demonstrate that the fbfp fluorescence  is largely decreased by efficient energy transfer leading to a dominant fluorescence of the yfp acceptor domain within the fusion protein . in contrast, fluorescence intensity of the plain acceptor was low at the same excitation wavelength . protease cleavage of the two fluorescent domains resulted in distances much larger than the förster radius between the donor and acceptor domain and thus in the loss of fret coupling, which is reflected by a dequenching of the donor fbfp and a dramatic decrease of yfp fluorescence .

in vivo functionality of flubo
next, flubo was tested as a fret-based ratiometric oxygen probe in living cells. initially, we analyzed the fbfp emission of flubo in e. coli by fluorescence lifetime imaging  under aerobic conditions leading to complete maturation of the yfp  chromophore. figure 2a shows e. coli cells expressing either fbfp or flubo color-coded according to their average fluorescence lifetimes observed at the fbfp fluorescence maximum. reduction of in vivo fluorescence lifetimes of plain fbfp  in comparison to fbfp fused to the fret acceptor domain yfp   again revealed efficient energy transfer between the donor and the acceptor domain of flubo with a difference in fluorescence lifetime  of  <dig>  ns under aerobic conditions. the apparent fret efficiency  is 37% using τave . a detailed analysis of the flubo-flim experiments in aerated e. coli cells revealed that two exponential functions are necessary to describe the observed fluorescence decay behavior satisfactorily . here, the longer fluorescence lifetime is very similar to that of fbfp alone. the other, shorter lifetime  exhibiting the major amplitude  represents the fret process . hence, a fret efficiency of approximately 62% within the flubo proteins can be deduced from τ <dig>  in comparison, the original fret donor cfp exhibits a similar fluorescence lifetime with a τave of  <dig>  ns whereas fret-mediated quenching led to an average fluorescence lifetime of  <dig>  ns within a yfp-cfp fusion  and an apparent efficiency e of  <dig> %  <cit> .

afterwards, we studied the oxygen-dependent fluorescence response of flubo in e. coli cells during batch cultivation . to this end, the biolector microbioreactor system  was used, which provides quantitative online data of the cell density via scattered light intensity  and dissolved oxygen tension  as described previously  <cit> . in parallel, intracellular oxygen values of e. coli cells expressing flubo were permanently recorded during cultivation by measuring the donor fluorescence at  <dig> nm  and the acceptor fluorescence at  <dig> nm  with an excitation wavelength of  <dig> nm. after approximately three hours of cultivation, flubo expression was autoinduced as indicated by rapidly increasing fluorescence intensities of both fp domains. after five hours , high respiratory activity of exponentially growing bacteria caused a drastic limitation of o <dig> in the growth medium . during this phase of growth, concomitant intracellular oxygen depletion was reflected by a weak increase of yfp fluorescence due to permanently increasing cell numbers and accumulated biosensor protein at low o <dig> concentrations. after  <dig> hours of cell cultivation, the change of carbon source from glycerol to the overflow metabolite acetate, produced in the first phase of the fermentation, led to a reduced oxygen consumption of e. coli cells. thus, the diauxic growth temporarily elevated the intracellular oxygen value  which could be monitored instantly by an increasing yfp fluorescence accompanied by fret-based decrease of fbfp fluorescence. consequently, reduced cell respiration led to a transient shift of dot to a maximal level of 11%. finally, the dot level rapidly increased after  <dig>  hours when the culture entered the stationary growth phase . as expected, this final change of the oxygen concentration also caused an immediate increase of yfp fluorescence accompanied by a decrease of fbfp fluorescence.

the yfp-fbfp fusion construct flubo represents a fret pair and thus provides a fixed stoichiometry of the two fp domains. hence, the ratio of observed yfp and fbfp fluorescence emissions directly reflects the change of cellular oxygen concentration . remarkably, extra- and intracellular o <dig> values are directly correlated and developed cooperatively during cell cultivation. for instance, low dot which occurred in the late logarithmic growth phase  resulted in an almost constant yfp-to-fbfp fluorescence ratio  until the molecular oxygen concentration increased due to the physiological adaptation of the bacteria during the stationary growth phase. here, the change of intracellular oxygen availability is directly reflected by an increasing flubo fluorescence ratio. the ratiometric change of donor and acceptor fluorescence is caused by o2-mediated maturation of the yfp chromophore resulting in dominant yfp fluorescence and a fret-dependent quenching of fbfp fluorescence . however, bacterial proteins exhibiting an intrinsic fluorescence may affect the biosensor-based oxygen readout. therefore, an e. coli strain carrying the corresponding empty expression vector was cultivated under the same conditions and the ratio of cell-mediated background fluorescence was analyzed at identical wavelengths . here, an only marginal change of the emission ratio was detected, which was clearly independent of the dot level.

in vivo calibration of the fluorescent protein-based oxygen biosensor
the results presented so far clearly demonstrate that the development of dot directly correlates with intracellular oxygen levels basically allowing the in vivo calibration of the fret biosensor within the used e. coli test system. however, the emission ratio of flubo at a certain time point of cell growth is modulated by the availability of oxygen as well as by the time needed for flubo synthesis and yfp chromophore formation. furthermore, oxygen-dependent maturation of the yfp chromophore is an irreversible process. therefore, repeating changes from sufficient to deficient oxygen concentrations as occurring during batch cultivation of e. coli indeed resulted in the inhibition of yfp chromophore maturation and thus led to almost constant but stepwise increased cyan-to-yellow fluorescence ratios under anaerobic conditions . for that reason, we subsequently considered the change of flubo fluorescence ratio over time /d ) as a measure for fluctuating intracellular o <dig> concentration. to accurately calibrate flubo in vivo, e. coli cells were batch cultured to the mid-logarithmic growth phase  and, subsequently, dot was temporarily increased twice. as shown in figure 4a the change of flubo emission ratio over time directly corresponded to the respective dot levels. remarkably, with the onset of repeated o <dig> deprivation in the medium, lowering of intracellular oxygen level led to a retarded yfp chromophore maturation, which in turn was directly reflected by a decreasing /d ) value of flubo fluorescence. hence, this new method also allows the indirect detection of decreasing oxygen levels in living cells. finally, a linear oxygen calibration curve could be derived from the e. coli in vivo fluorescence data  covering a dot level from  <dig> to 33% corresponding to a molecular o <dig> concentration up to  <dig>  mmol/l.

discussion
characteristics of the oxygen biosensor flubo
here, we describe for the first time the development of a genetically encoded fret-based biosensor, allowing the determination of molecular oxygen inside live cells. the biosensor flubo consists of the cyan fluorescing flavoprotein fbfp and the yellow fluorescing gfp derivative yfp as respective fret donor and acceptor domains. here, the oxygen demand for chromophore formation of yfp, but not of fbfp is the basis for the detection of cellular oxygen changes via the o2-dependent alteration of fret efficiency. at atmospheric levels of o <dig>  yfp chromophore maturation leads to efficient fret coupling causing an efficient quenching of fbfp fluorescence and a dominant yfp fluorescence. in contrast, the absence of molecular oxygen prevents yfp chromophore formation and thus immature yfp has no effect on the fluorescence of the fbfp donor domain due to the loss of fret coupling. to evaluate the in vivo functionality of flubo, we extensively analyzed the biosensor in e. coli cells during batch cultivation. parallel online detection of extra- and intracellular oxygen levels using an oxygen sensitive optode and the genetically encoded biosensor revealed a clear correlation between o <dig> levels outside and inside the cells.

calibration of flubo
development of dot directly correlates with intracellular o <dig> levels hence allowing the in vivo calibration of the fret biosensor within the used e. coli test system. the resulting oxygen calibration curve was derived from the flubo /d ) values that correspond to defined concentrations of extracellular oxygen.

generally, novel intramolecular fret-based biosensors are pre-calibrated in vitro and subsequently transferred into the living system of interest  <cit> . however, in contrast to other fp-based biosensors which allow the quantification of a certain metabolite, in vitro calibration of flubo is not an easy task. accurate pre-calibration requires biosensor protein, which was expressed and subsequently purified under anaerobic conditions. in addition, in vitro calibration has to be conducted using the gaseous substrate o <dig> in an otherwise oxygen-free atmosphere. furthermore, biosensor pre-calibration basically does not take into account that differences in non-specific interactions between a molecule  and its immediate surrounding  can greatly influence the equilibrium and rate of the respective reaction  <cit> . for that reason, the use of pre-calibrated reference probes does not inevitably lead to accurate in vivo calibration of a novel biosensor. finally, as discussed below, the level of biosensor expression and, to a minor extent, its stability  in the respective host cell rather than the cellular growth rate most probably represents the major bottleneck for functionality of a genetically encoded biosensor. however, these factors significantly depend on the individual properties of a biological system and might even vary within a particular cell depending on growth conditions and/or environmental parameters. additionally, ratio of extra- and intracellular oxygen concentrations in different organisms might vary in dependence on o <dig> consumption, which in turn can also be affected by individual parameters, such as variable metabolic activities and cell organization as well as heterogeneity of oxygen diffusion within cellular compartments and tissues. consequently, the intracellular o <dig> concentration inside e. coli cells is probably much lower than in their surrounding medium . therefore, the applicability of an intracellular biosensor as a quantitative probe needs to be evaluated and calibrated separately for each organism and condition to achieve reliable data.

environmental sensitivity of flubo
most of the yfp derivatives described in the literature exhibit a distinct ph sensitivity with pka values ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>    <cit> . using yfp as a fret receptor domain, therefore, ideally requires a constant fluorescence brightness which is not affected by intracellular changes of ph. to quantitatively interpret oxygen measurements with flubo, we utilized an eyfp variant distributed by clontech-takara . analysis of ph sensitivity demonstrated that this yfp derivative exhibits a remarkable ph resistance . thus, flubo-based oxygen determination is not affected within the physiological ph range. in addition, the early yfp variants were also sensitive towards chloride  <cit> . to further rule out that chloride ions influenced the flubo oxygen response in vivo, we also determined cl- sensitivity of the used eyfp. we could demonstrate that yfp fluorescence intensity remained constant in the presence of chloride concentrations up to  <dig> mm . this result clearly indicates that flubo is also insensitive to changes of chloride-ion concentrations in the physiological relevant range.

limitations of flubo
although flubo is a useful molecular probe, some aspects must be considered to allow online-detection of intracellular oxygen: first, as mentioned above, oxygen-dependent chromophore formation is an irreversible process. consequently, this biosensor indeed allows analyzing changes from low to high oxygen concentrations but it cannot directly be used to detect reduction of oxygen levels via its change of intramolecular fret efficiency. therefore, we analyzed alterations from sufficient to deficient oxygen levels by observing the total changes of dual emission ratio over time. by using this method, recurring oxygen limitation was reflected by a stagnating alteration of yfp-to-fbfp fluorescence ratio  and in turn by decreasing /d ) values . furthermore, it should be emphasized that due to the irreversibility of o2-mediated yfp chromophore formation repeated changes or a long-lasting increase of intracellular oxygen level can be determined only under specific conditions. namely, the degradation of oxidized flubo and the production rate of non-oxidized flubo need to form an equilibrium ensuring a continuous and sufficient supply of biosensor molecules which did not 'sense' oxygen before. it, therefore, remains to be experimentally demonstrated how flubo behaves in cells exhibiting significantly lower metabolic activity than e. coli. nevertheless, we expect the flubo /d ) value to represent a valid indication of intracellular oxygen levels in a large variety of different organisms. to this end, we are currently analyzing the applicability of fbfp and the fbfp-based biosensor flubo in various prokaryotic and eukaryotic including mammalian cell lines.

alternative in vivo o <dig> sensors
monitoring the heterogeneity and development of intracellular oxygen levels with high spatio-temporal resolution requires a molecular o <dig> biosensor that exhibits some important properties. for example, the ideal oxygen indicator must be either uniformly distributed or, alternatively, can be specifically targeted within a cell or tissue of interest. for quantitative in vivo o <dig> determination, the biosensor has to respond rapidly, reliably and reversibly to the full range of physiological oxygen concentrations.

in the last decade, different fluorescent dyes and proteins have been developed, which can be used as sensors for intracellular oxygen measurements.

 various fluorescence and phosphorescence based o2-sensitive probes, including the complex platinum-porphyrin dyes are widely used for imaging molecular oxygen in living organisms  <cit> . these probes exhibit a selective and reversible response to o <dig> within the full physiological oxygen range  combined with optimal photophysical properties . nevertheless, in comparison to genetically encoded sensors intracellular loading of these dyes appears to be relatively inefficient, slow and, furthermore, they cannot be generally targeted to specific cells or intracellular compartments  <cit> . consequently, intracellular visualization of o <dig> with high spatio-temporal resolution is limited.

 alternatively, gfp can be utilized as a reporter gene, whose expression is under control of an oxygen sensitive regulator within a certain organism. for example, in e. coli promoters pnar  and prpos , which are activated under microaerobic and anaerobic conditions, were applied to monitor oxygen limitations  <cit> . although this technique is potentially capable of analyzing limited oxygen supply and differences in population heterogeneities, this biosensor architecture can only be applied for specific host organisms. furthermore, regulators are often part of a higher-order regulatory network and thus might not solely respond to oxygen deprivation. beside oxygen sensitive gfp reporter gene constructs, takahashi and coworkers described an exceptional technique that also allows gfp-dependent in vivo oxygen determination  <cit> . this approach makes use of the oxygen sensitive red-shifted fluorescence of gfp that occurs after photoactivation with blue light  <cit> . however, since the magnitude of the observed red shift is abruptly increased with oxygen concentrations < 1%, this technique can only be applied for measuring low intracellular oxygen levels. furthermore, the basic mechanism of gfp photoactivation of red fluorescence as well as the oxygen-dependent recovery to green fluorescence is not fully understood yet. finally, it is worth mentioning that both of the described strategies, using gfp either as 'passive' or 'active' oxygen biosensor, inherently suffer from impaired chromophore formation under oxygen limited conditions. this fact makes flubo the first fluorescent protein-based biosensor enabling exact and reliably determination of molecular oxygen.

CONCLUSIONS
accurate determination of intracellular oxygen and analysis of changing o <dig> levels inside living cells and tissues is of the utmost importance in gaining new insights into complex physiological processes associated with oxygen deprivation, including invasion and persistence of pathogens or tumor development. our results show that flubo can be used as a ratiometric biosensor for molecular oxygen that changes the emission maxima of the donor and acceptor domain as a function of o <dig> availability and its sensitivity is within the physiological range relevant for bacteria as well as for eukaryotes, including mammalian and human cells  <cit> . the oxygen modulated fret-coupling allows the non-invasive readout of cellular o <dig> levels as well as the online analysis of its changes with high spatial and temporal resolution by fluorescence spectrometry and flim. thus, the observation of cellular oxygen levels in any cellular compartment using genetically encoded fret biosensors will offer a novel rational approach to understand hypoxia-dependent processes in biological, biomedical and biotechnological processes.

