BACKGROUND
modeling is an essential component of systems biology
 <cit> . an important class of models is the class based on mass-action chemical kinetics. models have the potential to elucidate the behaviors that logically follow from mechanistic knowledge and assumptions, which can often be reduced to a collection of reactions and the parameters that characterize the mass-action kinetics of these reactions
 <cit> . the parameters of models for the chemical kinetics of molecular interactions can be measured independently, at least in principle, and must take on values consistent with physicochemical constraints. models capturing mass-action chemical kinetics can be specified in various traditional forms, such as that of ordinary differential equations . this approach has been quite useful for studying small modules at biochemical reaction resolution
 <cit> . coarser resolution models of larger networks have also been useful for studying systemic properties, for example, how processes such as feedback and internalization may influence receptor tyrosine kinase signaling
 <cit> .

signaling proteins contain multiple functional components and multiple sites of post-translational modification. as a result the interactions among signaling proteins have the potential to generate myriad protein complexes and post-translational modification states
 <cit> . this feature of cell signaling networks has been called combinatorial complexity. because of combinatorial complexity, ode models are poorly suited for representing the molecular interactions within a cell signaling network. the number of chemical species that can be populated in a cell signaling network, and hence the number of equations in an ode model required to capture the dynamics of these species, is prohibitively large.

in part to deal with the issue of combinatorial complexity, the rule-based modeling approach was developed as a method for efficiently and compactly specifying the reactions that can arise from molecular interactions in signaling networks
 <cit> . in a rule-based model, the structure of a reaction network is implicitly defined by rules that represent molecular interactions, whereas in a traditional model, network structure must be explicitly specified. a rule represents a class of reactions involving reactants with common components and component properties. an important simplification of the rule-based modeling approach is that all reactions within a class are assigned the same rate law. thus, a key assumption underlying the rule-based modeling approach is that molecular interactions are modular, meaning that network dynamics are largely determined by local properties of protein components responsible for interactions. this coarse graining approach allows for more compact model specification than traditional modeling approaches. the rate law associated with a rule provides only a coarse-grained description of the kinetics of the reactions within the rule-defined reaction class. however, the coarseness of a rule can be adjusted by tuning the contextual elements of the rule. at the finest level, the contextual elements required for a reaction are highly specific and a rule defines a single unique chemical reaction. at the coarsest level, a rule indicates that a reaction center can undergo a reaction regardless of the molecular context in which that reaction center is found, and a single rule defines a set of reactions, one for each unique context in which the transformation of the rule can take place. simulation of a rule-based model yields results consistent with principles of chemical reaction kinetics.

although rules can be used to define large-scale biochemical reaction networks in a compact efficient manner, the shear size of such networks, has posed a formidable barrier to the development and analysis of models for signal-transduction systems that account for site-specific details of protein interactions . to address this problem, we and others have developed software for simulating large-scale rule-based models. the key feature of these tools is that the computational cost is independent of the size of the reaction network implied by a set of rules
 <cit> . thus, it is now possible to consider building and analyzing rule-based models that include site-specific details about protein-protein interactions.

here, we use the rule-based modeling approach to build a model for erbb receptor signaling. the model includes the four members of the erbb family of receptor tyrosine kinases, ras, phosphoinositide 3-kinase , and other signaling proteins that play a role in activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase  and akt. the model encompasses essentially the same proteins considered in the ode model of chen et al.
 <cit>  and it is related to a number of other ode models reported in the literature, such as the model of birtwistle et al.
 <cit> . the model presented here accounts for site-specific details of molecular interactions, which would be impossible to simulate using an ode model. a large number of models, of different types, have been reported in the literature for various aspects of erbb receptor signaling
 <cit> , but the consideration of site-specific mechanistic details by modelers has so far been limited
 <cit> .

we apply the conventions of chylek et al.
 <cit>  to visualize and annotate our model, and we demonstrate that the model can be simulated using recently developed software implementing a network-free simulation approach that enables the simulation of interactions marked by combinatorial complexity
 <cit> . a key advance of the model presented here is avoidance of arbitrary simplifying assumptions about the molecular mechanisms of signaling that have the sole purpose of facilitating ode model specification and/or simulation. the model accounts for over  <dig> sites of phosphorylation, which is far more than have been included in previous models of erbb signaling. the ability to incorporate individual phosphorylation sites in a model enables mechanism-based interpretation of temporal phosphoproteomic data and provides an opportunity to use such data to identify parameter values.

we note that our report is intended as a demonstration of recently developed methodology, and does not represent an effort to gain insights into erbb receptor signaling. our hope is that integrated modeling and experimental efforts, focused on understanding how site-specific details impact network function, will be stimulated by the demonstrated specification, annotation, visualization and simulation capabilities. the novelty of this study lies in the demonstration of these capabilities at the scale considered. we note that demonstrating the usefulness of rule-based modeling is not a goal of the study reported here; the usefulness of this modeling approach is already established by numerous applications of the approach
 <cit> .

RESULTS
we specified a rule-based model for molecular interactions in the erbb receptor signaling network . the model specification, including nominal parameter values, is provided in the form of a bionetgen input file
 <cit> , which is a plain-text file. the file comprises the “full model specification” tiddler of our tiddlywiki, which is available online . the bionetgen input file, which is named “erbb_model.bngl,” is also provided separately . the collection of online materials is included in the supplementary material as an archive file . the model is composed of  <dig> rules. it accounts for  <dig> proteins, over  <dig> protein domains, several linear motifs, and  <dig> sites of lipid and protein phosphorylation. the rules of the model represent interactions of ligands with erbb receptors, receptor dimerization, phosphorylation-dependent interactions of adapter proteins with receptors, the mapk cascade downstream of ras, pi3k signaling events that regulate phosphorylation of akt, multiple feedback loops, and phosphorylation events that regulate the above processes. dephosphorylation reactions are included in the model, but the phosphatases that mediate these reactions  are not explicitly considered.

the model accounts implicitly for more chemical species  than there are molecules available to populate these species . the model is able to provide this description because of simplifying assumptions embedded in its rules
 <cit> , which derive from assumptions of modularity. we view such assumptions as reasonable because proteins are composed of modular parts
 <cit> . the trade-off for concise model specification is coarse-graining of chemical kinetics, meaning that all reaction events implied by a rule are taken to have the kinetic rate law associated with the rule. this coarse graining is controllable, as rules can be refined as needed to capture empirical data. indeed, the only essential difference between a rule-based model and an ode model lies in the means of model specification; both types of models provide representations of chemical kinetics
 <cit> . to specify an ode model, a modeler must state which chemical species in a system are populated and how these species are connected and influence each other. in contrast, to specify a rule-based model, a modeler must state which interactions are occuring in a system and the contextual dependencies of these interactions. the latter approach is more convenient when interactions depend mostly on local properties of proteins, such as whether a site is phosphorylated and free. rules for interactions, together with rate laws and parameter estimates, can be used to predict which of the potentially populated chemical species are populated, regardless of the number of potentially populated chemical species
 <cit> . the main point of figure
 <dig> is to illustrate that known interactions and post-translational modifications of egfr imply a number of potentially populated chemical species that is so large as to confound intuition and the ode modeling approach, because the subset of populated chemical species, which is the information required to specify a mechanistic ode model incorporating site-specific details about egfr interactions, is impossible to identify through measurement or inference based on simple reasoning.
 <cit>  and hprd
 <cit> . this diagram also depicts substrates of the egfr kinase domain . these sites of phosphorylation in egfr and erbb <dig> are documented in hprd
 <cit>  and phospho. elm
 <cit> . next to each component of egfr and erbb <dig>  the number of possible component states is indicated. these counts are based only on the proteins, sites of phosphorylation, and interactions depicted in this diagram. note that additional interactions are considered in the model . for example, in this diagram, we do not consider phosphorylation of sos <dig> and gab <dig>  ligand binding sites have two possible states . docking sites for shc <dig>  have eight possible states . docking sites for grb <dig>  have six possible states. in the model, y <dig> in egfr  is a docking site for both grb <dig> and shc <dig>  thus, this docking site has  <dig> possible states. docking sites for pi3k  have three possible states. based on these counts of possible component states, the number of possible states for an egfr monomer is 2·8·6·8·12·6·6 =  <dig> , and the number of possible states for an erbb <dig> monomer is 2·36·8 =  <dig> . an egfr: erbb <dig> heterodimer has more than  <dig>  ×  <dig> states, and an egfr homodimer has more than  <dig>  ×  <dig> states. when we consider the additional interactions included in the model but not shown here, we find that the number of possible states for an egfr homodimer is much greater than a googol .  as illustrated in this panel, the ectodomain of egfr has two possible ligand-bound states: free or bound to egf.  as illustrated in this panel, a docking site in egfr for shc <dig> has eight possible states: unphosphorylated, phosphorylated, bound to unphosphorylated shc <dig>  bound to phosphorylated shc <dig>  bound to shc <dig> in complex with grb <dig>  bound to shc <dig> in complex with grb2: sos <dig>  bound to shc <dig> in complex with grb2: gab <dig>  and bound to shc <dig> in complex with a ternary complex of grb <dig>  sos <dig>  and gab <dig> 

a challenge of developing a large model is communicating the substance of the model in such a way that it can be understood. in figure
 <dig>  we present an extended contact map
 <cit> , which shows the proteins, protein components, and sites of phosphorylation as well as the direct interactions and enzyme-substrate relationships considered in the model. proteins are represented as boxes and arranged in layers to suggest the causality of signaling events, with the top layer corresponding to ligands, the layer below corresponding to erbb receptors, etc. most of the  <dig> rules of the model can be mapped to one of the  <dig> interactions represented by arrows in figure
 <dig>  the rules corresponding to a given arrow represent a common interaction but in different contexts. the correspondence between rules and arrows is indicated in a model guide
 <cit> , which is described below.

making a large model reusable and extensible requires not only a means to understandably visualize the model but also annotation so that the basis of the model can be evaluated and updated as new knowledge is generated. to annotate our model, we prepared a model guide
 <cit>  . the guide links formal elements of the model  to information about these components available in online resources, such as uniprot
 <cit> , omim , and pfam
 <cit> . this ability to easily connect formal model elements to information available in online resources, including sequences, is one of the advantageous and innovative features of rule-based modeling. for each protein included in the model, the guide includes a brief summary of available knowledge that was considered in the formulation of the model. finally, as mentioned above, the guide links the arrows of figure
 <dig> to specific rules.

the parameters of our model, rate constants and protein copy numbers, are largely unknown. identifying the values of these parameters to obtain a validated, predictive model would be a formidable challenge. here, our intention is simply to demonstrate the feasibility of specifying, visualizing, annotating and simulating a model that captures the site-specific details of protein-protein interactions in a signaling network. such a model can make predictions about time courses of phosphorylation for individual serine, threonine, and tyrosine  residues, which is essential for mechanism-based interpretation of multiplex temporal phosphoproteomic data
 <cit> . for the purpose of demonstrating that the model can be simulated, we divided the model parameters into several classes and estimated a range of feasible values for each class . we then sampled within these ranges to randomly specify nominal parameter values .

processes characterized by parameter classes marked by asterisks are taken to be first-order processes.

as stated above, the sheer size of the network captured  in our model  has posed a barrier to simulation using conventional methods. obviously if the cost of simulation scales with network size, then simulation of such large-scale reaction networks becomes impractical. on-the-fly stochastic simulations algorithms are an alternative to numerical integration of odes
 <cit>  but on-the-fly simulation also becomes prohibitively slow as the number of populated states increases and the number of reachable states explodes
 <cit> . the cpu time required for simulation of the model using such a method increases exponentially as the number of reactions in a network grows . in contrast, network-free simulation methods
 <cit>  have a constant cost of simulation per reaction event and hence the cpu time increases linearly with the number of reaction events in a system .

figure
3b illustrates that in our model a large number of chemical species quickly become populated after initiation of erbb receptor signaling. within  <dig> second after initiation of signaling, over  <dig>  chemical species are populated. this number of species exceeds the number that can be practically considered in a manually specified ode model in which one equation would be required for each reachable species. the results of figure
3b suggest that dispersion of mass into a large number of chemically distinct states is an inherent feature of cell signaling networks and explains why the on-the-fly method becomes impractical . it should be noted that the simulations of figure
 <dig> are not physiological, as the initial condition is artificial. the point of these simulations is simply to demonstrate that interactions of signaling proteins can be expected to lead to the population of more chemical species that can be practically tracked in an ode model.

to simulate the model we use nfsim
 <cit> , which implements a network-free simulation algorithm
 <cit> . the simulation results are shown in figure
 <dig>  the heat map of figure
 <dig> reports time courses of phosphorylation for the  <dig> s/t/y residues considered in the model. the time courses, which are clustered by similarity, are representative of results obtained with other parameter values, in that the model consistently predicts distinct kinetics for different sites of phosphorylation. thus, multiple sites of phosphorylation can be lumped together only with careful consideration, because in general, the kinetics of phosphorylation can be site specific. it is possible to generate the results of figure
 <dig> because the cost of network-free simulation, which was applied to obtain these results, depends on the number of rules in a model, not the number of reactions or chemical species implied by the rules.
 <dig> with nfsim . the simulation results demonstrate the capability of the rule-based modeling approach to represent site-specific phosphorylation kinetics. for each time course, phosphorylation level is normalized to the maximum level. time courses are clustered by similarity .

discussion
here, we have presented a dynamical model for erbb receptor signaling that captures site-specific mechanistic details and demonstrated that the model can be visualized, annotated, and simulated. many dynamical models have been formulated for erbb receptor signaling through the traditional approach for modeling chemical kinetics, i.e., ode modeling. in general, ode models for cellular regulatory systems track the populations of only 10’s to 100’s of chemical species
 <cit> . our model accounts implicitly for many more species . the discrepancy in size is attributable to omission of site-specific details about protein-protein interactions in ode models and the simplifying assumptions of ode models that are introduced for the sake of making model specification feasible. the simplifying assumptions typical of ode models often conflict with our knowledge of cellular biochemistry . an example of such an assumption is the use of a ‘virtual phosphorylation site’ to represent all sites of phosphorylation within a protein
 <cit> . such an assumption can be problematic or undesirable for a number of reasons. for example, for adaptor proteins that interact with different sites on a receptor, the virtual phosphorylation site assumption introduces a false competition.

although our model is large when measured in terms of potentially populated chemical species, the number of parameters in the model is comparable to the number of parameters in an ode model for erbb receptor signaling
 <cit> . for example, the model of chen et al.
 <cit> , which tracks  <dig> chemical species, has  <dig> parameters. the number of parameters in a rule-based model depends on the number of rules comprising the model rather than the number of chemical species or reactions implied by the rules
 <cit> . the model presented here has  <dig> parameters.

how should we view the increase in number of parameters from  <dig> to 543? model selection criteria used in statistics, such as the akaike information criterion, incorporate penalties for the number of parameters in a model. thus, one might view our model as inferior to the model of chen et al.
 <cit> . however, this perspective ignores the fact that our model, like the model of chen et al.
 <cit> , was formulated not to serve as a fitting function but rather to serve as a “vehicle of understanding”
 <cit> . if only a fitting function is desired, neither of these models is likely to be a good choice given any typical collection of data. however, if one desires a model that can be used to reason about mechanism, then the model presented here better captures the site-specific details that are known from experimental studies of erbb receptor signaling, and it is better able to connect to multiplex temporal phosphoproteomic data, which can be generated in principle. moreover, a rule-based model that captures site-specific details may actually be a better fitting function than an ode model. for example, consider a protein with multiple sites of phosphorylation. if we wish to model the phosphorylation dynamics of this protein, and we can only measure phosphorylation using a pan antibody, then a virtual phosphorylation site assumption and ode model may be justified. however, if phosphospecific antibodies are available, and the different sites in the protein have different phosphorylation kinetics, then a  model that treats the sites individually may be superior according to a model selection criterion, despite the introduction of additional parameters, because the best that a model that lumps sites together can do is reproduce the average phosphorylation dynamics, which may not represent the dynamics of any individual site. in the simple example considered, a rule-based model may be unnecessary, but the size of an ode model tends to increase exponentially as components are added if the model incorporates site-specific details
 <cit>  and eventually a rule-based approach would be required.

an important aspect of the model presented here is its ability to make predictions about specific sites of phosphorylation. phosphorylation of individual sites can be experimentally detected and monitored as a function of time after a perturbation of a cell signaling network using various multiplex techniques, such as reverse phase protein array , high-throughput microwestern blotting, and quantitative mass spectrometry . time courses for many of the sites considered in the model have been measured using these techniques
 <cit>  . table
 <dig> indicates which sites considered in the model were assayed in each of three proteomic studies. although no single study has generated time courses for all  <dig> sites of phosphorylation , it seems that, in principle, multiplex temporal phosphoproteomic data can be generated that would be useful for identifying the parameters of the model presented here, or other such models. ode models cannot connect to multiplex phosphoproteomic data because of the limited ability of these models to track individual sites of phosphorylation.

time courses have been measured for many of the serine, threonine and tyrosine  residues considered in the model presented here. here, we focus on three studies that applied distinct experimental techniques to measure time courses of phosphorylation for specific s/t/y sites. in the study of wolf-yadlin et al.
 <cit> , the technique of selected reaction monitoring and quantitative mass spectrometry was applied. in the study of vanmeter et al.
 <cit> , the technique of reverse phase protein array was applied. in the study of ciaccio et al.
 <cit> , the technique of microwestern array was applied. an ‘x’ entry in this table signifies that a time course of phosphorylation for the indicated residue was measured in the indicated study.

generation of data needed to begin validation of a large rule-based model would be a resource-intensive undertaking and one that ideally would involve not only use of multiplex data to estimate model parameter values but also carefully designed experimental tests of model predictions. it is unlikely that such an undertaking would ever start without a demonstration that modeling aspects of a study focused on site-specific mechanistic details are feasible. providing a demonstration of key modeling capabilities needed for this type of study was the rationale behind this report. models reported in the literature that are closest in character to that reported here are perhaps the models of thomson et al.
 <cit>  and tiger et al.
 <cit> , which are large rule-based models for cell signaling systems in yeast.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, with the development of network-free simulation tools, it is now possible to build and analyze rule-based models that capture a significant fraction of the proteins and protein-protein interactions in a cell signaling network with consideration of site-specific mechanistic details. the next challenge is to apply this type of modeling to gain new biological insights. the erbb receptor signaling network is important in cancer, so it may be especially interesting to study how best to target the network when it is affected by known mutations. for an example of such a study, see stites et al.
 <cit> . in the future, we anticipate that rule-based modeling will become a tool routinely used in proteomic and systems biology studies, enabling the development of more mechanistic, validated, and predictive models for cell signaling networks.

