BACKGROUND
nicotiana attenuata torr. ex watson   is an annual native to the great basin desert of california, nevada, idaho, and utah   <cit>  and primarily occurs in large ephemeral populations  after fire in sagebrush and pinyon-juniper ecosystems, in small persistent  populations in isolated washes, and as a roadside weed after new construction in a previously undisturbed area  <cit> . positive and negative control by environmental signals over germination from long-lived seed banks , seeds without dormancy germinate. when fires pyrolyze the litter layer, removing the germination inhibitors and saturating the soils with smoke-derived germination stimulants, the seed bank responds with a dramatic, synchronized germination response the following growing season during favorable moisture and thermal regimes.

this well-characterized germination behavior likely affects the genetic structure of this potential annual. genetic structure of a population results from mutations, gene flow , drift, and selection, all acting in the context of an organism's life history traits  <cit> . genetic differentiation may be more prevalent between primarily dormant and non-dormant populations, namely between plants found ephemerally  and those occurring more persistently . within the ephemeral populations, the number of plants in the population will vary in relation to the size of the burn and the distribution of the seed bank. because pollinators must locate these ephemeral populations in a landscape that may be largely composed of other plant associations, out-crossing may not be prevalent. flowers of n. attenuata are self-compatible and outcrossing does not significantly affect seed production, seed mass or viability  <cit>  indicating that this species relies on selfing as its primary form of reproduction. selfing may keep genetic variation low, especially within populations. persistent populations are more likely to experience outcrossing, owing to their predictability. these considerations in combination with the annual life cycle of plants in washes in contrast to the  <dig> –  <dig> year life cycle of plants growing in burns may increase the genetic differences among populations found in burns and washes.

here we examine the genetic structure of n. attenuata plants from wash and burn populations in the sw utah  to determine if the particular germination behavior of this species has left signatures in the plant's population structure. we use an aflp  analysis, based on the selective polymerase chain reaction  amplification of restriction fragments from a total digest of genomic dna  <cit>  and an issr  analysis in which bands are generated by single primer pcr that amplifies products between two simple sequence repeats  <cit> . both procedures produce reproducible markers useful for the quantification of genetic polymorphism within species  <cit> .
specifically, we compare plants growing from seeds collected from  <dig> large populations after fires, from small populations in  <dig> washes, from plants in transects across  <dig> large burns, and from plants growing in specific areas over  <dig> years during which a small wash population erupted into a large burn population as a result of a fire and returned to become a small wash population. by analyzing the genetic diversity across these n. attenuata populations, we aimed to answer the following questions: 1) are plants growing in burn and wash populations genetically distinct? 2) are plants growing in the same washes genetically similar through different years? 3) what is the genetic makeup of plants found growing across large burns and geographically adjacent populations? while genetic diversity among the various nicotiana species has been studied with rapd  <cit>  and aflp  <cit>  markers, and with peroxidase isozymes  <cit> , this is the first effort to study the spatial and temporal population structure of a native nicotiana species.

RESULTS
set-i
set i  consisting of  <dig> individuals, which was used only for aflp analysis, produced a total of  <dig> loci . this data was used for separate dendrogram and principle co-ordinate  analyses. the jaccard similarity index  <cit>  based on unweighted pair group method average  dendrogram revealed a lack of distinct spatial or temporal structure and had brush- or star-structures with nodal bootstrap values of less than 60% . the samples collected from the greatest spatial distances, namely california, oregon and arizona, did not form separate clusters from any of the utah populations. a cluster analysis of  <dig> wash and  <dig> burn populations all grown from seed collected in  <dig>  revealed no clustering based either on type of population  or geographic location .. some structure was identified when each time series at particular locations  were analyzed separately , but the nodes did not correspond to a particular growing season. no genetic differentiation was observed from a cluster analysis of plants collected from motoqua before  during  and after  a fire-associated population explosion . a similar lack of structure was found in the time series analysis from the di ranch  and shivwits roadside washes . similarly, the pco did not yield any apparent population structure or site- or population- specific grouping associations.

set-ii
set ii  is a subset of set i  and consists of  <dig> individuals analyzed by aflp and issr  and this dataset was used for dendrogram and pco analyses. combined  analysis revealed a total of  <dig> loci of which  <dig> were polymorphic . here, the aflp analysis showed higher percent polymorphic loci than did the issr analysis . interestingly in the aflp analysis, the primer and the restriction enzyme combinations that produced the lowest number of loci also delivered the highest rate of polymorphism . it produced an average of  <dig>  loci per primer combination with a high percentage of unique bands  and a high frequency of commonly shared loci . the issr analysis, on the other hand, produced  <dig> loci per primer with a predominance of commonly shared loci . dendrograms and pco produced from this data set had the same overall characteristics as those produced from showed same structure nature set i.

heterozygosity
a bayesian approach  <cit>  was used for heterozygosity calculations. the total heterozygosity as measured from the combined aflp and issr data set of utah collections  was  <dig>  ±  <dig> . the plants from arizona california and oregon were not included for heterozygosity and amova analyses due to insufficient sampling of these populations. different primer combinations produced different values; in particular, in the issr analysis, the 8a primer produced comparatively high heterozygosity values. in contrast, the aflp primers produced values that are more similar. different regions had different measures of total heterozygosity with plants growing at the lytle ranch preserve being the lowest  and plants from pahcoon, the highest  .

amova
amova analysis was performed separately for aflp, issr and combined analysis of plants collected from utah . the combined data set was also used to partition variation between wash and burn populations and to examine the effects of the collection year. in separate analyses, issr revealed higher variance than did the aflp in the among-sites, among-population, and within-site categories; whereas, variation in the within-population category from the aflp analysis was higher than that from the issr analysis . all values except the among-site category in the aflp analysis  revealed highly significant differences at p <  <dig> . aflp and issr data was combined for an amova analysis of all analyzed utah populations. from this analysis, all three Φ categories were highly significant  among sites , among populations within sites  and within populations  values were  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively. table  <dig> reveals low genetic differentiation among sites and a relatively high genetic differentiation within populations. pair-wise genetic distances  were calculated from the amova. of the  <dig> comparisons from the  <dig> populations,  <dig> showed highly significant differences and  <dig> were significant at the p =  <dig>  level  . very low among-site variation  was obtained when samples were compared as being derived from either burn or wash populations . to determine the effect of collection year, all individuals were grouped according to their collection year; an amova analysis revealed low  variance within years at p <  <dig>  significance level .

ns = not significant

the amova analysis had sufficient statistical power to detect small differences among populations, which accounted for  <dig>  to  <dig>  % of the variation, but this was dwarfed by the much larger genetic variation within populations, which ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  % . this dramatic high degree of within-population variance was found in all populations. again, populations from goldstrike canyon had the lowest among-population variance  and highest within population variance . the goldstrike populations were located in a narrow canyon produced by a stream and in this region seeds are likely transported among the populations during spring floods.

the Φ-statistic is an analogue of the f-statistic  <cit> . this analysis revealed that the Φct  values were  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the aflp + issr, aflp and issr analyses, respectively . when these sites were grouped by burn and wash populations, very little genetic differentiation was observed . interestingly, Φst  was always comparatively high in all analyses . substantially higher fst values were estimated by the program hickory   <cit>  as θb for the combined aflp + issr analysis  , but surprisingly, the individual data set θb values were lower .

mantel test were conducted to analyze isolation by distance using pair-wise Φst values obtained by amova . the Φst values from the aflp, issr and the combined data sets were separately correlated with geographical distance and all revealed non significant correlations 

discussion
the analysis revealed high levels of heterozygosity, with total heterozygosity from all populations  being higher than that from comparable analyses of self-pollinating annual plants   <cit> . the issr analysis  yielded estimates of heterozygosity that were comparable with the aflp analysis   despite the basic difference in the logic of the two procedures. issrs are designed to span a repeat region of the genome whereas aflp is designed to randomly sample the full genome  <cit>  and most plant genomes are thought to evolve faster in the repeat regions  <cit> . however, despite the differences in absolute estimates of genetic variation, both procedures produced the same conclusion.

the principle conclusion of this study is that large amount of genetic variation measured by amova, within populations at a particular area significantly dwarfed that observed among sites, among populations growing in burns or washes, or collected during subsequent years growing at a given site. the conclusion that the genetic variation between neighbors is greater than that found between temporally- or spatially-separated populations, is dramatically reflected in the plants sampled along transects through the pahcoon springs burn. only a small fraction  of the total genetic variance is found among the  <dig> sub-samples from the extreme corners of this burn that covered more than  <dig> hectares  <cit> , while the majority  was found among plants growing within  <dig> m <dig> of each other. pahcoon, was the site from which highest number of populations were analyzed. , whereas, from other sites smaller numbers of populations were analyzed.

f-statistic was estimated by using bayesian approach with an analogue of the f-statistic, the Φ-statistic. low but significant genetic differentiation was estimated among sites  from aflp , issr  and aflp + issr  data sets, whereas within populations, the Φst values were very high . in platanthera leucophaea, holsinger et. al  <cit>  showed that θb is substantially larger than the estimates from the amova analyses . in our study, aflp + issr analysis also showed such difference  whereas, exactly opposite values were found separate analysis of aflp and issr data sets .

a number of factors, including n. attenuata's unusual seed germination mechanisms and the irregular nature of fires, natural selection, gene flow mediated by pollination or the relocation of seeds via mammal-vectored transport could account for the lack of population structure and each deserve further discussion.

dormancy is a major adaptive response of native plants that allows them to cope with environmental variation and provide a means of habitat selection  <cit> . moreover, dormancy is likely to influence the genetic structure of populations <cit> . seed banks serve as repositories of genetic diversity for most species. many seeds use cues as general as temperature, photoperiod, moisture, or their own age to trigger germination and initiate vegetative growth  <cit> . to cope with the lack of reliability of these proximate signals and the unpredictability of the post-germination environment, some species may have evolved "bet-hedging" strategies, whereby only a certain fraction of the dormant seed bank germinates under favorable conditions. this has been experimentally shown by various researchers. in plantago lanceolata  <cit> , calluna vulgaris  <cit> , clarkia springvillensis  <cit>  and lesquerella fendleri  <cit>  it has been demonstrated that the seed banks have less genetic differentiation than do the adults of a given population. this strategy provides a statistical solution to the problem of cueing germination with unreliable signals  <cit> . other species, however, use specific signals to time their germination with particular niches. those species that specialize in the immediate post-fire habitat are a particular case in point  <cit> . studies on another fire-dependant plant, grevillea macleayana  <cit> , which also has a long-lived seed bank, showed fst  that were comparable to those measured in this study for n. attenuata, but had variable heterozygosity . another major difference from the current study was that g. macleayana showed significant isolation by distance.

seed dormancy increases the effective generation time of this annual plant and by doing so, prevents genetic decay and inhibits the formation of spatial structure between geographically distinct populations  <cit> . additionally, a long-lived seed bank results in the overlap of generations  <cit> , which has similar effects and additionally reduces the ability of genetic drift to drive unique alleles to fixation. operating under the assumption that the synchronized germination response observed after fires represents a synchronized germination of cohorts from the seed bank, we examined populations that occurred over a 6– <dig> year interval at the same location  to determine if temporally-defined genetic structure occurred in the populations, but none were found. this suggests that seed banks have a more complicated germination response whereby only fractions of a cohort may germinate at any particular interval and hence may represent a combination of "bet-hedging"  <cit>  and the chemically-cued germination of the seed bank.

n. attenuata has all the characteristics of species pollinated by moths at night  but day-active humming birds  and bumblebees  are also known to visit the flowers  <cit> . despite these traits that are thought to facilitate out-crossing,  <dig> years of field work with the utah populations have revealed that the vast majority of seeds produced are the result of self-pollination. no evidence exists for inbreeding depression in plants self-pollinated for more than  <dig> generations . however, the plant species likely enjoys sporadic bursts of cross pollination during the rare outbreaks of hawk moths  and could be dispersed by wind, water transport and animals, but none of these mechanisms are well documented. the seeds are eaten by various ground squirrels  <cit>  but are not known to survive a transit through the digestive track. the greater heterogeneity within populations and low genetic differentiation among populations found along the stream in the goldstrike canyon   suggests water transport may not be important. while seeds tend to be dispersed from the plant upon maturation of the seed capsules, the n. attenuata calyx is sticky and glandular and could be dispersed by adhering to animals. however, the plants ability to produce the defense secondary metabolite nicotine in substantial quantities in its calyx  <cit>  may be a much more important determinant of its long distance transport. native americans are known to have smoked leaves and seed capsules for recreational and medicinal purposes, buried their dead with leather pouches containing n. attenuata seeds, burned the sagebrush to promote its growth and are likely to have transported seeds throughout its range in north america  <cit> . hence, movement of n. attenuata genotypes across the landscape by humans who were smoking this plant may have contributed to the lack of correlation between geographical and pair wise Φst values, as reflected by mantel test for isolation by distance.

in summary, we conclude that the unusual nature of the n. attenuata populations from utah revealed by aflp and issr analysis is a likely result of combination of random dispersal by humans and its seed dormancy.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the genetic structure of n. attenuata populations in utah showed: 1) high similarity across collection sites; 2) small difference between populations growing in burns or washes; 3) small differences between growing seasons; and 4) large difference between individuals growing within populations.

