BACKGROUND
interspecific hybridization occurs in every eukaryotic kingdom and can lead to reticulated rather than branching phylogenies  <cit> . hybrid progeny are often at a strong selective disadvantage . however, in some instances the increased genome size and complexity of interspecific hybrids may result in greater fecundity and/or adaptive flexibility than either ancestral species  <cit> , particularly at the edges of the ancestral species' range, where they are more likely to encounter stress  <cit> . this phenomenon is amply documented in the agricultural literature as well as in field-based evolutionary studies  <cit> . laboratory studies of interspecific hybridization have largely been confined to the drosophila species complex, where foundational studies have shaped our understanding of the genetic basis for pre-zygotic and post-zygotic reproductive isolation  <cit> . long-term experimental studies aimed at discerning the evolutionary trajectories open to newly-formed hybrids under different types of selection are lacking, a knowledge gap due in part to the scarcity of hybrid eukaryotes that have the short generation time and ease of preservation needed to undertake experiments lasting hundreds of generations.

experimental evolution studies using microbes have enlarged our understanding of the tempo of adaptive change  <cit> , the shape of the adaptive landscape  <cit> , and the manner in which genotypes navigate that landscape  <cit> . increasingly, the budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae has become a favored model for such studies because of its genetic tractability, arsenal of post-genomic tools, and homology of many of its genes to those in higher eukaryotes. yeast's short generation time, simple, heterogonic life cycle and ease of preservation ideally suit it for studying evolution in the laboratory  <cit> , where it has yielded insights into the physiology of adaptive traits  <cit>  and how genome structure evolves under selection  <cit> .

the  <dig> members of the saccharomyces sensu stricto group, though closely related, have long been recognized as biological species by virtue of their post-zygotic reproductive isolation  <cit> . while bona fide representatives of each species are easily recovered from nature  <cit> , retrospective comparative genomics studies  <cit>  suggest that interspecific hybridization has occurred repeatedly during the group's evolutionary history. indeed, the lager yeast s. pastorianus, which likely arose ~500- <dig> years ago  <cit> , is a natural hybrid of two species, s. cerevisiae and the newly discovered s. eubayanus  <cit> . saccharomyces hybrids have most often been studied with the aim of developing industrially useful traits  <cit> , typically by focusing on the physiology of single clones. however, grieg et al.  showed that the sensu stricto group could also be used to investigate hybrid speciation in the lab  <cit> . currently lacking, however, are prospective studies of interspecific hybrid evolution under different types of selection, using either single clones or, more realistically, populations of hybrid clones, such as one might expect to arise in natural hybrid zones.

the two most distantly-related members of the saccharomyces sensu stricto group, s. cerevisiae and s. uvarum , are largely syntenic, exhibit 80% and 62% nucleotide identity in coding regions and intergenic regions, respectively, and are thought to have diverged ~ <dig> million years ago  <cit> . the two species differ in their stress tolerances, with s. cerevisiae being much more thermal tolerant  <cit>  and slightly more ethanol tolerant  <cit> ; s. cerevisiae x s. uvarum hybrids can exhibit greater ethanol tolerance than either parental species  <cit> . these genetic and phenotypic differences, coupled with the availability of genomic resources for both species, make s. cerevisiae x s. uvarum hybrids an attractive system in which to investigate how newly-formed hybrid genomes evolve under different types of stress. we therefore sporulated a s. cerevisiae x s. uvarum hybrid and mass-mated the progeny to create a pool of s. cerevisiae x s. uvarum homoploid and aneuploid hybrids that was used to found six replicate populations. because fungi in nature are chronically nitrogen limited  <cit> , experimental populations were evolved in a glucose-sufficient, nitrogen-limited 'common garden;' three were subjected to incremental increases in temperature, and three were subjected to incremental increases in ambient ethanol. because the two ancestral species and their f <dig> hybrid exhibit differential sensitivity to temperature and ethanol, and because stress has been shown to increase mitiotic recombination, including chromosome missegregation  <cit> , we hypothesized that the two selective pressures would lead to different genomic outcomes. as prior experiments in s. cerevisiae had shown that thermal tolerance confers cross-protection against other types of stress  <cit> , we further hypothesized that hybrids evolving under temperature selection would not only become more thermal tolerant than their ancestors but also exhibit greater ethanol tolerance, and vice versa.

we tested these hypotheses using an integrated approach that combined physiological assays with analysis of genome structure by clamped homogeneous electric field  electrophoresis and array-comparative genomic hybridization . consistent with our primary hypothesis, temperature selection resulted in loss of the s. uvarum genome from interspecific hybrids, while ethanol selection resulted in yeast that retained essentially both s. cerevisiae and s. uvarum genomes. consistent with our secondary hypothesis, cross-protection to ethanol was evident in the temperature selected isolates; however, cross-protection to thermal stress was not observed among ethanol-selected clones. thus, as hybrid populations evolve under different selection pressures their fate may depend not only on the outcome of competition between individual variants, but also on the outcome of competition between the ancestral genomes themselves.

RESULTS
creation of the founder hybrid population and experimental design
an overview of the experimental design is presented in figure  <dig>  a pool of approximately  <dig>  interspecific hybrid clones was created using two prototrophic parental strains: cen.pk   <cit>  and cbs <dig>   <cit> . we crossed haploid derivatives of the parental strains using double antibiotic selection and verified by pulsed-field gel and by a-cgh that the resulting f <dig> hybrid contained a complete genome from each parent . the hybrid population was then obtained by sporulating the f <dig> hybrid and removing vegetative f <dig> hybrid cells as described in methods and in  <cit> . f <dig> hybrids sporulate at low efficiency, thus sporulation was done en masse. because spore germination occurred in contact with other spores , it is probable that most of the viable and mating-proficient gametes mated, resulting in a genetically mixed hybrid population that was largely diploid. nevertheless, we cannot rule out the possibility that this population may have contained a low proportion of unmated f <dig> gametes. additionally, despite our efforts to obtain a pure f <dig> population, some f <dig> cells did survive the procedure.

hybrid cells with complete or almost-complete chromosomal complements tended to grow faster than those cells that were multiply aneuploid . consequently, our starting inoculum was a complex mixture of f <dig> and f <dig> hybrids having different levels of aneuploidy and specific growth rates. a mixture of f <dig>  haploid and aneuploid f <dig> hybrids is an evolutionarily relevant starting point for our experiments, inasmuch as it mimics the genetic complexity one might expect to see within a hybrid zone  <cit> . we refer to this pool as the founder hybrid population. for purposes of comparison with clones subsequently isolated after many generations of selective growth, three isolates were randomly chosen from the founder hybrid population and denoted h <dig>  h <dig>  and h <dig>  all strains used in this study are listed in additional file 1: table s <dig> 

steady-state population size declines as evolving hybrid populations respond to increases in either temperature or ethanol
in the wild, fungi including yeast are believed to live in a state of chronic nitrogen limitation  <cit> , as do yeast in large-scale industrial fermentations  <cit> . to mimic these conditions we performed our selection experiments in a 'common garden' in which nitrogen in the form of ammonia was limiting. cell density in evolving glucose-sufficient, nh4-limited populations declined as either temperature or ethanol was increased over the course of  <dig> generations . at the onset of experiments, cells cultured at 31°c attained steady state cell densities of  <dig>  ×  <dig> ±  <dig>  × 107cells ml- <dig> . following incremental temperature selection up to  <dig> °c  or ethanol amendment up to 14% , steady state cell densities fell to  <dig>  ×  <dig> ±  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells ml- <dig> and  <dig>  ×  <dig> ±  <dig>  ×  <dig> cells ml- <dig> respectively, a decrease of  <dig> orders of magnitude. indeed, at these low densities it was necessary to decrease chemostat dilution rate in order to prevent yeast populations from washing out of culture vessels, an indication of diminished growth rate under stress. we observed no dramatic between-vessel differences in population parameters, suggesting a similar response to ethanol and temperature selection in independent experiments founded with the same genetically heterogenous inoculum.

yeasts recovered from temperature selection are more thermotolerant than members of the founder population
to assess for heritable adaptations to thermal stress, we compared growth of  <dig> representatives of the founder hybrid population to that of  <dig> isolates selected at elevated temperature . when cultured at 40°c to stationary phase  in liquid low-nitrogen, minimal medium , temperature-selected isolates consistently showed greater thermal tolerance than s. uvarum, the f <dig> hybrid and members of the founder population. as a group, evolved isolates exhibited significantly greater yield than unevolved hybrids . isolates from vessel c had significantly higher cell yield at 40°c than all other isolates including the s. cerevisiae parent .

yeast acquire thermal tolerance following entry into stationary phase  <cit> , as well as following exposure to low levels of heat or other types of stress  <cit> . natural and laboratory variants can also exhibit strain-specific differences in thermal tolerance owing to different genetic backgrounds  <cit> . to test whether selection had resulted in yeast that were inherently more thermal tolerant than members of the founder population we evaluated survivorship of cultures exposed to 48°c for  <dig> h . following  <dig> and  <dig> h incubation at 48°c, all temperature selected isolates exhibited significantly greater survivorship than their ancestral strains . as no s. uvarum cells survived even  <dig> h at 48°c, they are not represented on this graph. we also wished to test the hypothesis that temperature-selected isolates would exhibit greater phenotypic plasticity under thermal stress. to do this, we induced thermal tolerance by first exposing cells to a sub-lethal elevated temperature  for  <dig> h prior to exposure to a 48°c heat shock . aside from s. uvarum, which again had no surviving cells, all other strains exhibited thermotolerance. temperature-selected clones from populations a and c displayed higher survivorship than the s. cerevisiae parent and representative hybrids from the founding hybrid population at  <dig> h ; clones from vessel b had significantly greater survivorship than founding hybrids . thus, selection on a population of interspecific hybrids resulted in yeast that not only sustain growth at higher temperature than members of the founder population, but also are intrinsically more heat-shock resistant and able to acquire greater heat-shock resistance physiologically by induction.

yeasts recovered from ethanol selection do not appear to be more ethanol tolerant than members of the founder population
the manner and extent to which interspecific hybrid populations responded to ethanol selection was less clear-cut. when cultured until stationary phase  in liquid, low-nitrogen minimal medium amended with 8% ethanol, culture densities among ethanol-selected isolates were statistically indistinguishable from those of s. cerevisiae, the f <dig> interspecific hybrid, founder population isolates h <dig> and h <dig>  and the temperature-selected isolates . only the s. uvarum parent and founder isolate h <dig> proved to be ethanol sensitive by this assay . furthermore, temperature selected isolates were no less ethanol tolerant than ethanol-selected isolates.

temperature and ethanol selection can lead to changes in cell wall integrity
heat-shock studies in s. cerevisiae have shown that yeast in prolonged stationary phase become resistant to heat and other stresses owing to progressive changes in cell wall structure that alter its mannoprotein content, increase the amount of chitin incorporated and augment the β- <dig>  glucan fraction  <cit> . phenotypically, such cell wall changes manifest as increased resistance to zymolyase digestion  <cit> . we therefore evaluated resistance of ancestral and evolved yeast to zymolyase digestion using the spheroplast assay described by  <cit> . over the course of a  <dig> h incubation, the cell walls of temperature-selected isolates from vessels a, b, and c consistently exhibited higher average resistance to enzymatic dissolution than did either parental strain, the f <dig>  or isolates from the founder hybrid population . as a group, temperature-selected strains had significantly higher remaining absorbance percentage  after  <dig> h than founder population hybrids , .

we also observed that temperature-selected isolates were more resistant to micafungin, a drug that targets β- <dig>  glucan synthesis  <cit>  . isolates from vessels a and c exhibited significantly greater resistance to this drug than s. cerevisiae, s. uvarum, the f <dig> and founding hybrids . this suggests that changes in cell wall composition or deposition contribute to the thermal tolerant phenotype observed in isolates from vessels a and c, whereas isolates from vessel b may have evolved a different resistance mechanism. this suggestion is supported by the fact that vessel b isolates, while not micafungin-resistant, did exhibit resistance to zymolyase digestion.

although interspecific hybrid populations responded weakly, if at all, to ethanol selection, we nevertheless assayed for heritable changes in cell wall integrity. interestingly, similar to members of the temperature-selected populations, ethanol-selected isolates were more zymolyase resistance than parental species, the f <dig> hybrid and founder isolates , though only isolates from vessel e showed significantly greater zymolyase resistance than founding hybrids after  <dig> h of treatment . strains isolated from ethanol-selected populations showed no difference in micafungin sensitivity relative to the parental species, the s. cerevisiae x s. uvarum f <dig> hybrid, or isolates drawn from the founder population .

temperature and ethanol selection lead to different genomic outcomes
we initially assessed genome-wide changes in evolving hybrid populations by analyzing their electrokaryotypes using contour-clamped homogeneous electric field  electrophoresis. chef analysis indicated that the founding hybrid population consisted of a mixture of f <dig> and f <dig> spore progeny . following  <dig> generations of temperature selection under nitrogen limitation , populations in vessels a and b appeared to be karyotypically monomorphic, whereas the population in vessel c was polymorphic , albeit with a numerically dominant clone. interestingly, the numerically dominant karyotype in each population  could be readily distinguished from the dominant clone in each of the other two populations , indicating that while cell growth phenotypes might have been similar among vessels, genome content was not. in other words, different genomic architectures can solve the problem of growing at elevated temperature under nitrogen limitation. further inspection of the karyotypes suggested that clones from populations in vessels a and c had lost virtually all the s. uvarum chromosomal complement of their genomes, keeping only the s. cerevisiae genome, while isolates from vessel b retained not only the entire s. cerevisiae genome, but also an additional chromosome . the dramatic large-scale genomic changes observed during temperature selection contrast sharply with ethanol selection, where after  <dig> generations, hybrids showed few rearrangements and no apparent loss of either parental genome .

temperature selection on the founding hybrid population favors loss of the s. uvarum genome
because changes in cell size and budding pattern  suggested that temperature-adapted interspecific hybrids had become haploid, genome content was assessed by flow cytometry of sytox green-stained cells. as anticipated, the parental species, the f <dig> interspecific hybrid, and a representative from the founder hybrid population were all diploid, whereas temperature-selected clone a <dig> was haploid . to estimate the approximate number of generations required for haploid cells to become prevalent in experimental populations we performed flow cytometry on archived population samples . we found that although populations in vessels a, b and c were founded with the same inoculum, the transition from diploidy to haploidy occurred at a different time in each . the last point at which population a was predominantly diploid was  <dig> generations , population b,  <dig> generations  and population c,  <dig> generations . moreover, the number of additional generations subsequently required for haploid, or nearly haploid genomes, to become prevalent differed among replicate experiments. an additional  <dig> generations ensued before population a became mostly haploid, whereas this occurred in population b within  <dig> generations. and although haploids arose earliest in population c,  <dig> additional generations elapsed before the population became mostly haploid. because the kinetics of transition between diploidy and haploidy differed among populations, fitness relationships between haploids and diploids co-evolving in each vessel likely came to differ, even though all were founded with the same inoculum and maintained under identical conditions.

we speculate that haploids arose when diploid hybrids sporulated under aerobic nitrogen limitation. alternatively, a rare haploid, or nearly-haploid, f <dig> gamete may have been present in the initial founder hybrid population. if such a gamete contained only s. cerevisiae chromosomes and no s. uvarum chromosomes, it would have been ho- , and could therefore have remained haploid. whatever their origin, multiple temperature-selected clones exhibited chromosome rearrangements at  <dig> generations . s. cerevisiae-like haploids likely acquired a competitive advantage at temperatures exceeding 35°c, a speculation supported by reports that the cardinal growth temperature of s. cerevisiae is significantly greater than s. uvarum  <cit>  and . given that temperature tolerance is a multi-locus, quantitative trait  <cit> , haploidization resulting in nearly-complete loss of the s. uvarum genome complement provides the shortest path to thermal tolerance for s. cerevisiae x s. uvarum hybrids. further, haploid s. cerevisae are known to exhibit greater induced thermotolerance than isogenic diploids  <cit> , and haploids outcompete diploids at elevated temperature  when serially propagated in either ypd or low-nitrogen, minimal medium  <cit> . consistent with these observations, after  <dig> h of growth at 40°c the haploid form of our s. cerevisiae parent attained higher cell density than the diploid .

two species array comparative genomic hybridization supports the inference that genome evolution in interspecific hybrid populations is selection-specific
to further characterize genomic changes that may have occurred during evolution at elevated temperatures or elevated ethanol, we performed array-comparative genomic hybridization  on the temperature- and ethanol-selected isolates as well as on parental strains and founding hybrids, using microarrays designed to uniquely detect hybridization to either the s. cerevisiae or the s. uvarum genomes, as described in  <cit> . analysis of the parental strains indicates that our s. cerevisiae and s. uvarum isolates appear exactly as expected, i.e., they contain full genomes of their respective species with no chromosomal regions corresponding to the alternate species . the parental f <dig> hybrid contains, also as expected, a full set of chromosomes from both its s. cerevisiae and s. uvarum parents . three isolates from the founder hybrid population were examined by a-cgh . one  appears to contain a complete two-species genomic complement, and is thus possibly an f <dig> hybrid , consistent with its chef electrokaryotype . two other isolates from the founder hybrid population  lack s. uvarum chromosome iii , as was also seen by chef. at the level of resolution afforded by a-cgh we see no evidence for recombination between parental genomes in . indeed, without a separate study on recombination in s. cerevisiae x s. uvarum hybrids it would be impossible to distinguish between an f <dig> that lost s. uvarum chromosome iii and an f <dig> that retained the majority of both parental genomes. nevertheless, even given the likelihood of suppressed recombination between homeologous chromosomes, the founding hybrid population was genomically diverse, owing to random segregation of these homeologous chromosomes when the f <dig> hybrid underwent meiosis.

using a-cgh we examined the same  <dig> temperature-selected isolates described above . for all  <dig> clones, the genome complement appears to be comprised solely of that of the s. cerevisiae parent . the a-cgh results for the three vessel a clones thus closely agree with their chef gel results ; furthermore, a-cgh reveals that all three vessel a clones contain a small deletion in the s. cerevisiae genome; because its length is only ~1- <dig> kb it was undetectable on chef gels. this deletion is located on chromosome iv and corresponds to the ars in the region between hxt <dig> and hxt <dig> . as the deletion appears identical among the three clones within the detection limits of a-cgh, it likely arose from the same member of the founder hybrid population within population a and does not represent multiple independent evolutionary events. additional experiments will be required to ascertain both its prevalence in the vessel a population , as well as its possible adaptive value.

for the three 500-generation clones from population b and c, our a-cgh results do not intuitively agree with the chef results. chef gel karyotypes for all b clones appear to show the presence of an additional chromosome; although the band is similar  to mobility of s. uvarum chromosome xi, a-cgh results from all assayed 500-generation vessel b clones show the presence of only the parental s. cerevisiae genome  indicating that the band must derive from a copy-neutral event within the s. cerevisiae genome. similarly, the chef electrokaryotypes of the clones from population c show increase in size of at least two of the smaller chromosomes, but again, only the parental s. cerevisiae genome is present , suggesting the occurrence of copy-neutral rearrangements.

we also performed a-cgh on  <dig> ethanol-selected isolates from each of vessels d, e, and f . we investigated clones from the  <dig> generation time-point rather than at  <dig> generations, as we had observed greater karyotypic diversity in the  <dig> generation populations . an ethanol-selected clone from vessel d  appeared to be an essentially euploid f <dig> hybrid with a large deletion in the s. cerevisiae genome :  <dig> kb of the right end of chromosome xii, starting just proximal to  the tus <dig> gene and extending to the right telomere, is deleted in this isolate. interestingly, tus <dig> is involved in cell integrity signalling  <cit>  and its deletion results in increased chitin deposition  <cit> ; ecm <dig>  which is also included in the deleted region, is a gene possibly involved in cell wall biosynthesis. this deletion may explain the increased zymolyase resistance observed in vessel d isolates . the vessel e isolate examined by a- cgh again appeared to be an essentially euploid f <dig> , but exhibited a  <dig> kb deletion on its s. cerevisiae chromosome xiv starting between mep <dig> and aah <dig> and extending to a trna gene just beyond fyv <dig>  the deleted region contains genes involved in a variety of functions including nitrogen utilization , recombination  and chromatin modifications . the ethanol-selected isolate from vessel f lost its s. cerevisiae mitochondrial genome, yet otherwise appeared as an intact euploid f <dig> hybrid .

CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first to report how populations of interspecific hybrid organisms evolving in the laboratory follow dramatically different evolutionary trajectories depending on the selective pressures applied. indeed, to the best of our knowledge this is the first long-term study in experimental microbial evolution initiated with a heterogenous population of genetically diverse variants rather than with a homogenous population derived from a single clone. this collection of variants was used to found six replicate populations that evolved under glucose-sufficient, nitrogen-limiting conditions: three under temperature selection and three under ethanol selection.

in clones that arose under temperature selection, thermal tolerance was significantly greater than that of isolates in the founder population and of the parental f <dig> strain, a result likely due in part to segregational loss of the temperature-sensitive s. uvarum genome, resulting in s. cerevisiae haploids. this event occurred independently in all populations under temperature selection, although the haploid variants arose at different times and swept their respective populations over different time intervals. interestingly, loss of heterozygosity under thermal and oxidative stress has recently been documented in candida albicans, where increased stress appears to elevate rates of recombination, including chromosome missegration  <cit> . in diploid s. cerevisiae, haploidization has now been shown to provide an escape for persistent dna rearrangement stress due to the presence of mutator alleles  <cit> . thus, strong selection to augment thermal tolerance as well as to diminish dna stress may help to explain the outcome of temperature selection on a population of newly-formed interspecific hybrids.

heritable thermotolerance among these strains was evident in their ability to grow at temperatures restrictive to founding hybrid isolates on solid  and in liquid media, as well as in their intrinsic and acquired resistance to heat shock. temperature-selected strains were also ethanol resistant, most likely due to loss of the ethanol-sensitive s. uvarum genome  <cit> . based on chef analysis, two of three temperature-selected populations came to be dominated by a unique karyotype, while one remained polymorphic, indicating multiple pathways to the evolution of thermotolerance. evolution of multiple heat stress tolerance mechanisms was also manifest as differential, strain-specific resistance to zymolyase digestion as well as to micafungin, a drug that targets cell wall biosynthesis. because increased zymolyase resistance correlates with increased ethanol resistance  <cit> , adaptive changes in cell wall integrity in temperature-selected clones may underlie "cross-protection" against ethanol stress.

under temperature selection, adaptive changes in zymolyase and micafungin resistance could be expected inasmuch as cell wall integrity has been shown to play a key role in thermal stress response  <cit> . acquisition of thermotolerance in diauxic and stationary phase yeast has also been linked to accumulation of the disaccharide trehalose  <cit> , however, we uncovered no evidence that trehalose hyper-accumulates in heat-shock resistant clones that arose under temperature selection .

we uncovered little evidence for adaptive evolution of ethanol tolerance. populations evolved under ethanol selection became dominated by euploid s. cerevisiae x s. uvarum hybrids. these hybrids showed improved growth on ethanol-amended media relative to some , but not all founding hybrids, nor to the parental f <dig> strain. evidence suggesting heritable changes in cell wall composition in these isolates was limited to higher  zymolyase resistance. we therefore conclude that a subset of euploid hybrids in the original founder population was at or near a fitness peak for ethanol tolerance  <cit> , providing limited scope for selection.

it is important to bear in mind that temperature and ethanol tolerance assays were performed on only a few clones that together represent a small fraction of the genetic variation latent in our terminal populations. other clones may exist that exhibit even greater thermal tolerance and, perhaps also greater ethanol tolerance. indeed, in follow-up experiments we found that the temperature-selected clones we had randomly chosen for analysis grew poorly in chemostat monoculture at > 45°c, suggesting that other more highly tolerant variants exist in the terminal populations. also, it may be that a slow ramp-up in temperature may be required even for thermotolerant clones to achieve their true performance maxima. we acknowledge the possibility that highly stress tolerant variants may have been present in the hybrid founder population used for these experiments. such clones may have persisted at low frequency under slow growth conditions  until selection favored them over more abundant, stress-sensitive clones. this possibility highlights an outstanding unresolved issue in experimental evolution, namely the extent to which adaptation results from accumulation of de novo mutations as opposed to selection of rare adaptive mutants that may exist at the onset of selection. in this regard, it would be interesting to perform a high-throughput phenotypic screen of hundreds of variants in the founder and terminal populations, as well as to perform population sequencing at the beginning and end of these experiments. still, given that selection was applied over the course of  <dig> generations it is virtually certain that multiple de novo mutations distinguish members of the terminal populations from their common ancestors.

the industrial applications of hybrid variability have already been recognized  <cit> , and our approach of selecting on a diverse hybrid population may be used to enhance routine industrial strain development. however, our findings highlight the need to carefully choose appropriate parental strains as the selection process cannot rely solely on hybrid vigor. genome plasticity under strong selection may lead to unexpected results, such as the shedding of one or another parental genome. in our experiments this remarkable occurrence seems to provide the most direct route to thermal tolerance, a trait whose many genetic determinants are widely distributed across the s. uvarum and s. cerevisiae genomes. selection on a genetically diverse population of s. cerevisiae alone might produce comparable gains in fitness at high temperatures. indeed, wild isolates of that species have been isolated which can grow at temperatures exceeding 45°c  <cit> , and genome shuffling experiments  <cit>  involving recursive protoplast fusions have produced s. cerevisiae strains that aggressively ferment at temperatures up to 48°c  <cit> . most importantly, our findings highlight the importance of the ecological theatre in determining the outcome of the evolutionary play. euploid interspecific s. cerevisiae x s. uvarum hybrids are genetically stable and highly fit as ambient levels of ethanol increase, but poorly fit under rising temperature. thus, the evolutionary fate of hybrids in nature likely depends as much on their environmental context as on their genetic potential.

