BACKGROUND
large numbers of dna elements  exhibiting 100% similarity have been found to be conserved across several mammalian species  <cit> . shorter ultraconserved elements  longer than  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp have also been identified in several insect species and plants, respectively  <cit> .

since the discovery of uces, a lot of effort has been expended on elucidating their functions and to determine the reasons for their extreme conservation. uces are often located near genes implicated in transcription and developmental processes, splicing, and ion flow control across membranes  <cit> . in vivo analysis of the embryos of transgenic mice uncovered the transcriptional enhancer activities of uces targeting developmental genes and transcription factors   <cit> . depletion of uces among segmental duplications and copy number variations were also reported  <cit> . single nucleotide polymorphisms  in uces have been linked to cancer risk, impaired tf binding, and homeobox gene regulation in the central nervous system  <cit> . nevertheless, homozygote embryo knockout experiments in mice revealed that deletion of ultraconserved elements can yield viable mice, suggesting the dispensability or functional redundancy of uces  <cit> .

the origin and evolution of uces have also been also investigated. there is evidence that some uces originated from retroposons and stabilized in genomes after acquiring a function that benefitted the host  <cit> . stephen et al. studied the evolution of uces in several vertebrate genomes and found that they were generated and expanded on a large scale during tetrapod evolution  <cit> . other studies of the human genome showed that uces experienced strong purifying selection and were not mutational cold spots  <cit> .

in this study, we investigated if evidence of the conservation of dna elements could be found in primitive species, such as sponge and hydra, and if these conserved elements have similar functions as those previously reported for higher eukaryotes. we identified many uces across diverse phyla, including porifera, cnidaria, arthropoda, echinodermata, and chordata, as well as a new type of short uces. by comparing distant species, we were able to identify new uces in human and fruit fly. clustering the uces based on the sequence similarity unveiled lineage specificity and distinct functions outlined by protein domains of their flanking genes and dna regulatory motifs. we concluded that each uce group arose independently on a specific lineage and was “frozen” on the genome as a regulatory innovation after the divergence of specific taxa.

RESULTS
identification of ultraconserved elements across diverse taxa
we began our analysis by asking if there is evidence of ultraconservation in primitive species and, if so, how uces diverged during the process of evolution. we considered six species whose genomes were previously sequenced including demosponge  from the phylum porifera, hydra  and sea anemone  from the phylum cnidaria, sea urchin  from the phylum echinodermata, fruit fly  from the phylum arthropoda, and human  from the phylum chordata. we identified uces  and shorter uces  by pairwise comparison of the whole genomic sequences across six species.

unexpectedly, the number of identified uces and the size of some of them  were large considering the evolutionary distance between analyzed species. this result suggested the presence of uces in primitive species and across distant taxa . most of the uces were found in hydra and sea anemone, which belong to the same phylum, cnidaria. however, the exact reason for the predominance of uces in these species cannot be addressed until more genome sequences of species around this lineage become available and current genome assemblies are improved. interestingly, the longest uce  was conserved in both sea anemone and human, two species that diverged approximately  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . we found that the number of uces and the evolutionary distance  between species are negatively correlated, an observation that is also the case for shorter uces.

columns and rows are sorted by the phylogeny as shown in figure  <dig>  upper and lower triangles show the numbers of  <dig> % identical matches ≥  <dig> bp and ≥  <dig> bp between two species, respectively.

we noticed that a large number of conserved dna elements that we identified overlapped in each species because the uce-identification program, mummer, reported all maximal matches regardless of the overlap  <cit> . to minimize redundancy and facilitate downstream analysis, neighboring uces and short uces in each species were joined as non-overlapping ultraconserved regions  . the numbers of these non-overlapping ucrs  were  <dig> for sponge,  <dig> for fruit fly,  <dig> for hydra,  <dig> for human,  <dig>  for sea anemone, and  <dig> for sea urchin.

novel ultraconserved elements in human and fruit fly
as a benchmark for our uce discovery pipeline, we examined how many uces that had been previously identified we were able to recover. previously reported uces in human and fruit fly were aligned to their reference genome using bowtie  <cit>  to determine their exact locations in the current genome build . the majority of known uces  were successfully aligned. we then compared these elements with our ucr set. unlike in the fruit fly where  <dig> out of  <dig> ucrs overlapped with data reported by glazov et al.  <cit> , we could not find any ucr in human that overlapped with previously reported uces  <cit>  .

to understand this incongruence, we tested if our pipeline could recover known uces of the human-mouse-rat alignment with the same species list and length constraint  of bejerano et al.  <cit> . our pipeline recovered  <dig> out of  <dig> known human uces that are conserved both in mouse and rat. the missing  <dig> known uces overlapped with repetitive regions, and these elements could not be recovered by our pipeline, which masks repetitive elements. furthermore, the human uces that were conserved in mouse and rat identified by our pipeline did not also overlap with those newly identified in this study, suggesting that our pipeline works properly. the effect of the genome assembly version used for uce identification was also negligible as explained above. on the other hand, our stringent repeat masking reduced the number of detectable known uces. the numbers of known uces were  <dig>   <dig> , and  <dig> for human-mouse-rat, d. melanogasterd. pseudoobscura, and d. melanogastera. gambiae, respectively, when we removed known uces with simple and known repetitive elements by repeat-masked chromosomes  <cit> , censor  <cit> , and tandem repeat finder  <cit> , the same criteria that we used in this study. however, the most important factor contributing to the identification of novel ucrs was the length constraint  and species compared. to test this further, our human ucr set was divided into  <dig> bp sub-sequences, and then a search for these sub-sequences in the genomes of mouse and rat was conducted. of  <dig> ucrs, one sub-sequence occurred in both the mouse and rat genomes with 100% similarity. on the other hand, the other  <dig> ucrs were not conserved in both species, suggesting that those sequences were no longer under strong selective pressure in rodents and could therefore not be identified by the traditional human-mouse-rat alignment . indeed, large portions of identified human uces are positioned in less conserved loci in placental mammals , which further supports our findings of novel highly conserved dna elements in model organisms.

ucr clusters arose independently
we then sought evidence for if ucrs from the same or different species share similarity. considering the short length of ucrs and also assuming that distal regions of ultraconserved elements have higher mutation rates than proximal regions  <cit> , we analyzed ucrs and their  <dig> bp-flanking sequences. in all,  <dig>  ucrs with flanking sequences from all species were clustered, and orthologous and paralogous ucrs were defined. this yielded  <dig> clusters, of which the largest cluster consisted of  <dig>  ucrs from hydra, sea anemone, and sea urchin .

although there are large numbers of ucrs across different taxa, we found that ucrs share sequence similarities and that each cluster of ucrs has a distinct species composition. moreover, cnidarian ucrs show a tight association, while human ucrs are largely clustered together with those of sea urchin and/or fruit fly . gain of essential functions for the survival of the species in ancestral sequences might contribute to the conservation of the sequence in a specific lineage  <cit> . another possible explanation would be that even if the ancestral sequences were not beneficial to the species, random sampling contributed to the elimination of other alleles and the fixation of these sequences in the downsized population, creating a new lineage, due to natural catastrophe or population migration, referred to as a “genetic drift” or “population bottleneck”  <cit> . although further study is required to explain the immutability of uces after lineage divergence and sequence fixation across a long evolutionary history, we cannot rule out this possibility. it also should be noted that the absence of ucrs in species from the same lineage does not necessarily mean that those ucrs disappeared in those species but rather that they may exist as derivative sequences by mutation  <cit> .

as shown in figure 3a and additional file  <dig>  ucr clusters are clearly separated in a minimum curvilinear embedding  plot  <cit> , although species is not a good factor to distinguish ucrs . short ucrs  also followed a similar pattern. interestingly, some clusters have nearly symmetric elements on the mce plot and it turns out that they are partially reversed complementary sequences.

network topology demonstrates the relationship between these ucr clusters, where some clusters are connected due to the sequence similarity between components, although most clusters do not share sequence similarity with others and have unique species composition . thus, the ucrs of each cluster may have their own independent origin in a specific lineage.

the neighboring genes of ucrs have distinct functions
uces are often flanked by developmental genes, tfs, ion channels, or splicing factors  <cit> . we investigated the functions of each cluster’s nearby genes. due to the paucity of functional annotations of genes and the short length of genome scaffolds in non-model species , we focused our analysis on the protein domains of nearby genes within  <dig> kb from ucrs. neighboring genes to ucr clusters span a spectrum of statistically significant protein domains. however, each cluster is enriched with a distinct set of domains .

ion channel and transporter domains are the predominant categories; they appear in many clusters composed of various species. neurotransmitter-gated ion channels and sodium or calcium ion exchanger genes are overrepresented in clusters  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  whose ucrs are conserved in all species considered here but human . cation transporters are identified in cluster  <dig>  which consists of human and fruit fly ucrs. sugar transporters and mitochondrial carrier domains that transport various molecules across membranes are enriched in clusters  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  these observations are probably because ion channels and transporters are crucial in all living organisms for the maintenance of water, salt, and nutrient homeostasis as well as for electric signal transmission in neuronal and muscle cells  <cit> .

the homeobox domain, part of the tfs that act during the developmental process, is enriched in five clusters. this domain is found in all six species, with three of the five enriched ucr clusters composed of ucrs from human and fruit fly, one from fruit fly and sea urchin, and the last cluster from hydra, sea anemone, and sea urchin. fruit fly genes regulating developmental programs ranging from axis patterning to molting, such as bicoid, fushi tarazu, and ecdysone receptor, are also found in several clusters, even those without significant domains.

histones are overrepresented in cluster  <dig>  which consists of sea anemone and sea urchin ucrs. evidence that chromatin-related genes flank conserved elements in human  and from other studies  <cit>  suggest that there is a liaison between conserved elements and epigenetic control mechanisms.

detoxification domains such as cytochrome p <dig>  udpgt, and gst are enriched in cluster  <dig> and cluster  <dig>  cluster  <dig> consists of ucrs from sponge, hydra, sea anemone, and sea urchin; cluster  <dig> consists of ucrs from fruit fly and human. these enzymes are important to catalyzing and eliminating endogenous and exogenous substrates and therefore to providing a healthy environment for the cellular system  <cit> . this remarkable linkage between ucrs and detoxification mechanisms has not previously been reported to our knowledge.

further analysis of ucrs  and short ucrs  in human reveals similar but more interesting properties in terms of nearby gene functions and species conservation . genes acting in various developmental processes are highly enriched near the ucrs in human that are also conserved in fruit fly and sea urchin. to our surprise and contrary to previous studies, few genes related to development are enriched near the human sequences conserved in sponge, hydra, or sea anemone. expansion of the relationship between developmental programs and ucrs in human, fruit fly and sea urchin  implies that the association of conserved sequences with the regulation of developmental genes started or expanded after the divergence of the bilateria lineage from the metazoan stem. our ucr clustering results bolster this hypothesis . four out of five ucr clusters that have overrepresented homeobox domains of nearby genes come from human, fruit fly, and sea urchin.

interestingly, genes surrounding short ucrs are enriched with epigenetic program-related genes . short ucrs conserved in human and in fruit fly, hydra, sea anemone, or sea urchin are located near histone gene clusters across several chromosomes. furthermore, many important epigenetic regulators are also found near elements conserved in sponge, hydra, sea anemone, or sea urchin. these include histone demethylases , histone acetyltransferases , histone deacetylases , retinoblastoma-like protein , polycomb ring finger oncogene , chromodomain helicase , and components of the chromatin remodeling complex, swi/snf . taken together with the previously suggested relationship between highly/ultraconserved elements and epigenetic control  <cit> , our results suggest an interesting hypothesis that epigenetic control mechanisms have tight relationships with conserved dna sequences and that they might have coevolved from metazoan ancestors rather than recently developed.

genes implicated in apoptosis, olfactory reception, and defense mechanisms are also enriched near dna elements conserved in sponge, hydra, or sea urchin . our analysis suggests that genomes preserve ancestral sequences well, and these ancestral sequences might have coevolved with a diverse set of essential genes. when and how genes and conserved elements initiated their relationships remains unclear and the mechanism for such an association needs to be further elucidated. however, our analysis expands the repertoire of conserved genomic elements that are possible regulatory elements.

ucrs are enriched with binding sites for developmental tfs
the enhancer activities of uces have been reported by several studies  <cit> . to investigate the possibility that these enhancer activities were also conserved in primitive species, we identified significantly overrepresented oligomers and related tf binding sites  for each ucr cluster .

among  <dig> tfs that had significant 8-mer matches,  <dig> were implicated in developmental processes and many were homeobox tfs. binding sites of homeobox tfs on uces near the developmental genes in higher eukaryotes have been identified  <cit> , although our clustering results identified various nearby gene categories that were not limited to developmental genes. prevalent occurrence of developmental tfbss regardless of cluster and species may be an indication that extensive binding of developmental tfs on uces existed in metazoan ancestors and these tfs regulated various nearby genes to coordinate developmental functions. these may have contributed to the strong selective pressure on uces that function as regulatory sequences.

CONCLUSIONS
genomes are dynamic entities and are under selective evolutionary pressure from mutation and fixation. beneficial or neutral mutations in the ancestors of specific lineages are maintained in the population and vertically transferred to descendants  <cit> . however, these dynamic and selective pressures are not applied uniformly across the whole genome  <cit> . deleterious mutations in essential regions are corrected in a population  <cit> . sequence conservation thus implies that the function of the sequence is essential. despite controversy about the indispensability of ultraconserved elements  <cit> , much work has demonstrated various vital functions of such elements  <cit> .

as more genomes from various taxa are being sequenced, the opportunity to understand genome conservation and usage increases. here, we compared genome sequences ranging from primitive aquatic to higher terrestrial species and described for the first time a number of novel uces present in primitive species as well as previously uncharacterized uces in human and fruit fly. we observed that uces cluster by sequence similarity and each cluster has distinct patterns of species composition. these uces also exhibited specific biases toward the function of nearby genes and oligomer compositions of the uce sequences, suggesting that each group of uces was generated in the common ancestors of specific lineages and fixed during the evolution of descendants. although a more detailed functional analysis of uces cannot currently be conducted due to the nature of the short draft sequences and because gene functions of non-model species have been less studied, our analysis suggests that uces harbor important sequence features, such as binding sites of developmental tfs to coordinate the expression of essential genes, which is why they were readily conserved over the long course of evolution.

