BACKGROUND
pseudomonas aeruginosa is a ubiquitous environmental gram-negative soil bacterium that is also an important opportunistic human pathogen causing a variety of different nosocomial infections including pneumonia, catheter and urinary tract infections as well as sepsis in burn wound and immunocompromised patients  <cit> . moreover, p. aeruginosa is the most prevalent and significant pulmonary pathogen in patients with cystic fibrosis causing eventually fatal lung disease  <cit> . the inability to successfully clear p. aeruginosa infections through antibiotic treatment is a major contributor to the complicated and often severe outcome of p. aeruginosa infections  <cit> . it demonstrates high intrinsic resistance to antibiotics and an ability to develop even higher resistance through mutation, acquisition of genetic elements, and adaptation to environmental conditions, e.g. through biofilm formation on surfaces.

p. aeruginosa also possesses a large arsenal of virulence-related factors. among others are a type ii, iii and vi secretion system and their associated effector proteins such as extracellular proteases and phospholipases and the type iii secreted toxins exou, s, t and y. in addition, they have flagella and type iv pili that are involved in motility and host cell adhesion  <cit> . p. aeruginosa also regulates the gene expression of most virulence factors including genes involved in iron acquisition , toxin production , exopolysaccharide biosynthesis or biofilm formation in a cell density dependant manner termed quorum sensing mediated by the two master regulators lasr and rhlr  <cit> . although some virulence factors seem to be host or site specific, the majority are involved in multi-host infections in a variety of different non-mammalian and mammalian organisms including amoebae, flies, nematodes, rodents and humans  <cit> .

the coordinated control of the production of virulence and antibiotic resistance factors and the ability to adapt to various environmental changes is a likely and important reason that p. aeruginosa is a successful and common pathogen. the genome sequence of this microorganism revealed that more than  <dig> genes, representing nearly 10% of the genome, have a putative role in regulation  <cit> . in addition to conventional regulators involved in transcription of particular genes, e.g. sigma factors, repressors, activators or two-component response regulators, p. aeruginosa possesses several additional proteins that modulate translation, protein biosynthesis and degradation, etc. here we have defined the role of the gtpase typa in the lifestyle of p. aeruginosa.

typa, also named bipa, belongs to a superfamily of ribosome-binding gtpases within the trafac class  of gtpases  <cit> . gtpases are widely distributed molecular switches found across all bacterial species, and generally cycle between a gdp-bound “off” state and a gtp-bound “on” state  <cit> . collectively they are involved in the regulation of multiple cellular processes and can play important roles in translation, ribosome biogenesis and assembly, trna modification, protein translocation, cell polarity, cell division and signaling events  <cit> . since gtpases are widely conserved in prokaryotes and play an essential role in many important bacterial processes, they are an attractive target for novel antibiotic development  <cit> .

typa is highly conserved in bacteria and shares sequence homologies to other gtpases like elongation factor g. it is found in many pathogens of significant public health importance including vibrio cholera, yersinia pestis and mycobacterium tuberculosis <cit> . although its precise function is still poorly understood, typa has been suggested to be involved in the regulation of virulence and stress responses in pathogenic escherichia coli <cit>  and salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium  <cit> , and stress responses in non-pathogenic sinorhizobium meliloti <cit>  and bacillus subtilis <cit> . open reading frame pa <dig> is annotated as the gtpase typa, exhibits 75% sequence homology to typa/bipa from e. coli <cit> , and plays a role in swarming motility and biofilm formation in p. aeruginosa pao <dig>  <cit> . however, the role of typa in pathogenesis of p. aeruginosa is still unknown.

here we constructed a knock-out mutant of typa in p. aeruginosa pa <dig> and demonstrated the involvement of typa in the pathogenesis of p. aeruginosa using different in vitro and in vivo infection model systems. consistent with these data, we showed using gene expression analysis that several virulence-associated genes were down-regulated in a typa mutant during host-pathogen interaction. we also found that typa plays a role in antibiotic resistance to a variety of different antibiotics and initial attachment leading to subsequent biofilm formation in p. aeruginosa pa <dig> 

RESULTS
typa is involved in p. aeruginosa virulence
previously, we showed that a mutation in the typa gene led to a defect in particular virulence-associated features such as swarming and biofilm formation in p. aeruginosa pao <dig>  <cit> . to further investigate the involvement of typa in the pathogenesis of p. aeruginosa, we constructed a site-directed typa knock-out mutant in p. aeruginosa strain pa <dig>  strain pa <dig> is capable of infecting a wide range of organisms including the amoeba d. discoideum <cit>  and the nematode c. elegans <cit>  and was therefore more suitable for virulence analysis using in vivo model systems in comparison to strain pao <dig> 

detailed analyses of virulence attenuation of the pa <dig> typa mutant using the unicellular eukaryotic model organism d. discoideum revealed a consistent, statistically significant  2-fold reduction in the numbers of amoebae required to form a plaque when compared to wild type strain pa <dig> . the virulence phenotype could be completely restored to wild type level by heterologous expression of the cloned typa gene in strain pa <dig> typa::ptypa+. in comparison, a similar 2-fold reduction in numbers of amoebae was determined when analyzing pa <dig> transposon mutant id <dig> obtained from the harvard pa <dig> mutant library  <cit>  with a defect in the pscc gene, which is an essential part of the type iii secretion system machinery  <cit> , as a control . to exclude the fact that a simple growth deficiency of the typa mutant is responsible for the attenuated virulence phenotype of pa <dig> typa, we performed growth analyses at 23°c and 37°c in m <dig> minimal medium using a tecan plate reader under shaking conditions. at both temperatures no significant growth defect was observed .

since phagocytosis of pathogens by macrophages is a crucial factor in the human immune defense system, we quantitatively analyzed in vitro uptake of pa <dig> wt and respective mutant strains using human macrophages in a gentamicin protection assay. we determined a more than 2-fold increase in internalization of the typa and the pscc mutant strain in comparison to cells of pa <dig> wt and complemented strain pa <dig> typa::ptypa+ . this result was in accord with the virulence defect observed in the amoeba model of infection, which is similarly based on phagocytic killing of bacterial cells.

to better understand the mechanism of virulence deficiency in the typa mutant, we additionally determined virulence in a nematode infection model using c. elegans as host organism under slow killing conditions. in contrast to the type iii secretion based killing of unicellular eukaryotic hosts like amoebae or macrophages, nematode killing is rather dependent on quorum sensing related virulence features in p. aeruginosa <cit> . when feeding c. elegans with pa <dig> wild type, typa mutant and complemented pa <dig> typa::ptypa+ strain, we observed a similar worm killing rate for all tested strains with only marginal differences between pa <dig> wild type and typa knock-out mutant at day  <dig> of the incubation time .

typa is involved in rapid attachment and biofilm formation
the ability to form biofilms is a known and important factor in the pathogenesis of p. aeruginosa. to assess the ability of the typa mutant to develop biofilms, static microtiter assays were performed to show that pa <dig> typa displayed with approximately 20% reduction a statistically significant  impairment in biofilm formation at 24 hours  in comparison to the pa <dig> wt. this biofilm defect could be complemented by heterologous expression of wild type typa in strain pa <dig> typa::ptypa+. to analyze whether this biofilm formation phenotype emerged during the initial adherence phase or later during biofilm growth, a rapid attachment assay was carri d out. the mutant pa <dig> typa exhibited with approximately 20% reduction a statistically significant  defect in adherence which was similar to the biofilm phenotype.

however, the investigation of flagellum-mediated swimming and swarming motility as well as the type iv pilus-mediated twitching motility, which are all involved in attachment and subsequent biofilm development, revealed no differences between mutant and wild type strain  ruling out defects in the biosynthesis and function of these cellular appendages in the typa mutant.

antibiotic susceptibility testing
since recent studies have demonstrated a role for typa in multidrug resistance in e. coli <cit> , we studied the impact of the typa gene in antibiotic resistance of p. aeruginosa against a variety of different antimicrobial compounds. as shown in table  <dig>  the typa mutant exhibited a consistent 2-fold increase in susceptibility to the cationic peptides polymyxin b and colistin, the ß-lactam antibiotics ceftazidime and meropenem, as well as tetracycline in comparison to the parent strain. this altered susceptibility could be complemented by introducing wild type copies of typa into the mutant strain. no change in susceptibility was observed regarding the fluoroquinolone ciprofloxacin, the aminoglycoside tobramycin, and the cationic host defence peptide ll- <dig> .

amics were determined by serial 2-fold dilutions in mh-medium. the mic represents the concentration at which no growth was visually observed after  <dig> h of incubation at 37°c. the values shown are the modes of  <dig> to  <dig> independent experiments.

reduced virulence of pa <dig> typa due to down-regulation of the type iii secretion system
previous studies have shown, that uptake by and killing of eukaryotic host cells is highly dependent on the type iii secretion system in p. aeruginosa <cit> . to analyze the potential molecular basis for reduced virulence of the typa mutant observed in our experiments, we investigated gene expression of known virulence-associated genes in p. aeruginosa using qrt-pcr on bacterial rna of wild type and typa mutant strain isolated during host-pathogen interaction with d. discoideum. these studies revealed that under the tested conditions, genes coding for the synthesis, function and regulation of the type iii secretion system, were significantly down-regulated in the typa mutant compared to wild type . this observed down-regulation of important virulence-related genes is consistent with the noticed virulence defects in the cellular infection studies with d. discoideum and human macrophages as hosts.

discussion
in this study, we have shown that typa is involved in virulence of p. aeruginosa by analyzing the consequences of a typa knock-out on phagocytic amoebae and human macrophages as well as the interaction with the nematode c. elegans. moreover, typa also contributes to resistance to different antibiotics as well as attachment and biofilm formation in p. aeruginosa.

typa is a highly conserved prokaryotic gtpase exhibiting structural homologies to translation factor gtpases such as ef-g and lepa and is described to associate with the ribosomes under normal bacterial growth  <cit> . in enteropathogenic e. coli , typa co-ordinates the expression of key stress and virulence factors including flagella, type iii secretion system as well as the lee and the espc pathogenicity islands  <cit>  by regulating gene expression of major regulators such as ler, which in turn controls these respective pathogenicity islands. consequently, it has been suggested that typa is on a relatively high level in the complex regulatory hierarchy of virulence regulation in this organism  <cit> . in contrast, analysis in mycobacterium tuberculosis revealed that typa does not act as a virulence regulator in this human pathogen, ruling out a general involvement of this protein in virulence regulation in pathogenic bacteria  <cit> . however, our results demonstrate that typa plays a role in the pathogenesis of p. aeruginosa. the typa knock-out mutant exhibited a significant virulence deficiency in both the amoebae infection model and the macrophage uptake studies. these defects were comparable to a pscc mutant with a disrupted type iii secretion system and consistent with the down-regulation of type iii secretion genes during host-pathogen interaction. the type iii secretion system of gram-negative bacteria is an important factor of pathogenesis and is involved in manipulating eukaryotic cells by injecting effector proteins into the host  <cit>  and impacts diretly on bacterial uptake by phagocytic cells  <cit> . in p. aeruginosa, this complex, needle-like machinery is encoded by  <dig> genes and an important factor for the survival during interaction with phagocytic amoebae or human macrophages, among others  <cit> . using qrt-pcr, we observed the down-regulation of selected genes participating in different aspects of type iii secretion, including pscc , pscj , psct , and pcrv . the transcription of type iii secretion genes is tightly regulated by exsa in p. aeruginosa. this master regulator controls both, the synthesis of the secretion system as well as effector protein production, and interacts in concert with the global cyclic amp and gac regulatory systems  <cit> . our studies showed that in addition to genes involved in assembly of the secretion apparatus, expression of exsa was also significantly down-regulated in the typa mutant compared to wild type cells. to identify, if increasing type iii secretion activity is sufficient to complement our virulence phenotype, we heterologously expressed the exsa gene using plasmid pucp20::exsa+ in the typa mutant and obtained an identical number of amoebae required for plaque formation in both mutant and wild type pa <dig> harboring pucp20::exsa . these findings suggest that, like in e. coli, typa is part of the complex regulatory cascade involved in controlling type iii secretion in p. aeruginosa by impacting expression of genes involved in regulation and assembly of the secretion machinery. since typa is a gtpase associated with the ribosomes, a further down-regulation of the type iii secretion machinery at the translational level might also be possible; this could result in an even stronger impairment of the type iii secretion system.

previously, it has been shown that the type iii secretion system including its associated virulence effectors does not play a noticeable role in nematode killing  <cit> , which is rather dependent on quorum sensing related virulence factors such as rhlr and lasr  <cit> . thus, it is not surprising, that a mutation in typa with a down-regulation in the type iii secretion system did not result in significant virulence attenuation in our studied infection model. additional analyses of quorum sensing dependent production of the extracellular protease lasb and toxin pyocyanin did not reveal a significant difference between wild type and mutant strain  demonstrating that typa does, most likely, not affect quorum sensing in p. aeruginosa pa <dig> 

typa was first described to be involved in human bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein bpi, a cationic host defence peptide from human neutrophils, resistance in s. typhimurium and e. coli <cit> . although we were not able to detect any differences regarding resistance to cationic human host defence peptide ll- <dig>  we found that typa is also participating in resistance against a variety of clinically important antibiotics such as ß-lactam, tetracycline and peptides antibiotics in p. aeruginosa. due to this wide range of different antimicrobials with unrelated modes of action, it is likely that the involvement of typa in antibiotic stress resistance is rather unspecific and could be based on the fact that typa is part of a more general stress response resulting in resistance. this would be in accordance with earlier studies showing the involvement of typa in a wide variety of very different stress responses in a number of pathogenic and non-pathogenic microorganisms, among other stress factors were antimicrobials, low ph, oxidative or detergent stress  <cit> .

biofilm formation is a crucial factor in the pathogenesis of p. aeruginosa and is involved in many chronic infections including chronic lung infections of cystic fibrosis patients or foreign body part infections  <cit> . biofilm development is a sequential process initiated by the attachment of planktonic cells to a surface, followed by formation of microcolonies and biofilm maturation. bacteria grown in biofilms exhibit high resistance against antimicrobial agents, are protected from the host immune response and are notoriously difficult to eradicate  <cit> . although the typa mutant was able to form biofilms, we observed a more than 20% reduction in biofilm mass compared to wild type cells. by analyzing the initial adhesion phase of biofilm development, we identified that this reduction in biofilm is, at least in parts, due to a significant impairment in rapid attachment of the typa mutant in the respective microtiter plate assay. this impairment in attachment results in less bacterial cells initiating biofilm formation and subsequently lower biofilm growth, which could not be restored to wild type levels during further biofilm development. interestingly, it was shown previously that typa is involved in adherence to biotic surfaces and interaction of enteropathogenic e. coli with epithelial cells  <cit>  and the symbiotic interaction of s. meliloti with the nodules of the legume medicago truncatula <cit>  indicating a role of typa in cell-cell contact. biofilm initiation and cell adhesion are rather complex processes influenced by a large number of proteins and factors, among others are flagellum- and type iv pilus-mediated bacterial motility and attachment, respectively. although we have recently shown, that typa is involved in swarming motility in p. aeruginosa strain pao <dig>  <cit> , we did not observe any impairment in swimming, swarming or twitching motility in the pa <dig> typa mutant suggesting a mechanism not related to a defect in flagella or type iv pili biogenesis and function, respectively, is responsible for the impairment in adhesion and biofilm initiation in this mutant.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we were able to demonstrate the involvement of typa in the pathogenesis of p. aeruginosa by analyzing the consequences of a typa knock-out. this typa mutant exhibited reduced virulence towards phagocytic amoebae and increased uptake by human macrophages, impaired cell attachment and subsequent biofilm formation and a reduction in antimicrobial resistance to ß-lactam, tetracycline and antimicrobial peptide antibiotics. the typa mutant exhibited a dysregulation of genes involved in regulation and assembly of the type iii secretion system, consistent with the observed phenotypes and role in virulence regulating type iii secretion system.

