BACKGROUND
leptospirosis is the zoonotic disease caused by members of the genus, leptospira. they are motile helical spirochaetes that metabolise long chain fatty acids as their carbon source. there are  <dig> species of leptospira as determined by dna-dna hybridisation  <cit> . these species can be further divided into pathogenic, non-pathogenic and opportunistic/possibly pathogenic leptospira with pathogenic species. the pathogenic leptospira include; l. interrogans, l. kirschneri, l. santarosai, l. weilii, l. alexanderi, l. borgpetersenii, l. genomospecies  <dig> and l. noguchii. the non pathogenic leptospira include: l. biflexa, l. meyeri, l. wolbachii, l. genomospecies  <dig>  l. genomospecies  <dig>  l. genomospecies  <dig> and opportunistic/intermediate pathogens leptospira include l. broomi, l. fainei and l. inadai  <cit> . the grouping of the last three species as opportunistic or possible pathogens is due to the lack of information on the pathogenicity of the species, different phenotypic characteristics compared to the pathogenic leptospira and also the limited number of reports of these species involvement in human leptospirosis.

before molecular techniques such as dna-dna hybridisation or 16s rrna gene sequencing became available, speciation of the genus leptospira was limited to the classifications of pathogenic  or saprophytic  and was performed using phenotypic tests such as growth at 13째c/30째c or growth in the presence of a chemical such as 8-azaguanine  <cit> . these tests can take up to  <dig> days to complete and the results can vary within a species  <cit> . since the introduction of molecular techniques, the identification of leptospira species has generally been performed using either dna-dna hybridisation  <cit>  or 16s rrna gene sequencing. both of these methods have inherent disadvantages; dna-dna hybridisation is laborious and requires the use of radio-labelled isotopes  <cit>  and the 16s rrna gene has significant sequence homology between species which requires the majority of the gene to be sequenced for a definitive leptospira identification. as an alternative target to 16s rrna for species identification, the dna gyrase subunit b gene  has been successfully used for species identification in a wide variety of bacterial genera  <cit> . more recently the gyrb gene has been used for the identification of leptospira borgpetersenii isolates from the amami islands  <cit>  though this study used universal gyrb primers and only conducted limited phylogenetic analysis.

this paper reports the development of a molecular technique for the identification of pathogenic leptospira species using conventional or real-time pcr amplification and sequencing of a partial fragment of the gyrb gene. the method was then used to ascertain gyrb sequences from representative reference strains of the eight pathogenic species. these sequences were used for phylogenetic and evolutionary comparisons between the species themselves and also between the gyrb gene and 16s rrna gene. to highlight the potential value of the gyrb as an alternate identification gene, a blind trial was conducted between the two gene targets to identify previously uncharacterised clinical leptospira isolates.

RESULTS
gyrb amplification
using conventional and real-time pcr we were able to amplify a  <dig> bp product from the eight pathogenic leptospira species: l. interrogans, l. borgpetersenii, l. weilii, l. santarosai, l. alexanderi, l. genomospecies  <dig>  l. noguchii and l. kirschneri. no pcr products were amplified from the representatives of non-pathogenic species l. biflexa, l. meyeri or from the pathogenic/intermediate species such as l. inadai, l. fainei or l. broomi . the development of both conventional and real-time pcr methodologies for the amplification of the gyrb gene enables this method to be instituted at the majority of laboratories and is not dependant on having relatively expensive real-time pcr equipment. the advantage of using real-time pcr over conventional pcr is that it is quicker  and there is no need to perform agarose gel electrophoresis or capture the gel image. confirmation of the gyrb gene amplification was performed using the melting curve analysis on the lightcycler instrument. the tm of the gyrb pcr product was found to be between  <dig> 째c and  <dig> 째c . cycle sequencing of the gyrb pcr product and comparison of the dna sequences enabled species specific identification. the gyrb dna sequences of the reference strains were deposited on genbank .

the amplification of only the pathogenic species from the genus leptospira has created an assay which has a wide potential in this field of research. for example, the gyrb pcr could be use to identify pathogenic leptospira from cultures or identify leptospira isolates that have been overgrown with bacteria or fungi. additionally it would be possible to apply this method to clinical samples that contain high concentrations of leptospira organisms such as kidney tissue. the non-culture identification of pathogenic leptospira would be difficult without the use of specific gyrb primers as universal gyrb primers such as those used by kawabata et al.  <cit>  would amplify dna from all bacteria present in a sample.

the potential of this assay must be balanced by three apparent limitations. firstly the lack of sensitivity of conventional detection methodologies would not enable this test to be used in diagnosis of human infections where there are generally only low levels of leptospira in the blood. secondly, potentially pathogenic species such as l. fainei, l. inadai or l. broomi are not amplified, and therefore could be missed or excluded during molecular investigations. finally, if a culture or sample contained two different leptospira species then it would result in a mixed sequencing result, requiring use of dna cloning and multiple sequencing reactions. the ultimate evolution of this method would be through the use of specific dna probe detection either through taqman/fret probe in a real-time pcr guise or through a more conventional chemical-luminescent detection format.

comparative phylogenetic analysis
multiple alignments of the dna sequences allowed phylogenetic comparisons between the species and between the gyrb gene and 16s rrna gene to be performed. global clustering  and similarity matrix analysis  was performed using the aligned sequence data and the unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean  algorithm for the 16s rrna, gyrb and a consensus of both genes to examine the level of relatedness between the pathogenic species. 16s rrna and gyrb genes show significant difference in total relatedness as shown by the percentage scale in figure  <dig> and more accurately in the similarity matrix analysis . the maximum nucleotide difference for the 16s rrna gene ranges from  <dig> % to  <dig> % whilst for the gyrb gene it ranges from  <dig> % to  <dig> %. the differences in nucleotide divergence between the two genes is due to gyrb having a higher rate of base substitution  when compared to 16s rrna   <cit> .

in addition to the cluster analysis, minimum evolution trees for 16s rrna and gyrb were constructed using  <dig> bootstrap replications . the trees have nearly identical topology except the evolution of l. kirschneri and l. interrogans in the gyrb gene is quite distinctly different to that of the evolution pattern in the 16s rrna gene. the changes in topology signifies that the gyrb gene in pathogenic leptospira has undergone significant evolutionary divergence compared to that of the 16s rrna gene and this result is consisted with research conducted in other bacterial genera including the preliminary work conducted by kawabata et al. with leptospira  <cit> .

identification of leptospira clinical isolates using gyrb pcr
to validate the use of gyrb as an alternative target to 16s rrna, a comparison study was performed using  <dig> unidentified clinical isolates all from human sources. the gyrb sequences of the unknown isolates were compared to those deposited on genbank using a blastn search. confirmation of the gyrb result was performed using 16s rrna sequencing and blast analysis as described in the methods. there was 100% agreement between the 16s rrna and gyrb gene sequencing for the identification of pathogenic leptospira species. within the  <dig> isolates tested there was found to be the following number of species; l. alexanderi , l. weilli , l. borgpetersenii  and l. interrogans . the advantage of using the gyrb gene over the 16s rrna gene is that during the blastn searches on genbank, the score values were generally higher and the e values generally lower for the predicted species when compared to the 16s rrna gene blastn searches allowing for greater confidence in the final result.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed and validated a conventional and real-time pcr method for the amplification of gyrb gene from pathogenic leptospira. when compared to the 16s rrna gene, the gyrb gene shows greater evolutionary divergence and an alternate evolutionary topology for l. kirschneri and l. interrogans using minimum evolution analysis. additionally the greater divergence of the gyrb gene makes it more amendable to the identification of pathogenic leptospira either through sequencing as shown in this study or in the future by real-time pcr using dna probe technology.

