BACKGROUND
predicting transcription factor binding sites and their motifs is essential for understanding transcriptional gene regulation and thus of importance in almost all areas of modern biology, medicine, and biodiversity research  <cit> . countless approaches exist for predicting motifs from these genomic regions , but predicting motifs from chip-seq data and similar experimental data is hampered by the contamination with false positive genomic regions as well as the enrichment of high-affinity binding sites .

the contamination with false positive genomic regions is caused by at least three reasons. first, the transcription factor or other dna binding protein pulled down by immunoprecipitation may not bind directly to the binding site  <cit> . second, chip-seq target regions may not contain a binding site due to experimental settings such as sequencing depth or dna fragment length  <cit> . third, false positive regions may be predicted in the subsequent chip-seq data analysis due to never perfect analysis pipelines and too low signal cutoff thresholds  <cit> . these three effects may lead to the selection of false positive chip-seq regions that do not contain at least one binding site.

the enrichment of high-affinity binding sites is caused by at least two reasons. first, most antibodies have a preference of binding high-affinity binding sites with a higher probability than low-affinity binding sites, causing the set of binding sites bound in the chip-seq experiment to be partially different from the set of binding sites bound in vivo  <cit> . second, true positive regions with low-affinity binding sites are rejected due to too high signal cutoff thresholds  <cit> . these two effects may lead to an under-representation of low-affinity binding sites and an over-representation of high-affinity binding sites in chip-seq regions.

taken together, the contamination with false positive genomic regions leads to the contamination bias  <cit>  and thus to the prediction of artificially softened motifs, whereas the enrichment of sequences with high-affinity binding sites leads to the binding-affinity bias  <cit>  and thus to the prediction of artificially sharpened motifs. neglecting these effects leads to distorted motifs and could potentially affect all downstream analyses . existing approaches for predicting motifs are capable of detecting and correcting the contamination bias, which has been found to increase the quality of motif prediction considerably  <cit> , and here we investigate the possibility of detecting and correcting the binding-affinity bias.

detecting the binding-affinity bias seems impossible based on sequence data from one species alone, but it seems possible based on inter-species information. this is possible due to the fact that the binding-affinity bias is stronger in the target regions of the chip-seq experiment in the reference species than in orthologous regions of phylogenetically related species. this stronger binding-affinity bias yields more biased motifs in the reference species than in phylogenetically related species, and this difference may be used for detecting and potentially correcting the binding-affinity bias.

phylogenetic footprinting models typically  take into account chip-seq data of only one species and  do not take into account heterogeneous substitution rates among different dna regions, heterotachious evolution of dna regions, and loss-of-function mutations in binding sites. the consideration of  chip-seq data of more than one species and  heterogeneity, heterotachy, and loss-of-function mutations are likely to improve both phylogenetic footprinting as well as the detection and correction of the binding-affinity bias, but in this work we investigate if the detection and correction of this bias is possible based on  chip-seq data of only one species and  a simple phylogenetic footprinting model that neglects heterogeneity, heterotachy, and loss-of-function mutations.

we first investigate if the effect of observing more biased motifs in the reference species than in phylogenetically related species is measurable beyond statistical noise in target regions of five chip-seq data sets of human and in orthologous regions of monkey, dog, cow, and horse. we then develop a phylogenetic footprinting model that incorporates the binding-affinity bias, investigate if this model improves or deteriorates motif prediction compared to traditional models that do not incorporate it, and compare the motifs predicted with and without the correction of the binding-affinity bias.

RESULTS
in subsection “using sequence-information of phylogenetically related species to detect the binding-affinity bias”, we describe the basic idea of how the binding-affinity bias could be detected based on inter-species information using a toy example. in the remaining subsections we perform three studies based on chip-seq data sets of five transcription factors and on multiple alignments of the human chip-seq target regions with orthologous regions from monkey, dog, cow, and horse. in subsection “decrease of information contents in motifs from phylogenetically related species” we investigate if the effect of observing more biased motifs in the reference species than in phylogenetically related species is measurable in these five data sets. in subsection “modeling the binding-affinity bias increases classification performance”, we investigate if a correction of the binding-affinity bias leads to an improvement or a deterioration of the classification performance. in subsection “modeling the binding-affinity bias leads to softened motifs”, we compare the sequence motifs predicted with and without the correction of the binding-affinity bias.

using sequence-information of phylogenetically related species to detect the binding-affinity bias
detecting and correcting the binding-affinity bias might be possible because the binding-affinity bias inherent to the chip-seq experiment in the reference species  is stronger than the indirect binding-affinity bias in orthologous regions from phylogenetically related species. under this assumption, the information content of the predicted motifs  <cit>  should decrease with the phylogenetic distance from the reference species due to the increasing number of mutations.
fig.  <dig> influence of binding-affinity bias on information content. a binding-affinity bias in the reference species. the left column shows binding sites bound in vivo as well as the sequence logo. in the right column, enrichment of high-affinity binding sites by chromatin immunoprecipitation leads to a different motif with higher information content. b binding-affinity bias in the reference species and three phylogenetically related species. the left column shows binding sites bound in vivo and the information content of the species–specific motifs. in the right column, the enrichment of high-affinity binding sites in the reference species and the other three species leads to different motifs with different information content in each species. the effect of this enrichment decreases with the phylogenetic distance from the reference species as reflected by decreasing information contents. please find the sequences of all species in table 1

b




to illustrate this idea, we present a toy example consisting of six binding sites from four phylogenetically related species in fig. 1b and table  <dig>  in this toy example, we assume an exaggerated binding-affinity bias of three high-affinity binding sites captured by the chip-seq experiment and three low-affinity binding sites not captured by the chip-seq experiment. in real world applications the native motif is unknown and the motif predicted on the available data is biased to an unknown degree. in the presented toy example, however, the native motif is considered to be known so that the effect of the binding-affinity bias on the motifs of the reference species  and the phylogenetically related species  can be illustrated.

the motif predicted from the three target regions containing high-affinity binding sites is strongly biased in reference species  <dig>  and it is impossible to predict the native motif from only those three target regions. however, a shadow of this strong binding-affinity bias also exists in orthologous regions of species  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  so the motifs predicted from these orthologous regions in species  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> are biased, too. this bias in species  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  however, is weaker than the bias in reference species  <dig>  and this difference can be exploited for detecting and correcting the binding-affinity bias and for predicting the native motif from the three target regions of high-affinity binding sites in reference species  <dig> and their orthologous regions in species  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> 

specifically, the binding-affinity bias introduced by the chip-seq experiment in reference species  <dig> causes a strong increase of the information content of the predicted motif  compared to the native motif . the shadow of the binding-affinity bias in species  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> also causes an increase of the information contents of the motifs predicted in species  <dig> , species  <dig> , and species  <dig> , but this increase in species  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> is smaller than in reference species  <dig> . the increase of information content decreases with the number of observed mutations and thus the phylogenetic distance of species  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> to reference species  <dig> in which the chip-seq experiment has been performed. hence, the observation of a decreased information content of motifs predicted in orthologous regions of phylogenetically related species compared to the information content of the motif predicted in the reference species could indicate the presence of a binding-affinity bias and possibly allow the correction of that bias.

decrease of information contents in motifs from phylogenetically related species
we investigate this hypothesis on human chip-seq data of five transcription factors  <cit>  and multiple alignments of the human chip-seq target regions with orthologous regions from monkey, dog, cow, and horse  <cit>  . we calculate the information contents of motifs from human , monkey, dog, cow, and horse for each of the five data sets  and present the results in fig.  <dig>  we find for each of the five data sets that the information content of the motif from the reference species is significantly higher  compared to the information contents of the motifs from monkey, dog, cow, and horse.
fig.  <dig> mean information content and standard error for motifs of five transcription factors in five species. the information content of motifs in the reference species  is significantly higher compared to the four phylogenetically related species . the information content typically decreases with the phylogenetic distance from the reference species



modeling the binding-affinity bias increases classification performance
motivated by this observation, we develop a phylogenetic footprinting model capable of taking into account the contamination bias , the binding-affinity bias , neither one or the other ℳ−−, or both  . in order to study to which degree these models are capable of modeling multiple alignments originating from chip-seq data, we consider the principle of parsimony  <cit> , which states that the simplest of competing explanations is the most likely to be correct. as the new model ℳbac is more complex than the traditional model ℳ−c, we should accept it only if it provides a more accurate representation of the data. a standard approach for measuring how accurately a model represents a data set is to measure its performance of classifying, in this case, motif-bearing and non-motif-bearing alignments, and a standard approach for measuring classification performance is stratified repeated random sub-sampling validation .


using this approach we measure the performance of the four models ℳ−−, ℳba−, ℳ−c, and ℳbac to classify each of the five data sets against the other four. fig. 3a shows that ℳbac yields a higher classification performance than ℳ−c in all five data sets , indicating that the new model ℳbac is more realistic than the traditional model ℳ−c. we also find that ℳba− yields a significantly higher classification performance than ℳ−c in all five data sets , which indicates that taking into account the binding-affinity bias has a larger impact on the classification performance than taking into account the contamination bias .
fig.  <dig> comparison of models ℳ−c and ℳbac. a mean classification performance and standard error of the two models ℳ−c and ℳbac quantified by the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve. we find for each of the five data sets a significantly increased classification performance for ℳbac compared to ℳ−c. examples for roc curves are shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  figure s <dig>  figure s <dig>  figure s <dig>  figure s <dig> and figure s <dig>  b mean information content and standard error of the motifs predicted by the two models ℳ−c and ℳbac. we find for each of the five data sets a significantly decreased information content in motifs predicted by ℳbac compared to ℳ−c 



modeling the binding-affinity bias leads to softened motifs
next, we investigate the information contents of the corrected motifs predicted by models ℳba− and ℳbac that take into account the binding-affinity bias and the traditional motifs predicted by models ℳ−− and ℳ−c that neglect this bias. fig. 3b shows that the information contents of motifs predicted by ℳ−c are significantly higher than the information contents of motifs predicted by ℳbac . we also find that the information contents of motifs predicted by ℳ−− are higher than the information contents of motifs predicted by ℳbac , stating that the binding-affinity bias is stronger than the contamination bias. equivalently, this states that the joint effect of both biases leads to an artificial sharpening of the motifs and an artificial overestimation of the binding affinities .

finally, we inspect the differences of the corrected motifs predicted by ℳba− and ℳbac and the traditional motifs predicted by ℳ−− and ℳ−c. fig.  <dig> shows the differences between the base distributions of pairs of motifs for ℳ−c and ℳbac by difference logos . we find for each of the five data sets that the corrected motifs are softer than the traditional motifs distorted by the binding-affinity bias. specifically, we find that the amount of decrease of the most abundant bases in the corrected motifs compared to the traditional motifs is roughly proportional to the base abundance, whereas the increase of the remaining bases is not proportional to the base abundance. hence, the corrected motifs are not simply a uniformly softened version of the traditional motifs, but motifs with different degrees of dissimilarity at different positions .
fig.  <dig> differences of motifs predicted by ℳ−c and ℳbac. the height of the base stacks is quantified by the jensen-shannon divergence, where high base stacks represent high motif differences. we find significant motif differences exceeding  <dig>  bit for all five data sets 



CONCLUSIONS
we studied the possibility of detecting and correcting the binding-affinity bias in chip-seq data using inter-species information. we found that the fact that this bias is stronger in target regions of the reference species than its shadow in orthologous regions of phylogenetically related species enables the detection and correction of this bias. we proposed a phylogenetic footprinting model capable of taking into account the binding-affinity bias in addition to the contamination bias, and we applied this model and its three special cases that neglect one of the two biases or both to five chip-seq data sets. we found by stratified repeated random sub-sampling validation that taking into account the binding-affinity bias always improves motif prediction, that the motif binding-affinity bias leads to a distortion of motifs that is even stronger than the distortion caused by the contamination bias, and that the corrected motifs are typically softer than those predicted by traditional approaches. the comparison of corrected and traditional motifs showed small but noteworthy differences, suggesting that the refinement of traditional motifs from databases and from the literature might lead to the prediction of novel binding sites, cis-regulatory modules, or gene-regulatory networks and might thus advance our attempt of understanding transcriptional gene regulation as a whole.

