BACKGROUND
optimization of enrichment methods to culture target pathogens from complex environmental, food and clinical samples is an ongoing challenge. traditionally, samples are incubated in nonselective and/or selective enrichment broths and then plated onto selective media. enrichment methods for specific foodborne pathogens will benefit from an improved understanding of the taxonomic diversity and relative abundance of microbiota that co-culture during enrichment. here, we use culture independent next generation sequencing  to characterize the microbiome at four hour intervals using three different enrichment methods used for recovery of listeria monocytogenes from naturally contaminated ice cream.


l. monocytogenes was first reported in  <dig> by murray, webb and swann as the causative agent of illness in >rabbits and guinea pigs in a laboratory breeding unit  <cit> . although it was long suspected that food might be a mode of transmission for human listeriosis, it was not until after  <dig> that several outbreaks conclusively linked l. monocytogenes to foods including, coleslaw, milk, cheese, meat, pâté, and jellied pork tongues . listeriosis outbreaks in the united states over the past five years have been associated with contaminated cheeses  <cit> , stone fruits  <cit> , ice cream  <cit> , cantaloupes  <cit>  and caramel apples  <cit> . results of the study presented here were obtained from bacteriological analysis of samples from the  <dig> to  <dig> listeriosis outbreak with several case-patients linked to milkshakes made from contaminated ice cream. analysis of l. monocytogenes in ice cream samples manufactured in the implicated production line provided information about the prevalence and level of l. monocytogenes  <cit>  and activity of l. monocytogenes in milkshakes prepared from the ice cream  <cit> . these analyses did not identify listeria species other than l. monocytogenes in the ice cream samples  <cit> .

a variety of enrichment media and methods have been developed for detection of l. monocytogenes. the three commonly employed methods examined in this study are as follows:

1) bleb as described in the u.s. food and drug administration  bacteriological analytical manual : 4 h incubation at 30 °c in buffered listeria enrichment broth  without antibiotics, followed by 44 h incubation at 30 °c in bleb with antibiotics  <cit> ; 2) hfb-fb as described in the international organization of standardization 11290–1: 24 h enrichment in half-fraser broth  at 30 °c followed by 24 h in fraser broth  at 37 °c  <cit> ; and 3) uvm-fb as described in the u.s. department of agriculture  microbiological laboratory guidebook : 24 h incubation at  <dig> °c in university of vermont modified broth  for 24 h, followed by 24 h in fb at 37 °c  <cit> .

once l. monocytogenes is detected and isolated from a food or environmental source, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis  has been a widely applied method for subtyping isolates. pfge has been the gold standard for the fda and the centers for disease control and prevention  for foodborne outbreak investigations for over 15 years. recently however, whole genome sequencing  has been employed to improve resolution of pfge for identifying closely related strains. currently, both pfge and wgs require isolation of confirmed cultures, which typically requires at least  <dig> to 7 days for l. monocytogenes.


l. monocytogenes from the same lot of ice-cream examined here was previously enumerated using an most probable number  method  <cit> . all samples from the lot tested positive for l. monocytogenes with a geometric mean of  <dig>  mpn −1g. to complement enumeration data, we used a metagenomic approach to examine how l. monocytogenes and other members of the microbiota of the naturally contaminated ice cream responded to three commonly used enrichment methods , hfb-fb , uvm-fb ). ribosomal rna amplicons and metagenomic sequence data from time-points every 4 h during a 48 h period were used to describe the taxonomic composition of co-enriching bacterial taxa and provide data to explore whether a hybrid culture/metagenomic approach can be used to source track target pathogens before they are fully isolated.

RESULTS
dynamics of l. monocytogenes and co-occurring bacteria
16s rrna amplicon sequencing revealed that proportional abundances of l. monocytogenes remained low  until 24 h of enrichment, even though each enrichment method employed selective antimicrobials . after 24 h of selective enrichment, relative abundances of l. monocytogenes increased at each successive time point until 40 h, at which time relative abundances ranged from 90% to near 100% of the microbial community. interestingly, l. monocytogenes was found to be more abundant at hour  <dig> than at the three subsequent time points. bleb and hfb-fb enrichment resulted in higher proportional abundances  of l. monocytogenes at  <dig> to 36 h than uvm-fb, while all enrichment yielded equivalent results at later time points.fig.  <dig> temporal incidence and relative abundance of l. monocytogenes and co-enriching bacterial genera in bleb, hfb-fb, and uvm-fb media every 4 h for 48 h. incidence and abundance of l. monocytogenes  and co-enriching bacterial genera are shown at four hour intervals from hour  <dig> through 48 h of enrichment  for three enrichment protocols  . four independent replicates for each enrichment at each time-point were pooled and sequenced to constitute each bar. the y-axis shows percent abundance of each taxonomic group within the total library




an examination of other community members, using 16s rrna gene amplicons, revealed a predominance of anoxybacillus, followed by serratia, geobacillus, and streptococcus species . during enrichment for all three methods , bacillaceae genera, anoxybacillus and geobacillus increased rapidly from a combined relative abundance of approximately 45% at hour  <dig> to almost 90% at hours  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . taxonomy based on shotgun sequencing also supported the presence of anoxybacillus and geobacillus species . species of both genera are reported as moderately thermophilic and in this study appeared to have an advantage over l. monocytogenes during early incubation at 30 °c. additionally, shotgun metagenomic data suggested the presence of two other thermophiles, thermus parvatiensis and t. thermophilus . anoxybacillus spp. have an optimum growth temperature  ranging from  <dig> to 62°c and their close relatives, geobacillus spp., have a slightly higher ogt of  <dig> to 65°c  <cit> ; thermus spp. have an ogt ranging from  <dig> to 82°c  <cit> .fig.  <dig> taxonomic profiles of co-occurring bacteria and l. monocytogenes strains derived from the shotgun metagenomic data employing cosmos id algorithms. taxonomy and relative abundance of l. monocytogenes and co-occurring bacterial taxa, identified using the k-mer based approached developed by cosmosid




another interesting observation of microbial dynamics during enrichment was the change in relative abundance of serratia during the first 24 h of enrichment which appeared to mirror that of listeria . however, after 24 h of enrichment serratia was outcompeted by other members of the microbial community, mainly listeria monocytogenes in all three enrichment broths. assuming that hour  <dig>  resembled the mixed culture microbiota in ice cream, serratia was a well-represented constituent of that microbiota, comprising approximately 20–30%. as observed for l. monocytogenes, anoxybacillus and geobacillus spp. outcompeted serratia spp. during the  <dig> to 12 h time points. in terms of other taxa present in the ice cream microbiome, relative abundances of streptocococcus and erwinia remained consistent during the first 24 h of enrichment until l. monocytogenes began to outcompete the rest of the community, while the relative abundances of pseudomonas species increased after 24 h and decreased after 40 h of enrichment. in the absence of selective antimicrobial agents, we observed a completely different microbial community dynamics during the 48 h of non-selective enrichment . at  <dig> to 8 h, we observed a very similar pattern to that in selective enrichments; however, after 16 h of non-selective enrichment, bacillus species dominated the ice cream microbiome, comprising ~80% of the total population. after 24 h, lactococcus emerged and became the slightly dominant species over bacillus for the remainder of the non-selective enrichment.

l. monocytogenes genome coverage by shotgun data
though 16s rrna gene sequencing data provided a detailed description of the ice cream microbiome and resulted in the detection of l. monocytogenes, a deeper sequence analysis utilizing shotgun metagenomics was necessary to characterize strains of l. monocytogenes. analysis of these samples revealed that near 100% genome coverage can be achieved as early as 24 h of enrichment . l. monocytogenes-specific sequence reads constituted  <dig>  to  <dig> % of the metagenome, varying according to enrichment broths employed. at 24 h, we achieved  <dig> to 97% coverage of the listeria genome at a  <dig> × to 12× depth of coverage with  <dig> to 35 m total metagenomic sequence reads. a similar trend was also observed after 28 h, however, shotgun metagenomic reads from this time point yielded slightly higher genome coverages  and the depth of coverage ranged from  <dig> × to 95×. the highest coverage among these two time points and three enrichment schemes was achieved in bleb ice cream enrichments at hour  <dig>  which had 45 m total sequence reads,  with near complete genome coverage , even though the uvm-fb ice cream enrichments contained 82 m total reads  .table  <dig> shotgun data for potential target assemblies

listeria genome size 

b bleb, h hfb-fb, u uvm-fb

shotgun sequence data are shown for hours  <dig> and  <dig> for all three enrichments. the target l. monocytogenes genome size is  <dig> , <dig> bases




three putative strains of l. monocytogenes
interestingly three variants of 16s rrna gene sequences were observed in l. monocytogenes populations from the selective enrichments. variable nucleotides occurred in the v <dig> region of the 16s rrna gene  with one variant comprised of ac nucleotides at those positions, a second with gt, and a third, the most abundant, possessing gc . analysis of  <dig> closed genomes, available from the patric database, revealed that the majority of l. monocytogenes genomes encoded six copies of the 16s rrna gene , with the remaining genomes encoding five , or four  copies. six 16s rrna gene variant sequence motifs were identified, with 96% of the  <dig> genomes harboring at least one of the variants identified in this study . interestingly, among the  <dig> closed genomes, two sub-variants of type gc were identified , characterized by changes to nucleotides in the g and c allele positions. these minor variants were found in five l. monocytogenes lineage i genomes, with type gc. <dig> comprising the sole 16s rrna gene sequence variant present in three of these five genomes. type gc was present in the four lineage iii genomes analyzed. overall, the distribution of major 16s rrna gene sequence variants was not significantly associated with lineage.fig.  <dig> incidence and abundance of l. monocytogenes 16s rrna gene sequence variants. relative abundance of three listeria monocytogenes 16s rrna gene sequence variant types: ac, gt, and gc. variants occurred at positions  <dig> and  <dig>  within the 16s rrna gene. the y-axis shows the percent abundance of each l. monocytogenes16s rrna gene sequence variant within the total microbial community at each time point



aseveral genomes encoded multiple  16s variants


bsix genomes carried only five 16s copies, with types gc and ac found in three and two genomes, respectively




analysis of intra-genomic distribution of 16s rrna gene variants  revealed the majority of l. monocytogenes genomes encoded a single 16s rrna gene variant type , though genomes containing multiple variant types  were common. overall, types gc or ac were most prevalent in genomes encoding a single variant,  <dig>  and  <dig> %, respectively; while types gc and gt represented the dominant type in mixed 16s rrna gene variant genomes,  <dig>  and  <dig> %, respectively. interestingly, type gt was predominantly found in mixed variant genomes, and accounted for the sole variant in only two genomes, whereas type ac was present in a single mixed variant genome .

it is noteworthy that the ac 16s rrna gene variant, which was the least abundant of the three types up to hour  <dig>  and less common among the reference set of  <dig> closed genomes, overtook type gt at hours  <dig> and  <dig> across all of the media employed in the study. type gc remained the most abundant throughout all time points . this observation was corroborated by analysis of shotgun datasets against a listeria specialty database, suggesting the possibility that of three potentially distinct l. monocytogenes strains were present. cosmosid identified strain- specific biomarkers  in the metagenomes, which was evidence for three putative l. monocytogenes variants . furthermore, we observed an interesting strain interplay in terms of their abundance over time where strain aacabd was most abundant during the first 20 h of enrichment and became the least abundant at later time points, due to the rapid upsurge of strain aacababa, beginning at 28 h . this same phenomenon was observed in the 16s data which suggests we may be documenting something biologically relevant.fig.  <dig> incidence of l. monocytogenes strains detected by cosmos id. relative abundance and incidence of three putative strains of l. monocytogenes are shown for hours  <dig> to 48




discussion
every food has its own innate or imparted microbiome that will respond to enrichment conditions according to complex eco-physiology. frequently, antagonistic microorganisms are co-enriched along with target pathogens  <cit> . for example, paenibacillus spp.,which are capable of inhibiting and killing salmonella  <cit> , were also enriched using protocols outlined in the fda bam to recover salmonella from tomatoes  <cit>  and cilantro  <cit> . thus, continued optimization of reference enrichment protocols is still needed. in the case of l. monocytogenes, additional selective agents as well as changes in media formulations may improve efficiency of recovery; however, the situation may be more challenging in this case due to relatedness of l. monocytogenes to its co-enriching bacilli relatives. the increase  of anoxybacillus and geobacillus spp. during the first 8 h of enrichment of the ice cream microbiome suggested these bacteria were able to adapt more readily to the environmental changes inherent to this study .

length of lag phase and growth rate typically depend on specific environmental parameters, as well as fitness of the bacterial cells. many factors have been reported to play a role in length of lag time and/or growth rate for a given bacterial species, including nutritional content, ph, physical environment, inorganic nutrients, temperature, rate of temperature change, water activity, gas atmosphere, inhibitors, spore germination, and initial cell levels, as well as fitness, age, size, and health of individual cells  <cit> . although lag time and/or growth rate modeling has been proposed to describe what should occur within a specific set of parameters, such results were variable . hence, it is evident that relationships between growth environments and lag time and growth rate are complex  <cit> , especially for testing foodborne pathogens in food and environmental samples. additionally, the effect of co-occurring bacterial species in enrichments has not been extensively described or considered in the literature since the analytic tools to do so have not been available and it is not always possible to obtain a sufficient number of naturally contaminated samples that are 100% positive for the target pathogen with relatively homogeneous levels of contamination  <cit> .

the sequence depth and genome coverage achieved in the ice cream metagenomes was sufficient to generate draft l. monocytogenes genomes after 24– <dig> h of enrichment, which is considerably shorter than the 96 h typically required to enrich and isolate viable bacteria from food samples. near complete genome coverage would facilitate high-resolution phylogenetic analysis, identification of virulence and antibiotic resistance factors, as well as subtyping. thus this approach might be applicable for rapid and accurate microbial forensics in future work but remains to be more extensively validated.

type gc represented the predominant allele and was present among the majority of strains belonging to lineage i , and was the representative pattern in  <dig> of the outbreak isolates sequenced in fda labs. type gc was also heterogeneously distributed within and between multilocus sequence typing  clonal groups, designated as clonal complex , for strains within lineage ii  type gc sequences were also present in three lineage iii genomes. type gt and type ac were rare among lineage i  and lineage ii  strains, respectively. the gc type was significantly prevalent among the human clinical strains from both lineages. the two variable positions  have been shown to contribute to the structure of helix  <dig>  located in the 5′ major domain of the 16s rrna gene , which forms direct contact with nearby helices  in the small ribosomal subunit  <cit> . as correct 16s rrna gene folding is important for proper ribosome assembly, translational kinetics, and fidelity  <cit>  it is intriguing to consider how specific allelic changes within this region may affect l. monocytogenes growth under infection-associated conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
the ability to rapidly and accurately identify the etiologic agent of a foodborne outbreak from a variety of food matrices is critical for preserving public health. culture-based recovery methods have been used for over 100 years and many have been optimized for recovery of major bacterial and fungal pathogens. we demonstrated that shotgun metagenomic sequencing facilitated the characterization of enrichment microbiota dynamics and identified the presence of competitive species co-occurring during enrichment. as l. monocytogenes was enriched, so were other bacterial species. the taxonomy and dynamics of co-enriching species are likely unique to each food commodity and may play a significant, as yet unidentified, role in the recovery and growth of target pathogens. lag times and growth rates for certain pathogens may be significantly influenced by those co-enriching species “native” to the food commodity or its production environment. thus, the approach taken in this study, namely to use a culture independent method to describe culture dependent dynamics of l. monocytogenes recovery and growth, provides insight and makes it possible to improve both sequence- and culture-based l. monocytogenes detection methods. the validation that resphera insight can accurately identify l. monocytogenes using 16s rrna amplicons is quite useful. as is the likelihood that draft assemblies of l. monocytogenes from shotgun metagenomic data may provide equivalent trace-back utility to wgs genomes - although more work will be needed to confirm this utility.

