BACKGROUND
the intestinal microbiota consists of hundreds to thousands of bacterial species which play an important role in normal gut functioning and are crucial for maintaining the organism in good health. it is composed of complex bacterial populations that have recently been found to be host-specific
 <cit> , a result of variations in environmental factors
 <cit>  and host genetics
 <cit> .

one important group of bacteria colonizing the gut is the lactic acid bacteria , a heterogeneous group of gram-positive rods and cocci that belong to the phylum firmicutes. there are indications of a correlation between oral administration of some lab strains and improvement of gut health disorders, such as pouchitis, ulcerative colitis, infectious diarrhea, antibiotic-associated diarrhea, traveler’s diarrhea, necrotizing enterocolitis, atopic eczema and helicobacter pylori infections
 <cit> . the largest bacterial genus in the lab is lactobacillus. it is highly diverged and consists of over a hundred species
 <cit> . lactobacilli are widely used in food fermentation and are well known for their preservative ability as well as for their positive contribution to texture and flavor formation in many food products. in addition, several well-characterized probiotic strains  belonging to this genus are used by the food and pharmaceutical industries, and new probiotic lactobacilli strains are discovered. one of the most intensively investigated lactobacillus species is lactobacillus johnsonii, which has been reported so far to inhabit the gastrointestinal tracts  of several hosts, including humans, mice, dogs, poultry, pigs and honeybees
 <cit> . specific l. johnsonii strains are known for their probiotic activities
 <cit>  and some, such as l. johnsonii ncc 533
 <cit> , are also used by the industry. probiotic characteristics are presented by various l. johnsonii strains, including inhibition of different pathogens in the chick gut, alleviation of diabetes symptoms, reduction of serum cholesterol levels, immunostimulation and adherence to intestinal epithelial cells
 <cit> .

due to increased interest in l. johnsonii, various molecular tools have been used for the precise differentiation of l. johnsonii from other members of the lactobacillus acidophilus cluster, particularly the closely related species lactobacillus gasseri <cit> . the fact that different strains display different characteristics highlights the need to develop tools for their accurate discrimination as well. various methods have been recently used to type l. johnsonii strains, such as pulsed field gel electrophoresis, amplified fragment length polymorphism, enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus pcr and repetitive extragenic palindromic pcr  <cit> . these typing methods differ in their discriminatory power, rapidity, complexity, cost, reliability and reproducibility.

in this study we used simple sequence repeats , also termed variable number tandem repeats . ssr loci presents inherently high mutation rate
 <cit> , which makes them an appropriate tool for strain typing in many bacterial species
 <cit> .

another bacterial typing method based on sequence variations is multiple locus sequence typing 
 <cit> , mainly of housekeeping genes, providing an indication of relatively distant evolutionary processes
 <cit> . similarly, conserved hypothetical genes can provide an additional source of sequence variation
 <cit> . this cluster of genes with unknown function is predicted to be present in the genomes of all members of a particular species.

in this study l. johnsonii was identified and isolated from a selected narrow spectrum of the fecal lab population originated from various animal hosts. the genetic relationships among l. johnsonii strains were inferred based on variation at selected sets of ssr loci and mlst of conserved hypothetical genes. our findings suggest specificity of l. johnsonii strains to their hosts.

RESULTS
isolation of l. johnsonii from various animal hosts and characterization of their selected fecal lab populations
a large survey for l. johnsonii isolation was performed, where  <dig> fecal samples originating in six host taxonomic classes were tested. the isolation procedure of l. johnsonii relied on few methods: identifying l. johnsonii within a narrow spectrum of fecal lab populations using terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism  analysis and isolation of suspected l. johnsonii colonies based on their morphology followed by species-specific pcr amplification of 23 s rdna and 16 s rdna sequencing.

the trflp patterns of the fecal lab populations grown on the selective medium menterococcus agar  generally presented four major peaks representing the enterococcus faecium species cluster, lactobacillus intestinalisl. johnsonii, and enterococcus faecalis. we compared the relative abundance of these bacterial species obtained from  <dig> different animal hosts from a wide variety of taxonomic groups . no correlation was found between the relative abundance of any of the four bacterial species and either geographical location or nutritional habits of the host . however, a correlation was found between the taxonomy classification of the host and the relative abundance of two bacterial species: l. intestinalis and the e. faecium species cluster. the e. faecium cluster was highly abundant in most samples , but appeared at significantly lower levels in samples originated from hosts belonging to the rodentia . in contrast, l. intestinalis was relatively rare in general, but was significantly more abundant in samples originated from hosts belonging to the rodentia . in addition, the presence of l. intestinalis was correlated with the absence of e. faecium cluster and vice versa. in contrast to the e. faecium cluster and l. intestinalis, the appearance of l. johnsonii and e. faecalis did not correlate with any taxonomic group. in a second step we studied l. johnsonii to the strain level. all together  <dig> strains were isolated from few tested animal hosts  and further genetically characterized.

polymorphism at ssr loci along the l. johnsonii genome
in silico genome-wide screen of l. johnsonii ncc  <dig> revealed thousands of ssr tracts that were evenly distributed and highly abundant along the genome
eleven loci with the largest number of repeats were chosen for genetic characterization of l. johnsonii , having motif sizes ranging from  <dig> to 480 bp. ten ssr loci were located in coding regions and one mononucleotide repeat  locus was located in a noncoding region. multiple alleles were found at the studied ssr loci among  <dig> isolates from various hosts, including eight additional strains mainly from humans , revealing a high level of polymorphism among l. johnsonii strains . two strategies were used to identify the polymorphism: sizing for the ssr loci, and sequencing for the mnr locus. most ssr loci did not amplify any product  in some of the isolates . variation at the mnr locus was observed only in the repeated tract, while the flanking sequences were conserved among isolates. all ssr loci presented  <dig> to  <dig> alleles with corresponding diversity indices ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> .

a subscript numbers are numbers of motif repeats. ssr loci have non-perfect repeats except for loci lj <dig> and lj_mono.

b based on the genome sequence of l. johnsonii ncc  <dig> 

c allele: number of repeat variant at ssr; st: number of sequence types at ‘conserved hypothetical’ genes.

d no. of alleles or st: mlst genes and ssr loci, except for the locus lj <dig>  included a null allele.

e isolates: lj_ <dig>  lj_ <dig>  lj_ <dig>  lj_ <dig>  lj_ch <dig>  lj_c2- <dig>  lj_c5- <dig>  ljc_3- <dig> and lj_c6- <dig> had a deletion of 903 bp.

sequence variation at conserved hypothetical genes
three conserved hypothetical genes were chosen for mlst . most isolates gave the expected product size, except for nine isolates which had a deletion of 903 bp in the lj <dig> gene. the psammomys isolate  did not amplify any product in any of the genes. sequence variation among isolates was rather high , yielding  <dig> snps out of 1922 bp sequenced in the three genes . this variation ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> sequence types at a gene, including null alleles, indicating rather high variation among l. johnsonii strains.

phylogenetic analyses
the variation data at ssr loci and conserved hypothetical genes were used in two separate analyses to infer the genetic relationships among l. johnsonii isolates.

ssr analysis: the phylogenetic analysis divided the 47 l. johnsonii isolates into  <dig> different ssr types, revealing high discrimination. the resulting dendrogram presented three main clusters , one composed of chicken and turkey isolates, the second of human isolates and the third of identical mouse isolates together with strains isolated from the caracal feces and the owl pellet . note that the owl pellet isolates might be related to the mouse isolates, as it might have originated from the owl's prey , rather than from the owl's upper git. the isolates from other diverse origins were spread out along the dendrogram. among them, isolates from psammomys  and silkworm , two unrelated host species, are undistinguished according to the typing results. this might be due to their common isolation location, thus additional sampling should clarify the phylogeny clustering of l. johnsonii isolates from these two host species. the genetic distances within strains from each of the three groups were significantly low  compared to the high genetic distances observed between isolates from the tested group and the remaining isolates .
 <dig> 

mlst analysis: phylogenetic analysis of the sequences at the three conserved hypothetical genes separated the  <dig> typable l. johnsonii isolates into  <dig> sequence types . three clear clusters were obtained, paralleling the ssr analysis, with the exception of strain ncc  <dig> 

in general, the two genetic analyses similarly separated l. johnsonii isolates into three groups . the clusters included strains with a common isolation host: various lines of chicken and turkey, humans, and laboratory mouse lines, while the isolates originating from other diverse sources were dispersed along the dendrograms.

discussion
the gut is a habitat for complex bacterial populations, composed of a large variety of bacterial species. here we concentrated in l. johnsonii, a potentially probiotic bacterial species that is of major interest to the pharmaceutical and food industries as it includes several known probiotic strains
 <cit> . we successfully identified and isolated 39 l. johnsonii strains from fecal-bacterial populations of few host species.

strain typing of these isolates together with six additional strains of human origin revealed high levels of genetic variation among the l. johnsonii strains. both ssr and mlst analyses were found to be effective for typing, providing high-resolution discrimination also among isolates originated in the same animal species. the genetic relationships among the strains inferred by the two analyses were similar, clearly dividing the l. johnsonii strains into three clusters. each cluster consisted of strains from different diverse hosts, i.e., chickens, humans or mice . these consistent results, obtained by different typing methods, suggest far phylogenetic separation among l. johnsonii isolates presenting host specificity. such association of particular l. johnsonii strains with the host taxonomy could arise as a result of co-evolution of the host and its git microbiota
 <cit> . interestingly, host driven evolution was observed in another lactobacilli species, l. reuteri <cit> . according to the recently suggested "hologenome theory"
 <cit> , the host and its symbiont microbiota  are one unit of selection in evolution. indeed, previous analysis of the l. johnsonii genome showed the absence of genes required for several metabolic pathways
 <cit>  emphasizing the high dependence of l. johnsonii on its host and further supports the concept that l. johnsonii and its host are one evolutionary unit of selection. since chickens, humans and mice are distinct genetic species divided during evolution, l. johnsonii strains associated with them may be evolutionary separated as part of the distinct holobionts.

in addition, analysis conducted on the trflp results of  <dig> host individuals suggest an association of l. intestinalis and e. faecium cluster with host taxonomic groups , and further support co-evolution of the host and its intestinal bacteria. the e. faecium species cluster was relatively rare in hosts belonging to the rodentia taxonomic order, and alternatively, l. intestinalis was found to be more frequent within that group. these observations may indicate possible competition or a similar function of these two bacteria in the same niche, each within its appropriate microenvironment. environmental factors, such as diet, are highly important in shaping the host gut's microbiota composition
 <cit> . however, in our study, no correlation was found between the presence of each of the four bacterial species tested and the hosts' food consumption  or geographical location.

CONCLUSIONS
l. johnsonii strain typing conducted here support host specificity of l. johnsonii only at the strain level. trflp analysis of a narrow spectrum of fecal lab populations demonstrated host specificity of l. intestinalis and the e. faecium cluster at the species level of bacteria. both observations suggest co-evolution of the bacteria, either at the species or the strain level, with distinct animal species.

the identified bacterial host specificity may be further applied to utilization of health-promoting specific strains based on the bacterium and the host’s genetics, as part of the personalized medicine approach.

