BACKGROUND
the study of the evolution of host-parasite associations has a long history, with the first paper published a century ago  <cit> . since then, numerous host-symbiont systems have been observed and several analytical methods proposed. when the host and parasite phylogenetic trees are the same, that is when visual inspection show that the two trees precisely match, with hosts and corresponding parasites at the same positions, a cospeciation pattern can be directly inferred. in other situations, the reconstruction of a hypothetical coevolutionary scenario is not straightforward, as it can involve different events including cospeciation, duplication, lineage sorting and host-switching  <cit> . in such cases, a rigorous and specific method must be used to differentiate cospeciation from a number of potential scenarios.

in the last two decades, several methods were developed to assess the level of cospeciation in symbiotic associations  <cit> , and the availability of programs such as treemap  <cit> , treefitter  <cit>  and parafit  <cit>  has led to an increased level of accuracy in host-parasite cospeciation studies  <cit> . these software search for an optimal evolutionary scenario for the association between hosts and their symbionts . previous work has investigated cospeciation between parasites and their hosts, such as lice and mammals  <cit> , plants and insects  <cit> , plants and fungi  <cit> , fish and platyhelminthes  <cit> , and animals and viruses  <cit> . however, cophylogeny between parasitoids and their insect hosts has been rarely investigated, with the few previous studies focusing on lepidoptera-parasitoids systems  <cit> .

almost every plant-feeding insect species is attacked by at least one parasitoid species  <cit>  and even without strict host specificity, there are at least as many  parasites than free-living species. among hymenopteran parasitoids, encyrtidae  is an economically important group of nearly  <dig> species of natural enemies of lepidoptera, scale insects and other insect orders  <cit> . the genus anicetus howard is well known for its important economic significance. several anicetus species, such as a. beneficus ishii & yasumatsu, are frequently used as biological control agents of wax and soft scales of the genus ceroplastes gray , which are significant pests of important agricultural crops  <cit> . however, due to their small size and frequent lack of distinct morphological characters, the accurate identification of wax scales and parasitoids is still a great challenge for taxonomists. the study of cophylogenetic patterns between species of anicetus and ceroplastes is therefore difficult, however, it is also crucial for a better understanding of speciation and diversification processes in this parasitoid genus. two recent dna barcoding studies of anicetus and their wax scale hosts were used as a taxonomic reference for the present study  <cit> .

several recent dna-based studies strongly suggest that morphologically similar lineages traditionally considered as single species are instead genetically isolated, and in many cases host-specific  <cit> . koinobiont parasitic hymenoptera, in particular, display an intricate physiological relationship with their hosts and consequently tend to have relatively narrow host ranges  <cit> . the degree of host specificity of encyrtidae is variable. for example, anagyrus sp. nov. nr. sinope and leptomastix dactylopii howard are two parasitoids of mealybug species; the former is highly host specific, whereas the latter displays a wider host range, having been recorded from more than  <dig> host species  <cit> . some encyrtidae species such as copidosoma floridanum   <cit>  exclusively parasitize a given host family or subfamily, while other copidosoma species have a wider host range and attack different families of lepidoptera  <cit> . high host specificity has been reported in comperia merceti   <cit> , gyranusoidea tebygi noyes  <cit> , and more recently in encyrtus sasakii <cit> . zhang et al.  <cit>  recently showed that host specificity tends to be strict in the anicetus group, where species are usually restricted to one host species. furthermore, anicetus species have a low mobility and individuals that leave the host die within a few hours or days, hence they are totally reliant upon their hosts for survival. this makes the genus anicetus a good candidate for evolution via cospeciation with their insect hosts.

the nine anicetus species used for this study exhibit narrow host ranges and only parasitize wax scales. a large number of ceroplastes individuals were collected throughout china . the aims of this study were to reconstruct molecular phylogenies for wax scale insects and their anicetus parasitoids, and to assess the degree of cospeciation in this host-parasitoid association in order to better understand the drivers of species diversification in this group of parasitoids.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses
the partition homogeneity test indicated that the coi and 28s datasets did not display any significant signal of heterogeneity . this test compared the summed lengths of most-parsimonious trees computed from each dataset  to the lengths of trees generated from random partitions of the combined sequences of both genes  <cit> , and calculated the probability of obtaining a random tree similar or shorter to the length of observed summed tree. the two datasets were then combined for subsequent phylogenetic analysis. in the host tree, parasaissetia sp. was strongly supported as basal clade and pulvinaria aurantii was sister group to the clade of all ceroplastes species, which was strongly supported . for parasitoids, most anicetus species were strongly supported except for two groups of a. benificus and a. rubensi individuals  . these two species are morphologically very similar, reflecting the taxonomic uncertainty at this level.

the parasite and host phylogenies built from consensus sequences were used to assess their phylogenetic congruence . these trees, using consensus sequences, were identical to previous phylogenies . furthermore, not all parasitoids from the same host clustered in the same clade, for example, a. dodonia ferrière and a. aligarhensis hayat, alam & agarval clustered together even though they use different hosts.

topology-based analyses: treemap  <dig> β and jane 4
the tanglegram built from the phylogenetic trees and individual associations between anicetus species and their scale insect hosts  suggested that the trees did not perfectly match. we then used treemap  <dig> β that generated  <dig> optimal solutions to reconcile the two trees with the lowest number of coevolutionary events considering their costs , none of which indicated significant congruence. we used different cost sets for each of these coevolutionary events to produce different results in jane  <dig> . in both methods, each event is given a cost inversely related to the likelihood of that event  <cit> , and a global cost is computed by summing the costs of all events needed to fit the parasitoid tree onto the host tree . a significant global cost  was only observed in jane with the treefitter default cost model, that is  <dig> for cospeciation,  <dig> for duplication,  <dig> for host-switch,  <dig> for loss and  <dig> for failure to diverge. setting the costs of host-switch to high values in the treefitter default model caused the overall fit to become significant, suggesting that host-switch is rare in this host-parasitoid system. meanwhile, a large number of sorting events  were found with the treefitter default model, in contrast to 0– <dig> sorting events with the other models. in addition, we compared the patristic distances  between parasitoid and hosts in copaths using treemap , to assess whether branch lengths are correlated in cospeciating hosts and parasitoids . a strong positive correlation would support cospeciation, and in this case the slope of the linear relationship indicated the relative evolutionary rates in hosts and parasitoids because the same genes were used to build the phylogenies. the branch length randomization test suggested a strong significant correlation between copaths , supporting the hypothesis that cospeciation has occurred in this host-parasitoid association. the slope of the linear relationship using the reduced major axis method was  <dig> , suggesting that anicetus species have evolved more rapidly than their scale insect hosts. this result is consistent with previous results obtained for achrysocharoides   <cit> .
anicetus 
and their hosts

asterisks indicate significance at the 1% level. columns indicate the number of each event type necessary to reconcile host and parasite trees under different event cost schemes. event costs are for cospeciation, duplication, host switching, sorting event, and failure to diverge, respectively. p-values were computed from  <dig> random reconstructions.
anicetus 
species and their scale insect hosts.

distance-based analysis: parafit
we used parafit to compare patristic distance between hosts and their corresponding parasitoids, to test the global fit between the two trees. in addition the method assesses if each individual host-parasitoid association  significantly contributes to the global fit, to evaluate which ones have a structuring effect. the global test indicated a significant congruence between anicetus and scale insect trees . however, the test of individual links showed that not all host-parasite associations significantly contributed to this global fit:  <dig> out of  <dig> individual links were significant , suggesting their structuring role in the global congruence.

discussion
a cophylogenetic signal is weak or absent in most host-parasite associations that have been studied to date  <cit> . however, significant cospeciation has been inferred in systems where host-switching is prevented by the asocial lifestyle of the host and the low mobility of the parasite. examples include rodent-lice associations  <cit>  and insect-symbiont systems where bacteria, needed for reproduction, are transmitted maternally  <cit> . the present study can be added to these few examples of extensive cospeciation, supported using various methods.

this study is the first to thoroughly investigate the cophylogenetic interactions between anicetus and their scale insect hosts, and suggests the ubiquity of sorting events coupled with strong host specificity in the genus anicetus. nine genetically distinct species were clearly delineated in the phylogenic tree based on combined molecular data . anicetus benificus, a. benificus_var and a. rubensi, all parasitoids of c. rubens, were found grouped in the phylogeny, which is congruent with the current taxonomy . furthermore, morphological data confirmed this pattern, for example, the antennal clava and ovipositor of these three species are similar to each other  <cit> . however, not all anicetus species from the same host were found to cluster in the phylogenetic tree: a. aligarhensis and a. dodonia, from two different hosts, appeared to cluster together as sister species with a high posterior probability value. the presence of host-switching  or sorting events  may explain this result.

the distance-based analysis showed a strong cophylogenetic signal between anicetus species and their scale insect hosts. however, tree-based analyses suggested that this signal is significant only when the cost of host-switching is high. in addition, a sharp increase in the number of sorting events was found using the treefitter cost model, suggesting that sorting has been an important component of anicetus diversification. paterson et al.  <cit>  have suggested that three processes can lead to the absence of parasites from their hosts: sampling error, parasite extinction and the patchy distribution of parasites . we believe that our sampling was dense enough to strongly reduce, if not eliminate, sampling error. our observations suggest that parasitism rates even within one species are not stable and low rates are often found in some locations. chantos et al.  <cit>  observed that the encyrtid wasp neodusmetia sangwani  exhibits a patchy geographic distribution. our investigations showed that most ceroplastes species only carried up to three anicetus individuals and that a patchy distribution of anicetus species may be very common in wax scales. therefore, anicetus species may have been absent from the host founder population because of a patchy distribution and the small size of the host population when speciation took place, leading to a sorting event via a “missing the boat” process. in addition, host specific parasites are likely to possess fewer populations than multi-host parasites  <cit> . these observations support the conclusion that some parasites in this study may have gone extinct from a host lineage after a host speciation event.

in the present study, we observed that anicetus species only attacked and parasitized single host species. this is coherent with the hypothesis that the evolution of obligate parasites  with limited ability to transfer between different host species is tightly linked to the evolution of their own host species  <cit> . however, the congruence of host-parasite phylogenies is not perfect, which can be explained by a mix of coevolutionary events such as host switching, parasite speciation without host speciation , parasite extinction, and non-colonization of all host lineages  <cit> . a previous study suggested that anicetus species is adapted to narrow niches or restricted to particular hosts. specifically, a. ceroplastis, a. beneficus, a. rubensi and a. aligarhensis develop on the same host , and thus far they have not been reared from other hosts across china  <cit> . after investigating a high number of samples from different provinces, we found that these species and others display strict host specificity . for example, a. sp <dig> and a. sp <dig> were observed to only attack pulvinaria aurantii and parasaissetia sp., respectively. this host specificity is not congruent with former multi-host records of the genus anicetus observed in previous studies  <cit> , which could be explained by the extensive examination carried out in the present study, coupled with the use of molecular data.
anicetus 
species


anicetus 
many studies have supported the hypothesis that koinobionts are more host-specific than idiobionts  <cit> , and a high degree of host specificity is relatively common among parasitic hymenoptera  <cit> . traditional species of parasitoid wasps that use many different hosts for their larvae can be complexes of cryptic taxa, each of them adapted to use only a few hosts  <cit> . an increasing number of studies using molecular data suggest that species traditionally considered generalists are in fact complexes of cryptic taxa, each of them adapted to narrow niches  <cit> . to avoid such problematic species identification leading to biased patterns of host specificity, taxonomic issues such as careful species discrimination and recognition of cryptic taxa must be carefully addressed before conducting cophylogenetic studies.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we carefully assessed the identity of anicetus species parasitizing wax scales and verified the taxonomic status of their hosts using laboratory rearing. through the distance-based analysis  and the topology-based analyses , we presented strong evidence for a prevalence of sorting events and high host specificity in the genus anicetus, offering insights into the diversification process of anicetus species parasitizing scale insects. our study emphasizes that extensive rearing of parasitoids and accurate identification are important for investigating coevolutionary relationships in host-parasitoid associations.

