BACKGROUND
as the price of high throughput sequencing declines, it is easier for researchers to apply genome-wide approaches to diverse samples of dna. one particularly interesting type of sample is dna enriched from techniques that map regulatory interactions on chromatin. these techniques include chromatin immunoprecipitation , which purifies fragments of dna that bind to a regulatory protein, such as a transcription factor or a covalently modified histone. when chip is applied to limited cell numbers, such as rare cell populations or a specific cell type that is difficult to harvest, the amount of recovered dna is frequently limiting for sequencing library production. multiplex library protocols typically require several nanograms or microgram amounts of input dna, while chip from limited cell numbers, such as 105drosophila cells or  <dig> mammalian cells, can yield far less.

the problem presented by limited amounts of input dna has been addressed in different ways. one strategy is to make multiple copies of the purified dna fragments prior to library production, either by pcr  <cit>  or by in vitro transcription  <cit> . this increases the amount of the input dna to the microgram range, so it is amenable to sequencing library construction. however, additional amplification cycles can skew sequencing results  <cit> , and these methods are inherently time-consuming, involving several additional enzymatic steps. other strategies for library construction from small amounts of dna are not suitable for chip analysis because they require unfragmented genomic dna as input material  <cit> .

to avoid these drawbacks, we developed a simple and fast library construction protocol  that uses sub-nanogram quantities of fragmented dna as input, and avoids pre-amplification and overnight steps. the resulting libraries are barcoded and suitable for multiplexed analysis on the illumina platform. the oligo design is based on the illumina truseq sample preparation and the protocol draws from that method, as well as others  <cit>  that require nanograms to micrograms of input material. the advantage of the protocol reported here is that it allows library construction from  <dig> pg of chip dna using a customizable, kit-independent workflow.

RESULTS
illumina dna library construction consists of four major steps: end polishing, a-tailing, adapter ligation, and library amplification. between steps, enzymatic reactions are purified using solid phase reversible immobilization beads . to adjust these steps for use with picograms of input, we introduced modifications that are outlined in table  <dig> 

we designed universal adapters and barcoded amplification oligos that would be compatible with single- or paired-end sequencing on the illumina platform. the illumina multiplex protocol for dna introduces the barcode  to the library in the adapter oligo. we preferred to use universal adapter sequences and add the barcodes during the amplification phase, a strategy used by others  <cit>  and also developed into a dna library prep kit  sold by new england biolabs. use of universal adapters and indexed amplification primers offers the option to save part of the adapter-ligated dna sample and, if experimentally necessary, amplify a library with an alternative barcode. we designed universal adapter oligos with similar melting temperatures to those developed by illumina for paired-end sequencing, and included sites of phosphorylation and phosphorothioate linkages  <cit> . ligation of universal adapters to dna fragments creates products that are extended by pcr to produce barcoded samples containing the identical sequences used for illumina truseq multiplexing . these oligos produce libraries that are compatible with conventional data analysis pipelines .

additional modifications to the illumina protocol include skipping the gel-mediated size selection step and monitoring the amplification of the library by quantitative pcr . illumina recommends purifying the ligation products on a gel to remove excess adapters. by adding less than  <dig> um adapters to the ligation reaction, we generally avoid excess adapters and find that gel purification can be avoided for samples fragmented either by enzymes  or sonication  <cit> . following adapter ligation, library amplification both enriches for dna fragments with an adapter ligated to both ends and increases the amount of dna in the library. illumina protocols recommend  <dig> cycles of pcr when starting with one microgram of input dna, and  <dig> cycles when starting with  <dig> nanograms, but it is difficult to know a priori how to optimize cycle number for alternative sample amounts. following the amplification in real time by monitoring sybr green fluorescence allows the reaction to be stopped during the exponential phase and before the reaction plateaus. this allows the maximum amount of dna to be produced for each library while preventing over-cycling and heteroduplex formation, which can interfere with downstream quantitation  <cit> . while we have not noticed any obvious decrease in the sequencing data quality when sybr green is included in the pcr step, one alternative to avoid this would be to amplify half the adapter-ligated dna using real-time pcr to determine cycle number, and repeat the reaction without sybr green using the remaining sample. .

we applied the modified library construction protocol to approximately  <dig> pg of dna from drosophila embryos enriched by chip against trimethylated lysine  <dig> of histone h <dig> . h3k27me <dig> is a repressive histone modification found in broad domains throughout the drosophila genome, notably at the bithorax complex , a  <dig> kb region containing  <dig> homeotic genes: ubx, abd-a, and abd-b. we reasoned that successful chip-seq library construction from picograms of dna would enrich the same domains as libraries constructed in a larger scale format.

the modified protocol produces data with enriched regions qualitatively and quantitatively similar to data from a related, larger scale experiment . multiple independent chip experiments from  <dig> cells reproducibly yielded measurements of 50– <dig> pg of dna when assayed with picogreen reagent. library preparation was performed on the output of two of these chip experiments, followed by single-end sequencing. tag density across the drosophila genome from the picogram-scale libraries was compared to tag density from a similar experiment performed at larger scale by the modencode consortium   <cit> . regions of enrichment were also identified. while the biological samples and chromatin fragmentation were not identical , we found enrichment of similar genomic regions at multiple levels of scale . furthermore, a genome-wide assessment demonstrates strong overlap between enriched regions in the picogram- and nanogram-scale experiments, and good reproducibility of the results from the picogram samples . this shows that using the method described here, it is possible to produce chip-seq results similar to larger scale experiments by using only ~ <dig> pg of dna as input for library preparation.

CONCLUSIONS
this picogram-scale protocol should be broadly useful not only for small scale chip experiments, but for any high throughput sequencing experiment where material or yields are limiting and multiplexed sample analysis is desired. we have yet to apply this protocol to chip-enriched dna from mammalian cells. since chip from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mammalian cells enriches 10– <dig> pg of dna and yields adequate depth of sequencing by other library construction methods  <cit> , it is reasonable to anticipate that this picogram-scale library construction protocol may also prove useful for experiments in genomes larger than that of drosophila.

several steps may serve as variables that can tailor the protocol to different dna samples or quantities. for instance, by monitoring library amplification in real time, cycle number can be kept to a minimum while still ensuring that the reaction has reached the exponential phase and produced enough dna for the final library. another variable is the amount of adapter added in the ligation reaction. this may be titrated up or down to accommodate different sample amounts. two reports demonstrated that use of alternative polymerases or even different thermocyclers can enhance library preparation from specific types of dna, such as samples unusually low or high in gc percentage, or ancient dna  <cit> . finally, the oligo design used in this protocol is transparent and allows all samples to be ligated to universal adapters, while the choice of barcode is delayed until the library amplification step. with simple adjustments to steps in this protocol, it may be customized to a wide array of dna input sources and concentrations. this should prove useful for high throughput sequencing from small or rare samples of cells, or from dna enrichment techniques that are particularly low-yielding.

