BACKGROUND
myosin ic  is a single headed class i myosin that localizes to the nucleus and the cytoplasm. in the cytoplasm, myosin ic has been implicated, among other processes, in lipid raft arrangements  <cit> , transport of vesicles containing membrane proteins such as the glucose transporter  <cit> , and in ion channel regulation in hair cells of the inner ear  <cit> . in the nucleus, myosin ic is involved in various aspects of transcription  <cit> , in chromatin remodeling  <cit> , and in dynamic organization of chromosomal structures  <cit> .

initially, it was thought that the cytoplasmic and nuclear functions of myosin ic are facilitated by two isoforms that are encoded by the myoic gene, known as myosin ic and nuclear myosin i   <cit> . however, a number of recent studies showed that both isoforms can localize to the cytoplasm and the nucleus  <cit> . in addition, we recently identified a previously unknown isoform of myosin ic and demonstrated that the myoic gene in mammalian cells encodes three isoforms: isoform a , b , and c . as shown in figure  <dig>  the only difference between the three isoforms are additional, short n-terminal peptide sequences of  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids that are added to isoforms a and b respectively that are derived from upstream exons  <cit> .

interestingly, despite the high sequence homology, initial studies on isoform localization and function indicate that the myosin ic isoforms localize to different cellular compartments and are functionally distinct  <cit> . however, the underlying factors that facilitate the functional difference between the isoforms are not fully understood. in addition to the potential functional differences between the isoforms and their distinct intracellular localizations, our previous analysis of expression of the newly identified myosin ic isoform a in tissue culture cells also indicated a potential difference in expression patterns between the isoforms  <cit> .

previous studies analyzing expression of total myosin ic with antibodies directed against an epitope in the c-terminal domain that is common to all myosins as well as studies analyzing protein and mrna expression of myosin ic isoform b  in a variety of organisms and tissues demonstrated a ubiquitous and conserved expression of myosin ic  <cit> . however, our comparison of myosin ic isoforms a and b expression in hela, cos- <dig>  and nih 3t <dig> cells showed that while all three cell types express myosin ic isoform b at comparable levels, isoform a was strongly expressed only in cos- <dig> cells but could barely be detected in nih 3t <dig> and hela cells  <cit>  which suggests a difference in the expression pattern of the myosin ic isoforms. therefore, we extended our studies and present here a comprehensive analysis of the expression pattern of myosin ic isoform a and b in mouse organs and tissues.

RESULTS
as shown in figure  <dig>  only two of the three myosin ic isoforms that are expressed by the myoic gene, namely isoforms a and b, contain nucleotide and amino acid sequences that are isoform-specific and thus can be detected individually  <cit> . to determine protein expression of the two isoforms, we performed immunoblot analysis of a panel of  <dig> different organs and tissues that were collected from 2- <dig> month old male and female c57bl/ <dig> mice. protein extracts were analyzed using antibodies that recognize the individual isoforms. figure  <dig> shows a schematic of the 5’ region of myoic, the resulting n-terminal amino acid sequences of the myosin ic isoforms, and the amino acid sequences that are recognized by the isoform-specific antibodies. the antibody that recognizes specifically myosin ic isoform a, is a monoclonal antibody that was generated using a peptide sequence that is encoded by the isoform a-specific exon - <dig> as immunogen  <cit> . the antibody that recognizes myosin ic isoform b  is a polyclonal antibody that was generated using the isoform b-specific  <dig> amino acid long n-terminal peptide as immunogen  <cit> .

probing the organ and tissue extracts with the myosin ic isoform a-specific antibody  showed that isoform a is expressed in a tissue-specific pattern. expression levels are high in kidney, adrenal gland, pancreas, and in a subset of adipose tissues, specifically in tissue from epididymal and retroperitoneal adipose depots. in addition, moderate levels of isoform a protein can be consistently detected with only slight variations, in protein extracts from liver, spleen, ovaries, and tissue from mesenteric, inguinal, and white subscapular adipose depots. in the remaining  <dig> analyzed organs and tissues isoform a protein is only present at minimal, barely detectable levels.

in contrast to the tissue-specific expression of isoform a, myosin ic isoform b protein is easily detectable in all analyzed tissues and shows only moderate variations in expression levels, with the lowest expression observed in skeletal muscle and heart and the highest expression observed in liver, thymus, and in the various adipose depot tissues . however, it should be noted that the maximum difference in relative expression of isoform b between the analyzed tissues is only  <dig>  fold while the difference in relative expression of isoform a between the various tissues is up to  <dig> fold .

we next analyzed if this difference in expression patterns between myosin ic isoforms a and b is also observed on mrna level. we measured mrna expression of the isoforms by quantitative real time pcr  using isoform-specific forward primer and reverse primer that bind to a region common to both isoforms. the location of the primer is shown in figure 3a. we found that the mrna expression profiles of myosin ic isoforms a and b correlate to the protein expression profiles indicating that regulation of expression takes place on gene level. comparable to the protein data, mrna expression of myosin ic isoform a is high in kidney, adrenal gland, pancreas, and in adipose tissue from epididymal and retroperitoneal depots. in addition, moderate levels of isoform a mrna are expressed in liver, spleen, ovaries, and adipose tissue from mesenteric, inguinal, and subscapular white fat depots. in the remaining  <dig> analyzed organs and tissues isoform a mrna can barely be detected .

in contrast, isoform b mrna is expressed in all analyzed tissues with only slight variations in expression levels .

in summary, we have identified and characterized a tissue-specific expression pattern of a recently identified, novel myosin ic isoform and we demonstrate that two of the myosin ic isoforms exhibit substantial differences in the expression profiles. our data show that in contrast to the ubiquitously expressed myosin ic isoform b, the newly discovered myosin ic isoform a exhibits tissue-specific expression patterns on both, protein and mrna levels. previous studies analyzing the cellular distribution of the myosin ic isoforms in cos- <dig> cells, i.e. in a cell line that expresses all three myosin ic isoforms at high levels  <cit> , revealed that each of the three isoforms localizes to specific cellular regions and interacts with different binding partners  <cit>  which strongly suggests isoform-specific cellular functions. our identification of differential expression profiles further strengthens the notion that the myosin ic isoforms are functionally distinct. future work is aimed at understanding the regulatory mechanisms that lead to tissue-specific expression of myosin ic isoform a and at identifying potential tissue-specific functions of this isoform.

CONCLUSIONS
the myoic gene expresses three different isoforms two of which exhibit significant differences in expression patterns. while myosin ic isoform b is ubiquitously expressed, myosin ic isoform a exhibits a tissue-specific expressed pattern that suggests tissue-specific functions of this myosin ic isoform.

