BACKGROUND
genomic studies capture an enormous amount of information about the molecular organization of biological systems. understanding this organization poses a challenge for biologists. in most genomic studies, the number of features  far exceeds the number of biological samples under investigation. consequently, while network methods are often used to illuminate patterns among pairwise relationships of genomic features, the rich information contained in the connectivity patterns among samples remains comparatively untapped. however, patterns of co-variation in genomic feature activity ultimately reflect heterogeneity among biological samples. it is therefore critical to understand the extent of sample heterogeneity before analyzing genomic feature activity, and whenever possible to relate sample heterogeneity to known sample traits, which may include both biological and technical sources of variation. in practice, biologists’ efforts to explore sample relationships in genomic studies are an integral component of data pre-processing, yet they are often performed in a perfunctory fashion using platform-specific and qualitative criteria.

a popular approach for exploring sample relationships is cluster analysis. cluster analysis is appealing for its intuitive nature, and is typically used for sample outlier detection, identification of globally distinct subgroups of samples, and identification of distinct subgroups of samples using pre-selected lists of features   <cit> . although widely used, cluster analysis suffers from several shortcomings that are often under-appreciated by biologists. besides depending on the measure used to quantify similarities among samples, the results of cluster analysis can depend heavily on the specific clustering algorithm that is employed. for example, dendrograms produced by hierarchical clustering algorithms acting on the same data may look quite different depending on whether single, average, or complete linkage is used to calculate distances between clusters  <cit> . other clustering procedures may involve additional parameter choices that can have a substantial effect on cluster assignments   <cit> . finally, cluster analysis can be impractical for very large datasets, in which the sheer number of samples obscures the organization and characteristics of a dendrogram and produces ambiguous cluster boundaries.

in this study we explore alternative means of describing sample relationships in topological terms by transforming a similarity matrix into a network adjacency matrix. our correlation-based sample network can be interpreted as a polynomial kernel, which implies that the symmetric adjacency matrix is positive semi-definite. many methods exist to address the challenge of mapping biological and genomic information to kernel matrices  <cit> . kernel methods involving genomic similarity measures are the basis of many statistical analytic methods such as nonparametric regression, mixed models, hierarchical regression models, score statistics, and support vector machines  <cit> . our primary approach in this study uses a signed weighted correlation network, since the resulting kernel i) works well in practice, as shown in our applications, and ii) allows for a geometric interpretation of network concepts  <cit> .

the approach we describe here is a useful complement to cluster analysis, but does not actually require that cluster analysis be performed. a novel feature of our approach is that we show how distinctions among subgroups of samples can be identified using topological measures , which are based on network concepts. network concepts include the connectivity  and the clustering coefficient   <cit> . the definitions of these and many other important network concepts are reviewed below and elsewhere  <cit> .

we illustrate our approach using microarray data generated from multiple human brain regions of control  subjects and patients with huntington’s disease   <cit> . hd is a progressive and incurable neurodegenerative disorder characterized by preferential destruction of medium spiny neurons in the striatum  <cit>  and caused by a cag-repeat expansion in the coding region of the huntingtin gene, which is thought to confer a toxic gain-of-function to the mutant huntingtin protein  <cit> . alterations in gene expression are considered a central feature of hd pathology, and the extent to which specific gene expression changes precede disease pathology is an area of active investigation  <cit> . our results indicate that hd exerts a profound effect on sample network topology in the caudate nucleus relative to other  brain regions. specifically, we find that the relationship between the standardized sample connectivity and the standardized sample clustering coefficient follows a simple scaling law in unaffected brain regions, but undergoes a sharp transition for hd caudate nucleus samples that reflects the degradation of sample correlation network structure in this brain region. by restricting sample network construction to modules  of genes that are naturally co-expressed in human caudate nucleus  <cit> , we find that this degradation is most significant in a neuronal signal transduction module. our findings demonstrate that sample networks can enhance the results of cluster analysis not only with respect to relatively simple tasks such as outlier identification, but also with respect to more complex challenges such as group comparisons.

RESULTS
the approach we describe in this study formalizes and expands upon a strategy that has previously been used to identify outlying samples in microarray data generated from human brain tissue  <cit> . our approach is applicable whenever a dissimilarity or similarity measure can be defined between samples . a major advantage of defining a network adjacency measure between samples  is that it permits specification of network concepts. in our implementation, we define adjacencies among samples as signed weighted correlations with values that approximate the underlying correlations when these correlations are large, as is usually the case in sample networks . a signed weighted correlation network is attractive since it preserves sign information, is robust with respect to the soft threshold  parameter , and preserves the continuous nature of correlations   <cit> . in addition, a signed correlation network is equivalent to a network based on the euclidean distance between scaled vectors .

dataset
the proposed framework for sample network exploration  was used to analyze microarray data from “the hd study”  <cit> . these data were generated from brain samples of patients with hd  and unaffected controls   <cit> . the authors of this study used affymetrix u133a microarrays to survey gene expression in caudate nucleus , cerebellum , primary motor cortex , and prefrontal cortex  in the ctrl group and across five grades of hd severity, which were scored between  <dig>  and  <dig>  using vonsattel’s neuropathological criteria  <cit> . hd causes extensive neurodegeneration in the cn, where medium spiny neurons are preferentially destroyed in early stages of the disease  <cit> ; comparatively, the other analyzed brain regions are relatively spared. in addition to disease status and severity, sample information included age, sex, the country where the experiment was performed , and the microarray hybridization batch   <cit> . in light of these myriad biological and technical sources of variation, this dataset presents a challenging analytical task.

a motivational example
below we provide an example that illustrates how network concepts can be used to distinguish samples when hierarchical clustering cannot. figure 1a depicts a subset of samples from ba <dig> of ctrl subjects from the hd study. as seen in this example, visual inspection of the dendrogram is sufficient to discern the outlying sample . however, it is illustrative to consider an alternative depiction of sample relationships using the network concept of standardized connectivity. standardized connectivity  is a quantity that describes the overall strength of connections between a given node and all of the other nodes in a network. as seen in figure 1c, the standardized connectivity of sample ba9_91_c is significantly lower than all of the other samples, confirming its status as an outlier in the group. it is important to note, however, that the distribution of standardized connectivities is independent of the choice or use of clustering procedures.

degradation of sample network topology in caudate nucleus by huntington’s disease
we used the samplenetwork r function to process all  <dig> samples from the hd study simultaneously. as seen in figure s <dig>  and our r tutorial , we observed a dominant effect of brain region on gene expression that was driven largely by the fact that gene expression in each non-cortical  brain region was quite distinct from gene expression in cortical  brain regions, as has been described previously  <cit> . in light of the strong effect of brain region on gene expression, as well as the fact that hd preferentially targets cn relative to the other analyzed brain regions, we next used samplenetwork to examine samples from each brain region separately. within each brain region, we analyzed ctrl and hd samples as a single cohort, but note that alternative strategies  may be desirable, depending on the downstream application.

after constructing sample networks for each brain region , we examined the relationship between the standardized sample connectivity  and the standardized sample clustering coefficient  for all samples in each brain region. we refer to this relationship as the standardized c curve. as discussed below,  c curves have been used to study the topological properties of scale-free networks and other large complex networks  <cit> . we propose using the spearman correlation to measure the standardized c curve since it is invariant with regard to monotonically increasing transformations. in particular, the spearman correlation between z.k and z.c equals that of the unstandardized measures, which is why we denote it simply by cor . in the following, we will demonstrate that the standardized c curve is a valuable tool for i) assessing the overall consistency of sample behavior within a dataset, ii) identifying distinct groups of samples, and iii) identifying important subsets of features .

for samples from prefrontal cortex , motor cortex , and cerebellum , we observed that z.k and z.c formed nearly perfect inverse relationships, with no obvious distinctions between ctrl and hd subjects. in contrast, samples from the caudate nucleus exhibited clear segregation according to diagnosis, with ctrl and hd subjects forming two distinct groups . this segregation indicates that cor is a useful network concept that measures an important aspect of the global architecture in weighted sample networks. interestingly, cor for hd cn samples differed when brain regions were analyzed together  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> e–08; figure s1d; additional file 1) and when they were analyzed apart  = − <dig> , p =  <dig> e–08; figure 2d), suggesting that the relationship between the node-based measures z.k and z.c depends upon properties of the network as a whole, a topic that has been the subject of recent investigations  <cit> .

understanding the properties of the standardized c curve
as discussed below, the c curve has been studied primarily in biological networks in which nodes correspond to gene products  <cit> . in contrast to the negative relationship observed in sample networks , we observed that z.k and z.c tended to exhibit a positive relationship in gene-based networks . a positive relationship was observed for genes that are naturally co-expressed in human caudate nucleus  <cit>   =  <dig> , p <  <dig> e-16; figure s2a,c; additional file 1), as well as for genes that were selected at random  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> e-16; figure s2b,d; additional file 1). to understand why cor is often positive in gene-based networks but negative in sample networks, consider that in most microarray studies, and in particular when analyzing similar biological specimens, samples are highly correlated with one another . in contrast, most genes exhibit moderate to weak correlations with other genes, such that the mean correlation in a typical gene co-expression network is close to  <dig> and follows an approximately normal distribution . even for a module of co-expressed genes, when compared with sample networks, the distribution of pairwise correlations is shifted towards smaller values . therefore, we hypothesized that the contrasting relationships between z.k and z.c in sample networks and gene networks might relate to differences in the global topological organization of each network.

to test this hypothesis, we conducted a simulation study to explore the properties of cor by systematically varying the network topology  and network size . for simulated networks with low mean node adjacency , we observed values of cor approaching  <dig> , indicating a nearly perfect positive linear relationship between z.k and z.c. as the strength of connections among nodes  began to increase, cor began to shift, while also revealing a dependence on network size . this shift accelerated dramatically as simulated networks began to consist of mostly strong connections among nodes, producing a “waterfall” effect reminiscent of a percolation transition  <cit>  . when simulated networks possessed very high mean node adjacency , cor approached − <dig> , indicating a nearly perfect negative linear relationship between z.k and z.c.

collectively, these observations suggest that the divergence of cor for hd cn samples relative to ctrl samples and other brain regions  reflects a degradation of global sample network topology in cn by hd. to visualize this degradation more directly, we compared the distributions of pairwise sample adjacencies between ctrl and hd subjects for each brain region. the distributions of sample adjacencies exhibited the greatest difference between ctrl and hd subjects in cn, where hd sample adjacencies were markedly degraded . thus, degradation of global sample network topology by hd in cn has shifted cor for hd cn samples. this relationship has begun to invert , indicating that hd has initiated a percolation-like transition in the global network topology of cn samples.

sample network topology reveals strong effects of huntington’s disease on specific gene co-expression modules in human caudate nucleus
the degradation of global sample network topology by hd in cn  was observed across all analyzed probe sets . we hypothesized that this effect might vary for specific subsets of genes involved in disparate biological processes, which in turn might implicate specific biological processes in connection with hd pathology. by focusing on pre-selected gene sets , we illustrate below how the standardized c curve can be used to identify clinically important subsets of features . toward this end, we make use of a second r function called modulesamplenetwork .

we have previously shown that the transcriptome of normal human cn is organized into modules of co-expressed genes, many of which relate to specific cell types and functional processes  <cit> . for example, gene co-expression modules corresponding to oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, neurons, mitochondrial function, synaptic function, immune response, gender differences, and the subventricular neurogenic niche have been described in human cn  <cit> . subsequent work in rodents has confirmed that striatal gene co-expression network architecture is robust across disparate strains of mice  <cit> . the inherent organization of the cn transcriptome provides a natural framework in which to study the effects of hd on sample network topology. therefore, we sought to determine the extent to which variation in sample network topology was associated with particular gene co-expression modules in cn. specifically, we constructed sample networks in cn for each of the  <dig> gene co-expression modules that were previously identified in this brain region in humans  <cit> . the  <dig> gene co-expression modules are labeled by colors , with pertinent functional characterizations taken from ref.  <cit> .

to assess the effects of hd on module sample network topology, we calculated cor for ctrl and hd subjects in every module . based upon the relationship observed between z.k and z.c for ctrl and hd subjects in ba <dig>  ba <dig>  and cb , we hypothesized that in the absence of an effect of hd on module sample network topology, cor ctrl should approximately equal cor hd. in addition, for module sample networks characterized by strong connections among nodes, we expected cor to approach − <dig> . the majority of modules clustered along the diagonal, indicating relative preservation of cor between ctrl and hd subjects; however, a handful of modules were clearly distinguished as outliers . among the outliers, the difference in cor between ctrl and hd subjects was most significant for the salmon module , followed by the black , royalblue , and red  modules . these results indicate that cor is a useful measure for highlighting differences in sample network topology among subsets of genes.

in the original hd study  <cit> , the authors determined that a large fraction  of transcripts showed differential expression  in post-mortem cn between ctrl and hd subjects. de in hd is thought to reflect both cell-intrinsic changes in gene expression , as well as changes at the cellular population level due to neuronal cell death and subsequent astrogliosis  <cit> . in light of such widespread changes, we asked whether particular gene co-expression modules were associated with de. as shown in figure 4c, many modules were significantly associated with de. this result is perhaps not surprising, inasmuch as cellular stoichiometry is altered by hd and many modules have been shown to be enriched with cell type-specific genes  <cit> . we next sought to relate the extent of modular de with the extent of modular degradation in sample network topology. as shown in figure 4d, the salmon module was the most significant in both of these dimensions, followed by the black and royalblue modules. overall, however, the relationship between these two measures was weak . indeed, one module  exhibited a very significant difference in cor between ctrl and hd subjects, with no significant evidence of differential expression .

cor can distinguish sample groups in the absence of differential expression
to explore the basis for this observation, we conducted a simulation study to determine whether cor could distinguish subsets of samples in the absence of differential expression. specifically, we simulated a set of  <dig> genes and  <dig> samples , using the real structure of the red module as an approximate guide . samples were assigned to one of three groups using a simulated sample trait , with  <dig> samples corresponding to control status,  <dig> samples corresponding to moderate disease status, and  <dig> samples corresponding to severe disease status . the simulation model assumed i) that 60% of the module genes were not related to the disease and ii) that these noise genes had lower mean values than the 40% of  genes that were down-regulated by the disease. figure 5a depicts the dendrogram produced by hierarchical clustering of sample adjacencies for the simulated module. as seen in figure 5b, the observed module eigengene was not related to disease status . in contrast, cor clearly delineated the control samples from the affected samples , despite inconsistent gene expression differences among the three sample groups . these results provide further evidence that cor can distinguish meaningful groups of samples in certain situations where differential expression analysis cannot.

a neuronal signal transduction module is profoundly degraded by huntington’s disease
examination of the distribution of z.k among samples in the salmon module  also revealed a distinction among grades of hd severity. grade  <dig> and a subset of grade  <dig> hd samples possessed z.k values that were comparable to those of unaffected individuals; however, a majority of grade  <dig> samples and grade  <dig> samples possessed z.k values that were substantially lower than all other samples . in contrast, examination of z.c revealed a monotonic arrangement of samples, with ctrl > grade 1 > grade 2 > grade  <dig> . when plotted in both of these dimensions, samples formed two distinct lines that clearly delineated ctrl and hd subjects . interestingly, three hd samples  fell upon the same regression line as the ctrl samples ; these were the same samples that belonged to cluster  <dig> in figure 6a. it is possible that the intermingling of some early stage hd samples with ctrl subjects could reflect the continuum of neurodegeneration that spans from normal aging to neurodegenerative disease. we also observed that the distribution of hd samples along their regression line tended to reflect their grade of severity . these results provide visual confirmation of the significant distinction between ctrl and hd subjects in the salmon module reported above . in addition, multivariate linear regression using the salmon module eigengene  as outcome confirmed an extremely significant effect of diagnosis  on gene expression in this module, as well as significant independent effects for grade and age . the effect of diagnosis on gene expression was evident when gene expression in the salmon module was visualized directly .

as can be seen in figure 6f, the vast majority of genes in the salmon module showed decreased expression levels with increasing severity of hd, which would be expected as a consequence of neuronal cell death . when it was originally described, the salmon gene co-expression module in human cn was found to be enriched with genes that are preferentially expressed in neurons, genes that encode synaptic proteins, and genes involved in signal transduction  <cit> . analyses of differential expression, functional enrichment, and membership strength for all genes in the salmon module are summarized in additional file  <dig>  to dissociate changes in gene expression caused by altered cellular stoichiometry in hd from changes in gene expression caused by cell-intrinsic effects of the mutant huntingtin protein, we cross-referenced cn module composition with a set of genes that has been found to be dysregulated in primary neuron models of hd  <cit> . in the study by runne et al., the effects of mutant huntingtin on gene expression were measured before cell death in primary striatal neurons cultured from rat brains  <cit> . we observed that the salmon module was significantly enriched with this set of dysregulated genes, and more so than any other module . we also note that a number of genes in the salmon module were previously found to be differentially expressed in laser-microdissected striatal neurons of ctrl and hd human subjects  <cit>  .

lastly, we used ingenuity pathways analysis  to determine whether the salmon module was enriched with annotated functional categories of genes. out of more than  <dig> annotated functional categories of genes in the ipa database, the two categories that showed the most significant enrichment with genes from the salmon module were “dyskinesia”  and “huntington”s disease”  .

discussion
to the best of our knowledge, this work provides the first formal demonstration that network methods can distinguish biologically meaningful relationships among samples in genomic datasets. we have shown that sample networks can identify outlying samples when hierarchical clustering procedures cannot, and even when hierarchical clustering procedures are not used at all. we have described a novel network statistic, cor, and shown that it can be used to i) evaluate sample homogeneity, ii) identify sample characteristics  with global effects, and iii) enable comparisons among groups of samples using pre-selected lists of features . by applying the latter approach to microarray data generated from human brain tissue, we have identified a neuronal signal transduction module that is an epicenter of transcriptional dysregulation in striatal samples from individuals with hd. the advantages of using network methods for describing sample relationships in genomic datasets are summarized below.

a major advantage of constructing sample networks is that individual samples can subsequently be described using established node-based network concepts such as the connectivity and the clustering coefficient. these concepts are independent of the choice or use of clustering algorithms and depend only on the adjacency measure used to construct the network. the distributions of standardized node-based network concepts provide an unbiased and quantitative framework for identifying samples that “behave” differently, even if the underlying causes of this behavior are unknown. intuitively, if the connectivity for a given sample  is significantly lower than all other sample connectivities from the same biological system, it suggests that there is something different about that sample compared to the others. the investigator must ask him/herself whether the observed difference is likely to reflect biological or technical variation. in light of the multiple steps that comprise a typical genomic experiment, each of which may introduce technical variation, a conservative approach is to exclude aberrant samples if there are no obvious biological factors that might explain their discordant behavior.

compared with other methods for identifying outlying samples in genomic data, our approach offers several additional advantages. first, because sample relationships are defined with respect to a correlation matrix, it is platform-agnostic and does not require access to raw data . second, it is easily applied to very large datasets, in contrast to clustering procedures that rely upon visual inspection of dendrograms to identify outlying samples. third, it produces a battery of measures for summarizing the consistency and integrity of genomic datasets , which can be compared across disparate studies, technology platforms, and biological systems. such measures are especially useful for meta-analyses, where objective assessment of data quality is highly desirable before seeking to pool or compare results across studies. finally, as implemented in samplenetwork and described in additional file  <dig>  our approach is both flexible and efficient, enabling users to move quickly through large datasets in an iterative fashion, specifying groups of samples for processing, identifying and removing outliers, testing the significance of sample covariates, and performing data normalization. to enhance user-friendliness, we have also incorporated the r function combat  <cit> , which is an effective tool for removing batch effects . at each stage, relevant output files are produced and exported automatically.

at the same time, there are several important caveats associated with our proposed approach for using network concepts to identify outlying samples in genomic data. it should be noted that our approach works best for datasets with large numbers of samples . it is also important to note that standardized network concepts such as z.k are relative measures whose interpretation depends on context. for example, in a relatively homogeneous sample network , a z.k value of − <dig>  implies higher adjacencies for the sample in question than it would in a more heterogeneous sample network . in light of these considerations, it can be helpful to have “targets” in mind, such as an expectation of what the mean isa should approach for a given biological system, technology platform, and adjacency measure. these targets can be guided by prior experience  or by the use of technical and biological replicates. lastly, although we have focused primarily on z.k and to a lesser extent z.c as intuitive indicators of outlying status, it is possible that other node-based network concepts  could produce different results.

beyond facilitating relatively simple tasks such as outlier identification, sample networks provide a novel perspective on more complex challenges such as group comparisons. our results indicate that the standardized c curve in weighted sample networks is a powerful tool for identifying sample characteristics with global effects on genomic activity. the stark divergence of cor for hd cn samples motivated us to explore how cor would be affected by other network topologies, leading to the observation that cor undergoes a percolation-like transition that is related to network density and size. although cor was inversely related to network density in our simulations, we note that cor is invariant if one scales all off-diagonal adjacencies by a constant. therefore, it is more accurate to consider cor as an indicator of network heterogeneity . in the special situation of an exactly factorizable network, we find that cor is determined by the network heterogeneity . one practical implication of these findings is that cor can serve as a useful indicator of data “cleanliness”: with each iteration of sample outlier removal or data normalization performed using samplenetwork, cor should approach − <dig> 

we note that our findings with respect to the percolation-like transition for cor are also applicable to unweighted  networks. we have observed a similar transition for cor in unweighted gene networks as the threshold for dichotomizing the adjacency matrix is progressively increased . at permissive  thresholds, which produce networks in which most nodes are connected, cor is negative; as the threshold is raised, producing networks in which most nodes are not connected, the relationship begins to invert, becoming positive at more stringent  thresholds .

in unweighted networks, the relationship between the  connectivity and  clustering coefficient of network nodes, i.e. the c curve, has previously been reported to follow a scaling law: c ≅ kα <cit> . it has been shown that the value of the scaling exponent α is not universal, but negative values approaching − <dig> have been observed in biological systems  <cit> . the inverse relationship for the c curve has been interpreted as evidence of hierarchical modularity in network structure  <cit> . specifically, it has been suggested that in hierarchically modular networks, nodes with low connectivity form small, densely connected clusters, while nodes with high connectivity serve to bridge these many small clusters into one large, integrated network  <cit> . however, the c curve has primarily been studied in the context of metabolic, protein interaction, and gene regulatory networks, as well as other non-biological networks  <cit> .

to the best of our knowledge, a percolation-like transition in the c curve has not previously been reported. however, prior work has revealed that global topological properties of unweighted networks, such as those embodied in the c curve, can be predicted by knowledge of local motif structure, and vice versa  <cit> . motifs, or subgraphs, describe basic interaction patterns among small groups of nodes  <cit> . in unweighted networks, it has been shown that subgraphs naturally segregate into two classes: highly abundant type i subgraphs, which are sparsely interconnected, and less abundant type ii subgraphs, which are densely interconnected  <cit> . it has also been shown that a phase boundary separating type i and type ii subgraphs can be accurately predicted using global network topological properties, including the c curve  <cit> . therefore, we propose that the transition in the standardized c curve observed in our analysis reflects a concomitant transition in local motif structure, which in turn reflects the degradation of sample network topology in cn by hd. although motifs have been studied almost universally in the context of unweighted networks, we are aware of at least one study that has presented an approach for generalizing motif scoring to weighted networks  <cit> . our results suggest that future research investigating the relative strengths of distinct motifs in weighted networks and their relationship to global network topological properties is warranted.

the effect of hd on the standardized c curve for cn samples was initially observed over all genes, which is consistent with the large impact that hd exerts on the cn transcriptome  <cit> . because the transcriptomes of human brain regions, including cn, are organized into biologically meaningful gene co-expression modules  <cit> , we reasoned that constructing sample networks for previously identified cn modules might expose variation in the standardized c curve, which in turn might implicate specific biological processes in connection with hd pathology  <cit> . this approach constitutes a novel strategy for exploring the effects of disease on sets of genes. we identified several modules that exhibited highly significant differences in cor between ctrl and hd subjects in cn. one potential drawback of our approach is that relatively small differences in cor can appear significant as |cor| approaches 1; for example, m <dig> was significant despite a relatively small difference between ctrl  = − <dig> ) and hd  = − <dig> ) subjects. for the four most significant modules, however, the differences in cor were >  <dig>  indicating that the standardized c curve had flipped from negative  to positive .

as illustrated above, differences between standardized c curves are not simply a proxy for differences in network density, but also relate to network size and heterogeneity. we have also observed that small numbers of samples that are highly discordant  can have a large impact on the standardized c curve . thus, the standardized c curve is an aggregate measure, and one that may be used to complement existing strategies for conducting both unsupervised and supervised analyses. we also note that in the present study, the overall relationship between differential expression  and differences between the standardized c curves of ctrl and hd subjects was weak. for example, although the salmon module  between ctrl and hd) was strongly associated with de, the red module  between ctrl and hd) was not. furthermore, our simulation study confirms that situations may exist in which cor can distinguish meaningful sample subgroups in the absence of de. these findings deserve additional study.

CONCLUSIONS
as genomic technologies proliferate and genomic studies grow ever larger, it is critical that methods to assess sample heterogeneity evolve in parallel. we have presented a standardized approach for sample network analysis that can detect outlying samples in the absence of hierarchical clustering. we have also described a novel network statistic, cor, and demonstrated that it can be used to assess sample homogeneity, identify sample traits with global effects, and facilitate supervised comparisons among groups of samples using pre-selected subsets of features. application of the latter approach to microarray data generated from human brain tissue identified a neuronal signal transduction module as an epicenter of transcriptional dysregulation in striatal samples from individuals with hd. to the best of our knowledge, these findings provide the first formal demonstration that network methods can distinguish biologically meaningful relationships among samples in genomic datasets. the dataset analyzed in this study, along with the samplenetwork and modulesamplenetwork r functions and a comprehensive tutorial illustrating their usage, are available on our web site .

