BACKGROUND
dna microarray technology and expression profiles are the most suitable tools to investigate gene activity with respect to the progress of disease. furthermore, they are useful for molecular classification of tumor types  <cit> , for revealing complexity in the intrinsic cancer subtypes and for developing oncogenic pathway signatures as a guide to targeted therapies  <cit> . in particular, breast cancer has been extensively studied for gene expression in order to individualize a signature useful for molecular classification  <cit>  and for prognostic purposes  <cit> .

however, the sample size of each study is usually too small with respect to the number of the genes in analysis to allow an accurate statistical evaluation. therefore, some authors used to analyze different data coming from different experiments with the goal of increasing sample size and thus increasing the power of the study.

this could be done in two ways: by meta-analysis  <cit> , which is the statistical analysis of a large collection of results from individual studies for the purpose of combining their findings to reach a common result, or by data merging, which is analyzing all the raw data coming from different studies with similar biological questions together  <cit> .

typically, the first transformation applied to expression data, referred to as normalization and summarization, removes non-biological variability between arrays  <cit>  and extracts gene level expression from probe intensities, respectively.

however, the transformation procedure cannot reduce completely the systematic differences from different data sets. when combining data sets from different experiments, non-biological experimental variation or ''batch effects'' are carried over and therefore it is inappropriate to combine data sets without adjusting for batch effects  <cit> .

the goal of this paper is to compare the performance of various data merging methods. our strategy for biological comparison is to use microarray data with known phenotypes associated with specific gene sets .

in literature, several techniques have recently been proposed for adjusting data for batch effects  <cit> . many of these methods can only be applied to two batches at a time. in previous studies, merging data sets were applied to develop a robust gene signature prognostic of survival outcome discretized into two  <cit>  or more categorical values, or diagnostic of tumor subtypes, or predictive of treatment response  <cit> . a comparison between several techniques to merge different datasets such as combat, ratio_g, sva, dwd, pamr, has been carried out.

we used three breast cancer microarray data sets from three different studies in which all the samples came from lymph-node-negative patients who had not received adjuvant systemic treatment. we performed three pre-processing methods: robust multi-chip average  <cit> , frozen rma  <cit>  and quantile normalization with model-based expression index  <cit> ; subsequently we applied two data merging approaches: combat  <cit>  and z-scoring standardization procedure for each dataset. frozenrma is a recent method that performs batch effect removal inherently at summarization time and which has not yet been compared to other methods in an independent study. combat has been up to now the best performing method  <cit> , and z-score is one of the first methods used to merge different datasets. chen and others  <cit>  suggest that the data from two experiments could be integrated for prognosis analysis after data standardization. the methods were compared from a new perspective, i.e. in terms of svm classification and feature selection performances.

for microarray data classification the methodologies involving feature selection and classification applied to svm are proposed in a previous study  <cit> .

variation attributable to batch effects before and after batch adjustment were identified using principal variation component analysis   <cit> . the success of batch effect removal was also evaluated using qualitative visualization techniques such as score plot of pca and hierarchical clustering dendrogram.

subsequently, the three microarray datasets, processed in different ways, were examined for specific patterns of pathway deregulation with respect to clinical disease outcome. for this reason we used the most popular gene-set analysis method, gene set enrichment analysis   <cit> .

RESULTS
data merging validation
we directly merged the three microarray data sets, using the  <dig> probe sets on affymetrix hg-u133a microarray, to form an integrated data set in seven ways: rma, quantile/mbei, rma - combat, quantile/mbei-combat, rma - z-score and quantile/mbei - z-score, frozenrma. the integrated data set consisted of  <dig> samples with distant metastases and  <dig> samples free of distant metastases, randomly divided into training and testing sets but respecting the proportions of the complete dataset. we evaluated the classification performance using precision and recall of class  <dig> because of its clinical significance. table  <dig> shows the results of the classifier which demonstrated less accuracy of data merging methods with respect to classification.

data merging verification
batch effects are present in microarray experiments when data are combined from different studies. to assess the quantity of batch effect and to compare the data merging methods combat, zscore and frma, we performed a novel hybrid approach known as principal variance component analysis.

principal variance component analysis  integrates two methods: principal components analysis  finds low dimensional linear combinations of data with maximal variability and variance components analysis  attributes and partitions variability into known sources via a classical random effects model.

the first step is to obtain the covariance/correlation matrix of the microarray expression data matrix. secondly, pca is applied to the correlation matrix and once the number of principal components is determined, a variance component model is fitted separately to each of these principal components. the variation in each principal component is weighted by its eigenvalue from pca, and the resulting value represents the overall variation explained by that component.

the pvca revealed that batch effects explained  <dig> % of the overall variation in the rma data  and  <dig> % in the quantile/mbei data .

after applying combat  and z-score  the variation was completely eliminated. the worst performance seemed to be that of frma  which showed a  <dig> % threshold of variation of the batch effects.

to assess the removal of microarray bias effect across data sets, principal component analysis  was applied to the data sets after the application of data merging methods. the aim was to reveal intermixing of samples from different datasets before and after adjustment. the results of these approaches  demonstrate that samples referring to the same dataset cannot be grouped after using merging methods. this trend was respected in the rma - combat data , rma - z-score data , mbei - combat data  and mbei - z-score data , as shown in the graphs of the first three principal components. conversely it is possible in the rma data , mbei data  and frma data .

again, frma seemed to be unable to adjust the combination among the three datasets.

the results of hierarchical clustering analyses of class  <dig> before and after batch adjustments are presented in figure  <dig>  the sample clustering showed a separation of the three groups of samples where adjustment for batch effects was not performed and the samples were only summarized by rma  and mbei . the distinct clustering of the tumor groups did not indicate a large difference in gene expression patterns but only a bias introduced by experimental conditions. we clearly identified a cluster of samples performed in the same batch without any clear biological interpretation.

after batch adjustment of the rma dataset  and the mbei dataset , the clusters were no longer confused with the batch effects. the eb adjustment  has the advantage of being robust to outliers in small sample sizes, thus no notable difference was seen in our experimental set-up.

the gse <dig> samples clustered together more sharply than the gse <dig> and the foekens samples which created overlapping clusters.

normalized mutual information   <cit>  between the distribution of class labels and the distribution of cluster labels was used to assess the results of clustering after cutting the tree at a given threshold . a value of  <dig>  was observed for the rma dataset, which decreased to  <dig>  and  <dig>  after batch adjustment. the nmi score was higher for the mbei dataset , again falling to  <dig>  and  <dig>  after batch adjustment. for frma we found a score of  <dig> .

gene analysis
as previously described, two separated methods, sam and rfe, were used to identify differentially expressed probes and to show the validation of rfe as feature selection in the training step of the classification.

sam resulted in  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> differentially expressed genes for the rma, cb-rma, zs-rma, mbei, cb-mbei, zs-mbei and frma respectively.

a total of  <dig> common probes were found from sam and rfe comparison. most probes were successfully identify by rma-combat. none was found by frma.

these results were analyzed by fisher's exact test to examine the significance of overlapping between the two gene selection algorithms. after correction for multiple testing by the benjamini-hochberg standard false discovery rate correction, we found that it could not be excluded that the overlappings were derived by chance for all but the frma dataset, where the test was positive for the "less" alternative. this result indicates that the frozen rma normalization hindered rfe from finding biologically relevant genes, although sam reported a number of genes comparable to the other normalization methods. with the "greater" alternative, every merging technique showed a pvalue >>  <dig> , showing that the number of overlapping genes between fre and sam is never greater than expected by chance.

enrichment analysis
we explored the performance of various pre-processing and data merging techniques by using biological pathway-based analysis and determining whether a group of differentially expressed genes is enriched for a particular set.

here, we utilized a powerful analytical method called gene set enrichment analysis  focusing on several biological pathways: egf, stathmin, her <dig>  brca <dig> homologous recombination, which are associated with breast cancer progression.

the use of different methods of data merging and preprocessing can lead to a problem of poor congruency among datasets. to compare the ability of the different methods we performed gsea algorithm showing the heat map, enrichment scores and corresponding p-values  <cit> .

all probe sets were pre-ranked using snr  with respect to their correlation with distant metastasis-free survival.

the signal to noise ratio  detects the expression patterns with a maximal difference in mean expression between two groups and minimal variation of expression within each group.

the order probe set list was used as the gsea input for pathway analysis.

in a heat map, expression values are represented as colors, where the range of colors  shows the range of expression values . the light blue and dark blue bars reflect genes that are positively associated with dmfs , indicating a higher expression in tumors without metastatic capability. the red bars reflect genes that are negatively associated with dmfs, indicative of higher expression in tumors with metastatic capability. the heat map of data sets that are pre-processed by robust multi-array average  and mbei and merged by frma are presented in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> 

considering the expression level of the genes reported in each considered pathway, it can be observed that applying combat after rma  or mbei  leads to similar results to rma  and mbei  alone, respectively. however, the z-score method reported activation of different genes in each pathway after both methods. .

the heat map of rma and mbei data identified two over-regulated gene sets, egf and stathmin pathway, indicative of higher expression in tumors with metastatic capability and three up-regulated gene sets, homologous recombination, brca <dig> and her <dig> pathway, indicating a higher expression in tumors without metastasis.

gene set enrichment analysis computes an enrichment score  for a given gene set which reflects the degree to which a gene set is over-represented at the extremes of the entire ranked list of genes.

a positive es suggests gene set enrichment at the top of ranked list; a negative es suggests gene set enrichment at the bottom of the ranked list.

the nominal p-value estimates the statistical significance of the enrichment score for a single gene set.

we found  that both rma and mbei detected homologous recombination as the most significant gene set, however, the statistical significance of rma of this gene set was much greater, p=  <dig>   p =  <dig>   p =  <dig>  versus p =  <dig>   p =  <dig>   p =  <dig>  .

overall, gsea with rma normalization identified two gene sets, homologous recombination and brca <dig> pathway, as statistically significant at p< <dig>  whereas gsea with mbei normalization detected homologous recombination and egf pathway with the same p-value.

for all gene sets, p-values obtained by rma normalization were generally smaller than the p-values of corresponding gene sets obtained by mbei normalization.

with combat data, gsea identified, although with higher significance, the same gene sets derived from rma or mbei data alone.

comparison of different data merging techniques confirmed that zscore shows more variation than mbei or rma data alone.

frma revealed different gene sets regulated with a higher p-value than zscore and combat. a comparative representation of the different evaluation and verification methods is presented in figure  <dig>  for the classification analysis an f-measure with beta equal to  <dig> is reported. this measure gives a recall higher than precision and is more suitable for a summarization of the classifier performances in the clinical context. for the pvca analysis the weight of the batch effect component is reported. figure  <dig> also presents a complement to  <dig> of the nmi score for the clustering analysis, the number of relevant genes found by sam and the -log <dig> for the negative effect of the merging algorithm on the ability of rfe to select biologically relevant genes. the number of enriched pathways found by gsea is shown at the end.

discussion
in this study we have presented the results of the classification of breast cancer microarray data, with respect to the event of distant metastasis free survival in terms of recall and precision. the results show very low classification performances. this is explained in part by heterogeneity of the data in terms of tumor grade, tumor size, histopathological tumor type and progesterone and estrogen receptor that might negatively influence the prediction. in the past, different classifiers were built for patients showing different values for these features with successful results  <cit> .

the f- <dig> scores in figure 7a show that for both z-score and combat merging procedures the results of classification with ldo validation are enhanced only when applied to the mbei summarization.

z-score performed better than combat with both summarization techniques and the worst results were achieved by frma.

the ldo validation is representative of a clinical application where batches of patients are analyzed after the classifier has been built on previous batches. in this context of practical interest the merged datasets show some advantages compared to non-merged datasets.

the difference between stratified percentage fold and weighted ldocv average is very sharp in the mbei pre-processed datasets showing that this method gets greater benefits from the merging algorithms. the comparison within the rma processed datasets shows that the non-merged dataset has even higher performances than the combat and z-score merged ones in stratified percentage folding.

however, the merging procedure achieved some results, as shown by the pvca and clustering analysis, where both z-score and combat datasets behaved better than non- merged ones. combat and z-score did not show sharp differences with these techniques. when comparing the differences in the svm versus pvca/clustering results, we can conclude that the merging algorithms are an effective tool, but should be handled with care when it comes to the next algorithm in the workflow pipeline.

frma showed performances comparable to non-merged datasets also in the pvca/clustering case and our findings exclude it from being a good data merging algorithm even when compared with the simplest strategy of z-scoring.

a comparative study of performances of recursive feature elimination  with sam has been given as an additional evaluation tool for the validation of rfe as feature selection.

also in this case we found an exception: sam did not suffer from the frma normalization and reported a number of differentially expressed genes compared to the other techniques. again in this case combat outperformed z-score with a number of genes almost double.

in the same step of gene selection, rfe showed results markedly different from sam, and the number of common genes, equal to zero, is not derived from chance: frma hindered rfe from finding biologically relevant genes.

the biological meanings of gene expression have been also analyzed in terms of enrichment analysis.

our objectives tested predefined gene sets for their association with breast cancer progression, assuming that gene expression changes can be identified at the level of co regulated gene sets rather than individual genes.

the application of gene set analysis by gsea was also useful in finding common biological pathway changes and in comparing different preprocessing and data merging methods.

gsea detected three gene sets, homologous recombination, brca <dig> and her <dig> pathway, as significantly up-regulated versus two gene sets, egf and stathmin pathway, which were over-regulated; although in many cases the same gene sets were identified as significant by various programs, in a direct comparison across mbei and rma normalization using breast cancer datasets, the p-values of rma were lower than the respective p values obtained by mbei , indicating that rma is more statistically sensitive than mbei for these gene sets.

again, frma found gene sets with lower significance than the others and combat outperformed z-score, although the latter showed better results in terms of classification performances. in terms of pathway enrichment, the results of combat merging are comparable to those of non-merged datasets.

overall, this study confirms the previous studies that did not show benefits of survival prediction with merged datasets as compared to individual data sets using linear methods  <cit> . it also confirms that combat outperformed the other programs and the different pre-processing methods  did not show significant variation giving rise to improvement of prediction.  <cit> .

furthermore, the analysis of gene expression level in specific pathways confirmed the better performance of combat with respect to z-score, and focusing on pvca, frma was inaccurate in removing the batch effect from the data. this is evident when observing the graphical representation of data after pcanalysis, hierarchical clustering and pvca.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study showed the difficulty of merging data from different datasets, even if they come from the same type of chip, due to the low accuracy even when using different approaches. this suggests that because of the low recall and precision of all methods, data merging does not seem to be the elective approach to combine samples in array analysis. thus a better way to improve accurate signature from microarray datasets is to apply a meta-analysis rather than merging all raw data or developing algorithms that can leverage the effect of data merging, since we have demonstrated that it is algorithm-dependent.

