BACKGROUND
the central assumption of comparative genomics is that functional sequences evolve under constraints while non-functional sequences evolve neutrally. this simple assumption underlies several useful algorithms that identify coding genes  <cit> , non-coding rnas  <cit> , and cis-regulatory sites  <cit> . however, current methods for detecting cis-regulatory sites could be enhanced significantly by addressing two major issues. first, most transcription factor binding site  analyses treat the species under consideration as independent, ignoring the underlying phylogeny that connects the species with each other. second, comparative genomic analyses should incorporate known information about how functional sequences evolve. for example, gene finders have specific models for coding regions, splice donor and splice acceptor sites. similar models of tfbs evolution should be incorporated into motif finders. we therefore developed a method to find tfbs in the genomes of related species that accounts both for the evolutionary relationships between the species under consideration and provides an explicit model for tfbs evolution based on weight matrix models  <cit>  of known cis-regulatory motifs.

three algorithms that incorporate phylogenetic information have recently been presented  <cit> . a major difference between the three methods is the underlying evolutionary model used to take into account the phylogenetic relationships of the species under consideration. emnem  <cit>  uses a jukes-cantor model  <cit>  in which the substitution rate inside the regulatory element is fixed ignoring the positional variation of the motif. phyme  <cit>  and phylogibbs  <cit>  use an evolutionary binding site model proposed by sinha et al.  <cit>  which is similar to felsenstein's molecular evolution model  <cit> . this model combines binding site specificity into the substitution rates. as a natural progression we use a more detailed hky <dig> model  <cit> , which allows us to incorporate binding site specificities as well as differences in transition and transversion rates.

another property that separates motif finding algorithms is how they search the space of possible motifs. emnem and phyme use expectation-maximization to find an optimal binding site, while phylogibbs uses a gibbs sampling approach. both motif search methods are designed and most commonly used to analyze sets of co-regulated genes. however not all tfbs can be found in this way because we lack sets of co-regulated genes for every transcription factor. our method uses an exhaustive search technique that does not require an enriched set of genes and is therefore well suited to look for regulatory elements across all intergenic regions in the genome, without additional information on co-expression, functional annotation, or dna:protein interactions.

other comparative genomics methods, including those proposed by cliften et al.  <cit>  and kellis et al.  <cit> , have been implemented that search the genome exhaustively for regulatory elements. our approach adds new information by considering the underlying phylogeny while exhaustively searching all hexamers for conserved sequences across all intergenic regions. by combining these hexamers we created putative regulatory motifs. we experimentally tested one motif prediction and found it to be a regulatory element that activates gene expression in response to glucose.

RESULTS
evaluating binding site conservation
sequences that match tfbs are often preserved in the promoters of closely related species simply because there has not been enough time for the sites to decay, and not because they are functional. therefore it may be beneficial to weight the significance attributed to conserved sequences in proportion to the phylogenetic distance between the species in which the sequences are found. to create a probability-based method that incorporates the evolutionary relationships among species, we applied molecular evolution models.

molecular evolution models are used to analyze base substitutions between related species. for any given sequence in a multiple alignment taken from different species we determine whether the pattern of substitutions better fits a neutral model of evolution or a conserved model of tfbs evolution. an hky <dig>  <cit>  nucleotide substitution model underlies both our neutral and conserved models of tfbs evolution. the two models are identical except that in the neutral model genomic base frequencies are used as the equilibrium base frequencies whereas in the conserved tfbs model position specific base frequencies derived from weight matrix models of specific tfbs are used. in concept, substitutions in a conserved motif are allowed to occur at the neutral rate as long as they do not disrupt the tfbs. by comparing likelihoods between the two models over the entire binding site we determine whether the conserved model is a significantly better fit than the neutral model  <cit> . likelihood ratio tests have been used effectively in a number of diverse situations and remain a powerful tool for testing simple hypotheses  <cit> . our comparison of likelihoods, which is similar to a likelihood ratio test, enables us to incorporate phylogenetic distances and position specific motif variation into a probabilistic framework.

properties of the method
to determine the properties of this new approach we performed searches for conserved sequences in simulated intergenic regions. we simulated groups of orthologous promoters from different numbers of species at different evolutionary distances, which contained either conserved or neutral instances of a binding site . we simulated over one million neutral binding sites in a total of over one billion base pairs. we used the chi-squared distribution as an approximation to our expected distribution of likelihood comparisons and set the significance cutoff at an fdr of  <dig> % . using these criteria we did not observe a single false positive, an instance of a neutral binding site being called significantly conserved by the likelihood comparison. the results from these simulated data suggest that the method has high specificity with a false positive rate less than  <dig> in  <dig> 

the sensitivity, or ability to find conserved binding sites, of the method is affected by the number of species under consideration as well as the evolutionary distance between them, measured in substitutions per site. the addition of species and an increase in evolutionary distances both add to the sensitivity of the method. in figure  <dig>  some commonly compared organisms are plotted to demonstrate the theoretical sensitivity of these different data sets. for instance, with the saccharomyces genomes under consideration in this study we achieve a sensitivity of 97%. notably, alignments of human, mouse and rat do not contain enough statistical power to determine significantly conserved binding sites with high specificity. most of the occurrences of tfbss in these alignments are expected to be selectively neutral making the identification of those under purifying selection difficult. addition of the chicken genome adds the resolution necessary to detect regulatory elements in human-mouse-rat alignments. these results are in good agreement with the theoretical analysis of eddy  <cit> . one caveat of these simulations is that we assume perfect alignments at every evolutionary distance. in practice increasing the evolutionary distance between species increases the chances of generating faulty alignments that would decrease the sensitivity of the method. since our results suggested that the method should work on the related yeast species, we decided to determine if our approach could be used to identify functional regulatory elements shared among these genomes.

we first determined whether our method of scoring conserved sequences identifies functional instances of known motifs. using the likelihood comparison on intergenic alignments  <cit>  we classified all occurrences of mcb sites as either neutral or conserved. mcb sites are bound by the transcription factors mbp <dig> and swi <dig> which activate gene expression in the g <dig> phase of the cell cycle  <cit> . we plotted the expression levels, during a cell cycle time course  <cit> , of genes whose promoters contained mcb sites that fit the neutral  or the conserved  models. genes with neutral mcb sites showed random expression through the cell cycle while genes with conserved mcb sites displayed a strong expression pattern with two peaks corresponding to activation in the g <dig> phase of the cell cycle. these results suggest that our method may be able to distinguish functional from non-functional occurrences of tfbs.

we compared the output of our algorithm using either the true mcb weight matrix or a matrix in which the columns of the mcb model had been randomly shuffled. although this shuffled model contains the same base frequencies and the same information content as the true mcb model, it does not represent any known tfbs. using the true mcb site greatly enriched for positive log likelihood ratios  , indicating a better fit to the conserved model than the neutral model, while the random dna motifs had more variation in log likelihood ratios with more negative log ratios. the observation that true regulatory elements have a very different distribution of log likelihood ratios than random dna motifs led us to investigate whether the likelihood comparisons could identify novel transcription factor binding sites.

significantly conserved hexamers
to find new regulatory elements we decided to take an exhaustive approach in order to efficiently search the whole genome for regulatory elements. we therefore tested all six base pair dna sequences . for any particular hexamer, we identified all instances of that sequence in intergenic alignments and tested them using the likelihood comparison. we recorded the number of significantly conserved sites and the number of neutral sites for each hexamer to identify sequences in which a high fraction of the occurrences were scored as conserved. the assumption is that hexamers that are conserved often are likely to be part of a transcription factor binding site. the percentages of conserved sites for each hexamer are plotted in figure  <dig>  the mean fraction conserved was  <dig>  with a standard deviation of  <dig> . this suggests that most intergenic sequences are not significantly conserved; however, there is large variability in the amount of conservation between hexamers. the three most often conserved hexamers  all match the reb <dig> binding site showing that the most conserved intergenic sequences are indeed cis-regulatory sites.

we used a chi-squared test  to determine which hexamers were conserved in a higher fraction of intergenic regions than expected by chance. the resulting list consisted of  <dig> hexamers whose number of conserved instances differed from expected with p <  <dig>   . there is no strict percentage cutoff corresponding to highly conserved hexamers. this is due to the variability in the number of intergenic occurrences for each sequence. of these  <dig> conserved hexamers,  <dig>  matched known binding sites, leaving  <dig> hexamers that were not correlated with known motifs.

we used a simple alignment approach  to combine significant hexamers into motifs. from the starting  <dig> hexamers we derived  <dig> alignments corresponding to possible transcription factor binding site matrices. a total of  <dig> alignments matched  <dig> different known binding sites. this indicates that the false positive rate of our motif reconstruction method is at most 50%. however, this estimate assumes that all of the motif predictions that do not match known binding sites are incorrect, which is unlikely to be the case. none of the other  <dig> alignments , that did not match known motifs, matched previous predictions made by kellis et al.  <cit> , cliften et al.  <cit>  or harbison et al.  <cit> ; all recent high-throughput searches for cis-regulatory motifs based on comparative genome analyses and genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation  data.

to maximize the power of our approach we used each of the  <dig> new weight matrix models, we derived by combining conserved hexamers, in genome-wide searches for conserved sequences. for each of the  <dig> new weight matrices we constructed a corresponding hky <dig> model and used it to search for sequences with positive log likelihood scores. to focus our attention on the most promising binding site predictions we looked for functional enrichment of genes with conserved motifs present in their promoters. the most promising motif , based on being found upstream of genes with a statistical over representation in a functional class, was significantly over represented in the promoters of genes involved in carbohydrate utilization . in figure 4b a subsection of the glucose utilization pathway in yeast is shown along with the number of conserved binding sites present upstream of each gene.

the motif acts as a regulatory element
these findings lead us to hypothesize that our putative motif is a regulatory element important in modulating expression in the presence of different carbon sources. to test this hypothesis we inserted a  <dig> base pair sequence  containing two conserved instances of the motif upstream of a his <dig> reporter gene. we also inserted a mutant version of the  <dig> base pair sequence  in front of a his <dig> reporter gene. to determine if our motif regulates expression we compared the growth of a strain containing the wild type sequence versus the mutant sequence in the presence of 3at , an inhibitor of the his <dig> gene product. when plated on media containing glucose a substantial growth advantage was observed in the strain carrying a plasmid with the motif insert as compared to the strain carrying a plasmid with the mutant insert . however, when plated on media containing acetate as the sole carbon source the growth advantage is no longer observed. these results suggest that this motif activates expression of the reporter gene in the presence of glucose, but not in the presence of acetate. we conclude that this motif is a cis-regulatory element that responds to different carbon sources.

discussion
as the power of comparative genomics to find functional dna elements becomes more apparent it is important to create practical statistical methods for describing evolutionary conservation. to this aim we developed a statistical test to assess transcription factor binding site conservation. the method takes into account the positional variation of explicit binding site models and weights significance in proportion to the evolutionary distances of the species under consideration. based on simulations, the approach should be sensitive and specific when applied to commonly used sets of related species. in practice, the approach led to the discovery and subsequent validation of a functional regulatory element, thus proving the utility of the new approach on real data.

by defining an explicit model of tfbs evolution, we have taken an approach that is fundamentally different from recent large-scale studies in the field. we believe this is the primary reason why none of our motif predictions match the numerous predictions made by kellis et al.  <cit> , cliften et al.  <cit>  and harbison et al.  <cit> . the motifs we have predicted are different from those identified in previous studies, but, are of high quality as shown by our experimental validation of a regulatory element. therefore this method will be useful in conjunction with other commonly used computational approaches.

in this study we presented a whole genome motif finding algorithm that incorporates phylogenetic information. other motif finding methods that incorporate phylogeny have used either expectation maximization or gibbs sampling. we performed an exhaustive search to look for regulatory elements across the whole genome. by searching exhaustively we have omitted position specific variation in the first step of motif finding thus limiting the space of sequence patterns evaluated. there is a tradeoff between searching exhaustively and incorporating position specific variation. in this study, we decided to search exhaustively. it would be interesting to expand our method to incorporate degeneracy into the search algorithm.

the regulatory motif we identified does not match any entries in the widely used scpd  <cit>  or transfac  <cit>  databases. the motif is also not correlated with any motifs identified in large scale comparative genomic studies  <cit>  or high-throughput chromatin immunoprecipitation studies  <cit>  of yeast transcription factors. however, after the completion of this work an extensive literature search revealed one study in which a regulatory motif similar to the one we identified was identified by site-directed mutagenesis of the pdc <dig> promoter  <cit> . in agreement with our results this study also demonstrated that the motif is responsive to changes in carbon source and likely regulates the expression of genes involved in glycolysis. our findings support the conclusion that this motif is indeed an important regulatory element, and warrants the inclusion of this cis-regulatory element in commonly used databases of known, validated regulatory motifs.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a motif discovery method based on the principle that functional dna sequences evolve in a different pattern than selectively neutral sequences. the approach is applicable to whole genome sequences and takes into account the specific phylogeny of the species under consideration. while half of the motif predictions made by our method match known regulatory elements, the novel motif predictions made by our algorithm are unique. we validated one motif prediction experimentally, showing that it is responsive to different carbon sources. the combination of the computational and experimental results suggests that our motif discovery method is a useful addition to the current suite of tools for finding regulatory elements.

