BACKGROUND
species that are locally abundant tend to be more widespread than species that are locally rare  <cit> . this positive relationship between density and distribution of species has been observed in a variety of species assemblages over a spectrum of spatial scales, and it has been suggested that it may be almost an universal pattern in ecology  <cit> . however, a few studies document a negative relationship between density and distribution  <cit>  . only recently gaston et al.  <cit>  encouraged ecologists to pay more attention to the possibility of a negative relationship.

nine mechanisms have been proposed to explain the positive relationship between density and distribution  <cit> . of these, two are artefactual  and seven are ecological . negative relationship between density and distribution can be generated by similar mechanisms that give rise to a positive relationship, but for substantially different circumstances and parameter values  <cit> . below we discuss briefly all of the mechanisms that can possibly explain the positive relationship between density and distribution, and evaluate whether they could also generate a negative relationship.

sampling artefact
since low density species are less likely to be detected in surveys, a positive density-distribution relationship may result from systematic under-recording of the distribution of species that occur at low density  <cit> . it follows logically that sampling artefact is not expected to generate a negative density-distribution relationship  <cit> . however, there is a possibility that rare species with limited, but known, distribution face proportionally higher sampling effort resulting in inflated estimates of their density. when this is the case, a false negative relationship between density and distribution may be generated.

phylogenetic non-independence
both positive and negative density-distribution relationship may result from related species being considered as independent data points  <cit> . however, phylogenetic non-independence may be the causative factor of a density-distribution relationship only if species density and distribution are determined by species specific life history characteristics affected by the common ancestry, and if there are differences between taxa in their density and distribution. phylogenetic non-independence has been rejected as an explanation for the positive density-distribution relationship in all previous studies that have controlled its effects  <cit> .

patterns of aggregation
a positive density-distribution relationship may be generated as a result of an underlying theoretical spatial distribution of individuals. for a given level of aggregation, a species with more individuals in a given area is expected to occur in more locations than a species with fewer individuals in the same area  <cit> . however, whether this purely statistical mechanism can actually cause a positive density-distribution relationship rather than serves as a restatement of the relationship in another form, is questionable  <cit> . this mechanism is unable to generate a negative density – distribution relationship  <cit> .

range position
empirical observations suggest that habitat occupancy and the density of individuals decline when moving along a gradient from the centre of the species geographical distribution range toward its edge  <cit> . therefore, a positive density-distribution relationship in any particular region may result when species are at different positions relative to the centre of their geographical range  <cit> . gaston et al.  <cit>  argued that this mechanism cannot generate negative density-distribution relationship. more recently, hanski  <cit>  has pointed out that if patches are more isolated toward range edges, only the largest or best quality patches, i.e. those patches that are able to support the most dense populations, will be occupied. we note that this may lead into a negative density-distribution relationship.

niche breadth
brown  <cit>  hypothesized that a positive density-distribution relationship arises because species which have an ability to use a broader range of resources are assumed to be widespread and more abundant. however, while some evidence exists that species with greater niche breadth are more widespread  <cit> , virtually all published studies fail to document a positive interspecific relationship between niche breadth and abundance . on the contrary, many species with wide niche breadth are widely distributed but locally rare  <cit> . however, even if the relationship is commonly and almost predominantly negative, it is not often significantly different from zero. nevertheless, it seems that the relationship between niche breadth and abundance may in fact generate a negative rather than a positive density-distribution relationship.

resource availability
on the assumption that density and distribution of resources determine the density and distribution of the species utilizing them, a positive or a negative density-distribution relationship in the resource will generate the same relationship in the consumer  <cit> . most of the density-distribution relationships of the resource are reported to be positive  <cit> .

density dependent habitat selection
if a species tends to inhabit more habitats when density is high and fewer when density is low, then locally abundant species will tend to occupy more habitats and have wider distributions  <cit> . at present, there is little evidence for positive density-dependent habitat selection  <cit> . instead, some evidence exists for negative density-dependent habitat selection  <cit> . a negative density-distribution relationship arises when a species has a wider distribution, i.e. inhabits more habitats, when the density is low.

dispersal ability
metapopulation theory may explain both positive and negative density-distribution relationships  <cit> . a positive relationship may arise where a species that has high density is less likely to go extinct in a given patch than a species that has lower density, or where dispersal increases with density, thereby promoting colonization of empty patches  <cit> . conversely, a negative relationship may emerge when the species differ in dispersal ability, since dispersal can reduce density but increase distribution  <cit> .

vital rates
if a set of species differs only in respect to its mortality rate, then species with higher mortality will have a lower density. moreover, the species will inhabit fewer patches than a species with low mortality, leading to a positive density-distribution  <cit> . under rather restricted conditions, the vital rates mechanism could also generate a negative density-distribution relationship  <cit> ; however, to test this mechanism, population level data on density-dependent birth and death rates are necessary  <cit> .

here, we will examine the relationship between density and distribution of finnish butterflies , and test the possible mechanisms affecting this relationship. the density-distribution patterns of butterflies have been examined in many previous studies, and if a relationship was found, it was generally positive  <cit> . however, most of the studies were conducted in the british isles, thus representing a sort of pseudoreplication in terms of range of environments and selection of butterfly species studied. using density and distribution data from two extensive butterfly censuses, we will assess which of the four mechanisms – phylogenetic non-independence, range position, niche breadth and dispersal ability – are best at explaining the density-distribution relationship of finnish butterflies. we will also discuss the effects of sampling artefact on the density-distribution relationship.

RESULTS
density-distribution relationships
a strong negative relationship was detected between the density and distribution of finnish butterflies  .

distribution of butterflies
to understand the effects of range position and dispersal ability on the distribution of the butterflies, we analysed the data using simple linear regression and with a multiple linear regression to even out correlated effects. in simple linear regressions, both variables had a significant positive effect on butterfly distribution . the overall multiple linear regression was highly significant , and both of the predictor variables had an independent positive effect on the distribution of the butterflies . the relationship between distribution of the butterflies and both of the predictor variables are shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig> 

to study the effect of niche breadth on the distribution of the butterflies, we analysed the effects of larval specificity and adult habitat breadth on butterfly distribution using analysis of variance  and tukey's multiple comparisons test. there was no significant interaction between larval specificity and habitat breadth on butterfly distribution , and thus the interaction term was removed from the analysis. however, both larval specificity and habitat breadth had a significant effect on butterfly distribution . a significant difference was found in the distribution of butterfly species with different habitat breadths. specialist butterfly species had smaller distribution than generalist species , and intermediate species had smaller distribution than generalist species . specialist species tended to have smaller distributions than intermediate species, but the difference was not significant . no significant difference was found in the distribution of monophagous and oligophagous butterfly species . however, the distribution of the polyphagous butterfly species was greater than mono- or oligo-phagous species  .

density of butterflies
in simple linear regressions, both range position and dispersal ability had significant negative effects on the density of the butterflies . the overall multiple regression of the density of the butterflies on their range position and dispersal ability was highly significant , and both the predictor variables had independently negative effects on butterfly density . the relationships between the density and the predictor variables are depicted in figures  <dig> and  <dig> 

to study the effect of niche breadth on the density of the butterflies, we analysed the effects of larval specificity and adult habitat breadth by anova and tukey's multiple comparisons test. no significant interaction was observed between larval specificity and habitat breadth on butterfly density , and thus the interaction term was removed. however, habitat breadth had a significant main effect on butterfly density . specialist species had a greater density than intermediate  or generalist species , but there was no significant difference between intermediate and generalist species . larval specificity also had an overall effect on butterfly density . monophagous species had significantly greater density than polyphagous species . however, tukey test detected no differences between monophagous and oligophagous, or between oligophagous and polyphagous species  .

phylogenetic non-independence
controlling for the phylogenetic non-independence by using the method of phylogenetically independent contrasts  verified that none of the results reported above were artefacts of treating species as independent data points. the results with the phylogenetically independent contrasts have been tabulated in table  <dig> and clearly support the previous studies on distribution, abundance or distribution-abundance relationships in which the phylogenetic non-independence not a causative factor in any of the results  <cit> .

discussion
density and distribution of butterflies
a positive relationship between the density and distribution of species is expected to be an almost universal pattern in ecology  <cit> . in contrast to this, we found a strong negative relationship between density and distribution in finnish butterflies. here we will discuss three mechanisms-range position, niche breadth and dispersal ability – that could be responsible for generating this negative relationship.

range position
according to the range position hypothesis, species are expected to inhabit increasingly fewer localities when moving along a gradient from the centre of the species' geographical distribution range toward the edges of the range  <cit> . in addition, density should also decline along this gradient  <cit> . if these two assumptions are correct, a positive density-distribution relationship in any particular region will result when species are at different positions relative to the centre of their geographical ranges  <cit> . however, there is little evidence for the latter of the two assumptions  <cit> . moreover, metapopulation theory suggests that if patches are more isolated toward range edges, only the largest or best quality patches will be occupied, i.e. those patches that are able to support the most dense populations  <cit> . if this is the case, a negative density-distribution relationship will be observed. in our study, we found a strong negative relationship between range position and density indicating that species on the edge of their geographical distribution are indeed more abundant on the patches they occupy. to illustrate the effect of this relationship on the density-distribution relationship, we divided the range position of the butterflies into three classes  and plotted these on top of the density-distribution relationship . species on the edge of their geographical distribution  had the smallest distribution and highest density, whereas the species furthest from the edge of their geographical distribution  had the largest distribution and lowest density. consequently, being at different positions relative to the centre of the geographical ranges may indeed cause a negative density-distribution relationship.

niche breadth
the niche breadth hypothesis predicts that a positive density-distribution relationship arises because species that are able to use a broader range of resources are widespread and also have high density  <cit> . there is evidence of a positive relationship between niche breadth and distribution  <cit> , but it is difficult to see why wider niche breadth should lead to higher density  <cit> . many studies have failed to document a positive interspecific relationship between niche breadth and density  relationships between niche breadth and density  and larval feeding specificity  on the density-distribution relationship. these figures illustrate that the negative density-distribution relationship may be caused by differences in the niche breadth: habitat specialist species and monophagous species have higher abundance, but simultaneously have smaller distribution, than habitat generalist or polyphagous species. based on the available empirical evidence, it seems that the relationship between distribution and niche breadth is generally positive  <cit> . if we accept this to be the case, and the density-distribution relationship is determined by niche breadth, then the form of the relationship is caused by the relationship between density and niche breadth.

dispersal ability
according to the metapopulation theory, differences in dispersal ability of species may generate negative density-distribution relationships  <cit> . if, for any reason, species differ in their dispersal ability and dispersal ability has a positive effect on distribution, but a negative effect on density, a negative density-distribution relationship will result. we found a strong positive relationship between dispersal ability and distribution and a strong negative relationship between dispersal ability and density, which support earlier studies in butterflies  <cit> . we divided the dispersal ability of the butterflies into three classes  and plotted the classes on the density-distribution relationship. fig.  <dig> illustrates that species with the lowest dispersal ability have the highest density but lowest distribution, while species with the highest dispersal ability have the lowest density and highest distribution, leading into the observed negative relationship between density and distribution.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that many of the ecological mechanisms proposed to create a positive density-distribution relationship are also able to generate a negative relationship. indeed, it is intriguing that many studies, which have found a positive density – distribution relationship have failed to find an ecological mechanism that would explain the observed pattern. this may not be surprising if the ecological mechanisms are more likely to generate a negative rather than positive density – distribution relationship. in support of this view we found a strong negative density-distribution relationship but what is more important also empirical support for ecological mechanisms that are able to explain the observed pattern.

our study area  is a long, northern country extending more than  <dig> km from south to north. many of the studied butterfly species meet the edge of their distributional range in finland. on the edge of a distribution range suitable habitat patches are likely to be more isolated than in the core of the range. in such a case, only the largest and best quality patches are likely to be occupied, but because these are the best quality patches, they may support a relatively dense population  <cit> , leading into a negative density – distribution relationship. we suggest that one important determinant of the density-distribution relationships is the geographical position of the study area and, therefore, future studies should place greater emphasis on the comparison of the relationship in different geographical areas.

