BACKGROUND
the controversial phylogenetic position  <cit>  of turtles among land vertebrates and their highly derived anatomical features  <cit>  have been subject of molecular and morphological investigations. three main hypotheses of sister-groups have resulted from them , if we ignore extinct taxa: the sauria clade  <cit>  or one of its subgroups, the archosauria  <cit> , with crocodiles and birds, or the lepidosauria  <cit> , with squamates and the tuatara. in view of this conflict, new lines of evidence to address this phylogenetic issue have been called for  <cit> . although embryology has played a major role in morphological studies of vertebrate phylogeny and primary homology testing, data on developmental timing have never been examined to explore and test these conflicting phylogenetic hypotheses about turtle origin.

when examining the phylogenetic position of turtles among amniotes, relationships within turtles themselves are very relevant, as they determine the reconstruction of the last common ancestor of the clade. the subdivision of extant turtles into the side-necked pleurodires and the hidden-necked cryptodires is widely accepted, but no consensus exists on the systematics of the cryptodire subgroups. alternative groupings of these clades are also included in our analysis . several additional hypotheses for the origin of turtles have been suggested in the past, but are no longer earnestly discussed, such as a close relationship of turtles to the remaining amniota, to aves, to crocodylia, or to mammalia  <cit> .

following recent comparative embryological work  <cit>  we defined  <dig> developmental characters of external morphology during organogenesis until hatching/birth based on a comprehensive review of the literature and our own study of embryological series . we examined  <dig> turtle and seven amniote species representing the other major extant amniote clades . one salamander was used as an outgroup. we included the first comprehensive data on side-necked turtle external embryology, represented by emydura subglobosa. we implemented parsimov  <cit> , a parsimony-based method to quantify and compare sequence heterochrony, and used the number of timing shifts from the consensus data of the methods of character optimisation as a criterion to support the robustness of a particular branch  <cit> . there are  <dig> topologies on which parsimov was implemented, resulting from eight alternative hypotheses for the position of turtles within tetrapoda , each combined with the three alternative topologies of the cryptodire subgroups . in addition, a total of  <dig> event pairs  were mapped:  <dig> characters  were constant, and  <dig> variable characters  were parsimony-uninformative. the remaining  <dig> characters  were informative.

RESULTS
the turtle-saurian relationship is clearly the best supported hypothesis using parsimov  <cit> , independent of which hypothesis of inner turtle phylogeny is taken as reference. among the latter, the cryptodire hypothesis with sea turtles in a basal position  <cit>  was the best supported topology of all . the archosauria hypothesis has very little support in comparison to all main hypotheses considered . the differences among the alternative phylogenies are distinctly significant and suggest that embryological data of the kind treated here are clearly most congruent with a basal position of turtles within sauropsida.

as additional exploration of the developmental data on the alternative hypotheses, we mapped the event pairs on the  <dig> topologies and counted tree length for each of them. when mapping unordered character states, the tree lengths range between  <dig> and  <dig> . the alternative tetrapod trees combined to one of the hypotheses of inner turtle relationship were the shortest ones . the best-supported topologies with  <dig> steps are  and . in contrast, when using the ordered character state approach, tree lengths range between  <dig> and  <dig> . we found the shortest tree for a sister group position of turtles to the sauria clade  with  <dig> steps. it is notable that both for the ordered and unordered character state approach the testudines-sauria tree is among the shortest and that the archosaurian hypothesis is among the most weakly supported ones .

the analysis presented here clearly shows that heterochronic shifts during tetrapod development do occur and can be recognised even with the conservative parsimov method  <cit> . the number of autapomorphies at a node on alternative phylogenies as test criterion is not a standard cladistic analysis, and the relative timings of events are not conventional characters either. but the differences among the alternative phylogenies are distinctly significant and suggest that embryological data of the kind treated here are clearly most congruent with a basal position of turtles within sauropsida.

characters that are phylogenetically informative are mostly those of the organogenic phase . character complexes such as eye, ear, eyelid, mandibular arch, pharyngeal arches, pharyngeal slits and neck flexure are involved in major temporal shifts. in contrast, we found few temporal shifts during limb development, in accordance with the conserved pattern across tetrapods reported in recent studies  <cit> . there are also few temporal shifts in the early period of embryonic development, that is, from the occurrence of blastopore and neurulation up to early somite cluster formation.

some changes at the different nodes of the phylogenies examined are potentially linked with functional or ecological aspects. one character that clearly distinguishes mammalia from sauropsida is the temporal occurrence of the lens/iris contour. in mammals it occurs late with respect to the occurrence of several other events, in sauropsids earlier, perhaps coupled with the differing life strategies of these two groups. since mammals are generally protected by and associated to the mother in the uterus or during the lactation period, they may not "need" to develop their eye as early as reptiles do, because the latter generally have to find food and avoid predators shortly after hatching. other senses-related changes may also be interpretable in this light. temporal shifts that characterise testudines + sauria are mainly related to the early occurrence of events of the eye, ear and nasal complex in relation to limb-related characters. the primary cervical flexure of 90° and its final disappearance is delayed within sauropsida. this is possibly related to an earlier hatching/birth in mammals and their need for a muscular, neck-related suction. a late occurrence of the fourth pharyngeal slit in sauria in relation to the occurrence of the third slit may be – compared to turtles as a sister group – correlated to a shorter neck. when discussing neck related characters also the count of cervical vertebrae and the ossification mode should be kept in mind. the sauria are distinguished from the testudines by an accelerated occurrence of some somite clusters. this is potentially coupled with the fact that whereas testudines are characterised by a constant and low count of vertebrae  <cit> , higher numbers of vertebrae are exhibited by saurian clades.

there are few empirical studies of sequence heterochrony with similar methods to those used here, so comparisons with our study are only preliminary. other studies of a similar phylogenetic breadth  <cit>  have found less heterochronies per node than reported here; studies at lower taxonomic levels and on diverse character complexes have found several heterochronic changes at different phylogenetic levels  <cit> . as claimed in recent comprehensive studies of skeletal development in mammals  <cit> , heterochrony can be expressed in different ways  and empirical studies are needed to further study its phylogenetic signal and relevance in vertebrate evolution.

several extinct groups, for which no molecular or embryological data are available, have been suggested as potential sister-groups of turtles  <cit> . we cannot test based on our exclusively neontological data whether testudines evolved within one of the fossil "anapsida"-clades or on the stemline of sauria within diapsida  <cit> . histological studies of head development should help understanding skull fenestration evolution and turtle origins. in this regard, the mode of jaw development in the snapping turtle chelydra serpentina was preliminary interpreted as consistent with a stem-position of turtles outside of diapsida  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the embryological data and their analysis presented here are in agreement with a basal position of turtles instead of one nested within a saurian clade. whatever future comprehensive genomic studies reveal, it is clear that important homoplasies have characterised either the evolution of adult morphological structures or the evolution of developmental patterns of organogenesis, or both, in land vertebrate evolution.

the elucidation of the developmental and molecular mechanisms  <cit>  and the discovery of potentially transitional forms in the fossil record  <cit>  for the turtle shell, in concern with solving the phylogenetic position of turtles, promises to explain one of the major evolutionary transitions in land vertebrate evolution.

