BACKGROUND
recently there has been an upsurge of interest in the question to what extent the human motor control system is influenced by the emotional state of the actor. several cortical and subcortical loops have been identified that provide an interface between the emotion system and the motor control system. as an example, limbic structures such as the anterior cingulate cortex and the orbitofrontal cortex receive input from the amygdala, and send projections to the basal ganglia via the so called limbic loop, also known as the anterior cingulate basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuit  <cit> . the ventral striatum also receives direct input from limbic structures such as the hippocampus, amygdala, and entorhinal cortices  <cit> . thus, the basal ganglia are likely involved not only in involuntary bodily movements, such as gait and posture, but also in the bodily expression of emotions. as another example, the limbic association cortex, which includes the orbitofrontal cortex, the cingulate cortex and the parahippocampal area receives projections from the higher-order sensory areas and from limbic areas, and can affect emotion-mediated motor planning via its projections to the prefrontal cortex  <cit> . despite neuroanatomical evidence regarding the interface between limbic and motor control structures, current knowledge about the precise interrelations between these systems is still limited and, as far as we know, motor control models with an explicit affective component remain to be developed.

the interrelatedness between the affective system and the motor control system likely serves an evolutionary purpose. darwin  <cit>  already argued that emotions are adaptive, in the sense that they prime a behavioral response pattern that is appropriate to deal with the environmental event that triggered the emotion. in an attempt to classify the wide variety of emotions, theorists in the field of behavioral neuroscience and psychology tend to agree that one overarching component of each emotion is its hedonic valence, i.e., the experienced pleasantness or unpleasantness. within this framework, emotions either have an appetitive  motivational component or a defensive  component . for present purposes we focus on unpleasant emotions such as fear and disgust, because they tend to be processed via a rapid subcortical projection, preparing the animal for quick and appropriate reactions . in this respect an important neural structure is the amygdala which, via projections to the periaqueductal gray , can trigger emotional response output, such as a fight-or-flight response or freezing behavior  <cit> . furthermore, the amygdala can induce an increase in autonomic activity such as an increase in heart rate via the lateral hypothalamus.

much of our current knowledge about interactions between the emotion system and motor system comes from animal research, such as aversive conditioning, but relatively little is known about how these systems interact to affect the behavior of healthy humans. a few studies have shown that emotions, especially negative ones, can prime adaptive behavioral responses, such as approach-avoidance behavior or freezing behavior. these responses become manifest as subtle changes in body posture, which is the focus of the present study.

three recent studies adopted a behavioral paradigm whereby participants were asked to passively view a set of emotionally charged images that were adopted from the international affective picture system . the pictures were shown while participants were standing on a force plate, and resultant changes in the body center of pressure  were taken as a measure of the bodily preparedness to engage in adaptive emotional behavior. first, a study by hillman et al.  <cit>  found postural adjustments when viewing affective pictures, especially when viewing unpleasant images depicting scenes of attack or mutilation. more specifically, in response to unpleasant images the cop of males displayed small anterior  postural adjustments, suggesting an approach action tendency. in contrast, the cop of females displayed posterior adjustments, suggesting a defensive  tendency. thus, emotionally charged images caused unintentional postural adjustments, and this effect was modulated by the gender of the viewers. second, a study by azevedo et al.  <cit>  examined in more detail the effects of pictures of mutilation on posture and heart rate. the pictures were supposed to induce an emotion of disgust with the viewers, and postural responses were compared to neutral pictures  and pleasant/arousing pictures . in males, this class of pictures resulted in a significant overall reduction of body sway, as evidenced by a reduction in the standard deviation of the cop trajectory. furthermore, the unpleasant images caused a significant heart rate deceleration. these postural and physiological responses were strongly suggestive of activation of the defensive system, resulting in bodily freezing and fear bradycardia. finally, similar findings were reported by facchinetti  <cit> , who found a reduction in postural mobility and an increase in mean power frequency of the cop signal in response to pictures of mutilation , compared to blocks of neutral stimuli. furthermore, pictures of mutilation resulted in a significant heart rate deceleration. these findings were also consistent with freezing behavior in response to a threatening context.

the aim of the present study was to examine how postural sway is influenced when viewers are confronted with emotion eliciting pictures. based on the studies described in the preceding section we predicted that especially pictures with negative emotional content have a discernible influence on postural sway. more specifically, we predicted that unpleasant images will result in small backward displacements of the cop, indicative of withdrawal behavior. in addition, unpleasant images depicting disgusting scenes were expected to lead to smaller cop excursions  than with other images. we employed a paradigm similar to the one used by  <cit>  but with two major changes. first, we modified the order of presentation of the images. in previous studies using iaps images  <cit>  all images within an emotion category were presented in a blocked order. this procedure could have biased the participants, in that they always knew within a block what kind of emotional experience the stimulus was expected to induce. relatedly, the blocking procedure could cause the effects of emotion to accrue over time, due to increased sensitivity to the images. this makes it difficult to attribute the observed postural adjustments to individual stimuli because subjects could somehow engage in anticipatory bodily behavior throughout a block of stimuli. based on these considerations we decided to administer the stimuli in a random order. although this design feature is likely to lead to smaller overall effects , it produces a more valid measure of emotion. second, we included an additional postural manipulation. the studies described above involved 'normal' standing, that is, standing on two legs on a rigid support surface. it is known that by introducing an additional challenge to posture such as standing on foam or standing with eyes closed, maintaining balance becomes more difficult  which, in turn, may cause a reduction in postural stability and greater sway. we therefore hypothesized that the putative effects of emotion on balance would be amplified when the balance system is challenged. to this end, we asked participants to view the affective pictures while standing on two legs  and while standing on one leg . we expected that the effects of emotion on posture would be larger during unipedal stance than bipedal stance.

RESULTS
all participants completed the experiment. fourteen trials  had to be discarded due to loss of balance in the unipedal condition.

valence and arousal ratings
using pair-wise t-tests we found that pleasant images were rated as significantly more pleasant than neutral images  =  <dig> ; p < .001), and that unpleasant images were rated as significantly less pleasant than neutral images  =  <dig> ; p < .001). we also found that pleasant images were rated as significantly more arousing than neutral images  =  <dig> ; p < .001), and also that unpleasant images were rated as significantly more arousing than neutral images  =  <dig> ; p < .001).

the transformed valence scores of hillman et al.  <cit>  were  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  for pleasant, neutral, and unpleasant pictures, respectively. in two instances the hillman et al.  <cit>  valence scores were significantly higher than in our sample  =  <dig> , p < .01; neutral: t =  <dig> , p < .01). for the unpleasant images the difference was not significant. the transformed arousal scores of hillman et al.  <cit>  were  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  for pleasant, neutral, and unpleasant pictures, respectively. in all three instances these scores were significantly higher than in our sample  =  <dig> , p < .01; neutral: t =  <dig> , p < .001; unpleasant: t =  <dig> , p < .001). in sum, our sample of dutch viewers rated the images as overall less pleasant and less arousing than their american counterparts.

postural effects
the anova performed on cop-ap only revealed a main effect of emotion; f =  <dig> ; p < . <dig>  both the neutral and unpleasant pictures resulted in a modest 1-mm forward displacement of the cop, whereas the cop displacement with pleasant pictures was virtually zero. no other effects were significant.

the anova performed on sd  only revealed a main effect of stance: f =  <dig> ; p < . <dig>  unipedal stance was more variable than bipedal stance .

in a similar vein, the anova performed on length  also revealed a main effect of stance; f =  <dig> ; p < . <dig>  the length of the sway path during unipedal stance was greater than during bipedal stance . furthermore, the stance × picture interaction was significant; f =  <dig> , p < . <dig>  the means are shown in figure  <dig>  inspection of the means revealed that sway path was shorter for pictures of mutilation compared to the other pictures but only with a unipedal stance .

pairwise t-tests between pictures of mutilation and all other picture categories revealed in all instances in the unipedal condition a significant  difference.

discussion
the aim of this study was to test whether the limbic-motor interaction would show up as behavioral adjustments of body posture in response to emotion eliciting images. based on neuroanatomical knowledge and on previous studies using a similar paradigm we predicted that especially unpleasant emotions would have a discernible effect on body sway. the results revealed only modest effects of emotion on the cop. we were unable to replicate the findings of hillman et al.  <cit> . however, we were able to partially replicate the results of previous studies  <cit> , in that our pictures of mutilation resulted in a shorter total sway path compared to the other pictures, at least in the unipedal stance condition. this finding is consistent with the hypothesis that perception of threat results in some degree of bodily "freezing", also known as fear bradycardia, or "attentive immobility"  <cit> , which can be described as a state of hypervigilance. this state is characterized by heart rate deceleration and a concommittant increase in attentional processing  <cit> .

there may be several reasons why the observed effects of emotion on cop changes were reduced compared to previous studies. first, it could be the case that our procedure involving randomization of the stimuli somehow 'washed out' the emotion inducing effects. the rapid and unpredictable succession of pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral images may simply not have left enough room for clear and powerful emotions to become manifest. however, we believe this is unlikely because other studies have successfully adopted randomization in this context: coombes et al.  <cit>  induced an emotion-movement interaction using complete randomization of iaps images , and it was found that the magnitude of sustained contraction of hand muscles was greater with unpleasant images than with the other categories. furthermore, bradley et al.  <cit>  obtained reliable psychophysiological changes as a function of picture category, again employing a complete random order of iaps images. thus, even when emotion eliciting images are presented in a random order they can still yield clearly measurable effects.

second, it could be that the adopted stimuli were not suitable for our audience of dutch viewers. after the experiment some participants remarked that some of the pictures displaying scenes of attack and of erotica were awkward, and that they rarely resulted in strong emotional feelings. the iaps was validated with american viewers, and cultural differences render it possible that the iaps is more suitable for an american audience than a european one. our assessment of the same iaps-images with an independent group of dutch viewers yielded clear effects of valence and arousal in the expected direction. however, the overall valence scores and arousal scores were significantly lower than the scores reported in  <cit> , who used the same stimuli. thus, it could be that the images only resulted in weak emotional feelings with our group of subjects, and hence only modest postural adjustments.

third, it could be that passive viewing of images is only weakly coupled to posture. a probably more effective way to probe the emotion-posture system would be to induce an emotional state that is somehow relevant to the postural control system. for example, anxiety can be successfully introduced by having participants maintain balance while standing close to an edge, which then primes the balance system for fear of falling. this manipulation was introduced by carpenter et al.  <cit>  who found that standing on a surface height resulted in a posterior displacement, i.e., away from the edge, with values that were about twice as large as those reported by hillman et al.  <cit> . furthermore they  <cit>  found that increasing the surface height caused participants to adopt a freezing strategy, as exemplified by an increase in mean power frequency and a concurrent decrease in amplitude variability of the cop.

CONCLUSIONS
we only found modest effects of affective picture viewing on cop changes. body sway was only affected when balance was challenged and when subjects viewed pictures with disgusting content. this result is consistent with the hypothesis that neural structures responsible for negative affect can exert their influence on structures responsible for adaptive behavioral actions.

