BACKGROUND
predicting the stability of a dna duplex from base sequences is a well studied problem nowadays. nevertheless, the accuracy of dna duplex stability predictions largely varies with sequence length, base composition and experimental conditions. the thermodynamic nearest-neighbour  model  <cit>  is a state-of-the-art approach that is used to estimate the stability of a single or a pair of dna  molecules based on pairwise base interactions and structural conformations. a large collection of thermodynamic nearest-neighbour parameters were acquired by interpolation of results obtained from various experimental processes like nmr  <cit>  and optical melting studies  <cit> . the accuracy of computing free energies for dna duplexes is an important aspect for all prediction methods, considering their direct application for selecting, for example, microarray probes that perfectly hybridize with their complements within a pre-specified hybridization interval, while avoiding self-hybridization for each probe  <cit> . here we select four widely used, publicly available computer programs that implement the tnn model using large numbers of experimentally derived thermodynamic parameters, namely: the multirnafold v <dig>  package  <cit>  with two sets of thermodynamic parameters, the vienna package v <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  and the unafold v <dig>  package  <cit> .

the multirnafold package  predicts the minimum free energy, suboptimal secondary structures and free energy changes of one, two, or several interacting nucleic acid sequences. the thermodynamic model for the thermodynamic stability of a joint secondary structure for two dna or rna molecules at a given temperature is performed similarly to that of a single molecule  <cit> , except that an intermolecular initiation penalty is added. the pairfold algorithm uses dynamic programming to calculate minimum free energy secondary structures and runs in time cubic in the lengths of the input sequences ). pairfold uses rna thermodynamic parameters from the turner laboratory  <cit>  and dna thermodynamic parameters from the mathews and santalucia laboratories  <cit> .

the vienna package consists of a suite of computer programs and libraries for prediction of rna and dna secondary structures. nucleic acid secondary structure prediction is done via free energy minimization using three dynamic programming algorithms for structure prediction: the minimum free energy algorithm of  <cit> , which produces a single optimal structure, the partition function algorithm of  <cit> , which calculates base pair probabilities in a thermodynamic ensemble, and the suboptimal folding algorithm of  <cit> , which generates all suboptimal structures within a given energy range of the optimal energy.

unafold, the acronym for "unified nucleic acid folding", is a software package for rna and dna folding and hybridization prediction. unafold folds single-stranded rna or dna, or two single dna or rna strands, by computing partition functions for various states of hybridization. the partition functions will then help to derive base pair probabilities and stochastic samples of foldings or hybridizations. the package provides various energy minimization methods, which compute minimum free energy hybridizations and suboptimal foldings.

all three packages use similar dynamic programming algorithms for prediction of minimum free energy  and suboptimal structures and for partition function calculations. for the purposes of our work , the main differences lie in the thermodynamic parameters used , and in the features considered . thus our first goal is to quantify the impact of these differences on the accuracy of dna duplex free energy approximations. throughout the paper, we use a set of measures that reflect the degree of similarity of calculated and experimental secondary structures and free energies. based on these measures we quantify the accuracy of the predictions of the aforementioned programs using a collection of  <dig> experimental dna duplex data that we collected from  <dig> publications.

we also introduce in this work an extended nearest-neighbour model for perfect matches based on triplet interactions, that can approximate free energies for dna duplexes under a wide range of temperatures, sodium and sequence concentrations. the model is similar to the one introduced in  <dig> by owczarzy et al.  <cit> , the main difference residing in the inclusion of only triplet interactions for our model, rather than a mixture of singlets, doublets and triplets for the other. thus, our second goal is to show that such a model outperforms simpler models based on doublet interactions and produces more accurate free energy approximations for dna duplex hybridizations occurring in non-standard experimental environments .

RESULTS
in this work, we compare similarities and correlations of free energy values calculated using three publicly available packages, namely multirnafold, unafold and vienna package and a nearest-neighbour  model for perfect matches based on triplet interactions. for this purpose, we collected and used a data set with  <dig> pairs of short dna sequences and we investigated what method produces the closest value to the experimental free energy and under what circumstances. we acknowledge the fact that not all sequence lengths are equally represented in the benchmark data set simply due to their availability and thus our analysis may apply better to shorter sequences. the majority  of experimental free energy calculations were obtained for perfect  and almost perfect matches , thus the current dna parameter sets tend to have higher accuracy for close-to perfect match dna duplexes. another bias in the analysis may come from the fact that some authors have already tried to reconcile the existing differences in free energy model parameters  <cit>  by optimizing sets of dna parameters using the same sequences already present in the benchmark data set.

comparison of absolute differences between experimental and estimated free energies 
we begin the presentation of our results by introducing a measure that provides insights into "worst" and "best" estimates for minimum free energies. thus, the first comparison involves the absolute differences between experimental and estimated free energies  among all the methods for model evaluation  and model prediction . in an ideal scenario, the estimated free energy would equal the experimentally inferred one, nevertheless in practice we would settle for a low absolute difference. in both scenarios, namely the evaluation of free energy estimates and the evaluation of secondary structure predictions, the largest maximal mfe_ad  were obtained for the pairfold-mathews method, while the minimal mfe_ad  corresponds to the unafold method . the average differences for the eval-fe methods range between  <dig>  kcal/mol  and  <dig>  kcal/mol , while for the prediction methods the interval is slightly shifted towards zero. we also observed a similar improvement trend for mfe_ad standard deviations of eval-ss methods versus eval-fe methods, a phenomenon that can be explained by the intrinsic regression-based construction of the underlying dna parameters used by each method.

each data set has the following characteristics: the number of sequence pairs , the length of the sequences , the experimental temperature measured in degrees celsius for estimating free energies , the sodium concentration measured in molar units and the sequence concentration . the set of  <dig> dna duplexes contains:   <dig> perfect match free energies measured at a temperature of 37°c and a sodium concentration of  <dig> m,   <dig> perfect match duplexes measured at a temperature of 25°c and a sodium concentration of  <dig> m,   <dig> perfect match duplexes measured at a temperature of 50°c and a sodium concentration of  <dig> m, and   <dig> duplexes with mismatches measured at various temperatures and sodium concentrations. note: n.r. denotes values that have not been reported in the original documents.

summary of results for free energy measurements obtained with eval-ss methods. the p-values for the pearson correlation test were less than  <dig> e- <dig> in all cases.

comparison of root mean squared errors 
we measure the root mean squared error between experimentally determined and predicted free energies. in an ideal scenario where predicted values equal experimental values, the rmse would be zero, thus the lower the rmse value is, the closer the predicted values are to the experimental ones. here, all methods produce comparably low rmses, the lowest eval-fe rmse  and eval-ss rmse  being obtained in both cases with vienna package .

summary of results for free energy measurements obtained with eval-fe methods. the p-values for the pearson correlation test were less than  <dig> e- <dig> in all cases.

estimated free energy parameters for unique dna nn doublets and triplets and their corresponding counts of appearance in the perfect match data set. all parameters have been estimated using experimental values measured at 37°c and  <dig> m sodium concentration.

comparison of pearson correlation coefficients 
a correlation coefficient is traditionally defined as a symmetric, scale-invariant measure of association between two random variables, which takes values between - <dig> and  <dig>  the extreme values indicate a perfect positive  or negative  correlation, while  <dig> means no correlation. positive pearson product moment correlations are observed for all methods when experimental and evaluated or predicted free energies are considered as random variables. the highest pearson correlation coefficients  are consistently obtained with the pairfold-santalucia method for both eval-fe and eval-ss, closely followed by unafold, vienna package and pairfold-mathews. a major and consistent deviation from the correlation line of approximately  <dig> kcal/mol for the data collected from doktycz et al.  <cit>  and a few other minor deviations for the data collected from four additional publications  <cit>  were consistently noticed for all free energy calculation methods . the majority of the deviations  may come from potentially different free energy interpolation functions used in those studies.

if we consider only perfect match data, the tnn-triplets-pm model  is capable of estimating free energies that correlate better  with experimental values , than all the other methods, which show an average correlation coefficient r =  <dig> . we notice also an improvement in the rmse for the tnn-triplets-pm model, compared to the other programs. to ensure that this improvement is due to the triplet aspect of the model rather than other confounding factors, we created a tnn-doublets-pm model that has been trained and evaluated on the same perfect match data set. a detailed description of the training and evaluation procedure is provided in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  for the complete data set with perfect matches measured at various temperatures and buffer concentrations, figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> show that our tnn-triplets-pm model consistently produces better correlations and rmses, when we run a random design experiment using  <dig>  <dig> randomly selected subsets with 67% duplexes  used for training and 33% duplexes  used for testing. the same high correlations can be observed when running the tnn-triplets-pm model on perfect match duplex free energies measured at a temperature of 25°c and  <dig> m sodium concentration, while for perfect match free energies measured at 37°c and  <dig> m sodium concentration, the other models produce better but still comparable correlations  and rmses  with the tnn-triplets-pm model.

comparison of secondary structure similarity indexes of experimental and predicted secondary structures 
the accuracy of secondary structure prediction for various methods can be evaluated by using the newly introduced measure described in equation  <dig>  the sssi measure simply calculates the percentage of correctly predicted secondary structure bonds corresponding to the positions in each secondary structure  that match the position in the experimental secondary structure, normalized by the sum of sequence lengths. comparable mean sssi values were produced by all methods with a maximal value of  <dig> % attained by pairfold-santalucia. the lowest value  was obtained with vienna package . all methods have large standard deviation for sssi values, thus suggesting a wide sample distribution.

comparison of sens, ppv and f for predicted secondary structures
the analysis of the variation for sensitivities and f-measures with respect to sequence length and gc content percentages reveals a common pattern for all prediction methods. mean sensitivities higher than  <dig>  and mean f-measures higher than  <dig>  were obtained for all methods and all sequence lengths with one exception. for sequences of length  <dig> a major drop in sensitivities and f-measures can be observed . the main cause for the abrupt drop in sensitivities seem to apply mostly for sequences whose experimentally determined secondary structures contain two consecutive mismatches , thus partially supporting the hypothesis that the prediction models under investigation seem to be optimized to produce better results for almost complementary pairs of dna sequences. next we look at how gc content % impacts the accuracy of prediction for the methods under consideration. while sensitivities and f-measures are higher than  <dig>  for all methods for a wide range of gc content % intervals , there are values for which sensitivities and f-measures drop under  <dig>  for sequences with gc content percentages in the range 10% - 40%. while pairfold-mathews, pairfold-santalucia and unafold generate predictions with sensitivities higher than  <dig>  for sequences with gc content percentages in the range 20% - 30%, the vienna package has a mean sensitivity of only  <dig> . for  <dig> out of  <dig> methods, the ppv equals  <dig> , while for the remaining one, namely the vienna package slightly lower mean values  were obtained.

comparison of free energy parameters for dna doublets measured at 37°c and  <dig> m sodium concentration
CONCLUSIONS
in this work we showed that no major differences exist among free energy estimations of short dna duplex hybridization when comparing four publicly available programs that employ various sets of thermodynamic parameters.

here we introduce a simplified tnn model based on triplets interactions for perfect match hybridizations of dna duplexes. the model is able to approximate free energies for dna duplexes under various experimental conditions with higher accuracy and lower rmses compared to the four publicly available programs considered in this work. the improvement is more noticeable for dna duplexes at non-standard experimental temperature conditions . this improvement obtained with the tnn model based on triplets could be explained by the presence of a larger set of parameters consisting of  <dig> unique triplets  that better capture the impact of sequence components on the overall free energy of a dna duplex. an alternative and potential complementary explanation of these improvements is the use of a wider variety of experimental data points in the thermodynamic parameter extrapolation process  compared to the smaller and less diverse data sets used in the other four programs. nevertheless, we notice that additional experimental data employing longer and more diverse sequences is required in order to obtain a better approximation of free energies for dna duplexes at other non-standard experimental conditions.

three extensions of the tnn-triplets-pm model might improve its performance, given that additional experimental data that covers a higher percentage of the parameters and experimental condition combinations is obtained experimentally:  the model can incorporate weighted additive terms that account for hybridization initialization, temperature, ph, sodium concentration or sequence concentrations;  the model can incorporate symmetrical and asymmetrical internal loops, multi-branch loops, dangling ends and hairpin rules similar to those already existent in the classical tnn model;  the model can also incorporate positional dependencies of triplets with respect to the 5' and 3' ends of the sequences.

