BACKGROUND
staphylococcus aureus is an important human pathogen that causes a wide range of infections, from superficial to systemic
 <cit> . the ability of s. aureus to infect a variety of tissues is due to its expression of a wide variety of virulence factors. these factors are categorized as surface-associated proteins, secreted proteases, toxins, or immune modulators
 <cit> . expression of virulence factors in s. aureus is carefully coordinated by a variety of regulators that include trans-acting global regulators, alternative sigma factors, and small non-coding rnas
 <cit> . indeed, the s. aureus genome has  <dig> putative transcriptional regulators
 <cit> . understanding virulence regulation during growth under different environmental conditions  is imperative for the effective prevention and treatment of s. aureus infections. to date, several global regulators have been identified, which include the agr operon, the sara gene family, the saepqrs operon, and the genes arlrs, lytsr, srrab, hssrs, vrasr, and grasr <cit> . several other regulators have also been identified, though they are not as well characterized 
 <cit> .

the msa gene, henceforth referred to as msac, was initially identified as a regulator of sara, agr, and several virulence factors
 <cit> . we previously reported that msac is also involved in biofilm development
 <cit> . indeed, we showed that deletion of the msac gene resulted in a significant defect in accumulation of biofilm but did not affect the initial adherence to surfaces
 <cit> . however, it was not clear if msac regulated virulence genes directly or via its effect on global regulators. for instance, we found that in the msac deletion mutant, sara expression was reduced during biofilm growth. since sara has been shown to be essential for biofilm development in several strains
 <cit> , it is not clear if the msac defect is due to the reduction in sara or other factors. sequence analysis of the msac gene showed that it is conserved among s. aureus strains and suggested that it encodes a putative membrane protein
 <cit> . we have been unable to express this putative protein, and therefore the mechanism of regulation by msac remains to be determined. the pleiotropic phenotypes in the msac mutant suggested that they were mediated by the global regulators sara, agr, and sigb. however, deletion of the msac gene leads to a decrease in the expression of the upstream gene , a gene that is not regulated by sara, agr, or sigb <cit> . these findings led us to hypothesize that msac regulated some genes  directly. here, we examined the relationship between msac and cspa and showed that the msac gene is part of a four-gene operon.

RESULTS
msac is a member of a four-gene operon
previously, we showed that msac regulates the expression of sara, and is essential for biofilm formation and protease production
 <cit> . one of the early observations about msac was that expression of the upstream gene  was significantly reduced  by deletion of msac <cit> . in addition, some assays involving expression of upstream genes did not show full complementation when we introduced the msac gene alone into the msac mutant. to investigate this further, we deleted the msac gene from the s. aureus community-acquired strain, usa <dig> lac, and complemented the mutant with a region of the chromosome that included upstream and downstream genes relative to msac. introduction of three open reading frames   resulted in full complementation to restore the wild type phenotype in biofilm formation, host protein binding assays, protease production, and expression of sara. these findings suggested that the msac gene is part of an operon that included at least three genes. to test this hypothesis, we deleted all three genes  in the usa <dig> lac strain and compared the phenotype to the msac single-deletion mutant. several phenotypic variables were examined in the two mutants and similar phenotypes were observed. both mutants showed reduced pigmentation and biofilm production and increased protease activity relative to wild type . both mutants also showed a downregulation in the expression of key global regulators, sara, agra, and sigb . the phenotype of the three-orf-deletion mutant was similar to the msac mutant, with one exception being that the three-orf-deletion mutant produced significantly more proteases than the msac mutant . furthermore, complementation studies in the msac deletion mutant confirmed that all three orfs were required for restoration of the wild type phenotype . these findings suggested that the three genes are functionally related and form an operon.
msac 
and 
msaabcr 
deletion mutants


sara
agra
sigb
*fold change in the transcription level in the various strains relative to wild type . values represent the mean ratio for at least three independent experiments.

these findings led us to analyze the transcript produced by these three orfs using rapid amplification of cdna ends  and northern blot analyses. we used the smarter™ race cdna amplification kit  to analyze the mrna transcripts harvested from the usa <dig> lac strain. we used several gene-specific primers to find the 5′ and 3′ ends of all transcripts produced by this operon. the race reaction products were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis, and the different dna bands observed were gel purified and sequenced. the results from race analysis  showed the production of a 1541-nt rna whose 5′ end was located 35 nt upstream of the gene encoding sausa300_ <dig> , while its 3′ end was located 230 nt downstream of the gene encoding sausa300_ <dig> . the ends of each transcript were confirmed using at least two different primers and three independent reactions for each primer . results of the race analysis were confirmed by northern blot analysis using gene-specific probes .

the findings from race and northern analyses confirmed that msac is part of a three-gene operon that comprises a gene that encodes for a hypothetical protein , a gene that is similar to the e. coli cold-shock gene , and the msac gene  . this indicated that all three genes were functionally related and involved in biofilm development, protease production, and regulation of the sara, agr, and sigb genes. we named this operon msaabcr, where msaa encodes sausa300_ <dig>  msab encodes sausa300_ <dig>  msac encodes sausa_ <dig> , and msar codes for an anti-sense rna .

another interesting finding from race and northern blot analyses was that in addition to the large transcript, there were three sub-transcripts corresponding to msaab, msab, and msac . additionally, northern blot analysis using an msaa-specific riboprobe showed the presence of a transcript that corresponded to msaa alone, however, we were not able to confirm the ends of this transcript by race . northern blot analysis also revealed that msab was the most abundant transcript produced from this operon, whereas the large msaabc transcript and the msac transcript were present at a much lower level . the expression level of these transcripts was further confirmed by real-time quantitative pcr  . these results suggested that the large transcript undergoes post-transcriptional processing to produce the final msab transcript. however, the mechanism of production of the abundant msab transcript requires further studies.

the msaabcr operon contains an anti-sense rna 
we used a sense riboprobe that hybridizes to the msab region and performed northern blot analysis. the probe detected an anti-sense rna that partially overlaps with the msab transcript. we performed race analysis to identify the ends of the anti-sense rna and found that it is 133 nt in length and is complementary to 112 nt of the 5′ utr region of msab and 18 nt of the msab orf region . our results are supported by the identification of this anti-sense rna in a screen of endoribonuclease iii targets in the s. aureus strain rn6390
 <cit> . lioliou et al.
 <cit>  found that this 133-nt rna is involved in regulating the stability of the cspa  mrna. to investigate this further, we measured the expression level of this anti-sense transcript at three growth phases and found that it was produced at early-exponential and mid-exponential phases but it was absent at late-exponential phase . the absence of the anti-sense transcript in the late-exponential growth phase may be due to lack of production or degradation. this differential expression may play an important role in the activity of the operon and suggests that regulation of the operon by msar might be growth-phase dependent.

detectable promoter activity within the operon is limited to msaa
race and northern blot analyses showed that, in addition to the large transcript , the operon produces four sub-transcripts . these transcripts might be produced from individual promoters or via processing of the large transcript. to test this, we fused the putative promoters from all of the genes in the operon to a promoterless luciferase gene, luxab. we used two promoter-prediction software packages, pepper 
 <cit>  and virtual footprint 
 <cit> , to select the putative promoters. the promoters included  <dig> to 300 bp of sequence upstream of each orf. selection of the putative promoter regions was also based on the results of race analysis by considering every detected 5′ end as a possible transcription start point. we introduced the fusions into the wild type strain and assayed for light production in three growth phases . we found that under these growth conditions, the msaa promoter was active in all three-growth phases . however, the putative promoters for msab and msac did not show any detectable light production . compared to controls, the msaa promoter shows higher activity than the serine protease promoter but lower than the sarap <dig> promoter . these findings further confirmed that a single promoter drives expression of the genes in the msaabcr operon and that the sub-transcripts probably arise from processing of the main transcript. however, we cannot completely rule out the function of the other putative promoters, which may only be active under growth conditions that we have not yet tested.

to further examine the potential role of the msaa promoter in the regulation of expression of the operon, we introduced msaa–luxab fusions into the two deletion mutants, the msaabcr operon, and msac. we found that the promoter activity was significantly increased  in both mutants, indicating a negative auto-regulation mechanism that controls the expression of the operon . interestingly, this increase in expression was observed in three phases of planktonic growth as well as in biofilms.

msac is a non-protein-coding rna
studies on the msac gene were initiated by the discovery of its role in the expression of sara and several virulence factors. in this study, we showed that msac is part of a four-gene operon, msaabcr, and that its deletion leads to a phenotype that is equivalent to deletion of the whole operon. lack of similarity of the predicted protein sequence encoded by msac with protein databases and our failure to express the protein using several approaches led us to hypothesize that msac is a non-coding rna. we constructed a mutant in the msaabcr operon that contained a frameshift mutation in the msac orf that did not significantly change the predicted secondary structure of the rna . this frame shift mutation led to the introduction of several nonsense mutations in the putative msac orf . we then introduced the mutated operon  into the msaabcr deletion mutant. we compared the phenotype of this strain to the wild type strain and to the msaabcr deletion mutant complemented with wild type msaabcr. we found that the frameshift mutant operon  complemented the deletion mutant in pigmentation, protease production, biofilm development, and expression of three global regulators sara, agra, and sigb . the level of complementation between the msaabcr operon and msaabcr-fsmut-msac did not show a statistically significant difference . these results suggested that the msac gene does not encode a protein. the absence of the msac protein from all current proteomic studies in s. aureus further supported the conclusion that msac produces a non-protein-coding rna that is required for the expression of the msaabcr operon
 <cit> .
msaabcr 
deletion mutant complemented with the frameshift 
msac 
mutation


sara
agra
sigb
msac
*fold change in the transcription level in the various strains relative to the wild type .

values represent the mean ratio for at least three independent experiments.

discussion
mutation of the msac gene was shown to have a pleiotropic effect on the expression of a variety of genes that are involved in virulence, biofilm development, and pigmentation
 <cit> . in this study, we showed that the msac gene is part of a four-gene operon that includes two putative rna regulators . we also showed that msaabcr interacts with three global regulators sara, agr, and sigb. the location of the msac gene in an operon is a significant finding because it has allowed the identification of other genes that are functionally related, and it will facilitate the study of the mechanism of regulation by this operon.

sequence analysis of the genes in the msaabcr operon showed that the putative protein produced by msaa is a conserved hypothetical protein in s. aureus. we used the i-tasser program to predict protein structure and function of the putative msaa protein and found that it has strong similarity to the twin-arginine signal-binding protein
 <cit> . in many bacterial systems, twin-arginine transport is used for translocation of folded proteins across the cytoplasmic membrane
 <cit> . in s. aureus, however, no such system has been described in detail. analysis of the predicted msaa structure also revealed that it is likely located in the cytoplasm and that it might be involved in the regulation of small gtpase-mediated signal transduction
 <cit> . the contribution of the putative msaa protein to the function of the operon remains unclear.

the msab gene encodes a 66-amino acid polypeptide that showed homology with cold-shock proteins of e. coli  and bacillus subtilis . based on sequence homology, s. aureus produces three proteins  that may be associated with cold-shock stress
 <cit> . however, anderson et al.
 <cit>  showed that only cspb responds to cold shock in s. aureus. this was confirmed by proteomic studies that showed increased expression of cspb under cold shock while cspa was not differentially expressed. studies have also shown that the cspa transcript is more abundant than cspb and cspc under normal growth conditions at 37°c, while the cspb transcript predominates at 15°c
 <cit> . in addition, katzif et al.
 <cit>  showed that cspa is important for the cationic antimicrobial peptide of human lysosomal cathepsin g and regulates pigmentation in s. aureus through a sigb-dependent mechanism
 <cit> . this indicates that cspa has biological functions other than the cold-shock response. our findings support this conclusion as we show that msab  acts as a regulator of several genes that are involved in protease production, virulence, and biofilm development. at this point, it is not clear how this protein interacts with other factors, but identification of the msaabcr operon will allow us to investigate this mechanism and further characterize this new regulator of virulence.

in e. coli, the cspa mrna is a thermosensor that modulates translation of the cold-shock protein . the cspa mrna in e. coli undergoes post-transcriptional modification in response to environmental variations such as a temperature shift from 37°c to 10°c
 <cit> . this rna-dependent regulation of gene expression allows e. coli to rapidly adapt and respond to its environment. further studies have shown that the cspa gene in e. coli produces a single-stranded nucleic acid-binding protein and an rna chaperone. this protein is one of the most abundant proteins during early growth phase, and its expression is even higher during cold shock, accounting for 2% of the total proteins in the cell
 <cit> . since msab  is not directly involved in cold shock in s. aureus, it is not clear if it has maintained the same mechanism of regulation or functions as its homolog in e. coli. based on our findings and those of lioliou et al.
 <cit> , the msab transcript in s. aureus binds the anti-sense rna , which contributes to its expression. msar is detectable in the early and mid-exponential growth phases but not in the late exponential phase. the msab transcript however is still present in late exponential growth phase albeit at a slightly lower level. it is not known at this point how this correlates with the production of the msab protein and what the significance of the differential expression of msar is. it is also not known if the decrease in msar in late exponential growth phase is due to increased degradation of the anti-sense rna or lack of production of the transcript. lioliou et al.
 <cit>  have shown that anti-sense rna  binds to the 5′ utr region of a long transcript of cspa  and prevents its processing by rnaseiii into a shorter transcript. the short transcript is presumably more stable than the long one and is translated more efficiently to produce the cspa  protein. this processing might also be responsible to the abundance of the msab transcript and suggests that it is the main product of the msaabcr operon. this also suggests that msab may be the main effector responsible for the functions we have shown such as biofilm development and regulation of virulence genes
 <cit> .

our findings suggest that msac produces a non-coding rna. our findings are supported by the absence of an msac protein from all proteomics studies in s. aureus. msac rna is expressed in the 3′ end of the msab transcript and its deletion leads to a significant reduction in msab transcript
 <cit>  and mutant phenotypes that are similar to the deletion of the whole operon msaabcr. this suggests that msac plays a regulatory role in the expression of msab. interestingly, msac is found both as an independent transcript and part of the large operon transcript . we were not able to detect an msac promoter that is active under the conditions tested, which suggested that the smaller msac transcript was the result of processing of the large operon transcript. the mechanism by which msac regulates the expression of msab is not clear and requires further studies.

the identification of the msaabcr operon will add insight into the complex network of virulence regulation in s. aureus. despite the identification of numerous regulatory elements in s. aureus, it is still not clear how this organism achieves the coordinated expression of virulence factors in the host. additionally, the strain-dependent differences observed in the pattern of regulation of virulence in s. aureus complicate this problem further
 <cit> . therefore, the addition of the msaabcr operon to the known repertoire of regulators used by s. aureus and studying its interactions with other regulators will improve our understanding of staphylococcal biology and the infectious process. this study was performed using a representative strain of the usa <dig> clonal lineage, whose hallmark phenotype is the high production of toxins, proteases, and phenol-soluble modulins
 <cit> . it has been suggested that the unique regulation pattern of toxins in these stains is primarily responsible for their increased virulence and epidemic spread. the msaabcr operon positively regulates the agr operon and therefore may play an important role in the phenotype of this epidemic lineage of s. aureus. we plan to examine the contribution of the msaabcr operon to the fine-tuning of virulence expression via agr and other regulators.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we identified a new operon, msaabcr, which regulates virulence and biofilm development in s. aureus. two rnas, msac and msar, regulate expression of this operon. the msac gene was shown to be essential for the expression and function of the operon since its deletion resulted in a similar phenotype to deletion of the whole operon. our findings indicated that the main transcript produced by the operon was msab, which encodes the effector protein. we conclude that the pleiotropic effects observed by deletion of the msaabcr operon are probably mediated by its interactions with the global regulators sara, agr, and sigb. studies are underway to define the mechanism of regulation of the msaabcr operon and how it interacts with its target genes.

