BACKGROUND
transcriptional regulation in development is a complex biological process that is absolutely essential for the existence of multi-cellular organisms, especially in the metazoa kingdom. while the main principles of transcriptional regulation on the molecular level have been discovered in 1960s  <cit> , and we do have relatively complete pictures of transcriptional regulation in single-cell model organisms such as e. coli  <cit>  or s. cerevisiae  <cit> , we still don't have a complete map of developmental regulation for even a singlemulti-cellular organism.

one feature that clearly differentiates multi-cellular species from simpler organisms is the modularity of regulatory elements. in microbial systems, transcription factors bind directly to gene promoters and modulate gene activity via direct repression or activation. in metazoan systems, it is more typical for a gene to have multiple regulatory elements, attracting collections of transcription factors and regulating target gene expression in a combinatorial fashion sometimes over large genomic distances. important class of regulatory elements are enhancers: discrete dna elements, able to enhance expression of their target genes in a tissue specific fashion. since enhancer activity can be tested by creating transgenic reporter assays, they are able to act independently of each other and cannot require any specific chromosomal context. this modular structure of regulatory sequences, particularly evident in developmental regulation  <cit> , makes it difficult to build comprehensive models of transcriptional networks. in order to make it more tractable, the task of building global models can be broken down into two distinct sub-problems: identification of all relevant regulatory sequences and linking them with respective target genes. recently, we have shown  <cit>  that in cases where we have a biological model with an experimentally verified map of enhancer elements, the second problem can be tackled with a probabilistic model giving high accuracy of predictions of both target genes and their tissue-specific expression. however, the first problem of finding the positions of all enhancers still poses a major challenge for the bioinformatics community.

historically, there have been two main bioinformatical approaches to enhancer discovery. firstly, people have observed that clustering of transcription factor binding sites is an indication of enhancer activity  <cit> and secondly, it has been shown in multiple cases that many functional enhancers are evolutionarily more conserved than other non-coding sequences in a genome  <cit> . soon, these two observations were used together to give rise to multiple methods using evolutionary conservation and motif enrichment to find functional regulatory elements  <cit> .

while methods based solely on the sequence information have achieved significant enrichment for true enhancers among their predictions, they are still prone to errors. on one hand, many of predicted enhancers are not functional because of contextual factors such as chromatin conformation  <cit>  leading to false positive predictions. on the other hand, enhancers responsible to species-specific or recently evolved features are bound to fail the evolutionary conservation filters leading to false negative predictions  <cit> . more recently, due to development of methods for experimental measurements of histone marks and other epigenetic features  <cit>  it has become standard to identify regulatory regions en masse by chip-seq experiments on such factors as h3k4me <dig>  <cit>  or p <dig>  <cit> . major experimental efforts such as encode  <cit>  are now underway to map multiple chromatin marks in as many conditions as possible, leading to more direct epigenetic maps of the genome. while these measurements are more directly assaying functionality of regulatory elements, they are, unfortunately, not a perfect solution. in particular, in a recent study  <cit> , we were able to show that not only is the activity of enhancers "encoded" in multiple marks, but the epigenetic patterns associated with enhancer activity are non-additive, making it more complex to recover truly active regions.

in this work we attempt to combine the strengths of both sequence-based and chromatin-based methodsfor enhancer prediction while avoiding the difficulties associated with each of these approaches. in the following sections we will describe the method itself and present the results obtained with this approach on several datasets consisting of different regulatory elements in the drosophila melanogaster model organism.

RESULTS
predicting enhancer activity from histone modifications
our first attempt was to reproduce results from a recent paper by bonn et al.  <cit> , where we used a bayesian network classifier to predict enhancers from chromatin features . while we were able to obtain a similar prediction accuracy , due to the small size of the training set, the variability on prediction quality between cross-validation folds was very high . for this reason, we have re-computed the epigenetic features for a larger set of putative crms compiled by zinzen et al.  <cit>  from chip-chip experiments. this dataset  is much larger , however it is not fully experimentally validated. assuming that the validation results from the work of zinzen  <cit>  can be extrapolated to the whole dataset, we expect not more than 5% of errors in this dataset . in figure 1b we can see that the bayesian network classifier performs much better on the larger dataset . as the larger dataset proves to be much better for classifier training, we have focused on it in our further analysis.

using sequence motifs to improve predictions
while features based on histone modifications contain enough information to obtain good and reproducible classifier training, we wanted to verify if the same can be predicted from the dna sequence of the respective sequences and to what extent the sequence motif information is redundant with the epigenetic component. to this end we have used all  <dig> insect related transcription factor binding site motifs deposited in the publicly available jaspar database  <cit> . even though they represent less than half of the estimated total number of transcription factors in the drosophila genome, they represent all major classes of dna-binding domains. based on our earlier results  <cit> , we assumed that this motif set should allow us to make reasonable predictions of enhancers based only on the motif occurrences. we extracted the dna sequences of all positive and negative examples and computed the thermodynamical binding energy score   <cit>  for each motif-sequence pair. this gave us a much larger feature set  in comparison with the epigenetic marks.

due to the high complexity of bayesian network reconstruction, bnfinder is not recommended for analysis of datasets with large sets of feature. for this reason, we have tested two popular general classification methods: support vector machines   <cit>  and random forests   <cit> . in order to assess the quality of motif features and its redundancy with the epigenetic marks we have trained each classifier on  <dig> feature sets: motifs alone , epigenetic marks alone  and both datasets combined . the detailed classification qualities measured by the area under the roc curve  in a10-fold cross-validation can be found in table  <dig> 

bnfinder seems to be indeed the best method for extracting the correct dependence of activity on the epigenetic marks, however it is unable to learn as much as other methods from datasets with more features. in particular, it fails completely on the motif-only feature set, indicating that there might not be a small subset of motifs allowing to predict activity. the other two methods perform similarly, although it should be noted that the random forest approach seems to be giving slightly, but statistically significantly  better results in case of combined feature sets. overall, all methods can improve significantly their accuracy by incorporating sequence information. in order to verify if the high predictive power of dna motif information is not a product of a biased negative set or some very simple feature of enhancer sequences, we have performed two additional tests. firstly, we have tested if the randomly chosen negative set is not biased towards low-complexity regions. for this purpose we have re-generated the negative sequence set avoiding the low-complexity regions annotated in the drosophila genome. as can be seen in table  <dig>  such modified dataset gives almost the same classification results for both sets of features including histone marks indicating that the results were not biased by potentially poorer read-mapping efficiency in repeat regions. interestingly, removing repeated regions makes the classification with motifs only almost as successful as with the complete feature set. this would be in line with the findings  <cit>  that repeated regions such as transposons may harbor many transcription factor binding sites.

validating classifiers on known enhancers
in order to assess whether the classifiers might be useful to biologists, we wanted to go beyond standard cross-validation approaches and test the classifiers trained on the  <dig> mesodermal enhancers on the more comprehensive, human-curated verified enhancer database. for this purpose we have used the well known redfly database  <cit>  that gathers enhancers reported in literature and makes them available with some human curation and additional annotation on tissue-specificity. as our training set was derived from mesodermal crms, we first tested our trained classifiers on the  <dig> enhancers reported to be active in mesoderm and then on  <dig> enhancers non-specific to mesodermal tissue. each dataset was complemented with a set of newly-generated random regions non-overlapping the training set .

the results are summarized in table  <dig>  it is clear that all classifiers give significantly non-random results. in the more predictable case of mesodermal enhancers, the complete feature-set expectedly gives the best performance. in case of non-mesodermal enhancers, however, the best performing classifier is the one based on sequence motif information. it seems that the performance of classifiers using epigenetic measurements specific to mesoderm was severely affected . however, the motif based classifier remained at a steady performance of 77%. this indicates that the motif information driving enhancer activity is possibly not as specific as it was thought earlier.

feature importance
in both partial sets the classification error is around 11- <dig> per cent, whereas in the all set the classification error drops significantly to  <dig> per cent. one should stress remarkable stability of the results. the average classification error in standard and reversed cross-validation scheme were very close to each other, in all cases the error is only  <dig> per cent higher in the reversed setup.

all features were identified as important by boruta algorithm  <cit> , in all three epi, mot and all data sets. in the all dataset the variables representing histone modifications were consistently ranked higher than those representing the motif binding, see figure  <dig>  .

the more detailed analysis of feature importance revealed several unexpected results. the iterative removal of least important tfs revealed that single transcription factor  is sufficient to improve the classification accuracy to a level similar to that of the full classifier, see table s <dig>  additional file  <dig> 

the analysis of redundancy between epigenetic modifications shows that removal of the most important modifications from the feature set leads to rapid degradation of the model quality. on the other hand removal of the least important modification decreases the model quality only gradually, see figure  <dig> 

the analysis of these results suggests that a feature set consisting of single sequence motif  and three chromatin marks  should be sufficient to build a model with stable prediction accuracy. this hypothesis was examined and it was confirmed by the 10-foldcross-validation. the average classification error obtained was  <dig>  per cent. the quality of this model cannot be improved either by increasing the number of tfs or by adding more modifications. this is however not the only set of such features as removing any single motif  can be largely buffered by usage of the redundant information from the other features. in case of epigenetic marks, the situation is different, as removing any one of the three most important marks results in a significant loss of accuracy . the most prominent marks are also the expected ones: mef <dig> is a mesodermal transcription factor, h3k4me <dig> is widely reported to be associated with enhancers and h3k36me <dig> is strongly correlated with transcribed regions, which are negatively correlated with regulatory activity.

CONCLUSIONS
our results strongly suggest that neither histone modifications nor sequence motif scan explain the total enhancer activity. however, our classification results for the complete data set are very promising suggesting that a model based on both types of features is sufficient to explain all phenomena represented in our training set. relatively lower importance for motifs suggests that individual motifs are redundant - and cooperation of multiple tf is required. this is consistent both with our earlier results on purely sequence based prediction methods  <cit>  as well as recent findings in heart-related enhancers  <cit> . the analysis of feature importance lead to the discovery of the reduced feature set comprising of three chromatin marks  and a single transcription factor  sufficient for a model with almost the same level of error that the full feature set. while all of these findings are in line with our current knowledge of the function of these features, it is difficult to make final biological conclusions due to redundancy between features. it is especially interesting in the context of apparent generality of the motif-based component of the classifier. overall, our analysis proves that not only there is non-redundant information between motifs and epigenetic modifications, but we can show that it is enough to get near-perfect predictions of enhancer activity.

while our results are very promising, it should be noted that the training set is coming from a relatively simple model organism. in order to test if these findings can be applied to more complex systems such as mammalian genomes remains unanswered. while this question is vital for any medically oriented applications, it is currently very difficult to answer due to lack of comprehensive enhancer datasets such as redfly  <cit> . additionally, much larger size of mammalian genomes will undoubtedly be a challenge to computational scalability of machine learning methods.

