BACKGROUND
as genome sequencing and annotation has progressed, it has become clear that even relatively compact eukaryotic genomes have large amounts of non-coding dna. this dna harbours elements that control genomic activity such as gene regulators, non-coding rnas and less well characterised elements that position the chromosomes on the nuclear matrix. the nuclear matrix forms a three dimensional protein network onto which chromatin fibres are attached. interaction between chromatin and the nuclear matrix is believed to occur at specific sites from  <dig> bp to several kb long, termed matrix attachment regions   <cit> .

there is increasing evidence for the involvement of mar in gene regulation. for example, expression levels of some genes alter depending on their position relative to the matrix  <cit> . mar have also been associated with enhanced transcription, notably in transgene constructs where flanking transgenes with mar results in higher and more stable expression . a role for mar as a boundary between functional chromatin domains has been proposed  <cit> . the effects of long-range enhancers may be restricted by the positioning of mar  <cit> . mar have also been implicated in the positioning of chromosomal territories  <cit> . coordinated spatial positioning of sequences on different chromosomes can facilitate interactions in trans. for example, active genes from different chromosomes have been shown to migrate through the nuclear space to converge on "transcriptional factories"  <cit> . localisation of genes in this way is likely to involve control of higher order chromosome structure and there is evidence that some chromatin loop attachments are under developmental control  <cit> .

experimentally, mar have been defined as either dna fragments that remain bound to the nuclear matrix after chromatin proteins and other dna have been removed, or dna that binds to extracted nuclear matrix in the presence of competitor dna  <cit> . the most common experimental method for identifying mar uses re-association assays to define dna fragments that bind to the nuclear matrix  <cit> . however, as experimental methods are poorly amenable to genome wide analysis, computational methods have been sought for identifying mar.

mar-associated sequences for approximately  <dig> experimentally defined mar are catalogued in the s/mar transaction database  <cit> . the overriding feature of many mar is that they are at rich, but several other more specific sequence motifs have also been identified  <cit> . mar sequences also show elevated dna unwinding potential, through stress-induced dna duplex destabilisation   <cit> . computational tools based on these sequence characteristics have been used to identify mar using dna sequence information alone. marfinder uses  <dig> motifs within a set of higher order rules. the density of rule occurrences is then used to identify mar  <cit> . smartest is based on a density analysis of a set of mar sequences represented by position weight matrices  <cit> . an in silico, genome-wide mapping of mar in arabidopsis thaliana using smartest revealed that genes containing predicted mars had low transcription levels  <cit> . sidd identifies putative mar based on the predicted sites of stress-induced dna duplex destabilisation  <cit> . chrclass uses multivariate linear discriminant analysis to compare mar sequences and develop a classification system  <cit> . the limited effectiveness of these methods in reliably identifying mar is discussed in a recent comparative study of mar prediction software  <cit> .

the most complex motif associated with mar sequences is the bipartite mar recognition signature . the mrs was identified through analysis of mar from three independent genomic regions of > <dig> kb in a. thaliana  <cit> . to assess the effectiveness of the mrs, van drunen et al. mapped all the mrs and experimentally detected mar on a single c. elegans genomic dna segment, ~ <dig> kb long. all mrs were located in six of the seven mar sites. further analysis of > <dig> kb of genomic sequence from  <dig> other eukaryotic organisms showed that mrs were present in 80% of mar, leading van drunen et al. to suggest that the mrs was a specific sequence element representative of a subset of mar  <cit> .

donev et al. used the mrs to identify novel mar in the human major histocompatibility complex class ii region  <cit> . the regions they identified were found to bind the nuclear matrix and a subset were also able to bind the mrna processing protein hnrnp-a <dig> during transcriptional up-regulation of nearby genes. the mrs has also been used to identify mar in entamoeba histolytica and was found in mar from bombyx mori  <cit> . however, mar mapping studies in mammals have shown that mrs are sometimes identified outside known mar sites  <cit> . in their analysis of  <dig> mb of the mouse genome, purbowasito et al. reported that mar prediction based on mrs had a specificity of 41%, with  <dig> of  <dig> predictions lying outside experimentally defined mar  <cit> . there is, therefore, some doubt as to the effectiveness of the mrs as a marker for mar.

we have undertaken a genome-wide mapping and analysis of mrs in c. elegans in an attempt to determine the validity of the mrs. if mrs constitute a feature with real biological meaning their distribution would be expected to be non-random with respect to other genome features. we found that the mrs signature had a distinctive pattern of distribution along chromosomes, similar to that of genes. further, we show that there is a marked increase in the frequency of mrs in the regions flanking c. elegans coding sequence .

RESULTS
the mrs is a degenerate bipartite motif consisting of a  <dig> bp pattern, awwrtaannwwgnnnc , within which one mismatch is allowed, and an  <dig> bp pattern, aataayaa   <cit> . to be scored as an mrs, both these sequences must lie within  <dig> bp of each other, although they may overlap and they may be on either strand of the dna duplex  <cit> . existing mrs finding programs were designed to under-report closely apposed mrs  <cit> . to allow full control over data reported, a custom program, mrsfinder, was designed. mrsfinder was used to map the location of mrs across the entire c.elegans genome.

mrs were found across all  <dig> c.elegans chromosomes at an average frequency of  <dig> per mb, similar to the frequency of genes . at small scales , the motif distribution was noisy . as would be expected of an at-rich motif, there was some correlation with regions of high at% .

however, at a chromosomal level distinct patterns emerged. analyses of non-overlapping  <dig> mb windows along the chromosomes showed that mrs were significantly more abundant in the centres than in the arms of all chromosomes except chromosome iv . the division between chromosome arms and centres is characteristic of several genomic features in c. elegans. centres tend to be gene rich, with a high concentration of essential, well conserved and highly expressed genes  <cit> . by comparison, the chromosome arms exhibit a higher meiotic recombination rate, and are enriched for transposons and repeats  <cit> . thus, at the chromosome level, mrs are more likely to be found in the vicinity of highly expressed and essential genes.

mrs frequency in real sequence is different to that in randomised sequence
although the distribution of mrs appeared to correlate broadly with several other genome features, the specific nucleotide composition of each sequence window will influence the number of mrs. by randomising the genome sequence whilst maintaining nucleotide composition , we estimated the number of mrs expected in the sequence due to nucleotide composition alone. additional randomisation models were used in order to account for relationships between adjacent bases. the mononucleotide randomisation model generated sequence in which the frequency of each of the four nucleotides matched that observed in the chromosomal sequence. more complex first, second and third order markov chain randomisation processes reflected the di-, tri- and tetra-nucleotide content of the chromosomal sequence. for each  <dig> mb non-overlapping window used in figure  <dig>  the nucleotide sequence was randomised  <dig> times, and mrsfinder was used to map and count the number of mrs in each randomised sequence. a comparison of mrs counts for chromosome i under each randomisation process is shown in figure  <dig> . the observed number of mrs in mononucleotide randomised sequence was similar to that found in real sequence, while the first, second and third order markov chain randomised sequence yielded far fewer mrs. as mrs occurrence was best modelled by the mononucleotide randomisation process, subsequent analyses focussed on this method of randomisation.

one effect of randomising the genome sequence in relatively large sections of  <dig> mb is that nucleotide content  becomes more uniform across each section, eliminating, for example, local peaks of very high at%. to identify the effects of local areas of extreme nucleotide composition, mononucleotide randomisation was applied to smaller sections of sequence  to c. elegans chromosome i. the number of mrs found in the whole chromosome under each mononucleotide randomisation regime, averaged over  <dig> iterations, is shown in figure  <dig>  the numbers of mrs found when the chromosome was randomised along its entire length in one section and in  <dig> kb sections were very similar to the  <dig> mb randomised sequence . however, at randomisation sections of less than  <dig> kb the total number of mrs found rose dramatically. a similar effect was observed in the second order markov chain process randomised sequence . compared to actual genomic sequence, the average number of mrs observed in mononucleotide randomised sequence doubled when the chromosome was randomised in sections of  <dig> bp.

different genome feature types have different mrs frequencies
the above results show that the number and distribution of mrs in the c. elegans genome is distinct from that found in random sequence. to investigate how this distribution is related to other genome features, the degree of overlap between mrs and different functional parts of the genome was assessed. the number of mrs occupying the same genome space as exons, introns, 3' untranslated regions , 5' utr, genes and intergenic regions, is given in table  <dig>  the expected score indicates how many mrs would be expected to lie in a feature, based on the total size of the feature and assuming a uniform distribution of mrs across the genome.

the number of mrs overlapping genes, exons, introns, 3' utr, 5' utr and intergenic regions of the genome was used to calculate an overlap score as described in methods. the expected overlap score was calculated assuming a uniform distribution of mrs across the genome, using the formulae described in methods. the ratio of the actual to expected score is shown. this ratio was multiplied by the at correction factor  to give the at corrected ratio. score system  <dig> was used except where indicated otherwise.

the ratios of actual and expected mrs numbers showed large differences in mrs abundance in each of the genome features. mrs were particularly rare in exons, which contained less than half the mrs expected. as a result, the number of mrs in genes was also lower than expected, despite enrichment for mrs in introns and untranslated regions. intergenic regions had slightly more mrs than expected. however, the 5' utr and 3' utr were by far the most mrs-enriched parts of the genome, by factors of  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. the relative enrichment of introns, 5' utr and 3' utr for mrs provides an explanation for the spatial relationship between genes and mrs described in figure  <dig> 

the mrs is at rich and so is more likely to occur in at rich sequence . to control for this bias, an at-correction factor was used to adjust the expected number of mrs. the correction factor was based on the number of mrs found in mononucleotide random sequence with at content equivalent to that of each feature, as a proportion of the number of mrs found in random sequence with at content equivalent to that of the whole genome. when this correction is applied, the at-poor exons appeared enriched for mrs, while the at-rich introns had fewer than expected. both genes and intergenic regions had approximately the number of mrs expected.

however, even with at correction, the untranslated regions, particularly the 5' utr, showed strong enrichment for mrs. alternative overlap scoring systems that take into account partial mrs-feature overlaps did not affect these results. although utr form only a small part of the genome and contain only a small proportion of the total mrs, the degree of mrs enrichment and their proximity to genes points to a functional role for mrs.

striking peaks of mrs and at content at cds boundaries
to clarify the relationship between genes, especially their 5' and 3' utrs and mrs, the frequency of mrs in the regions surrounding gene boundaries was investigated. using the data from mrsfinder, mrs locations were plotted on a section of sequence extending  <dig> bp upstream of the translation start site  through the first  <dig> bp of the coding sequence  from each c. elegans gene. the same analysis was carried out on sequence from the last  <dig> bp of the cds through to  <dig> bp downstream of the stop codon .

as expected from the overlap of mrs with genes and intergenic regions reported in table  <dig>  the frequency of mrs in regions outside the cds was higher than in the cds itself. the enrichment of mrs in the 5' and 3' utrs shown in table  <dig> correlates with striking increases in mrs frequency in the regions immediately flanking genes. the mrs frequency sharply rose and fell over a span of  <dig> bp, peaking 50– <dig> bp upstream of the cds start. at the 3' end of the cds the mrs frequency spike had an even greater amplitude, increasing by more than  <dig> fold in  <dig> bp.

one explanation for the mrs spikes bounding cds is that they are related to at content of these areas. for example, in the case of 3' utr the apparent over-representation of mrs was reduced when at content was taken into account . plotting at content in the region surrounding cds revealed a pattern of sharp spikes similar to that observed for mrs frequency . however, on closer inspection there were subtle differences between the mrs frequency and at content variation. firstly, the upstream at peak occurred in the  <dig> bp immediately preceding the start codon, 50– <dig> bp after the mrs peak. similarly at the downstream end, the at peak occurred in the  <dig> bp immediately following the stop codon, again 50– <dig> bp separate from the mrs peak.

another difference was that the at content dropped to 58% in the first  <dig> bp of the cds, then rose to about 62% for the middle part of the cds. the pattern was similar at the end of the cds, where the at dropped to near 58% in the last 50– <dig> bp. in both locations this at dip was not matched by a dip in the mrs frequency. the variation in at content in the vicinity of gene boundaries is an intriguing observation. a similar pattern was described previously by zhang et al.  <cit>  but further discussion of this phenomenon is beyond the scope of this paper.

an analysis of the mrs frequency surrounding gene boundaries was also performed on a related nematode, caenorhabditis briggsae . as in c. elegans, the frequency of mrs was higher in c. briggsae intergenic regions near genes than in cds. however, from  <dig> kb upstream to  <dig> kb downstream of the cds, the frequency of mrs was generally lower in c. briggsae than in c. elegans. the main difference in the pattern of mrs frequency between the species was that while c. briggsae displayed the same striking increase in average mrs frequency at the 3' end of the cds, it lacked any increase in frequency at the 5' end. the possibility that less robust gene annotation in c. briggsae could have lead to this discrepancy was addressed by filtering the dataset to ensure all cds started with atg and ended with a stop codon, and that the selected sequence was complete and of high quality . however, the possibility that the c. briggsae gene set is systematically lacking upstream exons cannot be excluded.

the difference between mrs frequency and at content is even more marked in c. briggsae than in c. elegans. although c. briggsae lacked an upstream mrs peak, an increase in at content from about 63% to 66% was evident in the  <dig> bp immediately preceding the cds start. in common with c. elegans, the downstream at peak occurred  <dig> bp before the mrs peak and the at dip at the start and end of the cds was not matched by a dip in mrs frequency.

mrs conservation between c. elegans and c. briggsae
the distinctive increase in mrs frequency at the downstream end of both c. elegans and c. briggsae cds could be due to conservation of mrs in specific genes, or simply a reflection of a general tendency. to investigate this, the occurrence of mrs within  <dig> bp of the cds stop codon in c. elegans genes was compared to mrs occurrence in the same region of the corresponding c. briggsae ortholog . surprisingly, of the  <dig> c. briggsae genes annotated as orthologs of c. elegans genes with an mrs within  <dig> bp of the cds stop codon, only  <dig> had an mrs in a similar position. nonetheless, a small but significant degree of correlation between c. elegans genes and their c. briggsae orthologs for the presence or absence of mrs was detected . therefore, the peak of average mrs frequency at the downstream end of c. elegans and c. briggsae cds was due partly to apparent conservation of mrs in specific genes.

the filtered set of c. elegans and c. briggsae orthologs were assessed to identify the number of genes in the set from each organism that had an mrs within  <dig> bp of the cds stop codon. the association between orthologs for the presence or absence of 3' mrs was significant .

functional classification of mrs associated genes
if the mrs is related to a cis regulatory function then the presence of an mrs near a gene may be associated with a particular functional group of genes. this possibility was examined by identifying the set of c. elegans genes with an mrs within  <dig> bp of the cds stop codon, and searching for over-represented gene ontology  terms within this set. the top most over-represented go slim terms are shown in figure  <dig>  the most over-represented term was the molecular function "receptor activity": 89/ <dig> genes in the mrs set had this annotation  compared to 1122/ <dig> genes in the reference set . none of the other terms were significantly over-represented after correction for multiple testing. analyses were conducted to detect correlation of mrs-associated genes with other genomic and functional genomic features, including expression pattern  and position in operons, but no significant associations were obtained .

discussion
in describing and analysing mrs frequency in the genome of c. elegans, we have shown these sites to have a specific distribution, particularly in relation to genes. these observations support the validity of the mrs as a real genomic feature, though not necessarily indicative of mar, and may also provide an insight to specific roles for mrs.

at the chromosomal level, mrs density had features similar to that of protein-coding genes, with more mrs per kilobase in chromosome centres compared to arms. chromosome x was distinct in having no such pattern in gene density, and mrs on the x also had a flat distribution. the mrs signature is at rich, and thus some correlation with local at% of the genome would be expected . we investigated whether the distribution of the mrs signature was merely a by-product of the local nucleotide content of the genome, and/or of the local content of di-, tri- and tetra-nucleotides. when genome sequence was randomised in  <dig> mb sections, the frequency of mrs observed in the real chromosomal dna was less than that predicted from simple  randomisation, and approximately double that found in second and third order markov model randomisations. thus, we conclude that the distribution of the mrs signature in the c. elegans genome is not simply a product of small- or large-scale base-compositional biases. mrs frequency in some classes of genomic regions was elevated compared to the surrounding sequence. coincidence of mrs and genes was apparent from their similar chromosomal distributions . by analysing the overlap of mrs with different functional parts of the genome, we found that mrs had relatively high incidence in the non-coding parts of genes, specifically 5' and 3' utrs and introns. these results contrasts with experimental identification of a high incidence of mar in intergenic and intronic regions, rather than utrs. this suggests that mrs may not be representative of a large portion of mar.

there were striking peaks of average mrs frequency at the 3' and 5' ends of c. elegans cds, which were distinct from similar peaks in average at content in the same regions. interestingly, the average mrs frequency surrounding c. briggsae cds showed no peak at the 5' end, though the pattern of average at content was very similar to c. elegans. however, the peak at the 3' end of cds was maintained in c. briggsae and there was evidence for conservation of mrs in this region.

although c. briggsae orthologs of c. elegans genes that had 3' mrs were more likely also to have an mrs than were orthologs of genes that lacked an mrs, it was surprising that the mrs was conserved in only 10% of orthologs. it is possible that the mrs, as currently defined, does not accurately represent the potential functional element. the non-conserved mrs from both c. elegans and c. briggsae could represent a high 'false positive' rate, giving rise to a background level of mrs that masks the degree of conservation of the underlying functional element. alternatively, the apparent low level of conservation of mrs could reflect rapid evolution of the mrs. the association of mrs with the start and stop of genes means they are in a position to influence the control of transcription. the over-representation of the go term "receptor activity" in genes with an mrs near the 3' end was significant but small. however, if, as discussed above, the mrs does not accurately represent an underlying functional element and is subject to a high false positive rate, then the true degree of association with specific annotations may be underestimated. efforts were made to correlate mrs-associated genes with other genomic and functional genomic features, including expression pattern  and position in operons, but no significant associations were obtained. the presence of mrs in c. elegans 5' and 3' utrs suggest that they may be transcribed and therefore also have a role in mrna stability or translational control. the mrs is therefore an element that is perhaps of limited value in predicting mar, but serves as a clear marker of some cds boundaries.

CONCLUSIONS
we have carried out a genome-wide analysis of the distribution of mrs in c. elegans. two distinct patterns of mrs frequency were identified. mrs were less frequent that would be predicted by nucleotide content but more frequent than predicted by di-, tri and tetra-nucleotide pattern. in comparison to the rest of the genome, there were striking peaks of average mrs frequency flanking c. elegans cds. although c. briggsae surprisingly lacked a peak in average mrs frequency upstream of cds, c. briggsae orthologs showed conservation of mrs in the region immediately downstream of the cds. the results presented here reveal the mrs to have a non-random genomic distribution, with particularly close association with genes. the results further suggest that, rather than acting as a marker for mar, the mrs is an indicator of cds, and may have role in control of gene expression.

