BACKGROUND
the transcription rate of genes is dictated primarily by interactions between dna-binding transcription factors. comparatively short sequences  upstream or downstream of the transcription start site often play a major role in the regulation of gene expression. specific sites within such regions are recognized by regulatory proteins , which act upon binding as transcriptional repressors or activators, controlling the rate of transcription. the identification of regulatory regions, which are generally composed of dense clusters of target transcription factor binding sites, forms an essential step in understanding the regulatory interactions that govern the spatial and temporal expression of individual genes  and genetic regulatory networks, .

ultimately, this task is accomplished experimentally using techniques such as empirical deletion analysis, direct binding measurements, and co-precipitation of protein-dna complexes. however, experimental verification is expensive and time consuming. therefore, to address the growing volumes of available genomic sequence, a number of algorithms that identify putative cis-regulatory modules and transcription factor binding sites using evolutionary comparisons, whole-genome data, and known descriptions of transcription factor binding sites, have been successfully developed. regulatory regions of higher eukaryotes can be subdivided into proximal regulatory units – promoters – which are located close to and upstream of the gene, and distal transcription regulatory units called enhancers or cis-regulatory modules. these may be located far upstream or downstream of the target gene, and are much more difficult to recognise. in our work we focus on recognition of enhancers.

methods for recognising regulatory dna may be divided into the following approaches:

 <dig>  recognition of regulatory dna regions based on description of known transcription factor binding sites . this approach exploits the clustering of known, cooperatively-acting transcription factors . extracting clustered recognition motifs is one of the most reliable techniques, but is limited to the recognition of similarly regulated cis-regulatory regions. among the most popular representatives of search by known tfbs are  <cit> .

 <dig>  recognition of regulatory dna based on phylogenetic foot-printing  <cit> . methods of this type assume that regulatory regions are highly conserved in cross-genomic comparison, and conserved segments can be extracted from evolutionary related genomes. performance of phylogenetic foot-printing depends on the evolutionary distance between given species and on the conservation level of individual genes. this is an actively progressing area, as more and more sequenced genomes appear. however, such an approach offers little information as to the specific function of the conserved sequences. furthermore, it is still an open question as to how many genomes are sufficient for reliable extraction of regulatory regions.

 <dig>  methods based on the difference of local nucleotide composition between regulatory and non regulatory dna  <cit> . it is assumed that this difference is due to presence of multiple transcription signals, such as binding motifs for tfs in regulatory regions. the works  <cit>  are based on constructing a global interpolated markov model, applied to promoter recognition only.

in our method, we assume that the abundance of regulatory motifs within regulatory regions leaves a distinct "signature" in nucleotide composition, and that it is possible to capture this "signature" statistically. more specifically, we hypothesize that it takes the form of an over-representation of "similar words" .

the approach of looking for over-occurrence of words has also been widely used in motif discovery, but this is not our aim here. this over-representation of similar words should appear as outliers in the right tail of the distribution of similar word lists of variable length. the "fluffy tail test", proposed in this paper, is designed to identify such outliers and is a useful technique when data from multiple genes and genomes are lacking. it may also be used as a complementary tool when such data are available.

RESULTS
in this section, we first present our new statistical 'fluffy tail' test for measuring the overrepresentation of similar words, and then show its performance on experimentally verified sequence data.

test bed
to demonstrate the power of our test, we need a positive, experimentally verified, training set of regulatory sequence data, and also negative training sets of non- regulatory sequence data. we use three test beds. the positive training set is a collection of  <dig> experimentally verified functional drosophila melanogaster regulatory regions  <cit> . this set consists of cis-regulatory modules located far from gene coding sequences and transcription start sites. it contains many binding sites , best known of which are bicoid, hunchback, kruppel, knirps and caudal, – the sites involved in the regulation of developmental genes. the total size of the positive training set comprises about  <dig> kb of sequence data, and contains  <dig> clusters of the same type of tfbs . the two negative training sets are:   <dig> randomly picked drosophila exons, and   <dig> randomly picked drosophila non-coding, non-regulatory dna sequences: we excluded exons and regions of length  <dig> kb upstream and downstream of genes, using the ensembl genome browser  <cit> . each training set contains  <dig> kb of sequences in total.

estimation of distributions of similar words
to construct the distribution of similar words, we first need to specify the length of words under consideration. we try to mimic the tf core, which is the less variable part of a binding motif. because the core of tfbss is relatively short  we considered 5-mer words, allowing for  <dig> mismatch. however, our results also hold for words of length  <dig> through  <dig>  allowing for  <dig> through  <dig> mismatches . thus, for each 5-mer word in each of the  <dig> sequences  we computed the number n of similar words of the same length. thus, each word is the "seed" of a list of similar words. next, the number of  lists containing n words is counted, where n =  <dig> , <dig> ...

. as an example, thehistogram of the distribution of similar 5-mer words is plotted in figure  <dig>  in this histogram, the y axis represents the number of lists containing  <dig> , ..., n words and the x axis shows the number n of similar words in the list.

from this plot it can be seen that most lists contain  <dig> to  <dig> words, but there are outliers: some very large lists form a long, "fluffy" tail. we call a list having the largest size the maximal similar word list . if the original sequence is characterized by the presence of an unusually high number of over-represented words, we expect it to contain more long lists in comparison to a random sequence.

to sample such a random distribution we shuffled the given sequence of original data  <dig> times. for each randomisation we assessed the frequency distribution of similar words. figure  <dig> shows a typical example of the distribution of similar words for one of the randomly shuffled sequences of the same  cis-regulatory module as in figure  <dig>  compared with the distribution of the original data , the randomised sequence in figure  <dig> lacks a heavy, "fluffy" right tail. figure  <dig> shows the difference between original and randomised similar word distributions in cumulative form. the difference between the two curves reflects the fluffy right tail of the original data.

in figure  <dig>  ten randomised sequences are plotted as dotted contours together with the histogram of the original regulatory knirps data . the cumulative histogram for original  and randomised  sequences is shown in figure  <dig> . all dotted tails are shorter than the solid one, indicating the statistical significance of the solid tail.

definition of the fluffiness coefficient f
to measure how strong the distribution of similar words of regulatory regions deviate from randomness, we introduce a "fluffiness" coefficient f:

)

w here l max,original is the number of words in the maximal similar word list  in the original sequence,  and σr are the mean and standard deviation of the mswl size in each of r shuffled sequences. here we call the sequence "random" if it is obtained from original sequence by shuffling it, preserving its single nucleotide composition. we will omit the subscript r for fr later in the paper for simplicity.

one can regard f as measuring the difference between signal and noise, where the signal is taken from the original sequence, and the noise from the randomised sequences with the same composition and length. thus, the fluffiness coefficient is normalised for the length and base composition of the sequence, because we compare each original sequence only with respect to shuffled sequences of the same length and composition. thus one can compare the fluffiness f for sequences of different base composition and length.

results for regulatory regions
our choice of r =  <dig> shuffled versions for each sequence allows us to obtain reliable estimates for the fluffiness coefficient f and make the computational time reasonable. table  <dig> shows that f is somewhat unstable for smaller r for the knirps regulatory region. however, for each choice of r, f clearly exceeds the threshold value  <dig>  in this example. see supplementary materials for more detailed descriptions .

using the methodology described above, we found that  <dig> out of  <dig> regulatory regions  analysed in our positive training set exhibit the significant "fluffy-tail" pattern . the non-detection of the remaining "non-fluffy" regulatory regions could perhaps be partly due to the limited power of experimental deletion analyses to correctly distinguish the boundaries of the cis-regulatory modules.

we calculated the distribution of f for our two negative and one positive training sets. the separation of regulatory dna from coding and non-coding, non-regulatory dna on the basis of fluffiness was quantified by estimating the distribution of the f coefficients. a kruskal-wallis test showed that these regions differ significantly in the magnitude of the fluffiness coefficient , with exons and non-coding non-regulatory dna having much lower f-values than regulatory regions .

we now turn to examine the location of similar words in the mswl for a given sequence.

when the start positions of each of the words in the mswl are plotted, they tend to be fairly uniformly scattered along the length of the sequence, as illustrated in figure  <dig> 

we now examine the relationship between the mswl and predicted tfbs sites. we found significant enrichment of most mswls with the occurrences of tfbs in databases: when submitted to the transfac and jaspar tfbs databases, the "seed" words for mswls exhibited 10– <dig> fold enrichment with putative tfbs in comparison with all 5-mer words within the given regulatory region: thus, for the most part, these "seed" words turned out to be instances of known tfbs .

results for exons
we repeated the fluffy tail test for randomly picked drosophila exons, and found that the distribution of over-represented words of the original sequences did not differ statistically from those of their randomised versions . note the absence of a "fluffy tail" in figure  <dig>  and the lack of distinction in the cumulative distribution .

thus we have established a statistical difference between exons and regulatory dna. next we compare regulatory dna with non-coding non-regulatory dna.

results for non-coding, presumed non-regulatory dna
the similar words distribution for non-coding non-regulatory dna typically shows two patterns:  without significant tails, as for exons and  with significant tails  but in this case – and in contrast to the regulatory sequences – the spatial locations of over-represented words are typically clustered .

to deal with this, we developed a measure of spatial clustering of similar words. we say that two words w  <dig> and w  <dig> belong to the same cluster, if their genomic start positions s  <dig> and s  <dig> satisfy |s  <dig> - s 2| ≤ m·k , where m is the word length, and k is a constant. we examined the following choices for k: 1;  <dig> ; 2;  <dig> ;  <dig> 

the size of a cluster is defined as the number of words in the cluster. for each mswl we computed the coefficient of variation  in cluster sizes, where cv is the standard deviation divided by the mean cluster size. we used analysis of variance to test for difference in coefficients of variance among four types of functional dna: exons, non-fluffy ncnr, fluffy ncnr and regulatory regions. the assumptions for anova , no correlation between means and standard deviations of the samples) were satisfied. the results show a strongly significant difference between the four types: see figure  <dig>  thus we can use the cluster size cv to distinguish fluffy ncnr from regulatory dna. cvs for fluffy ncnr are almost always more than  <dig>  for k from  <dig> to 3; and significantly different from cvs for regulatory dna.

we found that large clusters of adjacent over-represented words in fluffy ncnr dna disappear after repeat-masking  <cit> , thus revealing their identity as non-perfect simple repeats .

for details about spatial clustering and illustration of coefficient of variation robustness to choice of k and m, see supplementary materials .

discussion
our method allows us to distinguish regulatory dna from other non-regulatory dna. in effect, our method aggregates many small signals contained in the region, and makes an internal comparison with background, represented by shuffled sequences.

we would like to extend the application of our method to larger sets of experimentally verified regulatory regions, from drosophila or any other species. unfortunately, few experimentally  verified sets are available. we managed to extended our positive training set a little, including a few experimentally verified regulatory regions from human, chicken, sea urchin, fruit fly and yeast , but it is still not a lot.

we would also like to explore the correlation between the genomic positions of words in mswl , and positions of known regulatory elements. this may allow us to utilise our method as a kind of motif discovery algorithm. unfortunately, again, the lack of reliably annotated regulatory regions with regulatory elements makes this step difficult.

phylogenetic foot-printing is an important and rapidly developing branch of motif discovery methodology. it would be very interesting to compare genomic positions of words in mswl with conserved sequences from phylogenetic foot-printing analyses. this would reveal whether such words are conserved, and therefore of functional significance.

in a similar vein, we would like to compare the results of fluffiness analysis results across multiple species. we could then answer the question whether cross-species conserved regions have "fluffy" regulatory region properties, and thus infer their putative function.

we are keen to compare results of our fluffy-tail-analysis with the results of recognition methods based on description of known tfbs, such as in the works  <cit>  and  <cit> . these authors  <cit>  also analysed developmental genes of drosophila melanogaster containing approximately the same clusters of transcription factors.

the work  <cit>  is closely related to our study. however, it is likely that their method is unable to distinguish non-perfect simple tandem repeat sequences from truly regulatory dna. we have implemented their method as far as we can understand it, and found out that their separation of positive  and negative  training sets due to local words frequency seems to be less clear than our separation due to "fluffiness" coefficient f .

there might be possible other regulatory mechanisms apart from tfbs binding. it may be in some specific cases that the 3d local structure of dna in the nucleus  is the principal factor of gene expression and modulating regulatory modules play little or no role  <cit> . thus one of the next steps in our work will be the incorporation of nucleosome position information.

CONCLUSIONS
we present a novel statistical approach that allows regulatory dna to be distinguished from coding and non-coding non-regulatory regions according to its "fluffiness" values. this method is based on the presence of unusually high number of short runs of over-represented scattered words in the given dna sequence.

the performance of the method on experimentally verified sequence data shows that the method allows us to predict whether a sequence may be regulatory.

