BACKGROUND
novel adaptive phenotypes endow organisms with new means to survive and reproduce. such new phenotypes arise through a process that involves natural selection and random genotypic change caused by mutation. life's ability to adapt through random change is remarkable, as many man-made systems do not have this ability  <cit> . it is a result of how genotypic change translates into phenotypic change  <cit> . 

different classes of biological systems, ranging from protein and rna molecules  <cit>  to regulatory circuits  <cit>  and genome-scale metabolic networks  <cit> , share some similarities in how they translate genotypic change into phenotypic change. first, any genotype g produces some phenotype p in the absence of environmental and other perturbations. we will refer to such a 'default' phenotype as g's native phenotype . second, in all these systems genotypes exist in vast genotype spaces. in a genotype space, the distance between two genotypes indicates the number of mutations that set those genotypes apart. third, the set of genotypes with the same native phenotype define a "genotype network". for any two genotypes on a genotype network, there exists a sequence of small genetic changes that leads from one genotype to the other, without ever changing the native phenotype. genotype networks are typically vast and extend far through genotype space. a population that evolves on a genotype network through mutation and selection can traverse large regions of genotype space, while the population's bulk preserves the same phenotype. while doing so, members of the population can explore different phenotypes that occur in different regions of genotype space. because genotype networks extend far through this space, they facilitate exploration of many novel phenotypes  <cit> . in sum, genotype networks allow access to a wide range of new, potentially adaptive phenotypes  <cit> .

despite the existence of genotype networks, finding a specific novel phenotype through a blind evolutionary search is challenging, partly because genotype spaces are very large, partly because the fraction of advantageous novel phenotypes encountered during this search is usually small. for example, many more mutations are deleterious rather than advantageous  <cit> . here we explore a phenomenon that can facilitate this search, that of phenotypic plasticity.

phenotypic plasticity allows a genotype to produce more than one distinct phenotype  <cit> . such alternative phenotypes are induced by non-genetic perturbations. non-genetic perturbations influence the formation of all kinds of phenotypes, but molecular phenotypes illustrate this influence especially well. consider protein structure phenotypes. driven by thermal noise - a ubiquitous kind of non-genetic perturbation - the same amino acid sequence  typically folds into one main, native structure , as well as a large spectrum of alternative structures. several aspects of the protein's environment can influence which of these structures it forms. they include temperature, ph, but also other proteins, such as chaperones  <cit>  or infective proteinaceous agents   <cit> . the same holds for rna molecules, where a single genotype  can also fold into different structures  <cit> . on higher levels of organization, genes and their products interact in regulatory circuits. the genotype determines which of a circuit's genes interact; the gene activity or gene expression phenotypes resulting from these interactions are, again, influenced by non-genetic factors. for instance, a circuit's native gene expression phenotype can be altered through stochastic change - intracellular noise - in the number of regulatory molecules inside a cell  <cit> . biotic or abiotic environmental factors can also change a gene regulatory circuit's activity pattern and the macroscopic traits it helps build  <cit> .

the genotype network concept can readily accommodate the phenomenon of phenotypic plasticity  <cit> . genotypes that produce a given phenotype as their native phenotype belong to the same genotype network, but each of these genotypes may also produce a spectrum of alternative phenotypes. this spectrum may differ among genotypes on the same genotype network, and not all of these genotypes may have equal plasticity. for example, one genotype may readily produce an alternative phenotype, whereas in another genotype, the same phenotype may arise only rarely, for example through an extreme and rare perturbation. in these two genotypes, the phenotype would then have high and low penetrance, respectively. 

a growing body of work suggests that phenotypic plasticity strongly influences the origin of novel phenotypes  <cit> . the earliest support comes from classic work by waddington  <cit> , schmalhausen  <cit>  and baldwin  <cit> . waddington showed that artificial selection of a phenotype that initially appears only in a few organisms after non-genetic perturbations, can easily result in the trait's genetic determination  <cit> . more recently, other researchers have made the same observation for diverse traits and different species  <cit> . artificial selection can thus turn an alternative into a native phenotype. in addition, many observations in wild populations suggest that in multiple cases an ancestral alternative phenotype may have facilitated the evolution of new, genetically fixed adaptive traits  <cit> . the phenotypes where plasticity may have facilitated adaptation are very diverse. they include gill surface area in cichlid fishes  <cit> , pigmentation patterns in the crustacean daphnia melanica  <cit> , and head size in the snake notechis scutatus  <cit> , to name but a few. despite an abundance of candidate examples, plasticity's importance for adaptive evolution is not universally accepted  <cit> . we still do not know whether existing observations from artificial selection experiments or from wild populations are rare oddities or hint at general principles of evolution  <cit> .

if important for adaptive evolution, plasticity would facilitate adaptation through a scenario such as the following : consider a population in 'search' of some new superior phenotype pnew. at some point, genotypes arise that have pnew as a low-penetrance member of their spectrum of alternative phenotypes. such genotypes would accumulate through selection, as they occasionally produce pnew. second, some mutations in these genotypes produce genotypes where pnew has higher penetrance. these mutant genotypes now accumulate in the population. finally, the population gains mutational access to pnew's genotype network. in this genotype network pnew is produced as the native phenotype - without any non-genetic perturbations. here, pnew has become genetically stabilized.

in the above scenario, genotypes that produce a phenotype pnew through plasticity have better chances to find pnew's genotype network. this scenario requires several properties of the organization of genotype space. the conditions are:

i) finding genotypes that can produce a new alternative phenotype pnew through plasticity must be significantly easier than finding the genotype network of pnew .

ii) genotypes near the genotype network of pnew should have a tendency to produce pnew as an alternative phenotype. otherwise, reaching pnew's genotype network would not be easier from genotypes that produce pnew through plasticity.

iii) mutations of genotypes that produce pnew through plasticity must often result in genotypes that can also produce pnew through plasticity. otherwise, an evolutionary search of pnew's genotype network might not be able to progress through genotypes that can all produce pnew.

iv) the higher the penetrance of pnew is in a given genotype g, the easier it must be to reach pnew's genotype network from g.

conditions i)-iii) imply that there must be sets of mutationally connected genotypes that produce pnew as an alternative phenotype. from some of those genotypes, a single mutation must suffice to reach pnew's genotype network. condition iv) implies that selection can promote genetic stabilization of pnew through gradual increases in pnew's penetrance.

we here explore whether these conditions are fulfilled in a model of transcriptional regulation circuits. such circuits produce specific gene activity patterns in different parts and developmental stages of an organism. in doing so, they have a major role in directing developmental processes  <cit> . many evolutionary novelties involve changes in the gene expression patterns such circuits produce  <cit> . in the circuits we study, the genotype encodes the transcriptional regulatory interactions determined by a circuit's cis-regulatory regions. a phenotype corresponds to a circuit's stable gene activity pattern. we show that the requirements we mentioned above are fulfilled for these circuits. our work suggests that phenotypic plasticity can facilitate adaptive evolution that involves changes in gene activity patterns of regulatory circuitry.

RESULTS
the model
our model represents gene regulatory circuits comprising n genes. the activity of each gene in a circuit is regulated by the activity of other circuit genes. an n by n real-valued matrix a =  specifies the manner in which this regulation occurs. we view this matrix as a circuit's regulatory genotype. a gene j regulates the activity of another gene i when aij ≠  <dig>  the effect of gene j on gene i can be either activating  or repressing . we call two circuits neighbors  if they differ in a single regulatory interaction. we use the integer variable m to denote a circuit's number of regulatory interactions, i.e. the number of non-zero values in a; we use the real number c to denote a circuit's interaction density, that is, its number of interactions m divided by the maximally possible number of interactions n <dig>  we describe the activity state of the circuit at time t with a vector st=,...,st). in our model, cross-regulatory interactions among circuit genes and the circuit's activity state at time t determine the circuit's activity state after a time-step of length τ as follows:

  st+τ=σ 

where σ equals - <dig> when x <  <dig>  it equals + <dig> when x >  <dig>  and it equals  <dig> when x =  <dig> 

despite this model's simplicity, it has been successfully used to study various aspects of the evolution of gene regulatory circuits, such as the evolution of robustness, of modularity, and of pattern formation  <cit> . variants of the model have also proven useful to model developmental processes in plants and animals  <cit> .

we here consider circuits that attain a stable gene activity pattern s∞ when their dynamics start from an initial gene activity pattern s <dig>  such an initial state is determined by factors outside the circuit, be they genes 'upstream' of the circuit, maternal regulators, signals from neighboring cells or environmental factors. we refer to a stable gene activity pattern s∞ as a gene activity phenotype. as in previous research  <cit> , we do not analyze circuits that fail to produce a stable activity pattern.

circuit genotypes with the same gene activity phenotype form vast genotype networks in a space of regulatory circuits  <cit> . throughout this paper, we consider circuits in a given genotype network, that is, they attain a given gene activity phenotype s∞native from a given initial gene activity state s <dig> through the circuit's dynamics. we refer to this genotype network as the 'native genotype network' and to s∞native as the 'native phenotype'. the activity state s <dig> is the gene activity state from which the system starts its dynamics in the absence of non-genetic perturbations. we note that all properties of genotype network organization relevant to us depend on the fraction d of gene activity differences between s <dig> and s∞native, and not on the identity of these activity patterns  <cit> .

we study two kinds of perturbations. the first is a mutation of a circuit's regulatory genotype. a mutation changes an interaction by altering a value of aij in a circuit's matrix a. some mutations can cause a circuit to produce a phenotype different from s∞native. the second kind of perturbation has a non-genetic origin and affects the initial gene activity pattern s <dig>  such a perturbation could result, for example, from intracellular noise, from environmental fluctuations, or from disturbances in the activity of genes upstream of the circuit. for example, intracellular noise can create gene expression heterogeneity in clonal populations  <cit> , just as exposure to some environmental factors can induce major gene expression changes in different organismal lineages  <cit> , and impairing the activity of pair-rule genes upstream of the segment-polarity gene circuit in fruit flies can change the expression pattern of genes in this circuit  <cit> . such perturbations can alter developmental trajectories, and result in new gene activity phenotypes different from s∞native.

we call the phenotypes that a circuit genotype g produces after non-genetic perturbations and that are different from g's native phenotype 'alternative phenotypes'. some alternative phenotypes may be detrimental, but others may be beneficial  <cit> . an alternative phenotype has a low  penetrance if the likelihood that g produces it after a random perturbation in the initial condition is low .

finding new alternative phenotypes is easier than finding new native phenotypes
we first asked whether mutation-driven exploration of a genotype network can find new alternative phenotypes more easily than new genotype networks , as required by condition i) in the introduction. to answer this question, we allowed an ensemble of  <dig> ×  <dig> circuits to drift randomly on a genotype network by changing one regulatory interaction at a time, while preserving the circuits' native phenotype. during this process, we recorded two observables. the first was the cumulative number of new phenotypes that circuits could produce after each possible single gene-activity modifications of s <dig> . that is, after each mutation, we determined those alternative phenotypes that a mutated genotype could produce but that previous genotypes had not been able to produce, and appended these alternative phenotypes to a growing list of such phenotypes. the second observable was the cumulative number of new phenotypes that the circuits explored exclusively through mutation. every time a mutation caused a change in a circuit's native phenotype, we recorded the new phenotype, before replacing the circuit by its parent in the original native genotype network. we appended these new phenotypes to a growing list of phenotypes that had not been encountered through previous mutations. in this analysis, we found that plasticity allows a faster exploration of new phenotypes than mutation alone. figure  <dig> shows that after each circuit in the ensemble had experienced  <dig> mutations, plasticity had explored more than twice as many phenotypes as mutation. this figure averages results for  <dig> independent ensembles of circuits with n =  <dig> genes, interaction density c ≈  <dig> , and a fraction d of gene activity differences between s <dig> and s∞native equal to  <dig> . circuits with different values of these parameters also have faster access to new phenotypes through plasticity than through mutation alone .

mutations and non-genetic perturbations produce similar sets of phenotypes
if phenotypic plasticity facilitates the discovery of new genotype networks, then mutations and non-genetic change should often produce similar or identical new phenotypes  in the introduction). otherwise, genotypes that produce an alternative phenotype after non-genetic perturbations would not have preferential mutational access to that phenotype's genotype network. in other words, if condition ii) did not hold, mutations would not be able to turn an alternative phenotype into a native phenotype that is produced even in the absence of non-genetic perturbations. to find out whether this is the case, we sampled random genotypes from a given genotype network. all the genotypes on this network produce the same phenotype s∞native from s <dig>  we defined the following sets for each genotype g in the sample: pμ is the set of new phenotypes that mutations in g can create; ps <dig> is the set of alternative phenotypes that perturbation of each gene in the initial condition s <dig> can create. to quantify the similarity between both sets, we defined the index c as the size of the intersection between both sets divided by its maximally possible value for sets of the same size ). c ranges from zero, if mutation and non-genetic perturbations produce always different phenotypes, to one, if pμ and ps <dig> fully overlap. we also defined an index crand, which estimates how similar randomly chosen sets of phenotypes would be . by assessing c, we found that mutations and non-genetic perturbations produce the same phenotypes more often than expected by chance . this observation holds for all combinations of circuit sizes n, interaction densities c, and distances d between s <dig> and s∞native we examined . thus, genotypes that require a single mutation to reach the genotype network of a phenotype pnew also tend to produce pnew as an alternative phenotype.

c >crand, according to a wilcoxon signed-rank test. in this and all other tables, n refers to the number of genes in a circuit, c refers to the circuit's interaction density, and d refers to the fraction of gene activity differences between the unperturbed initial condition s <dig> and the native phenotype s∞native.

a even though we sampled  <dig> genotypes for each genotype network, we discarded genotypes in which either pμ or ps <dig> was empty.

similar circuits produce a similar spectrum of alternative phenotypes
genotypes producing a new phenotype s∞new through plasticity, but that are not themselves neighbors of s∞new's genotype network may still aid in the genetic stabilization of s∞new. this could occur if neighboring genotypes typically produce the same alternative phenotypes . in this case, mutations that preserve s∞new as an alternative phenotype can make it easier to reach s∞new's genotype network.

motivated by these considerations, we asked whether similar circuits produce similar sets of alternative phenotypes. we use the symbol ps <dig> to refer to the set of alternative phenotypes that a circuit genotype g produces after non-genetic perturbations. ps <dig> k refers to the set of alternative phenotypes that a genotype differing from g in k regulatory interactions, but residing on the same genotype network produces. we define the index ck=|ps0∩ps <dig> k|min. it varies from zero to one as the two sets of alternative phenotypes range from completely disjoint to fully overlapping.

similar circuit genotypes produce similar sets of alternative phenotypes . genotypes that differ in a single mutation share, on average, more than 93% of their alternative phenotypes . high similarity in alternative phenotypes also holds after variation on values of n, c and d . figure  <dig> also illustrates how ck decreases as two circuits diverge. circuit distance k and ck are negatively associated for all values of n, c and d that we examined .

this overlap decreases with the genetic distance between the circuits, according to spearman's ρ, a non-parametric rank correlation coefficient  <cit> . c <dig> is the overlap in the sets of alternative phenotypes of two genotypes that differ in a single regulatory interaction.

a we sampled  <dig> independent genotypes for each parameter combination, but we discarded genotypes that differ in k interactions where ps <dig> k was empty.

in addition, for each of  <dig> circuits on the same genotype network, we picked randomly one of the circuit's alternative phenotypes. we asked whether genotypes in the same genotype network but differing from the focal genotype in k regulatory interactions also produced the alternative phenotype through plasticity. more than half of the genotypes that differ from the focal genotype by five or fewer mutations also produced the same alternative phenotype . for all values of n, c and d we examined, the probability that two genotypes produce the same alternative phenotype was above  <dig>  for genotypes that differ in a single regulatory interaction . this probability decreases with the number k of regulatory interactions in which two circuits differ . in sum, similar circuits have better odds to produce the same alternative phenotype. thus, genotypes that produce an alternative phenotype s∞new but that are not neighbors of s∞new's genotype network can have indirect mutational access to this network. other genotypes that can produce s∞new as an alternative phenotype may provide this access, enabling genetic stabilization of the new phenotype.

genetic distance to a new genotype network is negatively correlated to a phenotype's penetrance
thus far, we demonstrated that conditions i) through iii) of our evolutionary scenario hold. we now turn to condition iv). this condition requires that circuits with a high penetrance alternative phenotype pnew have preferential  access to pnew's genotype network, where this phenotype is native. we next show in several complementary ways that this is the case.

we quantified the penetrance of a given phenotype as the fraction of different single-gene expression perturbations in a circuit's initial state that produce this phenotype. we then assessed whether a phenotype's penetrance is linked to a circuit's proximity to a new genotype network, as follows . we first chose a genotype g at random among all genotypes in a pre-determined genotype network. second, we determined g's alternative phenotypes and their penetrance. third, we chose one of the alternative phenotypes at random, regardless of its penetrance, and called it s∞new. fourth, we estimated the distance of g to the genotype network of s∞new . we repeated this procedure for  <dig> genotypes for each combination of values of n, c and d that we examined.

data for each parameter combination is based on  <dig> different circuits and on the non-parametric rank correlation coefficient spearman's ρ  <cit> .

we performed two additional complementary analyses, that we present in the additional files. in the first analysis we found that genotypes that produce an alternative phenotype with high penetrance have more mutational paths towards the genotype network of that phenotype . in the second analysis we compared two kinds of sequences of mutations: those that increase the penetrance of an alternative phenotype s∞new and those that merely preserve the alternative phenotype s∞new, regardless of its penetrance. we show that the former kind of mutations facilitates the arrival to s∞new's genotype network . taken together, the observations in this section show that the genotype network of a new phenotype is closer and easier to reach from genotypes where a new phenotype has high penetrance.

plasticity accelerates the discovery of new genotype networks
thus far, all our results support that plasticity facilitates discovery and stabilization of new phenotypes. we next asked more directly whether this is the case, by analyzing populations of circuits subject to repeated cycles of mutation and selection.

we started by establishing a population of m =  <dig> identical circuits. these circuits produce a phenotype s∞native from an initial state s <dig>  we assigned individuals with this native phenotype a fitness  ωnative <  <dig>  then, we chose a random gene activity phenotype s∞new as the target of an evolutionary search. we assigned individuals adopting s∞new a fitness of ωnew =  <dig>  starting from our initial population, we then carried out two parallel evolutionary simulations. in both we changed the population through repeated generations of replication, mutation and selection .

in the first kind of simulation, we randomly perturbed each circuit's initial state every generation. we did so by perturbing each gene's initial activity state with a probability α. then, we followed the circuit's gene activity dynamics, until the circuit attained its stable gene activity phenotype. we note that two circuits with the same genotype may produce different phenotypes because of these perturbations. we kept the rate of perturbation α low enough so that in most individuals the initial condition remained unperturbed. in the second, parallel 'control' simulation, we never perturbed the initial condition. here, individuals needed to 'discover' the novel phenotype exclusively through mutation.

in both simulations we recorded two quantities. the first is the time  until the first individual in the population 'discovers' the genotype network of s∞new. we call these times t*,plast and t*,control for the simulations with plasticity and the control simulations. the second is the time, from either t*, plast or t*, control, until at least one quarter of the population lies in the new genotype network. we call these times t <dig> , plast and t <dig> , control, respectively.

the number of generations that a population takes to 'discover' a circuit in a new genotype network is significantly lower when we allow plasticity , according to a wilcoxon signed-rank test.

the value of d is that of the old genotype network. we analyzed  <dig> pairs of evolving populations for each combination of n, c and d. we discarded population pairs in which any of the populations had not reached the new genotype network by the end of the simulation . thus, our actual sample size was lower than  <dig> populations. the probability α ofgene-activity perturbation in s <dig> equaled  <dig>  per gene when n =  <dig>   <dig>  when n =  <dig>  and  <dig>  when n =  <dig>  population size m = 1000; μ =  <dig> ; ωnative =  <dig> .

the number of generations that a population takes to 'discover' a circuit in a new genotype network is significantly lower when we allow plasticity , according to a wilcoxon signed-rank test.

the value of d is that of the old genotype network. we analyzed  <dig> pairs of evolving populations for each combination of n, c and d. we discarded population pairs in which any of the populations had not reached the new genotype network by the end of the simulation . thus, our actual sample size was lower than  <dig> populations. the remaining parameter values are as follows: d =  <dig> ; μ =  <dig> . c ≈  <dig>  when n =  <dig> and it equals  <dig>  when n =  <dig> 

a we analyzed  <dig> pairs of evolving populations for the simulations that we report in this row, but the populations found the new genotype network only in  <dig> cases.

in contrast to these observations, the time from the discovery of a new genotype network until  <dig> percent of a population occupied this genotype network was longer for populations in which we allowed plasticity . this difference, albeit small, is statistically significant for all combinations of values for n, c and d that we tested . thus, plasticity can slow the rate at which individuals with a genetically determined new phenotype increase in frequency. in sum, the shorter discovery time of a new genotype network associated with phenotypic plasticity is followed by a slower transition into this new network. the small plasticity-dependent delay that we observe in our work coincides with predictions of a previously published theoretical study  <cit> . in that study, the delay arises because of a decreased selection differential associated with alleles that have conditional fitness effects.

the number of generations that a population needs to increase the fraction of its circuits in the new genotype network to  <dig> percent is significantly higher with plasticity, i.e., t <dig> ,plast >t <dig> ,control according to a wilcoxon signed-rank test.

the value of d is that of the old genotype network. we analyzed  <dig> pairs of evolving populations for each combination of n, c and d. we discarded population pairs in which any of the populations never had 25% of its circuits in the new genotype network by the end of the simulation . thus, our actual sample size was lower than  <dig> populations. the probability α of gene-activity perturbation in s <dig> equaled  <dig>  per gene when n =  <dig>   <dig>  when n =  <dig>  and  <dig>  when n =  <dig>  population size m = 1000; μ =  <dig> ; ωnative =  <dig> .

discussion
the model of gene regulatory circuits we use here is a coarse, abstract representation of the real complexity of such circuits. this is its main limitation and, at the same time, its strength. it allows us to analyze millions of circuits, their native phenotypes, and any alternative phenotypes they might adopt. in other words, it allows us to determine how gene expression phenotypes are organized in circuit genotype space. this organization has several properties that facilitate the discovery of a new phenotype through plasticity and its genetic stabilization . first, many circuits show plastic phenotypes, which helps them explore many more novel phenotypes than mutation alone could. second, many circuits that can produce a new phenotype pnew through plasticity are neighbors of the genotype network of pnew. they thus allow mutational access to a genotype whose native phenotype is pnew. third, similar genotypes on the same genotype network often produce the same alternative phenotypes. fourth, the higher the penetrance of a new phenotype pnew in a genotype g is, the easier it is to reach pnew's genotype network from g. from these observations emerges an important role for plasticity in the discovery and stabilization of novel phenotypes : genotypes that produce a new phenotype through plasticity  may frequently be intermediates in evolutionary paths towards genotypes where that phenotype is the 'native' phenotype.

evolutionary simulations show that plasticity can indeed accelerate evolutionary adaptation. in these simulations we determined the time a population needs to 'discover' the genotype network of an arbitrary novel and adaptive phenotype. this time is significantly lower when phenotypes are plastic than when they are not.

at the same time, plasticity causes a small reduction in the rate at which the frequency of circuits in a new genotype network increases. the reason is straightforward. in the absence of plasticity, genotypes in the new genotype network always produce the new, best adapted phenotype. with plasticity, the same genotypes occasionally produce other, suboptimal phenotypes: these genotypes are thus overall less well adapted than in the absence of plasticity, which slows their ascent in the population. the resulting delay is similar to that predicted by previous theoretical work  <cit>  that showed smaller selection differentials in populations with plasticity. these smaller differentials can result from either the different fitness effects of the distinct phenotypes that a genotype may produce  <cit> , or from alleles that are visible to selection only under certain environmental or genetic conditions  <cit> . at least in our study system, this delay is insufficient to cancel out the acceleration in finding a new genotype network. plasticity accelerates the discovery of the new genotype network to a much greater extent than it slows down the 'conquest' of this network by a population .

in our system, the positive role of plasticity in the origin and stabilization of new phenotypes is closely tied to the existence of large genotype networks. such networks allow access to very distant regions in genotype space, while preserving an existing native phenotype. and because the spectrum of alternative phenotypes in these regions is not the same, genotype networks facilitate the exploration of many novel phenotypes through plasticity.

early studies, albeit based on an unrealistic genotype-phenotype map, suggested that plasticity could improve the efficiency of an evolutionary search by smoothing fitness landscapes  <cit> . ancel and fontana asked related questions with a more realistic genotype-phenotype map: the folding of rna molecules  <cit> . these authors showed that plasticity does not accelerate adaptive evolution in rna structures. the reason is that rna molecules lack the first of our four properties: it is not much easier to discover a novel alternative phenotype than to discover this phenotype's genotype network. this occurs because finding an rna genotype capable of producing two specific secondary structure phenotypes severely constrains the allowed base-pairings in each rna structure  <cit> .

in contrast to the rna system, plasticity has a positive role for evolutionary adaptation in our regulatory circuits. thus, the role of plasticity may depend on the level of biological organization one focuses on. we note that much of the empirical evidence supporting plasticity's importance for adaptation comes from morphological traits, such as head size in snakes, and developmental decisions, such as those involving spore formation in bacteria  <cit> . in this regard, it is significant that gene regulatory circuits are central to shape these kinds of traits. it may thus not be a coincidence that plasticity can facilitate evolutionary transitions in these traits. our modeling results suggest that future experimental analyses will produce observations similar to existing experiments and similar to our observations wherever regulatory circuits are involved in adaptation.

transcriptional regulation circuits, while important, are not the only systems in which change can lead to novel traits that confer a fitness advantage. changes in mechanical, biochemical or geometrical cell and tissue properties, in cell-cell signaling, in hormonal communication between distant parts of the organism, or even in behavioral traits can lead to new, potentially adaptive, phenotypes. whether plasticity facilitates adaptive evolution in all these traits and systems is unknown. to answer this question will require experimental studies of evolution in individual, mechanistically well-understood systems associated with innovation, combined with computational work like ours that reveals generic principles of evolution for a system class. in addition, the changes that constitute an adaptive novelty frequently span several levels of biological organization and multiple kinds of systems. new theoretical and empirical approaches are needed to ask how such different levels of biological organization interact in producing phenotypic variation. such approaches will be important to understand the evolutionary origin of complex adaptations and the role of plasticity beyond individual case studies.

CONCLUSIONS
our results predict that phenotypic plasticity will have an important role in adaptive evolution that involves changes in gene activity. the fundamental reason is that genotypes that produce occasionally a beneficial phenotype  give more easily rise to genotypes where that same phenotype is more strongly genetically determined. new adaptive phenotypes may frequently arise first as alternative phenotypes, induced by non-genetic perturbations, and then be genetically stabilized by selection. our work thus suggests a widespread relationship between phenotypic plasticity and adaptive evolution in gene activity phenotypes.

