BACKGROUND
the cellular response of plants to water deficits has both economic and evolutionary importance directly affecting plant productivity in agriculture and plant survival in the natural environment. ramanathan  <cit>  has argued, based on predictions of global environmental changes, that developing crops which are more tolerant to water deficits while maintaining productivity, will become a critical requirement in the early part of the 21st century. understanding how plant cells tolerate water loss is a vital prerequisite for developing strategies for improving tolerance of, and biomass/seed production under drought conditions.

in the last decade the genes induced by water-deficit stress have been successfully enumerated in plants that are relatively sensitive to cellular dehydration, in particular arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . in addition, the mechanisms by which the genetic response to water deficit is controlled by abscisic acid -dependent and independent pathways have also been extensively elucidated  <cit> . however, even with the recent addition of in-depth examination of gene expression patterns using arabidopsis microarrays  <cit>  we have little functional knowledge of the genes that respond to water deficits. of critical importance is the question of which of the genes identified as responding to water deficits actually have an adaptive role in establishing tolerance, in particular tolerance of cellular dehydration, and which are genes that are only responding to the injury incurred by the imposition of the stress. injury may induce, or repress, specific genes that are not involved in promoting adaptation to cellular dehydration. an indication that at least some of the genes have an adaptive function in dehydration tolerance derives from the observation that they are expressed in tissues that acquire desiccation tolerance, the extreme manifestation of dehydration tolerance, such as in maturing seeds and in leaves of desiccation-tolerant plants during drying  <cit> . however, in order to fully address the question of the adaptive importance of genes involved in responses to cellular dehydration it is necessary to gain an evolutionary perspective of the involvement of a gene in dehydration tolerance mechanisms. to this end we have established an ongoing comparative genomics program to study the genetic responses to dehydration in species that span the evolution of dehydration  tolerance mechanisms within the land plants. here we present an analysis of ests derived from the desiccation-tolerant bryophyte tortula ruralis  gaertn. meyer & scherb., that is representative of the primitive genetic strategy for the acquisition of desiccation-tolerance .

desiccation tolerance, the ability to recover from the almost complete loss  of protoplasmic water, is a phenomenon common in the reproductive structures of green plants: pollen, spores and seeds. however, the ability to survive vegetative desiccation is a demonstrable but uncommon occurrence in the plant kingdom  <cit> . within the flowering plants there are only approximately  <dig> species of flowering plants that are known to tolerate vegetative desiccation  <cit> .

recent physiological phylogenetic analyses indicate that vegetative desiccation tolerance was primitively present in the bryophytes , but was lost in the evolution of tracheophytes. desiccation-tolerant bryophytes are found worldwide and occupy a variety of ecological niches, most of which could, during some period of the year, be considered as extreme either on a macro or microhabitat level. in most cases the extremes that these plants experience are both in water availability and temperature  <cit> .

desiccation-tolerant bryophytes, because of their simple architecture, have few, if any, morphological  characteristics or adaptations that can limit water loss or regulate plant temperature. as a result of this, the internal water content of their photosynthetic tissues rapidly equilibrates to the water potential of the environment once free water is lost from the surface of the plant. this in turn means that these plants experience drying rates that are much faster than those experienced by their more complex pteridophyte or angiosperm counterparts. in fact, the drying rates that desiccation-tolerant bryophytes experience are generally lethal to desiccation-tolerant ferns and flowering plants  <cit> . the rapid equilibration of protoplasmic water potential with that of the environment in bryophyte tissues appears to demand a type of desiccation tolerance that is significantly different from that exhibited by desiccation tolerant angiosperms  <cit> . rather than acquiring desiccation tolerance in response to a dehydration event as seen in craterostigma plantagineum, sporobolus stapfianus, and other desiccation-tolerant angiosperms, desiccation-tolerant bryophytes appear to express this trait constitutively  <cit> . this form of desiccation tolerance is considered the most primitive of those that have received attention so far  <cit> . in this type of tolerance the primary response to a desiccation event, at least at the level of gene expression, occurs after the fact, during the first hour or two following rehydration. this has led to the suggestion that a major component of the mechanism of desiccation tolerance in bryophytes is a rehydration-induced cellular repair response  <cit> . the implication is that although cellular protection and hence desiccation tolerance is constitutive, it is not sufficient to prevent some damage from occurring  upon rehydration, and thus repair processes are needed and induced when water returns to the protoplasm of the cells.

the repair aspect of the mechanism of desiccation tolerance in these plants, although demonstrated to be a major component of tolerance, is difficult to detail and characterize. most work has focused on the proteins whose synthesis is induced immediately upon rehydration of desiccated gametophytic tissue. early work  <cit>  established the ability of t. ruralis and other mosses to rapidly recover synthetic metabolism when rehydrated. the speed of this recovery was inversely dependent upon the rate of prior desiccation: the faster the rate of desiccation, the slower the recovery. in addition, although the pattern of protein synthesis in the first two hours of rehydration of t. ruralis is distinctly different from that of hydrated controls, novel transcripts were not made in response to desiccation  <cit> . hence it was suggested that t. ruralis responds to desiccation by an alteration in protein synthesis upon rehydration that is in large measure the result of a change in translational control. changes in transcriptional activity were observed for nearly all transcripts studied  <cit>  but did not result in a qualitative change in the transcript population during desiccation or rehydration. it thus appears that t. ruralis relies more upon the activation of pre-existing repair mechanisms for desiccation tolerance than it does on either pre-established or activated protection systems.

in a detailed study of the changes in protein synthesis initiated by rehydration in t. ruralis, oliver  <cit>  demonstrated that during the first two hours of hydration the synthesis of  <dig> proteins is terminated, or substantially decreased, and the synthesis of  <dig> proteins is initiated, or substantially increased. controls over changes in synthesis of these two groups of proteins, the former termed hydrins and the latter rehydrins, are not mechanistically linked. it takes a certain amount of prior water loss to fully activate the synthesis of rehydrins upon rehydration. rna blots revealed that several rehydrin transcripts accumulate during slow drying  <cit>  at a time when it is assumed that transcriptional activity is rapidly declining. these transcripts do not accumulate during rapid desiccation, nor is their accumulation during slow drying associated with an increase in endogenous aba accumulation. aba is undetectable in this moss , and t. ruralis does not synthesize specific proteins in response to applied aba. the accumulation of these transcripts was postulated to be the result of an increase in mrna stability brought about by the removal of water from the cells  <cit> . recent studies clearly demonstrate that these transcripts are sequestered in the dried gametophytes in mrnp particles  <cit>  and that this results in the change in their stability. the implication from this work is that the sequestration of mrnas required for recovery hastens the repair of damage induced by desiccation or rehydration and thus minimizes the time needed to restart growth upon rehydration.

the major question arising from these studies concerns the identity of rehydrins and what possible functions and roles they may play in regards to the response to desiccation and rehydration and to desiccation tolerance per se. we have some limited knowledge of the functions  of a few of the rehydrins from classical molecular analyses,  <cit>  and from a small-scale est collection analysis  <cit> . however, there is an obvious need to extend this base and to develop testable hypotheses that will help us to elucidate the metabolic and genetic mechanisms that control the recovery and repair of dried plant cells and their role in the development and evolution of desiccation tolerance. to gain an appreciation of the number of possible rehydrin genes and the range of possible functions encompassed by their expression we have initiated a genomics level analysis of gene expression during the recovery of tortula gametophytes from the desiccated state. the first step in this process was to establish an est collection that is representative of the transcripts available to the moss during the first few hours following rehydration. in this report we present a bioinformatic analysis of  <dig>   <dig> ests from the early phases of recovery following rehydration of rapidly-dried tortula ruralis gametophytes; rapid dried gametophytes were chosen in order to maximize the recovery and repair response upon rehydration. the bioinformatics approach we have taken is based on that used by mccarter et al.,  <cit>  to conduct a comprehensive analysis of  <dig>  meloidogyne incognita l <dig> ests, and includes cluster analyses, transcript abundancy estimations, and functional classifications based on interpror domains, gene ontology hierarchy, and kegg biochemical classifications. the overall goal was to gain an appreciation of the tortula transcriptome during the time period following rehydration when the desiccation driven alteration in gene expression is at its peak. during this period we hypothesize the processes of cellular repair and recovery are the main focus of the metabolism of the gametophytic cells.

RESULTS
ten thousand three hundred and sixty eight individual cdna clones were selected from a tortula ruralis rehydration library and subjected to single-pass 5' directional sequencing to generate  <dig>  primary ests of which  <dig>   passed through quality control, vector trimming, e. coli contamination, and cloning artifact removal. the  <dig>  ests averaged  <dig> nucleotides in length and totaled  <dig>  million nucleotides submitted to genbank. these submitted ests form the basis of the subsequent transcriptome analysis utilizing the high throughput-gene ontology-genome annotation toolkit , a software developed by s.e. dowd .

cluster analysis
utilizing the assembly algorithms incorporated in the seqmanii software , the  <dig>  ests were grouped into contigs and clusters by establishing assembly stringencies that generated groupings defined by the analysis protocols of mccarter et al.,  <dig>  <cit> . contigs contain est members that appear to originate from single transcripts whereas clusters are assemblies of ests that could represent transcripts from the same gene but alternate splice isoforms, or in the case of tortula ests, which derive from a population of individual gametophytes, alleles of the same gene. the  <dig>  ests formed  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  clusters, both of which exhibit an average size of  <dig> nucleotides. however, the longest sequence increased from  <dig>  nucleotides for contigs to  <dig>  nucleotides for clusters. clusters varied in content from a single est  in  <dig>  cases  to  <dig> ests for a single cluster . the elimination of redundancy during contig building and cluster formation reduced the total number of nucleotides for further analyses from  <dig>  million to  <dig>  million  and  <dig>  million . overall the  <dig>  ests potentially represent  <dig>  genes, a discovery rate of 60%, with  <dig> % of the ests as singletons. this is an overestimation of gene discovery since several non-overlapping clusters can represent a single gene and from our blast search data this appears to be a possibility, at least in the case of clusters  <dig> and  <dig> that appear to independently represent a gene that has a weak similarity to the lea protein of caenorhabditis elegans. even though the ests derive from a non-normalized library  <dig> % of the clusters still have  <dig> or fewer est members.

transcript abundance
the consensus cluster sequences were subjected to a blastx style search of a custom curated non-redundant database derived from uniprot and annotated according to the degree of similarity of the cluster to the highest scoring match in the database of known gene sequences. the degree of similarity was based on the quality of the blastx statistical outputs as well as a visual inspection of the aligned sequences between the query and the target. clusters that generated an hsp-bit score below  <dig> and or e values higher than 10- <dig> were assessed manually for all possible alignments taking into account the alignment length, number of identical matches, gaps, and positive replacements. utilizing these criteria we were able to annotate  <dig>   of the  <dig>  clusters by their similarity to known genes within the database. this also meant that  <dig>  of the clusters, or  <dig> %, represent sequences that have no known counterpart in the public databases and that we categorize as unknowns.

although transcript abundance may reflect the metabolic or physiological needs of the moss during the rehydration phase of a wet/dry/wet cycle it would be more desirable to know how these transcripts are recruited and utilized by the translational machinery to make the proteins that actually contribute to the recovery of the gametophytes following rehydration. such information is beyond the scope of this analysis but the identification and isolation of the clusters that represent the tortula rehydration transcriptome does represent the first major step for such a pursuit.

functional classification of transcripts
physiological, biochemical, and molecular data all point towards an active period of cellular activity, presumably for repair and recovery from desiccation induced damage, during the first two hours following rehydration of dried gametophytes  <cit> . the identity of the more abundant transcripts  does provide some insight into the nature of the metabolic activity that is associated with rehydration, at least it gives an indication of what metabolic processes may be of prime concern as the plant recovers from desiccation. however, the functional classification of the tortula transcripts present during the initial phases following rehydration using the gene ontology  classification system paints a broader view of the possible metabolic activity of the gametophytic cells at this time. this does, of course, come with the understanding that these are transcript based analyses and do not directly reflect protein levels which would offer a more definitive assessment of the metabolic capability of the cells during rehydration.

functional classification of the tortula rehydration transcripts was achieved by matching the tortula clusters to characterized protein domains in a combined protein database, using ht-go-gat , which allowed us to assign go terms to each cluster. the assignment of go terms made it possible to place the clusters into the go hierarchy which can be viewed by use of an amigo browser. of the  <dig>   <dig> clusters that exhibited significant similarity to known genes in the public databases,  <dig>   represent genes that contain conserved protein domains that have known biochemical and physiological functions in other organisms and map to the go hierarchy. the go representations for the tortula rehydration clusters are presented in tables  <dig> through  <dig>  the representations are segregated into the three main organizing principles of go: biological process , cellular component , and molecular function . a complete listing of the go mappings is available on our website at .

of the  <dig>  clusters,  <dig>  map into the biological processes classification,  <dig>  of these fall into the physiological processes category and  <dig>  cross-map into the cellular processes category . within physiological processes 80% of the clusters were associated with metabolism and 20% cell growth and maintenance . the distribution is not surprising for ests  derived from a tissue that is harvested at a time of metabolic upheaval such as rehydration and recovery from the desiccated state. in support of this notion are the almost identical distributions of ests observed for cdna collections from protonemal tissues of the moss physcomitrella patens following various hormonal treatments designed to illicit developmental perturbations and metabolic switching .

the subcategory distributions within the physiological and cellular processes also seem to reflect the nature of the cellular disturbances that result from a desiccation-rehydration event. processes involved in metabolite and ion transport within and between cells are represented by 17% of the clusters that map to biological processes, and almost 86% of those that map to the cell growth and maintenance subcategory. within the metabolism subcategory of physiological processes 40%  of the clusters map to protein metabolism  and 37%  map to biosynthetic processes. the considerable representation within the aforementioned three subcategories is consistent with much of our biochemical and physiological evidence concerning the metabolic activity and emphasis in gametophytic cells during rehydration  <cit> . in particular, following rehydration the protein synthetic machinery is rapidly reconstituted, having been dismantled during drying, to direct the synthesis of pattern of proteins termed rehydrins that appear to be a crucial aspect of the desiccation tolerance mechanism of tortula ruralis . the importance of the protein synthetic machinery and its re-establishment following rehydration is also highlighted by the preponderance of clusters associated with the ribosomal subcategory of the cellular component classification; 40% of the cytoplasm category .

only  <dig> clusters  map within the cellular component classification and are presumably associated with structural functions . of these  <dig> clusters, almost all map to the cell classification within which 72% map to intracellular components and 38% to the membrane category. within these categories, representation is most significant in the ribosomal, integral membrane protein, and plastid subcategories. as discussed above the importance of protein synthesis during recovery from desiccation tolerance may explain the preponderance of clusters associated with ribosomal structural components as well as the number of clusters that are associated with the membrane and plastid subcategories. ultrastructural studies of dried and rehydrated gametophytes clearly indicate that the inrush of water during rehydration disrupts membranes and causes a disorganization of the internal granal structures and swelling of the large chloroplasts of the tortula leaf cells  <cit> .

of the clusters that can be mapped into go hierarchies, 90% can be ascribed molecular functions . of the major categories, binding activity , catalytic activity , structural molecule activity , and transporter activity  are best represented in the cluster collection. metal ion, nucleic acid, and nucleotide binding are the most represented subcategories within the binding activity category perhaps reflective of the need for biosynthetic and repair activity associated with rehydration of moss cells. within the catalytic activity category the majority of the clusters are associated with hydrolase , transferase , oxireductase , and kinase  activities. almost half of the clusters associated with the transferase activity subcategory map as transferring phosphate-containing groups. each one of these subcategories represent catalytic activities that could be argued as important for a cell to recover from a major metabolic perturbation such as that seen during rehydration. the significant representation within the kinase and phosphate transfer categories also suggests an active metabolic control "program" occurs when the desiccated cells receive water and attempt to recover from the damage. it is also intriguing that there is a significant representation within the transporter subcategory as little is known of this group within the context of desiccation tolerance in bryophytes, although solute  and sugar transport in and out of the vacuoles of desiccation tolerant angiosperms  <cit>  do occur during desiccation and rehydration.

of particular interest to this study are clusters that represent gene expression control factors both at the transcriptional  and translational level . these clusters, along with those that represent biochemical control mechanisms for signaling and gene expression at the protein level, such as kinases  and phosphate-transfer activities , may represent critical elements in the activation and execution of the cellular recovery processes necessary for the mechanism of desiccation tolerance exhibited by tortula ruralis. this is of importance because of the key position of bryophytes in the evolution of desiccation tolerance in plants. our main hypothesis is that an elucidation of the signaling and activation pathways for the rehydration response in this assumed primitive tolerance mechanism could have major implications for the study of stress tolerance mechanisms in all plants and thus these clusters represent important targets for further study at the molecular and biochemical levels.

go based comparison with physcomitrella patens est collections
the representation of the tortula rehydration clusters throughout the go mapping system is indicative of the emphases on, but not expression levels of, particular cellular activities represented in the moss gametophytes during this period of a wet and dry cycle. in an attempt to assess if the accents on particular cellular activities indicated for rehydrated gametophytes are characteristic of the rehydration induced metabolic state or are simply indicative of processes associated with normally active bryophyte cells, we compared the representation of the tortula rehydration clusters within the go categories with similar "clusters" from physcomitrella patens, the only other bryophyte that has similar genomic level information. the majority of the physcomitrella "clusters" are derived from a large est collection representing transcripts from both untreated and hormone induced  cells of protonemal cultures. the physcomitrella ests are described by nishiyama et al.,  <cit>  and were obtained from physcobase  as assembled contigs . in total  <dig>  physcomitrella contigs, derived from  <dig> ests obtained from physcobase and genbank, were subjected to a blastx search, as described for the tortula clusters using ht-go-gat. of the  <dig>  contigs  <dig>   represent genes that contain conserved protein domains that have known biochemical and physiological functions in other organisms and map to the go hierarchy.

there are two caveats for this comparison; 1) differences in representation may simply reflect species differences in the emphasis on individual classes of cellular activities between tortula and physcomitrella, or 2) differences in representation may reflect differences in the emphasis on individual classes of cellular activities between mature gametophytes  and protonema . until a comparison of go mapping distributions can be made directly between clusters derived from an est collection from hydrated control gametophytes from tortula with those from the rehydration collection these caveats remain important. nevertheless, even with these difficulties and limitations the comparison is still useful for developing new hypotheses as to what cellular processes might be important in the recovery of moss cells from desiccation.

in general the distribution of the tortula clusters within the go mappings are similar if not identical to the distribution of the phycomitrella contigs gleaned from physcobase. this can be seen especially at the go map  <dig> and  <dig> relationship-level categories  using the multi-species go browser . however, there are several notable differences and in general the differences are consistent with what has been determined, in earlier studies, to be important in the recovery of the moss from desiccation following rehydration  <cit>  and what is known about plant responses to abiotic stress in general  <cit> . the differences evident in the comparison are presented in table  <dig>  where the extent of the similarity in the distribution of the clusters are expressed as the ratio of representation for tortula to representation for physcomitrella . in the biological category the most striking differences in go representation of tortula clusters occurs in categories where the percentage representations are relatively low but the numbers of clusters are substantial. in the level  <dig> relationship, photosynthesis, the representation for tortula is  <dig> % compared to  <dig> % for physcomitrella, a  <dig>  fold difference, the majority of which is accounted for by the difference in the representation levels for the light reaction category. the rapid recovery of photosynthesis is critical for the recovery of bryophyte cells, particularly in regards to the production of energy and reducing power for the metabolic activity associated with repair and reconstitution of the gametophytic cells. chloroplast structure in tortula is severely disrupted, especially if desiccation occurred rapidly, in the first few hours following rehydration  <cit>  but recovers quickly. the difference in representation in this category is consistent with these observations and thus may reflect the greater need for a supply of a diversity of photosynthetic components in rehydrated tortula than in physcomitrella cells that have not experienced a disruption in the photosynthetic apparatus. similar inferences can be made concerning the differences in representation observed for carbon utilization  and oxidative phosphorylation  for tortula in that mitochondrial activity and integrity are also compromised during rehydration  <cit> . other differences in representation between tortula and physcomitrella mappings relate to a higher representation for tortula in the categories that relate to responses to external stimuli and responses to stress both of which would seem consistent with the emphasis that cellular activity for tortula would have in comparison to unstressed physcomitrella cells. in particular the increased representation within the response to oxidative stress is of note, as an elevated protection of cellular integrity from the damaging reactive oxygen species  typically associated with a desiccation rehydration event is a distinctive component of desiccation tolerant bryophytes when compared to their desiccation sensitive relatives such as physcomitrella  <cit> .

the above observations concerning the more extensive representation of clusters within the go mappings related to organelle function in tortula are mirrored in the cellular component level  <dig> classification mappings. in the cellular component classification tortula exhibits an almost two fold difference in representation within categories associated with either the chloroplast or mitochondria, such as extrachromsomal dna , thylakoid , mitochondrial membrane , and both inner and outer membranes . in this case the categories are generally related to genes representing membrane components and since it is the organelle membranes that exhibit the majority of the damage during desiccation and rehydration it is consistent that these categories would be better represented in the tortula cluster mappings than those for physcomitrella. in addition to the organellar related classifications the tortula clusters also exhibit a higher representation within the ribonucleoprotein complex category  which in all likelihood reflects an emphasis on ribosomal components since a similar difference in representation is seen in the structural constituent of the ribosome category  within the molecular function level  <dig> classification. again such differences in representation in the comparison between tortula and physcomitrella go mappings are consistent with our previous studies on the responses of tortula gametophytes to desiccation and rehydration and comparisons to non-stressed bryophyte tissues. protein synthesis is critical to the recovery of tortula cells following a desiccation event  <cit>  not only for the synthesis of proteins damaged by the stress of desiccation but also directing the response to the stress at the level of gene expression  <cit> . early studies determined that the speed at which desiccation occurred has a marked effect on both the rate of recovery of protein synthesis and the rate at which either new ribosomes are formed or pre-existing ones are repaired  <cit> , rapid desiccation results in a more prolonged recovery of normal protein synthetic levels and also slows the reconstitution of ribosomes upon rehydration. since the tortula clusters are derived from ests of rehydrated moss that was dried rapidly, the greater representation in ribosome related go mappings for this collection compared to the physcomitrella clusters, that represent transcripts from cells where presumably normal ribosomal turnover and synthetic rates are prevalent, is consistent with the biological state of the tortula cells. the emphasis on protein synthesis in rehydrated tortula cells compared to those of physcomitrella is also evident in the comparison of representations within the translation regulator, translation factor, and translation elongation factor activity go mappings.

other differences seen in the molecular function classification, such as the greater representation within the tortula collection of clusters involved in two-component sensor or channel/pore class transporter activity designated mappings, offer novel possibilities for investigation into rehydration metabolism that have not been indicated as important until now. the individual identity of the clusters that map to these categories should offer possible hypotheses that can be tested in our future research.

functional classification based on kegg analysis
an alternative classification of clusters, based on biochemical function, involves the use of ht-go-gat to assign clusters to individual kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  metabolic pathways. of the  <dig> clusters that map within the go hierarchy only  <dig> clusters had assigned ec numbers generating  <dig> unique mappings . the paucity of ec assignments limits this aspect of the analysis but the mapping of clusters to the kegg metabolic pathways still presents some useful perspectives on the metabolic emphasis of the rehydrated gametophytic cells. eighty-six of the  <dig> pathways contained within the metabolism category , were represented by  <dig> % of the  <dig> tortula clusters. the kegg metabolic pathways that are well represented by tortula clusters are carbohydrate metabolism , amino acid metabolism , energy metabolism , lipid metabolism , and metabolism of cofactors . all of these pathways have been previously associated with the cellular recovery processes associated with rehydrated moss gametophytes  <cit> . within the metabolic activities not represented by the tortula clusters only the lack of ascorbate metabolizing enzymes appears unusual as ascorbate has been well documented as an important metabolite in the protection of moss gametophytes from oxidative damage during stress. this however appears to be the result of a limitation in the assignment of ec numbers since several tortula clusters show significant similarities to enzymes involved in ascorbate metabolism in the original blastx search used to generate the go mappings. the limitation of the kegg based classification can also been seen in the poor representation of tortula clusters in the other kegg pathways  which is surprising given the number of clusters that were identified in the blastx search and in the go databases as being contained within these classifications. as an example, none of the  <dig> clusters that map in the go hierarchy as structural components of the ribosome  or any of the clusters that mapped to transcriptional and translational components were contained in the corresponding kegg pathways. thus although useful information can be gleaned from the kegg classification system and metabolic pathway mappings, especially in practical terms for functional studies using individual clusters, it has some major limitations for drawing any broad based hypotheses from the representation of tortula clusters within each pathway.

orf based assessment of tortula clusters
of the  <dig>  consensus cluster sequences used in the blastx search of our database   <dig> % failed to exhibit sufficient similarity  with known sequences to allow for an accurate annotation of the cluster. it is possible that these contigs, rather than containing novel amino-acid coding regions, contain mainly 3' or 5' untranslated regions  or coding regions that are so short as to render them incapable of generating a significant similarity score. in order to investigate this possibility we examined the three classes of contigs, those with significant similarity scores; "good hits", those that generated poor similarity scores; "false hits", and those that failed to generate any scored similarity; "no hits", to determine the longest open reading frame . we limited the orf determination to those clusters that contain an aug codon in the 5' to 3' direction of the clone in any one of the three possible reading frames . the results of this analysis are shown in figure  <dig>  of the  <dig>  clusters generated in the study,  <dig>  generated orfs under the limitations imposed by the analysis. of these  <dig>  were classified as "good hits",  <dig>  as "false hits" and  <dig> as "no hits". those clusters that are classified as "good hits" exhibit orfs that are in general evenly distributed from 20– <dig> amino acids long to 220– <dig> amino acids long. the clusters that are classified as "false hits" from the blastx search do have a relatively larger proportion of shorter orfs, in the 20– <dig> and 40– <dig> amino acid range but also a substantial proportion that are much longer. the distribution of orfs in this category  does not appear to be sufficiently skewed from that for the "good hit" clusters to render them incapable of generating similarity scores in the blastx search. this would suggest that these clusters do contain novel amino acid sequences that are not represented in the public protein databases by sequences sufficiently similar to generate significant hsp bit scores. in addition, the distribution of orfs in the "no hit" cluster category are distributed in a similar manner to those of the "good hit" classification and so are also likely to represent clusters encoding proteins with novel amino acid sequences. the clusters contained within the "false hit" and "no hit" categories are of particular interest in our search for novel genes and pathways that are associated with the ability of certain plants to acquire vegetative desiccation tolerance.

conserved gene comparison to physcomitrella and arabidopsis
in this analysis the physcomitrella and arabidopsis databases were independently used in a blastx search using the  <dig>  tortula clusters as query sequences. even though we used the entire  <dig>  cluster sequences as individual queries only  <dig>  actually represent sequences that could be annotated using the criteria for similarity discussed previously. when the tortula clusters were used as queries against the physcomitrella database,  <dig>  generated hsp bit scores however only  <dig> exhibited a level of conservation of sequence that passed the criteria established for annotation of our tortula clusters . against the arabidopsis database only  <dig> tortula clusters generated hsp bit scores but  <dig> had a level of conservation sufficient to be considered reliable matches to arabidopsis genes. these observations are difficult to rationalize and may simply reflect the inequality of the target databases. the physcomitrella database, which is generated from a relatively small est collection, is much smaller than that for arabidopsis, which is gleaned from the full genomic sequence. this may explain why although most tortula clusters generated hsp bit scores only a relative few were capable of producing scores sufficiently high enough, and with low enough error probabilities, for confident assignment of co-identity with a physcomitrella contig. obviously tortula ruralis is more closely related to physcomitrella patens, as they are both bryophytes, than to arabidopsis thaliana but the phylogenetic distance between the two bryophytes is still substantial, which may also help explain the paucity of high value matches and the large number of low value hits. the arabidopsis database is much more comprehensive and would be expected to generate more significant matches as observed and perhaps because of the evolutionary distance between the two plants more queries that do not generate an hsp.

the twenty gene products that exhibit the highest level of conservation for both comparisons, physcomitrella  and arabidopsis  are presented in table  <dig>  several common highly conserved genes are present in both comparisons, including genes involved in cell structure , protein synthesis , protein-turnover , stress proteins , chromosomal proteins , signal transduction , and binding proteins . interestingly there are differences between the two lists, which may reflect the relative phylogenetic distances between the three species. the three most conserved proteins between tortula and physcomitrella did not register as highly conserved between tortula and arabidopsis, the most conserved protein between tortula and physcomitrella, the rrna intron-encoded homing endonuclease, did not generate a match at all with an arabidopsis counterpart. interestingly, the most conserved photosynthesis related protein between tortula and physcomitrella is a chlorophyll a/b-binding protein which generates a hsp bit score of  <dig> and e value of  <dig> e- <dig>  the arabidopsis counterpart generates a hsp bit score of  <dig> and e value of  <dig> e- <dig>  in this case the level of conservation of this protein within the comparisons appears to reflect the phylogenetic relationships that exist between the three plants. however, the most conserved photosynthesis related protein between tortula and arabidopsis is a photosystem i p <dig> apoprotein a <dig> which generates a hsp bit score of  <dig> and e value of  <dig>  the physcomitrella counterpart generates a hsp bit score of  <dig> and e value of  <dig> e- <dig>  which appears contrary to what is expected at what is seen for the chlorophyll a/b-binding protein. this type of relationship is also seen for the ribulose  <dig> protein  that is conserved between tortula and arabidopsis but only to a low degree with the physcomitrella counterpart. if such relationships can be substantiated with further study and complete sequences  then some interesting evolutionary questions can be raised concerning both gene function and selection pressures on the individual plants and metabolic processes.

CONCLUSIONS
bryophytes have an important and underestimated place in the study of plant responses to water deficits, in particular desiccation tolerance. bryophytes occupy what we believe to be one of the most primitive states, along with algae, in the evolution of desiccation tolerance and represent, in all probability, the stage in the emergence of plants from a fresh water environment to occupy the various niches available on dry land  <cit> . unfortunately, it is only with the advent of the development of physcomitrella patens as a model plant for molecular genetic studies, fired by its particular ability to perform efficient and homologous recombination in vitro, that bryophyte genomics has become a topic of some interest. physcomitrella is rapidly becoming the model of choice for developmental and transgenic studies  <cit>  because of its ease of manipulation and indeed there are plans in place to sequence its genome  <cit> . tortula ruralis on the other hand has long been established as an attractive model for the analysis of environmental stress tolerance, in particular desiccation tolerance, it has been a very useful model in assessing structural, physiological, biochemical and genetic  aspects of severe dehydration of plant cells and mechanisms by which primitive plants respond to and survive protoplasmic water loss  <cit> . the progression of the tortula model into genomics is a critical aspect in the development, along with a transformation system and assessment of its ability for efficient homologous recombination, into a more useful and manipulable model for understanding desiccation tolerance and the nature of extremophiles. in addition to the importance of tortula for stress biology, the establishment of a second and contrasting bryophyte model, especially with regards to genomics, is essential for the validation and usefulness of the information gained from the analysis of the physcomitrella genome and the general principles gleaned from its use as a plant model. it is to these ends that we have initiated this study into the transcriptome of tortula gametophytes as they respond to a major stress event, in this case a combination of desiccation and rehydration.

the rehydration transcriptome of tortula, as defined by the clusters presented herein, is remarkably consistent with what we know about the desiccation response for this bryophyte and its metabolic activity during the first two hours following rehydration. the go mapping of the tortula clusters enabled a broad look at what cellular activities appear to be emphasized in the rehydrated gametophytes and in agreement with our previous biochemical analyses highlighted the prominence of the protein synthetic machinery, both in structure and control, membrane structure and metabolism, and the need to reestablish plastid integrity. these observations were bolstered by the comparative go analysis using the extensive est collection generated for the desiccation sensitive moss physcomitrella patens. the go analysis has also provided fuel for new investigations and hypotheses into the role of other cellular processes, such as membrane transport, phosphorylation and signal transduction, in the mechanisms that enable desiccation tolerance in plants. signal transduction is especially intriguing with regards to desiccation tolerance in this bryophyte as it appears to rely on alterations in translational control to effect a response to desiccation in contrast to the well characterized transcriptional responses, and associated signaling pathways, associated with abiotic stress in the angiosperms  <cit> . in addition to the functional based analyses, the simple abundance estimates has also correlated well with previous work and has given further credence to the notion that lea proteins may also play a role in maintaining cellular integrity when water is reintroduced into desiccated plant tissues. the strong correlation between what is known about the mechanism for desiccation tolerance employed by tortula ruralis and what can be inferred from the analyses of the tortula rehydration est collection gives a measure of confidence not only in the value of a bioinformatics approach to gain a view of a particular transcriptome but also in the basis for new hypotheses and research directions that are generated from them.

although the type of analyses presented here are extremely useful in assessing the types of transcripts present in a particular tissue at a particular time and in response to some perturbation, either external or internal in origin, and generating hypotheses concerning the functional aspects of the transcriptome they are intrinsically correlative in nature. in order to gain a more direct picture of the transcriptome and more importantly, with regards to functional assessments, the "translatome", the bioinformatics must be linked to a detailed expression profile of the transcripts represented within the ests generated to investigate the particular biological response or mechanism of interest. to this end the clusters described in this report form the basis of a tortula gametophyte microarray designed for the profiling of both the extant transcriptome and the associated translatome and their response to desiccation and rehydration under various conditions. the array and the experimental design of the expression profiling will allow us to generate a more accurate assessment of both transcript levels and transcript recruitment into the protein synthetic machinery during, and recovery from, desiccation in tortula ruralis. in combination with the bioinformatics analyses presented here, the expression profiling will allow us to generate a more complete picture of the cellular response of a tolerant plant species, an extremophile, to an extreme abiotic stress event.

