BACKGROUND
cladistic phylogeny reconstruction of mammals has its roots in publications by malcolm mckenna  <cit>  and was more explicitly algorithmic in the 1980s  <cit> . in the latter publications, discrete characters were analysed with an explicit optimality criterion, and were in principle observable by anyone with access to relevant material, in order to make specific, testable hypotheses regarding mammalian interrelationships. in retrospect, debate about mammalian interrelationships following these publications moved away from competing authoritarian statements on how mammalian groups are interrelated and towards a more focused discussion of the actual characters upon which such interrelationships are hypothesized .

objections to algorithmic approaches to phylogeny reconstruction, particularly regarding its practice among morphologists , have occasionally noted the uninformative and/or low quality of character descriptions. individual investigators are not necessarily to fault for the format in which their character lists are published, as editorial standards for such information vary widely, not to mention the capacity of different journals to publish graphic and/or textual appendices. nevertheless, calls for the improvement of standards by which morphological character data are published, and by which they are selected for inclusion in a given study, have been made .

web-based databanks offer an ideal means by which the information content of anatomical character sets can be maximized. initiatives such as: digimorph  <cit> , morphobank.org  <cit>  and morphbank.net  <cit>  have for several years taken advantage of this medium  <cit>  , and have made it easier for investigators to evaluate morphological data with the ultimate goal of better understanding character evolution and phylogeny. however, as of this writing, a databank focusing on the skeletal anatomy of placental mammals is still lacking.

hypotheses of placental mammal phylogeny
a widely cited dataset consisting primarily of nuclear dna sequences  <cit>  has been interpreted to contain an unambiguous signal dividing placental mammals into four main clades: xenarthra , afrotheria , euarchontoglires , and laurasiatheria , with a root separating afrotheria from the remaining placental mammals. studies of mtdna that include both coding and non-coding sequences  <cit> , as well as the longest concatenation of nuclear dna to date  <cit> , with ca.  <dig>  aligned nucleotides for  <dig> terminal taxa, support this topology.

other dna datasets, including analyses of rare molecular features such as the presence/absence of retroposons  <cit>  and sequence analysis of lines  <cit> , provide independent support for the same unrooted topology, but disagree on the location of the root. this falls either at atlantogenata   <cit> , xenarthra  <cit> , or glires   <cit> . earlier analyses of mitochondrial protein-coding genes  <cit>  and of a combined morphology+dna dataset  <cit>  have also supported a basal  position of rodents, although in  <cit>  erinaceids were located at the placental root, adjacent to murid rodents. the most recent molecular phylogenetic analyses of placental mammals support a relatively basal position of afrotherians and xenarthrans , and a monophyletic rodentia and glires  <cit> , but the precise identity of the basal-most placental taxon remains elusive.

palaeontological work continues to yield fossil mammals that are relevant to debates on mammalian phylogeny and the placental root  <cit> . some have argued that certain cretaceous eutherians comprise the sister taxon to glires  <cit> . if cretaceous eutherian lineages could be definitively linked with modern rodents and lagomorphs, this could be interpreted to support to the hypothesis of glires basal within placentalia  <cit> . however, the most taxon- and character-rich phylogenetic analyses including cretaceous eutherians  <cit>  do not support their placement within crown placentalia, nor are they unanimous in identifying a basal-most crown placental clade.

in this paper, i present an image-rich, morphological character-database focusing on placental mammals, in tandem with a reanalysis of morphological and sequence data that bear on placental mammal phylogeny. the morphological character list is based on  <cit> , which was in turn based on the work of many other publications, as cited therein. i combine these morphological data with the dna sequence dataset  of  <cit> , and for the first time include information on  <dig> indels from their dna sequence alignment. i apply a number of corrections to both the sequence- and morphological data sets; and using both maximum parsimony  and a bayesian algorithm, i investigate the support of these data for the aforementioned hypotheses on mammalian interrelationships and the placental root.

RESULTS
the majority of the combined dna-morphology analyses support the clades afrotheria, xenarthra, euarchontoglires, and laurasiatheria, as well as the placement of the tertiary insectivoran-grade mammal centetodon within lipotyphla and the two cretaceous eutherians  outside of placentalia . using mp, the position of the placental root varies. with all data and gaps included and weighted equally , or with third position transitions removed, it is at the malagasy lesser hedgehog-tenrec echinops, within a paraphyletic afrotheria. a strict consensus in each case leaves the placental base unresolved  due to the variable position of zalambdalestes. with third positions of protein-coding genes removed, it is at xenarthra followed by afrotheria with cretaceous taxa outside of crown placentalia . results from the bayesian analysis using either living taxa and sequence data alone, or including three fossils  plus morphology , places the placental root at afrotheria followed by xenarthra. when included, cretaceous taxa are again reconstructed outside of crown placentalia.

interestingly, mp applied only to extant taxa with all dna characters, but without morphology, yields a placental tree rooted on murid rodents . inclusion of morphology changes this signal to favour a root within afrotheria, at the malagasy tenrec echinops . removal of third positions favours a placental root at xenarthra  with or without morphological data. as evident by comparing figs. 1b and 4a, exclusion of the  <dig> fossil taxa in the equally weighted mp analysis does not shift the root away from the afrotherian echinops.

the position of the placental root influences the optimization of morphological characters throughout the placental tree. however, some morphological characters optimize at the root of placentalia under a number of hypotheses. with either afrotheria, xenarthra, atlantogenata, glires, muridae, or erinaceus at the placental base, three morphological character states optimize as placental synapomorphies: #39- <dig> , #48- <dig> , and #159- <dig> . with either afrotheria or atlantogenata basal, two additional morphological synapomorphies for placentalia optimize unambiguously: #11- <dig>  and #105- <dig> . a paraphyletic rodentia at or near the placental base  greatly increases the number of morphological characters that show unambiguous change on the branch leading to crown placentalia, and requires significantly more homoplasy among morphological characters than the other hypotheses of rooting.

the placement of several fossils, namely leptictis,paleoparadoxia, plesiorycteropus and zalambdalestes, remains ambiguous in this study. however, when resolved, the latter taxon falls outside of crown placentalia ; this result has also been supported by other, independent datasets  <cit> . in the current study, the treatment of dna third positions influences the topology of several fossils, a result that may appear counterintuitive since all dna data are missing for these fossils. nevertheless, this is a straightforward result based on the altered optimizations of morphological characters on those branches of the tree that are rearranged by addition of the sequence partition, which in turn can affect the influence of those characters on the placement of fossils  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
compared to just a decade ago, there is now a broad level of agreement on the basic topology of the extant mammalian radiation . using a relatively large dna-indel-morphology dataset based on  <cit> , this study has made a number of changes to both molecular and morphological homology , yet recovers the same basic pattern of living placental phylogeny , dividing the unrooted tree into afrotheria, xenarthra, euarchontoglires, and laurasiatheria.

the same level of agreement cannot yet be said to exist for all fossil clades. in this study, ukhaatherium, centetodon, hyopsodus, meniscotherium, phenacodus, arsinoitherium, moeritherium, and anagale are placed with some consistency across analyses. the remaining four fossils  vary in their position depending on the analysis, indicating that at present the morphological data sampled here are not sufficient to reconstruct the phylogeny of these taxa. i concur with  <cit>  that the current morphological sample could be expanded significantly. nevertheless, this study demonstrates that even a small morphological dataset can influence a much larger body of dna sequences. here, morphology not only improves resolution in some clades that remain poorly resolved based on dna sequences alone , but can also shift the placental root from muridae to afrotheria . the combined data favour a placental root at either afrotheria or xenarthra . both atlantogenata and muridae receive suggestively low p-values with third coding positions excluded; glires and erinaceus are the least favoured root-taxa among the alternatives tested with the present dataset.

the morphological web-database presented here will make it easier for researchers to incorporate these data into larger phylogenetic matrices that sample additional fossils. in the long term, such representations will be essential to reconstruct the morphology of the placental common ancestor. towards this end, morphological character matrices should be easily accessible and understandable across institutions and generations of scientists; and they should build upon previous work in order to offer an ever-expanding character database. many kinds of molecular data have enjoyed such accessibility for well over a decade. the relatively infrequent presentation of graphic character databases limits the utility and appreciation of morphological character matrices, a condition that in recent years has, fortunately, begun to change.

