BACKGROUND
the introduction of fluorescent proteins  and the ability to visualize molecular events using fluorescence microscopy have been of substantial value for understanding intracellular signaling events. fp-based biosensors, and especially those based on fluorescent resonance energy transfer , can report on cellular processes such as apoptosis or cell division, the levels of second messengers such as ca2+, ptdinsp <dig> and camp, or the activation status of proteins such as rhoa  <cit> . to date, the vast majority of analyses utilizing fp-based biosensors have been carried out on cells in tissue culture. however, for cellular processes that are controlled by cellular interactions or by the microenvironment, it would clearly be preferable to perform such analyses in vivo. indeed, the small number of studies that have analyzed the behavior of single cells in vivo, have been informative with regard to the intracellular interactions of immune cells and early events in tumors formation  <cit> . intravital images of whole mice or tumors can readily be acquired with macroscopical resolution using simple instrumentations . however, for imaging with subcellular resolution, sophisticated equipment and expertise  are required, which are only available in few specialized laboratories. furthermore, the generation of biosensor-transgenic mice is a lengthy process and thereby hampers the use of this technique in settings where a number of different biosensors are tested or combinations of biosensors are required. a few studies have previously described fast and simple techniques to target selective genes to specific sites. for example, li and hoffman have targeted reporter genes to hair follicles in mice using liposomes  <cit> . however, it will be important to extend such approaches to other cell types. here we present a rapid and inexpensive dna tattoo method to target fp-genes to keratinocytes in the skin of mice. the behavior of these keratinocytes expressing fluorescent or fret markers were followed for multiple days with subcellular resolution using a standard confocal microscope. the utility of this tattoo-approach was demonstrated by in vivo imaging of caspase- <dig> activation upon apoptosis induction.

RESULTS
prior experiments have demonstrated the feasibility of introducing transgenes in murine skin cells by use of a rapidly oscillating tattoo machine  <cit> . in an effort to determine the number of cells that express the introduced transgene upon this type of skin application , we tattooed a small area  of the abdominal skin of mice with dna encoding a gfp reporter protein driven by the cmv immediate early  promoter.  <dig> hours thereafter, mice were anesthetized and analyzed for dna tattoo-induced gfp expression by intravital imaging using a conventional confocal microscope. expression of the gfp reporter gene was observed in approximately  <dig> cells per  <dig> mm <dig> tattooed skin, showing that the transfection efficiency of dna tattooing was sufficient for imaging purposes. the majority of fluorescent cells obtained after a gfp-encoding dna tattoo were keratinocytes .

the uncorrected gfp images showed considerable autofluorescence of skin structures, in particular hair follicles, which was characterized by a substantially wider excitation and emission bandwidth. to discriminate the cells expressing gfp from these autofluorescent structures, autofluorescence was detected by imaging at  <dig> nm excitation and 410– <dig> nm emission. the resulting autofluorescence image was then subtracted from the gfp image, resulting in an autofluorescence-free gfp image . recent studies showed that in addition to gfp, multiple fps can be simultaneously imaged in vivo  <cit> . in line with this, the dna tattoo strategy also allowed  detection of cells expressing a broad range of fluorescent reporters , including cyan fluorescent protein , yellow fluorescent protein  and dsred. as expected, the in vivo emission spectra of the tested fps were similar to those reported in vitro . when performing intravital imaging at several time points post-tattoo, the first fluorescent cells could be detected as early as  <dig> hours after dna application. although the number of transfected cells varies per tattoo , the kinetics of expression are the same; within  <dig> hours the number of detectable cells increases approximately 2-fold and gradually declines over  <dig> days, at which point all expression has disappeared . adding to the flexibility of the dna tattoo approach, tattoo application of a mixture of plasmids encoding different fps , resulted in detectable expression of both reporter genes in approximately a third of the transfected cells . this number may be an underestimate because the wide range of observed intensities suggests that in many transfected cells one of the probes may be expressed below the level of detection.

having established the feasibility of monitoring biosensor expression in dna tattoo-treated skin, we set out to determine the versatility of this approach to report on cellular processes and its ability to follow the fate of individual cells through time. using a 63×  <dig> na water objective, captured skin images showed subcellular-resolution with details as small as ~ <dig> nm . two gfp fusion proteins, gfp-actin and the ptdinsp <dig> reporter gfp-ph, displayed their expected subcellular distribution: at the periphery of the cell in the cortical cytoskeleton and at the plasma membrane, respectively . importantly, we could reproduce the previously made in vitro observation that uv exposure of cells results in decreased ptdinsp <dig> levels  <cit> , as revealed by translocation of gfp-ph to the cytosol in cells irradiated with uv but not in control cells .

while many intracellular processes can be followed by monitoring the distribution of location-based probes, certain processes, such as conformational changes, are better revealed by  fret. to assess the feasibility of in vivo fret measurements and of the longitudinal follow-up of individual cells, we first applied the fret-based ca2+ sensor 'yellow chameleon'  and its fluorescent constituents, cfp and yfp on separate skin patches of the same animal. in ycam-tattooed skin areas fret was readily detectable either by sensitized yfp emission  or by acceptor photobleaching . in order to follow individual cells for multiple days, we subsequently set up a coordinate system that allows one to relocate the same cell in subsequent imaging sessions. to this purpose, ink reference points are applied at the edge of the tattooed area and the position of cells of interest relative to these marker points is recorded during the first imaging session . in subsequent imaging sessions, the coordinates of these cells combined with overview images at low  magnification  are then used to retrieve the position of defined cells .

to determine the potential of such longitudinal analysis, we performed a time-lapse experiment to study the involvement of caspase- <dig> in experimentally-induced apoptosis. to this purpose, a fret-based sensor of caspase- <dig> activity, consisting of cfp and yfp moieties separated by a caspase- <dig> substrate site  was utilized. dna encoding this 'apoptosis-sensor' was mixed with dna encoding an 'apoptosis-switch', consisting of a modified fk506-  binding domain fused to caspase- <dig>  <cit> , in a bicistronic configuration with tdtomato. this mixture was then applied to the abdominal skin of a mouse by dna tattoo. in parallel, as a control for background apoptosis, a separate skin patch was tattooed with the apoptosis-sensor mixed with a vector encoding tdtomato only . to follow the consequences of apoptosis induction in vivo, autofluorescence, cfp and yfp images were recorded in the same set of cells expressing the apoptosis sensor, before and  <dig> hours after intraperitoneal injection of the suicide switch activator ap <dig> . remarkably, after ap <dig> administration the activation of caspase- <dig> was readily detected by a drop in yfp/cfp fluorescence ratio, as shown in the higher magnification images in figure 5b. in line with this, after ap <dig> administration, the clear peak of sensitized yfp emission disappeared . importantly, cells in skin areas of the same animal treated with the apoptosis-sensor plus control dna did not show a change in emission spectrum upon ap <dig> administration . collectively, the data from this experiment demonstrate that this technique allows one to induce a defined process in individual cells and to subsequently monitor the effects of this process  in vivo by an appropriate fluorescent sensor.

CONCLUSIONS
mouse transgenesis in combination with intravital imaging is time-consuming and can only be performed in specialized laboratories. here we have presented a tattoo-based intravital imaging assay using techniques that are generally available. clearly, this new approach that is based on the intradermal delivery of fluorescent reporters by dna tattoo has its limitations. first, transgene expression obtained by the 'instant-transgenic' method as used here is confined to the epidermis and second, the expression of fluorescent reporters is restricted to a few days. in future studies, the duration of expression may be prolonged by enabling integration  <cit>  or episomal maintenance of the plasmid used for transfection  <cit> . furthermore, in vivo transfection using naked dna can be achieved by various means in other tissues, including hepatocytes  <cit> , myocytes  <cit>  and lymphocytes  <cit> . more importantly, for many applications the abovementioned drawbacks are balanced by the substantial advantages provided by intravital dna tattoo imaging. firstly, mice expressing multiple cellular reporters can be generated in a time span of hours instead of months to years. secondly, because it is possible to restrict expression of transgenes and reporters to a subset of cells amidst a population of unmodified cells, it is feasible to follow the behavior of gene-modified cells in isolation. in addition, this allows the retracing of individual cells in order to study these cells over a period of days. thirdly, several tattoos with different combinations of transgenes and reporters can be compared within the same animal, thereby reducing experimental variation. finally, imaging can be performed on widely available confocal or epifluorescent microscopes. these features suggest that intravital dna tattoo imaging can form a highly rapid and versatile system to analyze cellular processes such as cell cycle progression, cellular differentiation or apoptosis in an in vivo setting.

