BACKGROUND
mitochondrial genes are among the most commonly used markers for phylogeographic and taxonomic studies  <cit> . however, there are many pitfalls that can mislead the interpretation of phylogenies and/or phylogeographies based on mitochondrial genes, such as nuclear pseudogenes   <cit> , introgression through hybridization or incomplete lineage sorting  <cit> . the latter is commonly encountered and a particular problem for disentangling relatively young species  <cit> , where different mitochondrial lineages do not necessarily coincide with current evolutionary entities. nevertheless, the pattern of currently geographically separated lineages is commonly interpreted as being stable in the long term  <cit>  and thus useful to delimit taxa or deduce conservation units  <cit> .

the development of methods to extract dna from ancient and historical samples  <cit>  has opened up the possibility to directly study the evolution of demographic and/or biogeographical patterns, i.e. changes in these patterns over time. thomas et al. <cit>  found no significant change in the distribution patterns of mitochondrial lineages in stable large populations of kangaroo rats during the twentieth century. in contrast, the studies of pergams et al. <cit>  and goldstein & desalle  <cit>  did reveal that such patterns can be altered significantly in a comparable time span. for instance, recent habitat fragmentation led to the extinction of populations with intermediate haplotypes and thus simulated a pattern of long-term separated lineages in the tiger beetle cicindela dorsalis <cit> . similarly, leonard et al. <cit>  could show by means of ancient dna extracted from subfossil bones that a supposed long-term pattern of geographically separated mitochondrial lineages of the brown bear in alaska had evolved more recently than was previously thought. consequently, pääbo et al. <cit>  encouraged further studies on the history of phylogeographic patterns to determine whether modern patterns are recent effects of genetic drift or reflect long-term separation of populations.

in the field of evolutionary genetic studies on museum specimens, only few studies were conducted so far on insect species, e.g.  <cit>  , although they are a very suitable model group. especially those insects that are popular among amateur collectors have accumulated a large representation in museums and collections of specimens dating back to the late nineteenth century  <cit> , which often equates to more than a hundred generations. hawkmoths are conspicuous insects characterized by large size and often striking colour. the widespread spurge hawkmoth  is particularly appealing to collectors due to its great variability in colour pattern  <cit> . taxonomic delimitations are based on these patterns as genitalia are almost uniform throughout this globally distributed genus, which thus allows  hybridization between even distantly related species  <cit> . accordingly, the species-level taxonomy has been controversial for a long time  <cit>  and, for example, the taxon hyles euphorbiae has accumulated  <dig> synonyms  <cit> . a recent molecular study  of more than  <dig> specimens from across the whole range of the hec revealed that it comprises six distinct mitochondrial lineages in the mediterranean region  <cit> . unexpectedly, three of these lineages were found to conflict with the current taxonomy and thus were given provisional names   <cit> . the distribution of the lineages appeared mainly to reflect isolation in refuges during the ice ages and subsequent postglacial range expansions  <cit> . the southernmost lineage, tithymali corresponds closely to the current valid species, hyles tithymali, which occurs in the macaronesian islands, northern africa and a now isolated population in yemen. most of continental europe, from the caucasus and the balkan peninsula to portugal, the range of the current species h. euphorbiae, is occupied sympatrically by the lineages euphorbiae and 'enigmatica'. they were proposed to be colonizers from two eastern european and/or central asian glacial refuges that had expanded simultaneously into large areas of europe after the end of the last ice age  <cit> . the mitochondrial lineage of the endemic h. cretica is confined to crete and the dodecanese islands. as has been found in many other groups of organisms  <cit> , the italian glacial refuge gave rise to its own endemic hec entity, the 'italica' lineage. it dominates southern italy and sicily but is replaced by euphorbiae and 'enigmatica' northeast of the northern apennines. even though the southern italian populations are currently synonymised under h. euphorbiae, morphology also suggests a distinct entity. the change of mitochondrial haplotypes in northern central italy is congruent with a sharp change in larval colour patterns  <cit> . furthermore, subspecies of h. euphorbiae have been regularly described from southern italy based on the frequent occurrence of a reddish adult forewing pattern variety  <cit>  which is absent from central europe.

the maltese endemic, h. sammuti, has long been considered a hybrid population between african and european lineages and therefore probably invalid as a species, though nevertheless interesting from an evolutionary perspective  <cit> . paradoxically, it is the european mainland lineage euphorbiae that is the major component  of the maltese population, in addition to the ancient endemic 'melitensis' lineage and migrants of the north african tithymali <cit> . no ‘italica’ haplotypes have yet been recorded from this island, despite its proximity to sicily. this colony of euphorbiae haplotypes on malta is isolated from the euphorbiae core population in central europe and northern italy by about  <dig> kilometres of intervening land inhabited by 'italica'.

in the present study, we investigate the evolution of the mitochondrial marker demography of the hec in italy and malta directly by means of historic dna from museum specimens. thereby we aim to determine if and/or how the disjunct distribution pattern of the euphorbiae lineage and an integral 'italica' core region evolved during the last century and to propose hypotheses for the underlying mechanisms.

RESULTS
sequence yield
in total, we accumulated samples of  <dig> relevant specimens from the target area . we successfully amplified all three targeted fragments  of the co i/ii genes from  <dig> specimens . this corresponds to an amplification success of  <dig> % for all target fragments. from a further  <dig> specimens we were able to sequence only the shortest fragment l, accompanied by stochastic amplification of only one of the longer fragments in eleven of these specimens . hence, the success rate was considerably higher for fragment l alone . however, the success rate differed strongly between collections . pcr success was significantly higher for specimens from museums of higher geographical latitude . it was lowest for the samples from the maltese collections, and the mrst, terrasini, even though the samples from these collections were comparably young . advanced decomposition of specimens of the mrst was further indicated by the occasional amplification of non-target yeast sequences for fragment l. accordingly, we did not find a significant correlation over all samples between pcr success and lower sample age . however, if the samples from the maltese and mrst collections are excluded from the data set, the trend becomes significant , i.e. pcr success is significantly lower with higher age of samples.

collections sorted by latitude of locality; * = specimens sampled by staff of the museum; n = number of specimens sampled; success = percentage of pcr success for all three targeted fragments ; age = age range of the vouchers.

by means of a haplotype network we were able to assign the specimens confidently to a lineage . based on fragment l alone, unambiguous lineage assignment was also possible for the  <dig> specimens for which all three fragments could not be gained . we detected  <dig> ‘ghost’ haplotypes . six belonged to the 'italica' lineage cluster, six to euphorbiae, three to 'enigmatica', and one to the tithymali cluster . in contrast, four 'italica', two euphorbiae, one 'enigmatica' and one of the tithymali haplotypes were not found in the historical but only in the recent sampling. we detected misincorporations in  <dig> out of the  <dig> specimens that yielded sequences  with a mean year of origin at  <dig>  c→t  and g→a  transitions were most frequent followed by t→c , a→g  and single occurrences of a→t, a→c and c→g.

lineage distribution through time
today , the 'italica' lineage dominates - with the exception of a few specimens around rome - an area that we define as its core region. this area encompasses sicily and southern to central italy up to the coastal and lower regions of northern tuscany . the two european mainland lineages, euphorbiae and 'enigmatica', are absent from this area but replace 'italica' northeast of the apennines. looking back in time, we also find euphorbiae and 'enigmatica' in today’s 'italica' core region . the last evidence for the euphorbiae lineage in this region is from  <dig> in tuscany , from  <dig> and  <dig> in southern italy  and from  <dig> on sicily . thus, euphorbiae disappeared earlier from the more southern areas. its former substantial abundance of 29% in the 'italica' core region’s population in 1884– <dig> declined with fluctuations to zero in the recent sampling . if the samples are pooled into time periods of three decades, the decline is seen to be gradual . likewise, euphorbiae gradually declined from 17% in 1884– <dig> to zero in 1970– <dig> in the sicilian subpopulation . the 'enigmatica' lineage inhabits the higher altitudes of the apennines in central italy  and has also been occasionally present in adjacent areas of latium at lower altitudes throughout the twentieth century until today . furthermore, it also occurred in southern italy until at least  <dig>  and on sicily at least once in  <dig> . the 'enigmatica' lineage was most frequent in the 'italica' core region in 1910– <dig>  comprising 14% of the total population . it gradually declined in this region from 12% to 3%, if the samples are pooled into time periods of three decades . together, the two european mainland lineages euphorbiae and 'enigmatica' decreased from 35% to 3% over the entire time period of about 120 years considered here .

in contrast, the proportion of 'italica' in the total population of its core region steadily increased throughout the twentieth century from 59% in 1884– <dig> to 87% in 2004– <dig> . the curve is strongly linear . this trend also proves to be robust when we pooled the samples into three decades per time period  or if only sicily is considered. the 'italica' lineage gradually increased its abundance in sicily from 78% in 1884– <dig> to 95% in 1970– <dig> . on the italian mainland, the north african tithymali lineage occurs only in a restricted area around rome at a rather low frequency throughout at least the past 100 years . it slightly increased in abundance in the 'italica' core region’s population from 2% to 8%, if the samples are pooled into time periods of three decades . in contrast, we did not detect it in other areas of italy or on sicily throughout the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries. the southern lineages, 'italica' and the closely related tithymali, together increased from 65% to 97% of the 'italica' core region’s population.

we were able to gather only few historical specimens of the hec from malta, and most of these samples did not yield sequences . hence, we cannot deduce historical demographics for the archipelago. however, we were able to show that euphorbiae has been present on malta since at least  <dig>  and tithymali was already present by  <dig>  . in the five sequences obtained, the endemic 'melitensis' lineage could not be confirmed for malta in historical times. however, we found it occasionally on the adjacent island of sicily as single specimens , representing a comparatively stable proportion of 1–2% of the entire italian  or 4-5% of the sicilian population  through time. as in the recent sampling, 'italica' could not be found on malta in historical times.

the mean air temperatures for summer/autumn in italy, which corresponds to the main period of adult flight and larval activity of the hec, fluctuated throughout the twentieth century. northern tuscany experienced especially warm summers at the end of the 1920s, in the 1940s and in the first decade of the twenty-first century . correspondingly, 'italica' occurs in more northern areas in tuscany and emilia-romagna during these warmer periods . in  <dig>  the second warmest summer recorded, 'italica' was even found north of the apennines near bologna . equally, the northernmost specimens of the 'italica' lineage were found much further south, in southern tuscany or latium, in colder periods in the 1910s to 1920s and mid-1950s to 1970s .

discussion
lineage distribution through time
geographic isolation in different refuges during the ice ages generally led to the evolution of differentiated genetic lineages in european biota  <cit> . based on the investigation of present day biogeography, these lineages generally did not mix to a greater geographical extent when they repopulated more northern areas in the postglacial but formed confined contact zones across europe  <cit> . by implication, it is often argued that these spatially separated lineages may represent distinct evolutionary entities  which remained predominantly separated since their origin and that the suture zones were probably stable since first contact thousands of years ago  <cit> . likewise, a separate hec entity in southern italy was supported by the prevalence of the mitochondrial 'italica' lineage   <cit>  and distinct larval morphology  <cit>  as well as the frequent occurrence of a reddish adult forewing pattern variety  <cit> .

in contrast, our study revealed that the distribution patterns of the hec’s mitochondrial lineages have been highly dynamic only during the last century and that the pattern of the integral 'italica' core region evolved very recently . the european mainland lineages, euphorbiae and 'enigmatica' were once mixed in a moderate frequency among 'italica' throughout the entire range of the latter, thereby connecting the present-day euphorbiae exclave on malta with central european euphorbiae north of the apennines. thus, there was no integral source range of a supposed italian entity a couple of decades ago. instead, the past situation in italy resembles the present day sympatric occurrence of euphorbiae and 'enigmatica' in most of the european distribution range of the hec . in the recent sampling, single specimens of the 'italica' lineage have also been found in southern greece, north-eastern spain and morocco among the dominant euphorbiae and 'enigmatica' or tithymali respectively  <cit>  which could have been attributed to recent dispersal and introgression of an isolated italian entity. however, the observed past admixture of lineages in italy and thus the absence of a pure source range of 'italica' strongly favour ancestral polymorphisms with lineage sorting ‘in action’. concordantly, the frequency of the reddish adult wing pattern variety appears not to support a separate entity as it did not rise in frequency in correlation with 'italica' in italy through time but fluctuated independently .

environmental factors that probably caused the demographic changes during the last century  also fluctuated throughout the entire postglacial  <cit> . in deduction, the biogeographical pattern of the hec would have changed repeatedly during this period. thus, mitochondrial lineage compositions in refuges during the last ice age and/or even the actual areas of origin of the different lineages in preceding ice ages can neither be reliably deduced from the present day nor the historic nineteenth century’s biogeography. given the hec is a mobile, rather common and widespread species  <cit> , it appeared to fulfil the criteria of a good model for assessing biogeographical patterns sensu schmitt  <cit> . consequently, a wide range of other species could have likewise experienced such fast demographic changes caused by the same general environmental changes. a similar sorting of mitochondrial lineages into geographically separate areas in an unexpectedly short time period could be shown for the alaskan brown bear  <cit> , an organism with a very different life history strategy. however, further studies on historic biogeographies of additional taxa are needed to investigate if such a fast lineage sorting is a common phenomenon or if the hec and the alaskan brown bear rather represent single cases.

causes for demographic changes
the hec is a strong flier  <cit>  and a widespread taxon that has not been considered rare or endangered in italy  <cit> . hec caterpillars live in a variety of xerothermic open habitats  <cit> , e.g. natural beach dunes, field margins, uncultivated land, etc. these habitats were promoted by deforestation and extensive agriculture by early human settlers and thus probably quite abundant in historical times in italy  <cit> . however, they started to decline with the acceleration of anthropogenic pressure on the landscape about 150–100 years ago  <cit>  in correlation with the observed lineage sorting. coastal dune habitats lost about three-quarters of their former extent during the last century in italy  <cit> . in increasing areas of intensive agriculture  <cit> , the use of pesticides had a growing impact on insect populations of the field margins  <cit>  while vegetation succession on abandoned land  <cit>  also led to population extinctions of many species of open habitats in italy  <cit> . for instance, the gradual decline in the number of hec samples from capri in the natural history collections  is postulated to reflect a real decline in population size of the hec rather than a collector bias since former habitats appeared to be largely overgrown on the island nowadays . most habitats where we found hec caterpillars in italy recently were rather small and sometimes temporary, thus many populations probably undergo bottlenecks and/or local extinctions and founder effects. hence, we postulate that genetic drift promoted the observed lineage sorting process. it would statistically favour the fixation of the already most abundant lineage 'italica' in southern italy as we actually observed in our study. genetic drift is strongest in small populations  <cit> . thus, it is particularly strong for mitochondrial markers because they are haploid and maternally inherited, thus further reducing the effective population size to one-quarter of that of nuclear loci  <cit> . furthermore, the existence of biogeographical patterns based on maternally inherited mitochondrial markers  <cit>  supports the hypothesis that females are rather faithful to a habitat  <cit> . thus, mitochondrial gene flow between populations is likely to have decreased with increased habitat fragmentation  <cit> . in contrast to the majority of small habitats, genetic drift would not play a major role in large, temporally stable populations, such as the one near rome airport  or on malta. consequently, the mitochondrial polymorphism could be maintained there. nevertheless, overall gene flow between the fragmented habitats of the hec is likely to be maintained more strongly by dispersing males, as postulated by hundsdoerfer et al. <cit> . further investigations using nuclear microsatellite markers  <cit>  are promising to elucidate the overall gene flow and the actual extent of current biological entities.

in addition to genetic drift, changes in climatic conditions likely have contributed to the observed demographic changes since the hec appears to be sensitive to temperature as has been shown for many other lepidopterans  <cit> . the northernmost occurrences of 'italica' have - though based on only a few specimens - closely followed the fluctuations of mean summer/autumn air temperatures . similarly fast range extensions in the 1940s and subsequent retractions in the 1950s have also been found in some butterfly species in britain  <cit> . beyond these short term fluctuations, many insect species gradually expanded their ranges in latitude and/or altitude into previously unsuitable areas throughout the twentieth century  <cit> . for a few insects so far, demographic shifts of molecular markers within the existing range could also be shown in correlation with climate warming  <cit> . likewise, the observed gradual increase of 'italica' haplotypes in its core region  correlates with the trend of temperature anomaly values increasing by about 1°c per century over the last 140 years in italy  <cit> . in addition, haplotypes of euphorbiae disappeared slightly earlier in more southern regions. the suture zone along the apennines that constitutes the present day northern limit of 'italica' is remarkably concordant with the northern limit of summer drought  <cit>  and the border between the mediterranean and the continental biogeographical region  <cit> . furthermore, a climate niche modelling based on the extant distribution of mitochondrial lineages predicted a very congruent northern limit of 'italica', while euphorbiae could potentially be present throughout italy  <cit> . thus, 'italica' populations appear to be more successful in a mediterranean climate and outcompeted euphorbiae in southern italy while they could not establish themselves in the continental climate of the po plains yet. a mitochondrial lineage could be indirectly linked to nuclear genes under selection at population level, i.e. individuals of more southerly populations in italy have a higher probability to bear an 'italica' haplotype and are also potentially better adapted to a warmer climate based on alleles of their nuclear genome . thus, as the climate warms up, the 'italica' lineage would concomitantly increase in frequency. alternatively, it cannot be ruled out that sequence differences in the mitochondrial genes have a direct influence on individual fitness with regard to climatic conditions, since in poikilotherms, the external temperature is directly experienced by the mitochondria  <cit> . nevertheless, such adaptations to local climatic conditions are known to occur within widely distributed lepidopteran taxa  <cit>  and thus do not necessarily support a distinct italian entity.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of our study are in contrast to the common point of view that the pattern of currently geographically separated lineages indicate taxa which have been long term separated since the origin of these lineages in glacial refuges and which did not mix to a greater extent in the current interglacial. even though it still has to be investigated on further taxa if the fast lineage sorting observed in the hec during the twentieth century is rather a single case or a common pattern, we strongly emphasize that caution should be taken in interpreting modern day biogeographical patterns based on mitochondrial dna  as unaltered in the long term and for drawing hasty taxonomic conclusions based upon them.

