BACKGROUND
analysis of cellular states under well-defined conditions can be performed on different levels. one important method is the generation of expressed sequence tags , short informative sequences generated from mrnas of the cell. the ests provide a snapshot of the transcriptome and the conditioned capabilities in the investigated cell state. moreover, ests are a resource for the annotation and further analysis of genome sequences in the respective organism, since they identify transcribed loci within the genome. comparisons to genome or est sequences of related organisms are then used to elucidate the functional capabilities of an evolutionary branch.

many genomes and transcriptomes are currently characterized and more will follow in the future  <cit> . typically, only key species in each branch, so-called model organisms, are submitted to a full genome analysis and further studies from a global point of view  <cit> . initially, model organisms were chosen according to the following criteria: i) being the best studied species on an evolutionary branch ii) having a short life cycle, iii) being cost effective to maintain, iv)having the potential to be manipulated. in the animal kingdom prominent models include drosophila for insects, c. elegans for primitive metazoans, and mouse for mammals. accordingly, in the plant and fungi kingdom there are also well defined model organisms  <cit> . yet, model organisms can not fully describe and represent a whole evolutionary branch. since models are real species and therefore have suffered from specializing adaptations for their specific ecological niche, more than one model within one evolutionary branch should be taken in account  <cit> . furthermore, the more genomes that are known in a certain evolutionary branch, the more is known of the branch characteristics. thus, the comparison of multiple species within an evolutionary branch is becoming more and more common. helpfully, analysis of each subsequent genome within the same evolutionary branch is easier. currently the best-surveyed eukaryote kingdom of life from a genomics perspective is that of the fungi  <cit> . metazoa and green plants are also represented with several complete or nearly completely sequenced genomes  <cit> .

protists as a non-taxonomic unit have great genomic and phenotypic diversity. the position of specific protist branches in the phylogenetic tree of life is often unsure, if not controversial. complete genome sequences can help to resolve even deeply branching phyla. from one branch of protists, the amoebozoa, we currently have full sequence information of two species, namely dictyostelium discoideum  <cit>  and entamoeba histolytica  <cit> . this branch is now generally accepted as a major kingdom within the eukaryotes in addition to fungi, plants, and animals  <cit> . while d. discoideum possesses the main aspects of a model organism, obligate parasites like e. histolytica are of limited use for the intended description of evolutionary trends, since they very often have lost genetic information due to their adaptation to a host. thus, the full width of this evolutionary branch can only be described if free living, relatively distantly related organisms, are compared. the free living amoebozoon physarum polycephalum is best suited to characterize the functional capacities of this evolutionary branch further. currently a project targeting the whole genome of this organism is underway at the genome sequencing center of washington university  <cit> . we complemented this approach by generating expressed sequence tags  from protein-encoding loci of this species. here we describe the analysis of these ests.

p. polycephalum schweinitz is an acellular slime mould  with a complex life cycle. under favorable conditions, mononucleate haploid physarum amoebae hatch from mature spores. these myxamoebae feed on bacteria and multiply by cell division with an open mitosis during which the nuclear envelope disaggregates  <cit> . at high population density two amoebae of compatible mating types may mate to form a mononucleate diploid zygote  <cit> . the zygote develops into a diploid multinucleate plasmodium since the plasmodial cell does not divide, while nuclear divisions continually occur as the cell grows. closed mitosis by division of plasmodial nuclei is often found in protists  <cit>  while open mitosis as it occurs in the amoebal stage is typical for higher eukaryotes. a plasmodium grows as long as nutrition is available, resulting in a macroscopic mass containing millions of nuclei which all are synchronous with respect to cell cycle and development  <cit> . despite their unlimited capability for growth and nuclear division, plasmodia can enter two alternative developmental pathways  depending on environmental conditions and cell size  <cit> . when a big mature plasmodium  starves, it develops the competence to sporulate. sporulation of a competent plasmodium is finally triggered by visible light and/or elevated temperature . during sporulation the entire protoplasmic mass develops into fruiting bodies. in sporangia, haploid mononucleate spores are formed by meiotic cleavage of the plasmodial mass.

for our analysis of the transcriptome of p. polycephalum we used this sporulation- competent state. since the cells in this state still have all options of growth and development, we expected that vegetative specific genes would be only slightly reduced and that additional factors needed to progress to the commitment point would also be expressed. using this method we can find more genes than either in the vegetative or committed state.

RESULTS
generation and clustering of ests
in total  <dig>  directionally cloned cdnas were sequenced from the 5' to the 3' end of the corresponding mrna resulting in  <dig> contigs after clustering . since the sequences were all generated from the 5' end of the corresponding mrna and the library was enriched for long inserts, each contig should represent a single gene. transcripts from very recent gene duplications could not be discriminated if no single nucleotide polymorphisms  were present in overlapping regions. the mean coverage of each contig is  <dig>  with less than half of the contigs represented by only one sequence read. the most abundant transcript in the library codes for a non-transporter abc protein of which the exact function is not known. the relatively low sequencing depth shows that the normalization procedure was successful.

similarity of est contigs to other organisms
based on blast analysis,  <dig> of the  <dig> potential genes had detectable similarities to entries of a database containing all currently available sequences . obviously, not all similarities found must indicate true orthologous relations, since the est information does not always cover the whole gene. yet, due to the partial nature of the gene information in est data it is also not feasible to introduce a score cutoff to get only reliable information. the closest free-living relative, of which the whole genome is known, is d. discoideum. we conducted a search for similarities to protein coding genes in this genome and found that  <dig> of our contigs matched at least partially to d. discoideum proteins indicating a relationship between the matching pairs. surprisingly, we found  <dig> contigs with similarities to entries in other databases but not in the d. discoideum protein database. this can be partly due to false positive matches, but some identified proteins hint at a scenario where d. discoideum has lost the respective gene as was shown previously for some genes   <cit> .

we also analysed, which evolutionary branches contained genes with similarities to our contig sequences. for this purpose we used sequence databases representing only certain parts of the evolutionary tree . as with the screen in the complete sequence database trembl we initially did not limit the blast output by using a restricting threshold. matches were then assigned to subgroups to give information on the phylogenetic distribution of the best matching proteins. in table  <dig> the results are compiled for the listed categories. since spurious hits may limit the value of the analysis, we introduced a score threshold of  <dig> in a second round of analysis . the number of contigs without any hit to known genes increases slightly when we use this threshold, but the overall distribution of database matches remains the same, indicating that the values given are generally applicable.

next, we searched for genes, which are present in vertebrates, but cannot be detected in d. discoideum, invertebrates, or plants. presumably, these proteins evolved before the split of the the amoebozoa from the eukaryote/fungi kingdoms but were lost individually in invertebrates and in d. discoideum. in table  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  the best matching contigs to vertebrate database entries can be found.

domain distributions, pathway analysis, and signal transduction
the kyoto enzyclopedia of genes and genomes  is a valuable resource to evaluate the presence or absence of pathways. despite the incomplete nature of est sequence data, we were able to identify most components of the basic metabolism by using the kaas server from the kegg database. for example, we found the transcripts of  <dig> aminoacyl-trna synthetases. two transcripts for phenylalanyl-trna synthetase are present, while the transcripts for histidyl- and valinyl-trna synthetase are missing in our data set. furthermore, the transcription and translation machineries as well as the replication and repair components are nearly completely represented in our dataset. this is consistent with the previous finding that protein synthesis and nuclear divisions still occur in the starving, competent plasmodium, although the cytoplasmic mass continually decreases  <cit> . certainly, protein synthesis depends on intact metabolic pathways. except for malate dehydrogenase, the enzymes of the citric acid cycle were represented at the rna level.

many components of the wnt, mapk, notch, calcium, and phosphatidylinositol signaling pathways are present in our data set. also represented were the transcripts of genes involved in the regulation of the cytoskeleton or cell cycle progression .

to check whether p. polycephalum uses additional main pathways compared to d. discoideum we queried the kegg database again using only those contigs without a match to d. discoideum genes. all contigs classified by kegg also have a d. discoideum counterpart .

the scan against interpro domains yielded  <dig> potential domains in all  <dig> frames in the raw output . a total of  <dig> contigs contain at least a part of an interpro domain . to avoid redundancies caused by potential sequencing errors resulting in frame shifts this raw list was then reduced to  <dig> entries by only counting one frame. visual inspection showed that in most cases the additional hits on other frames were the same as in the counted frame indicating sequencing errors that caused a frame shift. the remaining entries were grouped according to their involvement in different cellular processes . the sizeable proportion of genes expressed for the generation and maintenance of signal transduction chains indicates that this seems to be a major task of the starving plasmodium. in addition, genes for transport processes and the cytoskeleton play a significant role at least under these conditions.

we found  <dig> contigs that had no similarity to any database searched using blast but contained an interpro domain. this number nearly doubles  if we apply a threshold score of  <dig>  not surprisingly most of the detected domains are relatively short domains involved in protein-protein interactions.

the physiological state from which the mrna for library construction was obtained can be described as a stand-by position where the cell waits for environmental input. we therefore searched specifically for domains forming receptor structures or involved in receptor functions. in  <dig> of our contigs we found these domains . since receptors are often present in genomes as large families  <cit>  the specific trigger for a certain receptor molecule cannot be inferred from sequence analysis alone. three contigs encode proteins of the photolyase family. all photolyases sense light and some family members are known to function as receptors for certain light qualities  <cit> . one of these potential receptors  is most closely related to fungal proteins, but the function of these proteins is still unknown . the other two family members cluster together with class ii cpd photolyases, which are involved in uv damage repair processes  <cit> . possibly, one of these light sensing molecules is the activator of a signal transduction chain inducing sporulation.

alternative splicing
the clustering of the single ests to contigs revealed that there were many sequences with identical sections but that could not be put together in one contig without introducing gaps in the alignment. we concluded that the corresponding mrnas were transcribed from the same locus on the genome but differentially processed. this alternative splicing of transcripts is a common feature for all eukaryotes, but the extent of transcript diversification varies between species  <cit> . we determined the number of alternatively spliced loci by clustering the ests irrespective of whether gaps were created in the alignment. example alignments of alternatively spliced ests are shown in additional file  <dig>  with this method  <dig> potential alternatively spliced messages were constructed comprising  <dig> % of all clusters. further analysis revealed that alternative splicing affects genes regardless of their phylogenetic similarities, since no significant differences were found between phylogenetic categories using the χ <dig> test. we tried to find genes, which can be alternatively spliced in p. polycephalum as well as in d. discoideum, the closest relative. this is perhaps unlikely as there are only  <dig> known alternatively spliced genes in d. discoideum  <cit> . a comparison with these genes revealed no gene alternatively spliced in both organisms.

several alternatively spliced transcripts were of the intron retention type as could be deduced from potential splice sites at the border of the longer alternative transcript. those introns are normally relatively short and rare in humans but widespread in arabidopsis  <cit> . we tried to resolve the genomic structure of some of the alternatively spliced transcripts. for this purpose we chose  <dig> alternatively spliced contigs randomly and designed primers for an amplification of the known part of the genes from genomic dna. nine out of  <dig> amplification attempts were successful, i.e. gave products, which could be subsequently sequenced. the low success rate is possibly due to wrong placement of oligos for pcr on the est sequences since we did not know whether and where introns were present in the gene loci. the alignment of the resulting genomic sequences to their corresponding transcript counterparts revealed that all ests were correctly clustered despite the differential splicing. we could determine all donors and acceptors from  <dig> introns . of these  <dig> introns,  <dig> introns were not spliced out in a part of the ests, thus comprising the number of intron retentions via alternative splicing. nine introns had alternative donors or acceptors, and  <dig> introns were not affected by alternative splicing, i.e. all ests lost the respective intron. in one case we identified a small additional exon in a transcript, which otherwise is considered as intron part and skipped. the longest defined spliced intron comprises  <dig> bases. interestingly,  <dig> bases of this intron are a or g nucleotides , whereas in the second largest intron in this gene  <dig> % are c and t nucleotides . thus, intron base composition can be very diverse even in only one gene. two of the fully spliced introns represented u <dig> dependent introns, thus confirming that this type of intron is present in all evolutionary branches.

we aligned all our u <dig> dependent donor and acceptor sites  to calculate the consensus splice motifs. in fig.  <dig>  donor and acceptor consensi are shown as weighted base probabilities  <cit> . interestingly, as in d. discoideum, the splice site consensi do not extend far from the canonical gt-ag motif, neither into intronic nor exonic regions, contrary to splice site motifs in animals and plants. a slight preference for pyrimidines can be found at the acceptor site, and at the intron side of the donor, a and t are preferred at the second and third position after the splice site. this resembles the situation in d. discoideum.

discussion
genomic differences within the amoebozoa
one of our goals was to investigate the common capabilities within the amoebozoan evolutionary branch, and  <dig> % of all contigs could be assigned to related proteins of d. discoideum. that this matching percentage is not higher might be due to several different possible reasons: i) est contigs represent only a fraction of the whole gene ii) d. discoideum has a high nucleotide bias that also influences amino acid usage possibly obscuring protein-protein relationships iii) the evolutionary distance of the two species is large, thus evolutionary specializations account for the observed differences.

more surprising is the observation of nearly  <dig> contigs with more or less conserved counterparts in other genomes but not d. discoideum. these genes are not involved in basic pathways as the kegg pathway analysis showed. the corresponding genes could have been lost in d. discoideum since the separation of the two species. another possibility is that these genes evolved faster in d. discoideum than in other species .

functional categories and pathway analysis
the starving, competent plasmodium is in an undetermined physiological state in that it has three options of development: re-enter growth, spherulate or sporulate. when a competent plasmodium finds a nutrient source, it re-enters growth, when it is submersed by water, it spherulates or when it is induced by light or heat shock, it sporulates  <cit> .

therefore, a starving, competent plasmodium is in a delicate limbo state primed for several options. this state is destabilized if receptors and signal transduction chains receive environmental signals. we choose this state for our analysis, since the cell should generate mrnas for all its possible future fates. as a result, it is not surprising that we could find major signal transduction chains. yet, what was unexpected was the percentage of all contigs they represented indicating the presence of a sophisticated signaling network. we also could define potential receptors, which, upon activation, could be responsible for the determination of the plasmodial fate . one of the potential light receptors  obviously belongs to a family of well conserved proteins, but the functions of proteins in this specific family tree branch remain to be determined.

the main metabolic and housekeeping genes are still expressed in this state. this indicates that at this point in the life cycle of p. polycephalum, the normal turnover of material can take place and this might be responsible for its ability to resume growth instead of committing to spherulation or sporulation. whether the transcription and translation rate is reduced in this specific state remains to be determined. since the starving, competent plasmodium has other choices depending on the environmental signals received, these genes involved in this simple form of cell fate specification are also expected to be expressed in the plasmodium. however, the exact nature of them can not be determined from the sequence alone. further functional studies have to be performed to define these components.

alternative splicing and intron signatures
levels of alternative splicing differ between organisms. the best analyzed species are vertebrates, where alternative splicing is thought to contribute to transcriptional and, consequently, organismal complexity. yet, even within vertebrates there are large differences in levels of alternative splicing  <cit> . moreover, alternative splicing is not well conserved on the gene level, i.e. closely related species can differ in their splicing patterns in certain genes  <cit> . p. polycephalum seems to possess, compared to other lower eukaryotes like dinoflagelates and diatoms, extensive alternative splicing capacities . if we compare the nearly  <dig> percent alternative splicing events with the only  <dig> described alternative transcripts in d. discoideum, we find no overlap of alternatively spliced transcripts in the two amoebozoa. since the genome of d. discoideum is with  <dig> mb a factor of  <dig> smaller than that of p. polycephalum with ca.  <dig> to  <dig> mb  <cit> , one is tempted to conclude, that the amount of alternative splicing could be partly positively correlated to genome size.

the longest intron we detected consists almost exclusively of a and g nucleotides. if many such introns exist in the genome, we expect that the assembly of whole genome shotgun sequences will prove difficult in these regions.

ests as a resource for a whole genome project
lower single-celled eukaryotes contain between  <dig> and around  <dig> thousand protein coding genes as currently available data show  <cit> . the only available species related to p. polycephalum, d. discoideum, was predicted to contain around  <dig>  genes  <cit> . the largest protein coding gene repertoire known is currently that of paramecium tetraurelia with around  <dig>  genes, yet this high number is due to a recent genome duplication  <cit> . even human genomes do not encode for more than around  <dig>  genes  <cit> . thus, the number of protein coding genes in p. polycephalum should be in the same range. we think that with the nearly  <dig>  est contigs we described parts of at least  <dig> % of all genes in p. polycephalum. sequencing of significantly more ests would increase the amount of data only slightly. accordingly, the remaining  <dig> % of genes are expected to be either specifically expressed during other stages of the life cycle or only weakly or both. this conclusion is supported by the fact that the much deeper coverage with ests  of the d. discoideum genome was not sufficient to cover most of the genes. even this amount of est data covers less than  <dig> % of all predicted genes in d. discoideum. thus we think that we have found a large fraction of the genes, which can be defined using est data. for the ongoing genome project for the p. polycephalum genome this is a valuable resource. it can be used to define transcribed loci even if no similar counterparts are available in the databases. additionally, the splice site patterns found here can be used for the training of gene finding programs so that the automated gene prediction can be more reliable. our finding, that a considerable part of the transcripts is alternatively spliced pinpoints the additional problems which could be associated with the gene finding process.

CONCLUSIONS
we provide an extensive overview on the transcriptional activities of a sophisticated acellular system, physarum polycephalum in a well defined multi-potential state. the presence of the primary metabolism demonstrates its not yet committed state, whereas the presence of various signal transduction chains points at its alertness towards possible environmental changes. the surprisingly high extent of alternative splicing we observed could reflect an additional power to adapt to changing environments via slightly changed transcripts.

