BACKGROUND
over the past several decades, more than twenty different cortical areas have been recognized as processing loci of specific properties of visual scenes, such as form, color, motion, etc. in fact, new brain imagery techniques assign particular functions to specific cortical sites. it remains to be demonstrated how these distributed activities are combined to provide coherent visual targets. certainly, electrophysiological investigations carried out on monkeys pointed out few locations in the nervous system where the parcellated information of visual scenes and objects could be resynthesized to form a unified and a coherent percept . in these previous investigations, it was shown that the cellular firing rate may suffice to encode image properties. but a different view also emerged: it has been suggested that synchronized firing between excited cells allows linkage ofimage properties. for instance, it has been proposed that synchronization of action potentials, within a time-window of  <dig> to  <dig> ms, between two or more neurons belonging to distant pools of cells may be an encoding process, permitting the binding of various features of a single visual object  <cit> , but see the review by logothetis & sheinberg,  <dig>   <cit> . such a binding could arise whether local properties are similar or dissimilar. for example, when a group of cells are excited with two collinear light bars, they may fire in synchrony. but, it has also been shown that synchronization of action potentials happens when orthogonal angles are formed in an image. such linking of image properties by synchronizing action potentials has been defined as a coding assembly  <cit>  or synchrony-encoding assembly. hence, binding through synchrony of action potentials, in general terms, is a process permitting the functional linkage of distributed neuronal activity  <cit> . interestingly, it has been previously reported  <cit>  that synchronization modulations are unrelated to firing rate increases resulting from co-excitation of a common input determined by the same stimulus.

numerous previous studies have been carried out with multiunit recordings where several cells are recorded simultaneously. although suggestive of the activity of a neuronal network, this method fails to identify which cells participate in the synchronization process and consequently how an encoding assembly is formed,  <cit> . hence, when slight modifications are introduced in image configurations, the participation of cells in the synchrony-encoding assembly changes. however, do all units contribute equally to the formation of the synchrony-encoding assembly or do some units join or leave the grouping as local features of the image change during natural viewing? indeed, recently we demonstrated that a high degree of synchronization between multiunit discharges shown by cross-correlograms may mask the contribution of individual cells  <cit> .

the present investigation aims to further understand the processes leading to the formation of encoding assemblies by synchronization. for this objective we adopted our previous paradigm for target presentations  <cit>  which showed that synchrony magnitude may be modulated when two sine-wave grating patches are laterally displaced in the visual field. in these configurations one central patch covers both receptive fields while a second patch, called contextual, is displaced laterally. both patches share identical properties such as contrast, spatial and temporal frequencies and velocity. thus the only aspect which distinguishes one image from another is the distance between both stimuli, i.e., the spatial relationships. we investigated the synchronization between pairs of neurons sorted out from multiunit recordings. results revealed that the level of synchronization of one pair of cells fails to reflect the synchrony-encoding assembly of the pool of neurons. the consequence of this last result could mean that when considering one pair of cells, the spontaneous synchronization may be high enough to mask stimulus-related-synchronization, whereas when other pairs of cells are added to the neuronal assembly, random synchronization is progressively outweighed, and the pattern of stimulus induced synchronization is revealed.

RESULTS
the study was carried out in areas  <dig> and  <dig> of cats. the analyses were performed on  <dig> sites yielding  <dig> multiunit recordings. the synchronization index  or synchronization strength was statistically significant in  <dig> cases for at least one stimulus configuration. we will refer to these pools of neurons as "multiunit data." cross-correlating single unit responses shows a lower incidence of synchronization. thirty-one different neurons were extracted from the twelve recording sites. they formed  <dig> pairs of cells referred to as "single-unit data." thirty pairs yielded statistically significant synchronization for at least one applied target. these cells are called 'participating cells' to synchrony-encoding assembly. figure  <dig> shows one example. cross-correlating multiunit activity  produces a central peak suggesting synchrony between both pools of neurons. the latter occurred for the following image structures: compound receptive field stimulation in isolation , and shifts of  <dig> °, 8° , while a 4° displacement  of the lower patch failed to produce a synchrony . two units , one from each site, were sorted out from these two pools of cells and were recorded on all stimulus conditions. cross-correlating their activities generated synchrony only for the crf stimulation in isolation  and a  <dig> ° shift  while shifts of 4°  and 8°  conditions revealed an absence of time relationships, in spite of the fact that there was a central peak with the multiunit recordings . the synchronization also was computed for spontaneous activity. however cross-correlograms may be carried out meaningfully only if available spikes exceed  <dig> per channel  <cit> . since cortical cells are relatively inactive in absence of stimulation it becomes impractical to perform valuable cross-correlations within a reasonable period of time. consequently, we cross-correlated neuronal activity when the number of spikes allowed the computation to be executed. for each pair, cross-correlations were made separately for spontaneous and stimulation periods. weak synchrony is sometimes observed during spontaneous activity, though visual stimulation noticeably enhances  cortical synchrony . figure  <dig> illustrates an example. the number of coincident spikes in the central bin indicates a very low si:  <dig>  . on the other hand the stimulation produced a cross-correlation with a significant peak: si =  <dig>  . figure 2b shows the average si in spontaneous activity  and when stimuli were applied .

participation in assembly
as indicated above, thirty pairs yielded statistically significant synchronization for at least one configuration and ten failed to reach significance threshold. out of these thirty pairs of cells exhibiting synchronized firing, four presented a statistically significant si in  <dig> to 50% of configurations evoking responses and twenty-six  exhibited a statistically significant synchronization in more than 50% of applied configurations . similar proportions were obtained with multiunit data. six paired sites are illustrated with averaged spike waveforms sorted out from each pool of neurons as recorded simultaneously with two electrodes  . in these examples each action potential could be followed for applied configurations, and cross-correlograms were carried out between respective cells. for instance, from the examples shown in figure  <dig> row c, the cell labeled  <dig> in site i and cell  <dig> in site ii exhibited significant synchronization to all nine applied conditions  whereas the cells labeled  <dig> and  <dig> from the same sites and recorded simultaneously synchronized only to one configuration . hence, for some image configurations, the latter two units failed to synchronize and thus withdrew from the coding assembly. the participation histograms  summarize our data. the number of configurations in response to which a particular cross-correlation yielded significant value of the central peak is indicated on the y-axis. quite notably, even though neurons belonged to same respective pools, these distributions reveal that some cells synchronized for all configurations while others were rather selective and only a few stimulating conditions showed a significant synchronization suggesting that synchrony-encoding assembly may be rather selective.

assembly formation
as suggested by figure  <dig> the contribution of participating neurons differs from one set of stimuli to another. the next questions raised by the above results is to what extent does synchronized activity between two neurons reveal the behavior of the cluster of cells to which these units belong? to answer this question we further analyzed a group of eight pairs of cells that we were fortunate to record at both sites for all stimulus conditions. for this purpose we measured the relative strength of synchronization between groups of paired cells in response to each target structure and correlated this value with synchronization modulations measured in multiunit recordings for the identical stimulus configurations. the selected neurons of each pair belonged to their respective multiunit populations. in the first step the synchronization changes of each pair were correlated with the average synchronization modifications derived from multiunit data . then cell-pairs were grouped two by two . variations of synchrony of each combination were averaged and correlated with averaged multiunit values. these computations were repeated by assembling three pairs , four pairs , five pairs , six , seven , and finally all eight pairs put together. thus, for each combination the coefficient of determination  <cit>  with the multi-unit synchronization pattern was computed. our results showed that when pairs of cells are assembled by two or three, they reflect the multiunit behavior poorly, since coefficients of determination values  varied from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , respectively. in contrast, when cell-pairs were grouped by four, five, six, or seven, the synchronization modulation approached, on average, the multiunit recordings . moreover, when groupings were made of seven cell-pairs, the mean of synchronization modulations of each permutation was similar to the multiunit value . such high values suggest that, as one would expect, several pairs of synchronized neurons must be measured to obtain a more accurate understanding of the process leading to a synchrony-encoding assembly. therefore and most importantly the modulation of the synchronization strength of one pair of neurons is inadequate to deduce the synchronizing strength of the pool of cells to one particular stimulating target.

finally histograms of figure  <dig> are positioned according to their group size. these distributions further indicate that the width of the distribution progressively narrowed as the number of grouped pairs of cells increased. in parallel, the sd progressively became lower, σ =  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> . finally, the normalized distribution curves  are shifted to the right, indicating that the coefficients of determination values were better. however we should be cautious and keep in mind that the above measures are correlations between synchronous firing and displacement of image elements. we still need to address how the image as a whole is encoded.

discussion
as intuitively expected, taken together those findings suggest that with larger numbers of grouped pairs of cells, one comes close to a synchronized firing similar to the multi-unit data. therefore, any spontaneous or accidental synchronization, which is infrequent because it happens in a very narrow time-window of a few milliseconds, carries little weight in comparison to the barrage of synchronization induced by many input fibers discharging during a time window that is established by the presence of the stimulus which generates a common input. hence, the above data would suggest that spurious synchronization, produced randomly and observed with a small number of grouped pairs of cells, may be 'immersed' in synchronization induced by a visual stimulus and therefore, only synchronization produced by visual stimuli is salient. indeed, since targets may share a number of characteristics , several pools of cells are activated creating a putative stream of action potentials closely related in time. hence any accidental synchrony will be absorbed in the surge of simultaneous spikes induced by target properties. this line of reasoning may be appreciated by comparing the relative frequency between groups . for instance, when a group consists of one pair, then in only one case did we measure a high coefficient of determination suggesting that cross-correlation modulations of this particular pair represent the population's cross-correlation changes. by comparison, if a single group was made up of  <dig> pairs and the coefficient of determination equaled  <dig> , this suggests the behavior of the group reasonably reproduced the multiunit activity.

finally, it is important to note, as we have previously demonstrated with very similar experiments  <cit> , that the above modulations of the strength of synchronization are unrelated to the firing rate, because the compound receptive field is always stimulated with the same target and when the firing rates change the fluctuations are dissociated from modulations of synchronization levels. likewise the synchronization index derived from spontaneous activity is significantly lower than the values obtained when stimuli are applied  <cit> . obviously, it is impossible to record from all cells within a short distance of the electrode tip and consequently the numbers presented in this investigation underestimate the total number of units making up a coding assembly for one particular image.

in contrast, others have argued that synchronization could not be a phenomenon implicated in the sensory binding task since too many neurons are present in a small cortical area with an enormous number of synaptic connections and a high level of synchronization occurring without relationship to any particular target  <cit> . this spontaneous or accidental synchronization is always present. indeed, it has been calculated that a typical cortical neuron receives several thousand synaptic inputs  <cit> , but see below. because of cortical modular organization, nearby neurons generally have similar functional properties and hence fire roughly together  <cit> . visual cortical neurons excited by an appropriate stimulus usually exhibit firing rates in the range of 10– <dig> spikes per second. consequently, neurons must be able to ''distinguish" random synchronizations from synchronizations that "make encoding sense"  <cit> . there must be physiological mechanisms that allow neurons to distinguish inputs originating from the same or different arriving cells within the matching time-windows. moreover, temporal and spatial summations from the same afferent must be ignored and only temporally correlated firing from different neurons must be considered. in other words, as stated by several investigators  <cit> , how is a neuron able to engage in selective synchronous interactions with a subset of its inputs when a fraction of all of the cell's inputs is active and synchronous? on the other hand, cortical cells may act as coincident detectors. indeed, it has been demonstrated  <cit>  that cortical neurons' responses may depend very much on the interval between two arriving spikes and any intervals less than  <dig> ms are a very potent reinforcement for the efficacy of synaptic transmission. data  <cit>   further show that membrane properties of cortical cells are compatible with such behavior and that neurons are sensitive to time correlations. yet the detection of two temporally correlated active synapses must take place amongst other active afferents. this constraint is partly alleviated by the recent observation that thalamocortical synapses account for fifteen percent of synapses onto a cortical neuron. in addition these synapses are weak. hence it is suggested that cortical cells are activated by synchronous activity  <cit> . indeed, simultaneous activation may boost post-synaptic responses. one may suggest that the effect from accidental synchrony would be small in relation to the enhancement expected from a synchronous barrage produced by stimuli that activate common inputs. finally the above arguments do not rule out a contribution of a firing rate code as a process of signaling coherent images.

CONCLUSIONS
at the neuronal population level encoding by synchronization may be reminiscent of a game of stacked dice or loaded dice. even if accidental or intrinsic synchrony may be relatively common, the synchronization induced by the linkage of particular visual features of a stimulus may be functionally significant if there are a large number of synchronizing cells included in the neuronal assembly. in other words, if a phenomenon includes both random and non-random events, an exogenous driving force, which in this case is the application of the target, stimulates a larger number of units to synchronize their action potentials and random synchrony is masked as noise. by analogy, this phenomenon of synchronization behavior may be compared to stacked dice, with each face being differently weighted . with a few tosses of these dice , a naïve player will be unable to realize that there is something wrong with the dice, since numbers obtained randomly differ little from the ones due to stacked numbers. in our synchronization models, when only few pairs of neurons participate or unexpected coincident spikes occur, the resulting synchrony is indistinguishable from synchrony attributed to spontaneous activity. however, with an increased number of tosses , the numbers on the dice will favor certain patterns . in physiological terms, correlated activity surpasses spontaneous levels of synchrony when clusters of neurons in an assembly are activated together by visual stimuli. that is, in spite of spontaneous synchrony this particular configuration biases the afferent inputs in favor of parallel connections driven by the applied images.

