BACKGROUND
twin and other classical genetic studies indicate that drug addiction is a complex brain disorder with strong genetic contributions  <cit> . genetic association studies, including candidate gene studies and genome-wide association studies , can provide insights into the genetic background of this neurobiological and behavioral disorder. using these approaches, more than  <dig> publications during the past three decades have reported genomic loci and/or specific genetic variants that have been associated with susceptibility to drug addiction. it has been difficult to draw general inferences from these studies, however, because genetic association studies generated results that were sometimes inconsistent, many of these studies were modestly powered , genomic controls are infrequent, and biases can be detected in a number of analytic strategies. in this context, meta-analysis of genetic association studies may be particularly useful, especially when the underlying genetic architecture for the disorder is relatively straightforward  <cit> . in addition, although different addictive drugs have disparate pharmacological effects, there are also similarities after acute and chronic exposure such as acute rewarding and negative emotional symptoms upon drug withdrawal  <cit> . it would thus be interesting to elucidate the potential 'common' genetic backgrounds underlying those shared addictive actions, which might further help the development of effective treatments for a wide range of addictive disorders  <cit> . however, to date there have only been limited meta-analyses on drug addiction, mostly focused on candidate genes, and none on gwas.

although the number of genetic variations identified has increased rapidly, the understanding of how genetic variations contribute to disease susceptibility has lagged behind. earlier studies mainly focused on nonsynonymous snps  <cit> . more recent studies have attempted to explain functional mechanisms of action of haplotypes that contain snp and other regulatory variants  <cit> . a number of haplotypes defined by specific snps have been found to alter gene expression by modifying transcription factor binding sites  <cit> , microrna binding sites  <cit>  and alternative splicing  <cit> . others regulate signaling pathways  <cit> . however to date there have been only modest genome-scale efforts to study the molecular mechanisms of addiction-associated genetic variants. the relative contributions of different molecular mechanisms remain largely unknown.

previous work has been spotty in seeking or reporting overlap between the genes identified by genetic association studies and genes identified by other molecular biologic approaches, such as animal models, cdna microarrays and proteomics  <cit> . our prior systematic assembly of data obtained by these "other" approaches  <cit>  allows us to seek such overlaps in a systematic fashion.

RESULTS
meta-analysis of genetic association studies of drug addiction
first, we performed an integration and meta-analysis of candidate gene association studies of drug addiction. we retrieved  <dig> publications on candidate gene association studies of drug addiction from pubmed by keywords query and review paper curation . two hundred and twelve of these reports met our inclusion criteria, from which we extracted data on  <dig> allelic contrast tests for  <dig> genetic variants . thirty-five genetic variants were examined in case-control genotype comparisons from three or more independent datasets. we carried out meta-analyses of these  <dig> genetic variants under simple genetic models using both the random-effects model and fixed-effects model  <cit> . from these data,  <dig> genetic variants in  <dig> genes showed effects that reached statistical significance . we noted that most of these variants show comparatively weak genetic effects, with fixed effects summary odds ratios  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , typical results for studies on other highly heritable phenotypes with "common variants, common disease" design  <cit> . we further assessed the variants using criteria established by the hugenet road map  <cit>  that was recently proposed for assessing cumulative evidence from genetic association studies. using these stringent criteria, six variants displayed moderate epidemiological credibility . a full list of the curated information is available online at http://karg.cbi.pku.edu.cn/karg2/. for each study, we extracted meta-data including over thirty demographic and experimental variables where available .

gene
drd2/
*variants were ranked based on the summary ors. **degree of 'epidemiological credibility' based on published protocols . ***researchers previously associated the polymorphism taq 1a to the drd <dig> gene. however, the polymorphism sits in an exon of the ankk <dig> gene.

next, we retrieved  <dig> independent datasets of drug addiction gwas  <cit>  . among them five datasets met our criteria for inclusion  <cit> . we integrated the five gwas datasets using a new meta-analysis approach to select positive snps with significantly more gwas support than expected by chance . overall,  <dig> snps were supported by at least three items of positive evidence, with meta-false discovery rates less than  <dig>  .

we combined the findings identified by candidate gene association studies and gwas into a list of  <dig> snps in  <dig> haplotypes. since many of the genetic susceptibility snps may provide genetic 'tag markers', while these tag snps were generally designed to detect linkage disequilibrium blocks and functional snps may be easily left out in most gwas platforms  <cit> , we thus used the whole-genome linkage disequilibrium data identified by hapmap  <cit>  to expand the list into  <dig>  snps by adding snps that displayed strong linkage disequilibrium with these genetic marker snps in all three hapmap populations.

genome-wide analysis of possible molecular mechanisms of the addiction susceptibility factors
we mapped the  <dig>  snps to putative functional elements in the human genome. as summarized in table  <dig> and detailed in additional file  <dig>  we identified a total of  <dig> putative functional snps in  <dig> of the haplotype blocks identified herein. only  <dig> of these putative functional snps, in  <dig> haplotypes, were non-synonymous. one snp was located in splicing junctions. four lay in putative transcription factor binding sites. two lay in potential microrna target sites. by integrating data from high-throughput studies that have correlated human genotypes with levels of gene expression , we found that  <dig> snps in two haplotypes were strongly correlated with differential expression of at least one human gene, one haplotype also contain snp located in transcription factor binding sites, providing a possible explanation for the observed correlations .

additional evidence for functional roles for many of these snps came from studies of apparent effects of natural selection. a total of  <dig> snp in  <dig> haplotypes displayed evidence for negative selection. thirty-four snps in  <dig> haplotypes displayed evidence for positive selection. signals of recent positive selection provide information about the adaptation of humans to local conditions and have been implicated in phenotypic variations  <cit> . thus, the  <dig> genes located in these regions of positive selection may be of particular interest in studying addiction vulnerabilities.

we estimated the magnitude of the contributions of different molecular mechanisms to the effects of addiction susceptibility. we compared observed values to those that would be obtained by chance based on  <dig>  monte carlo simulations . the categories of 'synonymous snp'  and 'non-synonymous snp'  showed nominally significant over-representation, consistent with the conventional idea that snps in coding regions may play important roles in disease susceptibility. in addition, the data suggest regulatory snps that modify transcription factor, microrna binding or alternative splicing sites, may also contribute to addiction susceptibility in addition to those played by non-synonymous snps and other allelic variants.

genetic association findings and molecular biology findings form significantly more gene interactions
the  <dig> functional snps identified belong to  <dig> genes. these addiction susceptible genes are enriched in several functional categories such as focal adhesion  that had been previously reported to be involved in drug addiction  <cit> . we compared these findings to findings from molecular biological studies extracted from the knowledgebase for addiction related genes   <cit> . in karg,  <dig> genes are linked to addiction susceptibility by at least two independent lines of molecular biologic evidence such as results from animal mutagenesis, microarray mrna profiling and proteomics profiling. only four genes were common between the two genetic association findings and the molecular biology findings , consistent with previously observed modest overlaps between genetic and molecular biology findings in studies of other diseases  <cit> .

we set out to explain this difference with further analysis. because of the different nature of genetic experiments and molecular biology experiments, could they have discovered different genes in the same molecular network underlying addiction? we hypothesized that the genes identified by genetic studies and those by molecular biology studies may interact more frequently than expected by chance. indeed, gene interaction enrichment analyses  revealed that genes identified by these two types of studies interact with each other more than expected by chance. the addiction susceptibility genes formed interactions with  <dig> %  of the addiction-related genes identified by molecular biology studies that had known interaction data . this result thus provides one explanation for the differences between the genes identified through genetics and those identified through molecular biologic and molecular pharmacologic approaches.

development of an updated version of karg database
we make all of our new data publicly available in an updated version of a comprehensive knowledgebase for addiction-related genes, karg  <cit> , available at http://karg.cbi.pku.edu.cn/karg2/.

discussion
in this study, we collected genetic association studies published in the field of drug addiction for meta-analyses. the power of such meta-analyses is linked to the relatively simple model of the underlying genetic architecture that they presuppose: that snp genotype results from different samples with differences in genetic background will provide association with drug addiction with the same phase. the significant convergence that such analyses provide herein does support roles for genetic variants with these properties in some aspects of individual differences in susceptibility to dependence. however, recent analyses also provide evidence for roles in addiction susceptibility for more "recent" variants raised after population divergences, which are less likely to be identified by such meta-analytic procedures. besides the 'common' genetic background identified, it is also interesting to evaluate susceptible variants for different addictive drugs. however, currently the number of available allelic contrast tests data was too limited to perform such an analysis. in the future we will continue to integrate new data toward a better understanding of drug addiction. in addition, recent re-sequencing efforts using next-generation deep sequencing technology support larger effects for at least some rarer variants in both mendelian  <cit>  and complex diseases  <cit> , which would also be missed by the current analyses. nevertheless, the interesting findings from these meta-analyses is complementary to recently published gene-based approach that was used to analyze primary gwas data in ways that allow for substantial allelic and locus heterogeneities  <cit> . this study also provided an opportunity to study the relationship between addiction susceptible genes identified by traditional genetic association studies and rare addiction causal variants linked by "common disease, rare variants" approaches, when more genomic re-sequencing efforts become available  <cit> .

over  <dig> candidate gene association studies have been published in this field, but only  <dig>  of these reports met our inclusion criteria. some papers published  <dig> years ago were missing raw genotype and allelic distribution data and had inconsistent use of genetic markers. in addition, since the number of available allelic contrast tests was limited, we combined all data regardless of the types of addictive drugs and the racial/ethnic composition of the group studied. the heterogeneity of the datasets was high: even after our comprehensive meta-analysis, the results were still grades b and c, according to the criteria of the human genome epidemiology network  . protocols such as those proposed by hugenet  <cit>  could standardize data collection and reporting and allow for improved meta-analyses in the future.

compared to candidate gene association studies, gwas provide hypothesis-free, genome-wide view of possible genetic susceptibility factors underlying drug addiction  <cit> . when we compare the addiction susceptible genetic variants linked by candidate gene association studies and gwas, we found that the gwa arrays included probes for three polymorphisms showing significant summary odds ratio of the addiction susceptibility . among these polymorphisms, only rs <dig> show some suggestive significance in methamphetamine abusers of japanese   <cit> . consistent with meta-analyses in alzheimer disease, schizophrenia, major depressive disorder and parkinson disease  <cit> , it seems some important candidate genes have received inordinate attention in candidate-gene based association study, while the gwa studies with hypothesis-free design might not support many a prior hypothesis. on the other hand, gwas provide more opportunities for traditional candidate-gene based association study to improve the experimental designs by avoiding potential biases from subjectively selection of candidate genes in the beginning of the study.

we were able to tentatively link  <dig> of the identified susceptibility variations to potential functional mechanisms . we expanded the genetics tag snps using haplotype data to detect the most likely nearly functional snps and genes. besides fitting with the conventional idea that snps in coding regions may play important roles in disease susceptibility, the analyses presented here suggest that regulatory snps may also play important roles in addiction susceptibility. it will be interesting to study why and how natural selection shaped these cis-regulatory factors that potentially modulate addiction susceptibility.

to explain the modest overlap between genetic association findings and other molecular biology findings at the gene level, we identified abundant evidence for interactions between the sets of genes identified in these two ways. thus, at the level of network analysis, there was good consistency between the genetic and molecular biologic results. this new insight should continue to motivate communication between geneticists and molecular biologists as they study addiction from different perspectives.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we report the first comprehensive meta-analysis of genetic association studies in drug addiction. we curated and integrated  <dig> candidate gene association studies and  <dig> gwas.  <dig> vulnerable haplotypes were identified. we estimated the magnitude of the contributions of different molecular mechanisms to the effects of addiction susceptibility in one of the first 'post-gwas' global attempts. we further found that at the levels of gene interaction networks, there was in fact good consistency between the genes identified by association studies and those identified by molecular biological studies of drug-regulated genes.

we have made all new data and knowledge publicly available by updating the karg database  <cit> . our study thus provides a 'dynamic' approach. we hope that this approach, as it stands, will provide a basis for meta-analyses of gwas results of other diseases under the simple genetic architectures postulated herein, as well as a basis for consideration of meta-analytic approaches to more complex architectures in which the focus might be on genes in which variants that display differing frequencies in individuals with different genetic backgrounds are likely to be located. such analyses could conceivably integrate both the idea of more population-specific variants with the rare variants that are being identified in disease and control samples through re-sequencing efforts.

