BACKGROUND
both hematological and biochemical data are needed to characterize the health status of animal populations over time and to determine the habitat or captive habitat quality. such information may be useful when screening for diseases, infections or routine check-ups in captive populations.

numerous studies have demonstrated the importance of regular monitoring of blood biochemical markers in different contexts in various animal species . blood or serum biochemistry is effective for detecting stress induced by capture, captivity and/or research procedures. for example, the quantified haptoglobin concentrations are good indicators for controlling the stress of capture and retention in the steller sea lion and to detect potential unknown stressors on free-ranging animals 
 <cit> . recently, blood biochemical markers were used to highlight the effects of a short-term effort on dugongs 
 <cit> . such markers have also been used to quantify and to compare blood acid–base disturbances associated with capture and to investigate how interspecific differences in the physiological stress response could be related to life history ecology and phylogeny 
 <cit> . likewise, comparisons of blood biochemistry levels between species could be useful to prevent diseases or pre-disease states, such as kidney dysfunction in chimpanzees and humans 
 <cit>  or rhabdomyolysis in marine mammals 
 <cit> . finally, blood chemistry profiles are used as biomarkers for disease evolution, including atherosclerosis in rabbits 
 <cit>  or organohalogen contamination in raptor nestlings 
 <cit> .

blood components change based on several factors, particularly sex and age, but few studies follow-up these biochemical markers long term. there have been only a few studies on animal development, especially in primate species. a chimpanzee report described the utility of following hematological and biochemical markers in cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses 
 <cit> . blood biochemical parameters are subject to changes with increasing age in many animal species 
 <cit> . in humans, reference values of several blood components in young, middle-aged, old and centenarian individuals have been established 
 <cit> .

from long-term studies, blood biomarkers may be used to define the biological age of an individual by comparing its various biochemical parameters. for some species, including humans, studies have reported standard values . however, standard values for exotic species or new primate experimental models, such as the grey mouse lemur, are not available.

the main objective of this study was to utilize cross-sectional blood chemistry monitoring to establish the reference values of blood biochemical parameters in the grey mouse lemur , a nocturnal prosimian primate used as a model for aging research 
 <cit> . this species may live in captivity for 10– <dig> years and exhibits photoperiod-dependent behavioral and physiological changes. mouse lemurs have an exceptional lifespan compared to other mammalian species of similar size, such as rodents. mouse lemurs may live up to two or three times longer than mammals of equivalent body mass 
 <cit> , which is an advantage for research on key mechanisms underlying aging. longitudinal studies are currently underway in the breeding colony of brunoy 
 <cit> , but no study has previously reported the effects of aging on blood biochemical markers in this species. data were collected over a three-year period on  <dig> mouse lemurs, ranging in age from  <dig> to  <dig> years; this cohort represents approximately 15% of the brunoy breeding colony. the potential effects of sex, season and age were analyzed. our study may provide a reference for basic diagnostic and clinical care of mouse lemurs in captivity or in the field.

RESULTS
body mass
the body mass of mouse lemurs varied significantly between the two sex groups and between the seasons, and we observed important general effects of sex  and season . sex-specific and seasonal differences were independent of age . regardless of age, male mouse lemurs had a 20% lower body mass than females, and animals in the long-day  season had a 22% lower body mass than animals in the short-day  season .

the blood biochemical markers values obtained from the grey mouse lemurs were represented by gender in tables 
 <dig> and 
 <dig>  according to the short-day season and to the long-day season respectively.

median, 25%-75% quartiles and range  of blood biochemical markers during the short-day season in male and female mouse lemurs.

median, 25%-75% quartiles and range  of blood biochemical markers during the long-day season in male and female mouse lemurs.

electrolytes
sodium 
blood na concentrations averaged  <dig>  mmol/l, which was independent of sex , season  and age .

potassium 
blood k concentrations averaged  <dig> mmol/l, which was not significantly different for different sexes , seasons  or ages .

calcium 
blood ca levels averaged  <dig> mg/dl, and no differences were observed between sexes , seasons  and ages .

phosphorus 
by contrast, phosp concentrations were significantly higher in the ld season than values observed in the sd season ; this difference was independent of sex  or age  .

glycemia
glucose 
a significant seasonal effect was observed for blood glucose concentrations ; higher glu values were observed in the ld season regardless of gender  or age  .

enzymatic activity
alkaline phosphatase activity 
measurements of alp averaged  <dig> u/l, and no significant differences were observed for the various sexes, seasons or ages .

alanine aminotransferase activity 
alt values averaged  <dig> u/l, and the values did not significantly vary between the sexes, seasons or ages .

amylase 
blood amylase values were highly variable among animals , and no significant effect of sex, season or age was observed .

renal function markers
creatinine 
creatinine levels  varied according to age   and between sexes . higher cre values were observed in females compared to males, which was independent of season . while middle-aged animals had no difference in cre levels compared to young animals , old animals had significantly higher levels of cre when compared to young animals levels .

blood urea nitrogen 
blood urea concentrations averaged  <dig> mg/dl, and a significant effect of age   was observed, which was independent of sex  and season . old animals had higher bun levels when compared to young animals , but there was no difference between bun levels of middle-aged and young animals  .

proteins levels
total protein 
in mouse lemurs, tp values varied from  <dig> to  <dig> g/dl and were significantly higher during the sd season compared to the ld season . no differences were observed between the sexes  or age groups  .

albumin 
like tp levels, alb values were significantly different between the seasons, and higher levels were observed during the sd season . no differences were observed between the sexes  or age groups  .

total bilirubin 
bilirubin values did not significantly differ between seasons  or age groups , though tbil levels tended to be lower in females .

globulin concentration 
glob levels averaged  <dig>  g/dl but were significantly impacted by season; higher glob levels were detected in the ld season compared to the sd season  . glob levels were also modified by age ; both seasonal and age effects were independent of sex . middle-aged animals had higher levels of glob compared to young animals , and old animals had significantly higher levels of glob when compared to young animals  .

relationship between body mass and biochemical markers
due to the high seasonal changes in physiological functions, potential relationships between blood markers and body mass have been evaluated .

sample sizes for each photoperiod: long-day  season and short-day  season and the pearson correlation coefficient r are given for each regression, as dependent and independent variables. values were statistically significant if p< <dig>  . a p< <dig>  was indicated by two asterisks .

alp levels and body mass were significantly correlated in the sd season . however, this relationship was not observed in the ld season . similarly, bun levels and body mass were highly correlated in the sd season  but not in the ld season . in addition, during the sd season, glu levels exhibited a strong positive correlation with body mass , which was not true for glu levels in the ld photoperiod . finally, there was a significant relationship between phosp measures and body mass in the sd season , while no relation was observed during the ld season .

relationship between chronological age and biochemical markers
we tested the relationship between blood markers and animal age in years. chronological age was considered to be the independent variable. blood urea nitrogen, creatinine and globulin levels increased sharply as age increased; this relationship was illustrated by the significant correlation between chronological age and these parameters  .

discussion
the potential effects of gender, season and age on blood parameters were characterized for the first time in mouse lemurs through a cross-sectional study.

a comparison of mouse lemur biochemical values to “normal” biochemical blood parameters recorded in other mammals and primate species revealed several similarities and discrepancies depending on the parameter tested. compared to ranges described for mice and rats , mouse lemurs had similar levels of albumin, alkaline phosphatase activity, total bilirubin and calcium levels, but mouse lemurs exhibited higher levels of alanine aminotransferase activity, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine and total protein. compared to other non-human primate species, mouse lemurs had lower albumin and total protein levels than squirrel monkeys , macaque rhesus  and cynomolgus monkeys ), while mouse lemurs exhibited higher blood urea nitrogen values relative to these primates . we also compared the mouse lemur parameters with values observed in chimpanzees 
 <cit> . creatinine, calcium and total bilirubin did not differ between chimpanzees and mouse lemurs. however, levels of glucose, blood urea nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, total protein, albumin and globulin were higher in mouse lemurs than in chimpanzees. the most important difference in these species was the alanine aminotransferase activity; this activity was approximately five times higher in mouse lemurs compared to other primate species. the liver is the site of many biochemical and enzymatic activities, and it represents 2% of the total body weight in humans and approximately 8% of the total body weight of the mouse lemur . this discrepancy in the liver weight/body weight ratio may explain the high levels of alanine aminotransferase in the mouse lemur. in addition, stress is a key factor causing variations in blood parameter measurements; thus, anesthesia is often used prior to sample collection. in this study, however, anesthesia was not used. breeding animals are accustomed to repeated handling, and not using anesthesia prevented disruptions in blood metabolite concentrations due to active anesthetics.

sex differences
in mouse lemurs, no sex-specific differences were observed in blood biochemical values except for creatinine levels, which were higher in females. in many species, serum creatinine levels have been shown to be generally higher in males . this gender difference is due to higher muscle mass and increased turnover in males compared to females 
 <cit> . it is noteworthy that female m. murinus are heavier than males, both in the wild 
 <cit>  and in captivity, regardless of the season. however, despite a significant 20% higher body mass in females, no relationship between body mass and creatinine levels was found. this result suggests that either female body mass is not related to increased free fat mass or that other parameters are involved.

seasonal differences
almost half of the  <dig> parameters studied were impacted by seasonality and could be related to life history traits of mouse lemurs, especially seasonal variations in energy balance and fat storage during the resting season 
 <cit> .

in mouse lemurs, glucose and phosphorus levels were higher in the long-day photoperiod. these two parameters are closely related to nutrition or malnutrition in mammals. despite the fact that blood samples were collected when animals were fasting, high glucose values observed in the summer reflect the increase in food intake during the breeding season. this elevated glucose level during the summer has been previously observed in the black bear, which presented with higher glucose levels during the pre-denning season  
 <cit> . in the brown hare , the highest glucose and phosphorus concentrations were observed in summer and the lowest values were obtained in the fall 
 <cit> . as for glucose, higher levels of phosphorus in the summer are related to changes in food intake and to modifications in the regulation of energetic metabolism. moreover, the relationship between blood glucose and body mass in mouse lemurs in the winter season is consistent with the known relationships between body fat  and glucose and food intake, which has been previously shown in mouse lemurs 
 <cit> .

additionally, albumin, globulin and total protein levels were significantly higher during the winter season. the significant increase in albumin, globulin and key proteins regulating the colloidal osmotic pressure of blood may be due to the reduction of water consumption and food intake during the winter. both of these factors have an effect on blood composition and osmolarity by increasing the concentration of certain blood components. seasonal effects modifying albumin levels have been reported in birds , with low values reported in the winter 
 <cit> . in mouse lemurs, the marked seasonal rhythm is related to physiological outputs, particularly plasma hormone concentrations of igf- <dig> and sexual hormones 
 <cit> . changes in hormone concentrations may lead to significant alterations in protein turnover due to high metabolism in response to differences in photoperiod. however, albumin may consistently vary according to environmental factors such as housing conditions . moreover, total protein levels may reflect nutritional status as well as kidney and liver functions; low levels of total protein may indicate liver, kidney or absorption disorders. in mouse lemurs, high protein content values during the winter may also be linked to changes in renal function or decreases in muscle mass from less motor activity. high protein content in the winter could also be related to the fact that endogenous lipids are the main source of energy utilized, and proteins are spared during this period 
 <cit> .

all of the observed seasonal differences in blood biochemistry in mouse lemurs reflect adaptive seasonal changes in energy balance, and these differences do not appear to be clinically significant.

age-related differences
total blood urea nitrogen, globulin and creatinine levels were increased in old animals, independently of gender. these parameters are relevant markers of renal function and are known to decline with age. in mammals, decreased renal function is associated with a drop in glomeruli numbers and decreased renal blood flow and pressure; these changes occur as a result of modified cardiac function or persistent vasoconstriction. in the literature, age-related increases in these markers have been previously observed .

age-related alterations in renal function have been observed in mouse lemurs, and most deaths in captivity are due to renal insufficiency 
 <cit> . chronic kidney disease in older animals may explain the age-related increase in creatinine levels.

CONCLUSIONS
because the grey mouse lemur is considered to be a pertinent model for experimental studies on aging processes 
 <cit>  and for anti-aging protocols 
 <cit> , this study provides relevant and useful biomarkers to monitor the health status of captive animals. enzymatic activity markers and electrolytes weakly vary between the sexes and seasons and may be used for assessing the general health status. by contrast, blood parameters linked to renal function or protein metabolism need to be further studied to control for age-related changes in this primate species.

