BACKGROUND
"...a flower and a bee might slowly become, either simultaneously or one after the other modified and adapted in the most perfect manner to each other..." darwin  <cit> 

using similar logic to the quote above, darwin  <cit>  was able to make his bold prediction that the madagascan star orchid, angraecum sesquipedale, with a spur length of  <dig> cm  must be pollinated by a moth with a tongue of equally outrageous proportions. only after his death, some  <dig> years later, was darwin vindicated when a suitable candidate was found...a moth, xanthopan morganii praedicta, with a tongue of  <dig> cm in length  <cit> . not only did darwin predict that there is strong selection on floral tubes to exceed pollinator tongues, but that there is also strong natural selection for pollinator tongues to exceed floral tubes in order to access all the nectar within the flowers of a plant population. in consequence, this theory specifically implies that a coevolutionary race  should occur and that the length of tongues and tubes should match closely when one  partner is dependent on the other  <cit> .

one possible outcome of this prediction is that if adaptive traits of interacting organisms are geographically variable at the species or population level, then these complementary traits may be closely correlated across the distribution range of the interaction . indeed, in plant-pollinator as well as host-parasite systems where there seems to be strong geographic variation in adaptive traits, highly significant positive correlations have usually been found . unilateral evolution refers to an evolutionary scenario whereby one organism adapts to the morphology of a second organism but not vice versa . for example, plants may adapt to novel pollinators after range expansion, but the pollinators need not necessarily adapt to the new flowers if they already have other abundant nectar sources to feed on  <cit>  similarly, although there is strong selection for rewardless batesian mimic orchids to closely track pollinator traits, pollinator morphology is not driven in any way by the orchids themselves .

therefore, one possible, though perhaps simplistic expectation from these interactions is perfect matching between the morphological traits of interacting species pairs, but in reality mismatches are commonplace. for example, even darwin's famous hawkmoth, which is frequently cited as textbook example of close trait-matching , has a proboscis which is considerably shorter than the nectar spur of angraecum sesquipedale. in addition, nilsson  <cit>  observed that several studies report corolla tubes which were longer than the tongues of their pollinators. although trait mismatches may seem counter-intuitive, the geographic mosaic theory of coevolution predicts that they should be common  <cit> . one potential reason for trait mismatches is that geographic differences in community structure can alter the strength of selection imposed by one species upon another, and vice versa, resulting in putatively balanced armaments in some populations but imbalanced armaments in others. although geographic variation in the strength of directional selection may result in trait mismatches, which might weaken the correlation between co-varying traits across populations, this mechanism need not result in predictable mismatches in a particular direction across coevolving species pairs . trait mismatches in a geographic mosaic need not influence the form of the relationship between interacting phenotypes, an important component of trait matching which is less frequently reported and less well-understood than the significance of the relationship itself.

in this paper we primarily explore the influence of trait magnitude on the scale and direction of trait mismatches  between interacting plants and insects , and in particular ask whether the patterns of mismatch are predictable. ecological and evolutionary theory make no singular prediction about the regression slope, but one possibility, under perfect phenotypic matching of coadapted traits, is that the match should be invariant irrespective of trait magnitude i.e. the slope should equal one. counter to this prediction, the data in some studies appear to have slopes that differ significantly from one , suggesting that the direction and extent of trait mismatches is dependent on other factors, such as trait magnitudes. for example, in the camellia-weevil system described above, the weevil rostrum is consistently longer than the thickness of the fruit pericarp in most populations, but the phenotypic mismatch is small at high trait magnitudes and large when traits are small  <cit> . importantly, deviation from 1: <dig> phenotypic matching does not necessarily imply functional mismatches, as has been neatly demonstrated by toju and sota  <cit> . they showed experimentally that a functionally perfect phenotypic match  occurs when weevil rostrums are  <dig>  times longer than fruit pericarps. thus, from a functional perspective, the imbalance in trait mismatch with respect to trait magnitude is greater than suggested by the phenotypic relationship alone, with plants gaining the functional upper-hand at large trait magnitudes despite close trait matching. other than the camellia-weevil system, we know of no other studies which have determined the expected phenotypic relationships under perfect functional morphological trait matching . however, numerous studies have investigated the observed patterns of phenotypic matching between interacting plants and insects and here we focus on the predictability of the influence of trait magnitudes on the scale and direction of trait mismatch across species pairs.

asymmetric trait matching between interacting species within a community may be expected if the strength of directional selection operating on the traits of the interacting species are different. this idea is exemplified in the controversial  <cit>  "life-dinner" principle proposed by dawkins and krebs  <cit>  where prey are thought to have stronger selective pressures acting on them than predators, because the consequence of being captured is greater than the consequence of a predator not catching the occasional prey item. as a result, it is thought that arms races are led by victims if they have more to lose than the exploiters. brodie  <cit>  extended this principle, hypothesizing that when a specialist interacts with a generalist, then the selection pressure on complementary traits will be greater on the specialist and so the specialist should 'lead the race.' recent advances in understanding of the structure of networks of interacting plants and animals provide some support for the prevalence of asymmetrical specialization: interaction networks have consistently been shown to exhibit a strongly nested structure whereby specialists interact with a subset of the species with which generalists interact  <cit> . in addition, pairs of interacting species within networks tend to exhibit asymmetry in their degree of dependence on the interaction  <cit> . thus, asymmetry in the degree of specialization between interacting species is the norm and interactions between specialized species are rare  <cit> . however, in order for asymmetries in specialization to lead to consistent patterns of trait mismatches across multiple interacting species pairs, either the plants or the animals would need to be consistently more specialized. most traditional studies on pollination guilds, syndromes and/or specialization-generalization stress that plants are typically more specialized . however, recent network studies suggest that this is not the case - plants and animals in pollination and seed dispersal networks exhibit a similar range of specialization with plants on average more generalized than insects  <cit> . thus, although asymmetry in specialization could determine trait mismatches because functionally specialized species should experience stronger selection to match  the morphology of their interaction partner than functionally generalist species, the predictability of mismatches will depend on the consistency of specialization asymmetry across species pairs. in a similar way to generalization, plants capable of autonomous autogamy may also experience relaxed selection on their traits to match  the traits of their pollinators because they can achieve substantial female fitness in the absence of successful pollen transfer. consequently, plants capable of autonomous selfing may be less influenced by the evolutionary arms race with their pollinators than plants whose fitness is completely dependent on them.

in this manuscript we compile a database from the published literature, and some previously unpublished data, and review the results of specialized plant-insect relationships from the pollination and host-parasite literature. specifically, we ask if the morphologies of interacting plants and insects are frequently mismatched, and if there is predictable directionality to mismatches when they occur. we consider that at least three possible scenarios might exist : firstly, plant and insect traits may not be matched, suggesting that the selection for trait matching is not strong enough to overcome factors that constrain the evolution of these traits. secondly, relationships between plant and insect traits may exhibit slopes of one, suggesting that the scale and direction of mismatch is independent of trait magnitude. note that traits are only morphologically matched if the intercept of the line passes through zero and if the slope is one . finally, although insect and plant traits may covary geographically, regression slopes may deviate significantly from one, suggesting imbalance in the extent of morphological trait matching with respect to trait magnitude. importantly, theories such as the geographic mosaic theory of coevolution do not make any specific prediction about directionality of mismatches, and the present study therefore addresses this important knowledge gap. we then use the available data to explore some possible functional explanations for the predictable pattern of armament imbalance that we reveal.

RESULTS
population level analyses
using ols, eleven out of twelve relationships had significant positive slopes for plant versus insect traits suggesting close trait matching. both of the parasitic relationships had slopes which were statistically shallower than one . using rma, of the ten pollination relationships, eight of them were for plants which were pollinator-dependent and all of these had slopes which were < <dig> . both antagonistic and mutualistic pollination relationships of non-selfing species consistently had slopes of less than one. in contrast, both of the autonomous selfing pollination relationships had slopes which were > <dig>  but not statistically so . furthermore if all slopes are analyzed together ) against an expected slope of one using a one sample t-test, then this analysis also suggests that slopes are significantly shallower than one . excluding autonomous selfers  from this analysis only serves to reinforce the pattern of the slope being less than one , t <dig> =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). similar results were obtained if the axes were reversed  or if the slopes were analysed using ordinary least-squares  regression . if the data from all population studies are combined as a single rma regression , the slope  of the relationship is significantly shallower than one . if only antagonistic/parasitic species are grouped together, the rma slope of the relationship is significantly less than one , and when all mutualistic  species are grouped together, . thus, in general, whether analyzing populations within species  or pooling populations across species , imbalances in trait matching with respect to trait magnitude appear to be common and consistent, favouring the plants most when trait magnitudes are large.

note that the origin of the regression was allowed to vary freely . plant breeding system is indicated for pollination relationships with o = outcrossing and as = autonomous selfing, and the type of interaction is categorized as parasitic or pollination. pollination relationships are further divided into mutualistic  or antagonistic  relationships. preg = probability value for the t-test for regression significance, pslope = probability value for the comparison of estimated slope against expected unity , df = degrees of freedom. the slope for "all populations" was derived by pooling all data points within each of the studies below, and not by averaging the slopes of each relationship. insect order is indicated by a letter in parentheses where c = coleoptera, h = hemiptera, d = diptera, hy = hymenoptera. † bold values are significant at p =  <dig>  after false discovery rate correction.

the effect of community and functional generalization/specialization
we found that trait mismatches between the focal plant and pollinator were related to the heterogeneity of trait magnitudes within the plant community . when other nectariferous plants within the community had nectar tube lengths which differed greatly from the focal plant, it was likely to find a large mismatch between the pollinator and the focal plant as well.

inter-specific analyses
our analysis used  <dig> different insect species visiting a total of  <dig> different plant species in our dataset . the average number of insects per plant across the data set is  <dig>   while the average number of plants per insect is  <dig>   probably indicating a strong asymmetry in the degree of specialization. overall, there is a significant difference between insects and plants in terms of the number of interactions .

before adjusting for phylogeny, the slope of the species-level regression was  <dig>  ±  <dig>   which was significantly shallower than a slope of one . results from the inter-specific pgls analyses indicated that the phylogenetically-adjusted model which incorporated the insect phylogeny was the best model, while the probability that either the conventional or pgls model using the plant phylogeny was correct was extremely small . the trait matching relationship from the pgls adjusting for the insect phylogeny yields a slope shallower  than the conventional analysis and substantially less than one , again suggesting trait mismatches which predictably favour the plants more at high trait magnitudes. rma regression of species-level results produced a similar result . furthermore, these species level results  mirror the trend seen for population-level analyses , whether adopting a conventional, or a phylogenetically-adjusted statistical approach, and irrespective of the choice of phylogeny .

each model was tested using either  an actual phylogenetic hypothesis for one taxon , assuming equal branch lengths , or  a "star-shaped" phylogeny with all species equally related, equivalent to a conventional non-phylogenetic analysis or  using reduced major axis  regression without any phylogenetic adjustment. lcl: lower 95% confidence limit; ucl: upper 95% confidence limit. λ lambda is a measure of phylogenetic correlation ; aic is akaike's information criterion; wi is the akaike weight, the probability that the model is the correct one of those tested  <cit> . rma confidence limits calculated by bootstrapping  in rma for java v.  <dig>   <cit> .

the effect of plant breeding system on trait matching
using rma, we found that the mean slope for pollinator-dependent plants was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , . in contrast, the regression slope for autonomous selfers was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , . slopes were very similar using ols . however, there was a significant interaction effect of autogamous versus pollinator-dependent plants on the steepness of the pollinator-plant trait length slope , with the slope for pollinator-dependent plants being steeper than for autonomous selfers, meaning that pollinator-dependent plants had more exaggerated morphological traits at high values than plants which were able to self pollinate.

discussion
these results, from both the population- and species-level analyses, suggest that local adaptation of one species to another frequently produces strong correlations between putatively adaptive traits. however like many other studies , our results also show that mismatches often occur in biological systems. in particular, we provide evidence for the ubiquity of imbalances in the "armaments" of complementary traits. but, most importantly, we suggest that there may be a predictable pattern to these mismatches which is repeated at several taxonomic levels . here, matching/mismatching refers to the degree at which trait matching scales with trait size. at low trait magnitudes, traits are reasonably matched or mismatches favour the insects, whereas at high trait magnitudes, plant traits are usually larger than those of insects. to use a classic example, darwin's hawkmoth has a proboscis which is substantially shorter than the spur length of the madagascan star orchid . our results also support nilsson's  <cit>  casual observation that when moths and flowers evolve long tubes and tongues, the flowers most frequently seemed to have longer floral tubes than the moth proboscides. this trend holds for the population- and species-levels irrespective of method or statistical approach used. this pattern of mismatching not only holds for multispecies, co-evolved pollination mutualisms , but also for potentially pairwise co-evolved host parasite relationships  and, although the unilaterally evolved studies were lacking in sample size, the trend remained the same for all of these studies too. the notable exceptions to this rule were the two population studies where plants are autonomous selfers. in addition, when the  <dig> autonomous selfers were analysed separately in the species-level data set, they were found to have a slope value which statistically approximated one, suggesting that plants were not gaining a morphological advantage over their pollinators at high trait magnitudes, perhaps because selfing in the absence of pollinators relaxes the selective pressure imposed by the pollinators. in contrast, plants reliant on pollinators for seed set had more exaggerated morphological traits than their insect pollinators indicating that the adaptive advantage lies with the plants. furthermore, the difference in the steepness of these slopes was found to be significant after testing for an interaction between tube length and pollinator reliance.

asymmetrical specialization and predictable imbalances in trait matching
contrary to current understanding of the interaction webs within which coevolution takes place, we find that published studies of trait matching generally involve interactions between specialist plants and more generalist animals . why coevolutionary studies should represent a non-random subsample of interactions from many plant-animal mutualistic networks remains an intriguing and open question. however, it is possible that generalized plant - specialized insect systems seldom produce exaggerated morphological traits or produce a different set of traits and thus trait measurements are not reported in the literature. for example, traits associated with specialized pollen collecting bees may be hard to measure , particularly if specialized species are more rare. interestingly, simulations have shown that coevolutionary complementarity  and subsequent phenotypic convergence can generate strongly nested interaction networks i.e. asymmetric specialization  <cit> . thus, coevolutionary trait matching of a focal species pair and subsequent evolutionary convergence of other taxa may generate asymmetry in the degree of specialization, which, coupled with geographic variation in the selective environment  or in the identity of the focal species pair, may generate the consistent trait mismatch in favour of the more specialized partner that we demonstrate here.

the effect of asymmetric specialization was explored further by examining mismatches between the long-tongued fly  which forages from a variable guild of plants and its widespread and primary host plant  which is pollinated almost exclusively by p. ganglbaueri. these mismatches in complementary morphological traits were related to the variability of the nectar producing community used by the fly at each site. the focal plant  had more exaggerated morphological traits than the pollinator when pollinators foraged from other plants with very short traits. the morphological traits of insects were more exaggerated than the focal plant if the background plant community consisted of species with even longer tubes. although the relationship between mismatches and variability in the floral traits of the nectar community is very strong, some of the variation in this relationship may still be explained by the fact that the analysis did not take abundance or nectar quality of each species into account. verification of these results using other systems and more advanced methods would add greatly to this field of biology. nevertheless, the results from this study lend support to the idea that community context  <cit>  and the symmetry of reciprocal specialization  can play decisive roles in patterns of trait matching and local adaptation. furthermore these results suggest that evolutionary races can be won or lost by being a functional specialist  or a functional generalist .

the degree of symmetry in specialization, or more particularly dependence, seems also to be affected by plant mating system which can in turn affect trait evolution. comparisons of pollinator-plant traits in plants with different mating systems revealed that autonomous selfers had steeper slopes than plants dependent on insects for pollination. thus, if pollinated by the same pollinator, an autonomous selfer would have a shorter tube length than a plant species reliant on pollinators for seed set or seed siring. autonomous selfing effectively reduces a plant's reliance on pollinators, neutralizing the asymmetries normally observed in interactions where plants are reliant on insects for seed set. plant mating system can be viewed in the same way as specialization, with autonomous selfers being the equivalent of generalists, and so this data also lends support to the life-dinner principle  <cit>  which suggests that specialists may outpace generalists in arms races because selection for extreme traits is greater for specialists than generalists.

alternative mechanisms resulting in predictable trait mismatches
although asymmetric specialization may contribute to mismatches between pollinators and plants, it is unlikely to account for trait mismatches in the host-parasite interactions examined in this study as they appear to be reciprocally specialized. similarly plant breeding system is unlikely to influence the pattern of mismatches in the host-parasite systems investigated because the host-plants in this study do not depend on their parasites for seed production. thus, despite the simplistic appeal of asymmetric specialization or plant breeding systems as an explanation for the pattern we report, it is likely that other factors may also be important.

a likely alternative explanation is differences in the physiological and developmental constraints on evolution of traits in animals and plants. it may be relatively more costly for insects to move around with extremely long mouthparts or legs because it hampers foraging efficiency and contact time on plants, as well as being more costly in terms of flight energetics and simple insect body plan construction costs . alternatively, physical constraints, of e.g. nectar uptake rates relative to nectar concentration or proboscis dimensions  <cit> , may become more critical at high trait values. in contrast, the production of extreme traits in plants is only associated with construction costs . asymmetries in physiological constraints could generate the observed pattern of consistent trait mismatches within species, and in addition, it is a mechanism which potentially scales up to generate the same pattern across species . support for this possibility is provided by the fact that we find that it is important to correct for insect phylogeny, but not plant phylogeny, in our species-level analysis, suggesting that insect mouthparts may be more constrained by phylogeny than plant flower parts. this result is similar to that of rezende et al.  <cit>  who found that phylogeny is significantly correlated with ecological similarity in 60% of interaction webs for animals, but only in 25% of webs for plants. in another study rezende et al.  <cit>  also show that phylogeny significantly influences trait distributions for animals but not for plants, lending further support to the idea that the evolution of complementary traits is more constrained in animals than in plants.

differences in the relationship between phylogeny and ecological similarity  for plants and animals might also result from differences in the mobility and evolvability of each group  <cit> . for example, differences in the spatial scale of adaptive responses between plants and insects could result from the homogenizing effects of gene flow if insects move further than pollen or seeds. mismatches on either end of the trait continuum could result from the constraint on evolutionary matching imposed by insect dispersal from populations with intermediate trait values. although insects intuitively seem more mobile than plants, morjan and rieseberg  <cit>  show that historical gene flow levels  are roughly equivalent across plants and insects, especially when only considering gene flow through seed dispersal. importantly, substantial overlapping variation in gene flow estimates exists in both groups, contingent on species-specific life-history, dispersal and behavioral attributes. thus, it is unlikely that the direction of gene flow mismatches between interacting plant and insect species is predictable, but should instead vary depending on the specific traits involved. moreover, asymmetrical gene flow cannot easily explain trait mismatches across species.

morphological mismatches may also favour plants if they consistently evolve faster than insects and stable evolutionary equilibria have not yet been reached. this could occur if plants are usually found in larger, more genetically-diverse populations than insects or if plants have faster generation times. although the former could be true for many pollination systems, it is unlikely to be the case for most host-parasite systems . in addition, insects tend to have much faster generation times than plants, with many specialized plants being long lived or perennial  <cit> , so we consider it unlikely that differing rates of evolution is the primary explanation for these mismatches.

hanifin et al.  <cit>  found that garter snakes  evolve resistance to the neurotoxin of their newt prey , and that occasionally the snakes were able to escape the coevolutionary arms race by evolving extreme resistance phenotypes. interestingly, the salamanders never gained the evolutionary "upper hand" in this relationship and so imbalances in armaments always favoured the snakes. they proposed that the imbalances in armaments in this system were related to the genetic architecture of the complementary traits under selection. for example, it may be easier to evolve extreme resistance than it is to evolve extreme toxicity. similarly, differences in the evolvabilty of the traits in our study may have played a role in determining winners and losers in plant-insect systems, with extreme floral traits being more easily evolved than extreme insect traits. this however was not tested in any way in our study, but remains a possible avenue for future research.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study demonstrates that there is a consistent and predictable asymmetry in the development of "armaments" in interacting plants and insects. these data suggest that plant morphological traits are more exaggerated than insect traits at the long end of the spectrum of traits measured, and this could have far-reaching implications for community ecology and the evolution of species interactions. mismatches may be more pronounced at the long end of the spectrum because pollinators with exaggerated morphological traits are able to utilize a greater subset of plants than insects with less exaggerated morphological traits. insects with exaggerated morphological traits may therefore be less dependent on a single food source than insects with less exaggerated traits, which might have implications for climate change related risks on pollinator  networks . in pollination systems, the pattern of trait mismatches was also affected by the level of dependence of plants on their pollinators. species capable of autonomous selfing did not show the pattern of exaggerated morphological trait imbalance at higher trait magnitudes prevalent in species reliant on pollinators for fruit set, perhaps because autogamy eliminates their reliance on pollinators and thus the asymmetry in the dependence of one partner on the other. in order to better understand the functional significance of the regression slopes, it is necessary to start investigating pollination relationships in terms of their phenotypic interfaces as demonstrated in the studies of brodie and ridenhour  <cit>  and toju and sota  <cit> . the phenotypic interface is an important but as yet neglected avenue for studying functional trait matching and we hope that this paper stimulates such studies in the future. asymmetries in specialization are also not the only explanation for these patterns and are unlikely to explain the slope patterns evident in some host-parasite systems . consistent differences in constraints on trait evolution in insects and plants may also play roles in determining the imbalance of armaments. for example, foraging and flying may be hampered in insects with extremely long mouthparts but plants with extreme traits may not suffer similar constraints. we also hope that this paper stimulates future research on the costs and mechanisms which constrain the evolution and matching of morphological traits in plants and insects. it is evident that there is a real paucity of non-pollination studies in this data set and we believe that population level trait-matching in host-parasite systems  is extremely understudied. this is an exceptionally important area of study as it has applications for the control of pests, disease, drug resistance and biological invasions . as a result, understanding what determines the outcomes of interactions in model systems may have practical implications for combating disease, pests and invasions. because there are only a small number of published studies available on morphological trait matching, we see a need for more studies which determine where and when armament imbalances occur as well as whether the directionality of armament imbalances is as consistent as suggested here. in particular, there is a need for future studies to report trait measurements in other taxa such as hymenoptera , which are absent from our data set.

