BACKGROUND
microsporidia are obligate intracellular parasitic fungi that can infect a wide variety of organisms including vertebrate and invertebrate . some species lead to severe syndromes in immunocompetent hosts and cause opportunistic infections in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome  patients  <cit> . more than  <dig> microsporidia species that belong to  <dig> genera have been reported thus far  <cit> . among them, the genus nosema is the most diverse one. the domesticated silkworm, bombyx mori, has long been considered as the primary source for the silk production worldwide. a highly mortal disease referred to as pébrine is currently the major threat to the silk production. pébrine is caused by the infection of the microsporidian parasite, nosema bombycis. this disease was first recognized during the destruction of the european silk industry in  <dig>  <cit> . n. bombycis infects silkworms through vertical transmission from the mother host to their progenitive eggs, and chronically damages the entire body of the worm . after infections, the silkworm larvae are inactive and slow in development. later, black spots, a disease symptom called pébrine  <cit> , will appear throughout their bodies and lead to death. since no effective treatment methods have been developed up to this point, the infections by n. bombycis inevitably cause devastating economic losses in the silkworm industry. apart from the domesticated silkworms, n. bombycis can also infect various lepidopteran insects  <cit> , indicative of their broad hosts range.

so far, the underlying genetic mechanisms of the highly infectious ability and the broad host range of n. bombycis remain unknown. to this end, we conducted a comparative genomic approach, from which we might learn a great deal about the genetic basis as to why and how n. bombycis can be so infectious across various hosts. in this study, we sequenced the genome of two microsporidian parasites: n. bombycis and n. antheraeae . by comparing their genomes with a published distantly related nosema genome, n. ceranae <cit>  , we show that the n. bombycis genome surprisingly expands due to the production of duplicated genes, the proliferation of host-derived transposable elements, and the acquisitions of many horizontally transferred genes from bacteria. some duplicated genes associated with the cytotoxic pathway have experienced positive selection, implying that this adaptive evolution might enhance the infectious ability of n. bombycis, as well as the expansion of its host range. considering that all reported microsporidian genomes are highly reduced and compact  <cit> , our data, for the first time, reveal a usual genome evolution process showing that the genome of parasites could expand. those expanded genetic gears might have influenced the infectivity and the survivorship of parasites as we report herein.

RESULTS
genomic architecture of n. bombycis and n. antheraeae
by using various sequencing platforms,  <dig> x, 10x, and 28x physical coverage of whole genome sequence of n. bombycis were obtained from the sanger sequencing method , the minibac end sequencing method, and the illumina short-read sequencing method respectively . our sequencing efforts resulted in  <dig>  scaffolds built from  <dig>  contigs. the total assembly genome size is  <dig>  mb  . a total of  <dig>  protein coding sequences were identified . the assembled genomic size  is close to previous estimation by pulse-field gel electrophoresis   <cit> , indicating that the coverage of the assembled genome is nearly complete. to sequence the genome of n. antheraeae, a total of 657 mb of illumina reads were obtained after filtering ambiguous reads. our analysis results in  <dig>  scaffolds and a total of  <dig>  mb of unique sequence. totally,  <dig>  protein coding sequences were identified . the assembled genome size of n. antheraeae was estimated using the following equation: genome size = number of 15-mers per kilo-bases/depth of 15-mers per kilo-bases. the assembled genome size of n. antheraeae   is close to our previous estimation by pulse-field gel electrophoresis  <cit> , indicating that approximately 90% of the n.antheraeae genome was captured. a comparison of genome features among the generated nosema genomes and published microsporidian genomes  is listed in table  <dig> 

to gain some insights into the variations of gene content among n. antheraeae, n. bombycis, and n. ceranae, the number of orthologous genes were compared. most genes are shared among all three species, but 8% of genes were n. antheraeae-specific,  <dig> % were n. bombycis-specific, and  <dig> % were n. ceranae-specific . gene ontology analysis revealed that no distinct differences were found among different gene functional categories . collectively, these three nosema species lack genes for tricarboxylic acid cycle, oxidative phosphorylation, and fatty acid β-oxidation, consistent with previous observations  <cit> . our observations further support that microsporidia do not possess tricarboxylic acid cycle and oxidative metabolism, and microsporidia parasites have often experienced on-going genome streamlining via the relaxation of purifying selection.

to determine if the nosema proteins were more compact than other microsporidian parasites, the length of those silkworm nosema proteins with assigned functions was compared to homologs of two published microsporidian parasitic encephalitozoon species, e. cuniculi and e.intestinalis . our results show that the average length of total homologous genes from n. antheraeae and n. bombycis is shorter than that from e. cuniculi and e. intestinalis, indicating that proteins in nosema were more compact than those in encephalitozoon.

overall, our comparative genomics analysis showed that n. bombycis possesses a much larger genome size than other two nosema species . considering that n. bombycis has wide host range, the genome expansion might facilitate the host adaption in n. bombycis. thus, for the subsequent analyses, we aim to seek for the underlying genetic mechanisms as to why and how n. bombycis genome expands. furthermore, we seek for the putative genetic components that contribute to the infectious ability of n. bombycis in a hope that our analyses could provide some clues on the development of treatment strategies of pébrine.

proliferation of host-derived transposable elements in n. bombycis
after obtaining the genomes of the two nosema species, we seek for the potential molecular mechanisms underlying the genome expansion of n. bombycis. considering that the proliferation of transposable elements often contributes to the genome size variation in many eukaryotes  <cit> , it was considered as the first molecular mechanisms for us to check. although the genomes of several human pathogenic microsporidians have been shown to lack transposable elements, transposable elements have been detected in the genomes of other non-human pathogenic microsporidians  <cit> . to understand what degree those transposable element shape the genomic architectures in nosema, we searched for transposons in n. bombycis and n. antheraeae . two different approaches were implemented in this study. because most transposable elements comprise internal protein-coding genes  that are necessary for their transposition, we first identified those putative transposable elements by searching for their internal protein-coding sequences. in many cases, the internal protein-coding sequences are highly generated but recognizable. second, for those that do not possess readily identifiable internal protein-coding sequences, other features such as inverted repeats or insertion sites were used to recognize the transposable elements.

overall, our results show evidence that a larger genome size of n. bombycis is partly due to both the acquisition of new transposons and expansion of existing transposable elements . among all identified transposable elements, the ty3/gypsy retrotransposons  <cit>  constitute the largest part of known classes of transposable elements in n. bombycis. a broad sampling from genbank shows that these transposable elements also reside in other microsporidian groups including spraguea lophii, edhazardia aedis, and brachiola algerae, indicating that this transposable element family exists back to the common ancestor of most microsporidian species and further expand in n. bombycis. majority of transposable elements among nosema genomes are common across three nosema species, whereas piggybac transposons were only found in n. antheraeae and n. bombycis except for n. ceranae . to test whether piggybac was lost during the evolution of n. ceranae or was gained in the most recent common ancestor of n. antheraeae and n. bombycis, the phylogeny of piggybac was reconstructed from nosema, domesticated silkworms, and other insects. our analyses show that the nosema piggybac sequences fall into four well-supported groups, and three out of them are closely related to piggybac elements from domesticated silkworms . although the exact relationships of these piggybac elements between nosema and bombyx is complicated, our phylogenetic analysis suggests that piggybac was acquired in the most common ancestor of n. antheraeae and n. bombycis through horizontal transfer events from possibly host silkworms. these transfers likely independently took place three times, leading to the three major subgroups . in addition, the nosema pbac <dig> , <dig> are closely related to the elements from other insects , suggesting that these nosema piggybac elements might originate from the insects. to rule out the possibility of the host contaminations during the genome assembly, we amplified regions flanking piggybac elements using nosema-specific primers, and confirmed the existence of piggybac in nosema genomes .

since the host-derived piggybac elements are so abundant in n. bombycis, can those host-derived piggybac elements serve as the vector of capturing host-derived genes? to answer this question, we checked the host-derived piggybac elements that do not have any readily identifiable internal protein-coding sequences. because they are usually hard to be identified due to the lack of the internal readily recognizable protein-coding genes, the terminal inverted repeat  and the insertion site  of the piggybac elements were used as the criteria for our search. in other words, we searched for the n. bombycis genomic regions that are flanked by the itr and the insertion site  of the piggybac elements and comprise “extrinsic” sequences. after identification of those piggybac elements, we examine whether the “extrinsic” sequences were recently transferred by the transposition of the piggybac elements that are specific to n. bombycis via comparing the colinearity of these regions with those in n. antheraeae and n. ceranae. a total of  <dig> piggybac elements with an internal “extrinsic” sequence were identified . among them, only one case might be recently gained in n. bombycis based on the colinearity . when we blasted the internal “extrinsic” sequence of the  <dig> piggybac elements in genbank using the “nr” database by the blastn function, no detectable similarity with any known sequences was found. our analysis thus far suggests that the host-derived piggybac elements might not be able to serve as the vector of capturing genes from hosts to n. bombycis.

horizontally transferred protein-coding genes is another source of genetic expansion in n. bombycis
since n. bombycis has experienced the proliferation of native and host-derived transposons, we sought to determine if horizotally transferred protein coding genes from other organisms can also facilitate the genome expansion in n. bombycis, as was recently found in encephalitozoon <cit> . to maximize the likelihood of detecting horizontal protein coding gene transfer  events in n. bombycis, we implemented two different approaches: a genome-wide prediction method based on orthologous sequences using the software darkhorse, and a phylogenetic method where we screened the putative hgts in a total of  <dig> gene family phylogenies. overall, these two different approaches identify  <dig> and  <dig> different hgts in n. bombycis, respectively. among them,  <dig> genes are shared between these two approaches , resulting in a set of  <dig> union hgt genes between two different dataset. by investigating the taxonomic origin of these  <dig> unions hgt genes in a phylogenetic framework, all of them were transferred from prokaryotes . no host-derived genes were found in our analysis, further suggesting that only host-derived transposable elements can be transferred into the n. bombycis genome instead of host-derived protein-coding genes. using the clusters of orthologous group database, we found that  <dig> hgt candidates are unknown in functions, and  <dig> are predicted to fall into diverse gene functions . among  <dig> hgt genes, five genes are involved in nucleotide metabolism and two genes are involved in sugar metabolism. interestingly, one hgt gene that was annotated as phosphomevalonate kinase  is shown to be an important player in the mevalonate pathway of n.bombycis . in the mevalonate pathway, phosphomevalonate kinase is a key enzyme to catalyze the rate-limiting step for the production of isopentenyl pyrophosphate . ipp is important for various molecular functions such as terpenoid synthesis, protein prenylation, cell membrane maintenance, protein anchoring, and n-glycosylation. overall, our observations lead us to hypothesize that some of hgts might play a pivotal role on the adaptation or survivorship of n. bombycis over the course of evolution. alternatively, many hgts might be merely neutral without any immediate adaptive consequences after their transfers. further hypothesis testing will be necessary.

recent gene duplication events contribute to the genome expansion in n. bombycis
although our previous analyses showed that the proliferation of host-derived transposable elements and horizontally transferred genes could contribute to the genome size expansion in n. bombycis, their contributions are not sufficient to explain the much larger genome size of n. bombycis than other two small-genome nosema species . considering that gene duplication is a common molecular mechanism mediating the expansion of genome size in many eukaryotes  <cit> , we then seek for the evidence if gene duplications also play a role on the genome expansion in n. bombycis. we first performed a syntenic analysis to identify possible segmental duplication events in each nosema species. among three species, we found that n. bombycis contained  <dig> pairs of segmental duplications throughout its genome . in contrast, almost no segmental duplication could be detected in either n. antheraeae or n. ceranae. because the assemblies of all these genomes are fragmented, it is not possible to conclude whether these segmental duplications are large in number and spread throughout the genome, or arise due to multiple whole chromosome duplication events or an ancient whole genome duplication event. nevertheless, we have identified a region where it appears that a single large-scale duplication event explain the data better than several independent large-scale duplication events . to date these duplication events, we estimated synonymous substitution rate  for paralogous genes from segmental duplications in n. bombycis, and compared them with the ds derived from orthologs between n. antheraeae and n. bombycis. the ds values are commonly used as the proxy of age of gene duplication because the synonymous substitutions evolve in a neutral fashion  <cit> . on average, the ds values of paralogs from segmental duplications in n. bombycis are generally lower than that of orthologs between n. antheraeae and n. bombycis , suggesting that these duplication events took place after the separation of n. antheraeae and n. bombycis. in addition to the detection of segmental duplications, we identified numerous tandem duplication events among three nosema species. we detected a higher rate of tandem duplications in n. bombycis compared to other two nosema species, and in some cases multiple events could be mapped at a single locus . on average, the ds values of these paralogs are also much lower than that of orthologus genes between n. bombycis and n. antheraeae , indicating that most tandem paralogs in n. bombycis also arose relatively recent after the separation between n. bombycis and n. antheraeae. in short, the n. bombycis genome has expanded in size largely due to many large-scale and small-scale gene duplication events.

adaptive evolution of duplicated genes might enhance the pathogenic ability in n. bombycis
paralogs often provide raw materials for evolutionary innovations, including the survival of parasites in their hosts  <cit> . we therefore sought to identify possible instances of adaptive changes associated with the pathogenic ability of n. bombycis among those duplicated genes derived from large-scale duplication events in n. bombycis. first, we examine if paralogs of n. bombycis contribute to the adaptive evolution more often than orthologs among all nosema species. clusters of homologous genes in n. bombycis were classified to four different groups: 1) clusters of orthologus genes  of 1:1: <dig> trios of n. bombycis, n. antheraeae, and n. ceranae, 2) cogs of 1: <dig> gene pairs of n. bombycis and n. antheraeae, 3) cogs of 1: <dig> gene pairs of n. bombycis and n. ceranae, and 4) clusters of paralogous genes  in n. bombycis. pairwise dn/ds ratio analyses for these four different clusters of homologous genes were computed and their cumulative dn/ds ratio curve were compared . compared to cogs, a higher proportion of cpgs in n. bombycis showed higher value of dn/ds ratio, suggesting that cpgs are evolving at a faster rate than cogs at the amino acid level . in most cases, this is likely due to the relaxation of purifying selection. however, we observed that a higher proportion of cpgs showed dn/ds ration greater than  <dig>  indicative of positive selection. overall, our observations support the view that cpgs contributed more to adaptive evolution than cogs in n. bombycis.

to examine if any particular codons of cpgs of n. bombycis have undergone positive selection, we applied a site model approach with maximum likelihood using the software paml . the results show that  <dig> out of  <dig> cpgs have experienced positive selection in n. bombycis , and 62%  genes in  <dig> cpgs have the support of est tags . the estimated parameters and positively selected sites for those positively selected cpgs are shown in additional file  <dig>  although the majority of positively selected cpgs are hypothetical proteins with unknown functions, a handful of them are not. for example, cpg <dig> is related to lpxtg motif cell wall anchor domain protein and cpg <dig> is related to surface adhesion protein. positive selection acting on these two cpgs might play an important role in host recognition and interaction since they are involved in surface adhesion. other examples are two positively selected cpgs that are related to serine protease inhibitor . the functions of serine protease inhibitor have been shown to decrease the immune responses in hosts  <cit> . in the melanization pathway of b. mori, serine protease cascade is one of the most important biochemical reactions to inhibit the propagation of pathogens  <cit> . we scanned the gene expression pattern of b. mori post infection of n. bombycis by microarray analysis and found that the key gene ppo in melanization pathway was significantly suppressed. from our gene chip expression analysis , we found that the gene expression of two upstream regulators of host ppo melanization pathway, β-grp <dig> and β-grp <dig>  in b. mori are up-regulated during the infection of n. bombycis . the upregulation of β-grp <dig> and β-grp <dig> subsequently suppress the production of ppo against the infection of n. bombycis. to seek for the treatment method of pébrine, the interplay between spn <dig> and β-grp should be treated as our priority in the future studies. these observations lead us to hypothesize that adaptive evolution of serine protease inhibitor in n. bombycis might deter the melanization pathway by blocking the serine protease cascade in domesticated silkworms .

note: sd, segmental; td, tandem; dd, disperse; m <dig> vs. m <dig>  lrt statistic for model m <dig> versus m2; m <dig> vs. m <dig>  lrt for model m <dig> versus m8; * significance with p <  <dig> ; ** significance with p <  <dig> ; *** significance with p <  <dig> .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
preventing the infection of nosema bombycis is one of the prime concerns in the domesticated silkworm industry. however, attempts to manage these pathogens have been hindered by our poor knowledge of the underlying molecular mechanisms contributing to the highly infectious ability of n. bombycis. in the absences of transformation, genetics, and axenic cultivation, the comparative genomics approach is one of the few tools available to tackle these issues. in this study, we compared the genome of the major commercial silkworm pathogen, n. bombycis, to those of n. antheraeae and n. ceranae. our study showed that the large genome size in silkworm nosema genome is due to the proliferation of host-derived transposable elements, horizontally transferred genes from prokaryotes, and the production of segmental and tandem duplicates. previous studies on the characterization of microsporidian genomic architectures have focused more on the genome reduction aspect  <cit> . although few studies assumed the possibility of genome expansion in the microsporidia  <cit> , the direct evidence is lacking. from the genome streamlining perspective, it is evident that many metabolic essential genes  are missing in the microsporidian genome. in stark contrast, our study provides the first solid evidence showing that the microsporidian genome can expand. gene duplications and proliferation of host-derived transposable elements are the two predominant molecular mechanisms contributing to the genome expansion in n. bombycis.

recently, two studies have reported that some genes in the microsporidia encephalitozoon romaleae were derived from an ancestral host  <cit> , but we did not find any evidence of host-derived genes in n. bombycis. instead, some genes in the n. bombycis genome were apparently derived from prokaryotes or viruses by horizontal gene transfer, similar to other microsporidian genomes  <cit> . surprisingly, these prokaryote-transferred genes could complement some important metabolic pathways in nosema, indicative of its essentiality over the course of nosema evolution. the mobility of transposable elements has been shown to be associated with the frequency of horizontal gene transfer  <cit> . although the n. bombycis genome is composed of ~38% repetivitive elements, only  <dig> genes were found to be horizontally transferred. such observation indicated that a great number of transposons will not lead to higher rate of hgts in n. bombycis. one explanation is that most transposons of n. bombycis have lost their activities such that the rate of hgts is not enhanced. alternatively, those repetitive elements do not possess the ability of capturing genes to facilitate the rate of hgts.

the other major source of novel genetic materials in n. bombycis is the numerous paralogs by large-scale and small-scale duplication events. some of them show evidence of accelerated changes through the relaxation of purifying selection, whereas others show evidence of positive selection. in either case, these paralogs seem to have provided raw materials for functional innovations as we showed in this study. among them, the serine protease inhibitor family stands out as potential targets to study the higher infectious rates in n. bombycis.

