BACKGROUND
evolution and statistics are two common themes that pervade the modern analysis of molecular sequence variation. it is now widely accepted that most questions regarding molecular sequences are statistical in nature and should be framed in terms of parameter estimation and hypothesis testing. similarly it is evident that to produce models that accurately describe molecular sequence variation an evolutionary perspective is required.

the beast software package is an ambitious attempt to provide a general framework for parameter estimation and hypothesis testing of evolutionary models from molecular sequence data. beast is a bayesian statistical framework and thus provides a role for prior knowledge in combination with the information provided by the data. bayesian markov chain monte carlo  has already been enthusiastically embraced as the state-of-the-art method for phylogenetic reconstruction, largely driven by the rapid and widespread adoption of mrbayes  <cit> . this enthusiasm can be attributed to a number of factors. firstly, bayesian methods allow the relatively straightforward implementation of extremely complex evolutionary models. secondly, there is an often erroneous perception that bayesian estimation is "faster" than heuristic optimization based on a maximum likelihood criterion.

in addition to phylogenetic inference, a number of researchers have recently developed bayesian mcmc software for coalescent-based estimation of demographic parameters from genetic data  <cit> . like phylogenetic analysis, these also require a gene tree in the underlying model, although in this setting, the sequences represent different individuals from the same species, rather than from different species. most recently, bayesian mcmc has also been applied to a central problem in evolutionary bioinformatics: the co-estimation of phylogeny and sequence alignment  <cit> . taken together with progress in phylogenetics and coalescent-based population genetics, bayesian mcmc has been applied to most of the evolutionary questions commonly asked of molecular data.

beast can be compared to a number of other software packages with similar goals, such as mrbayes  <cit> , which currently focuses on phylogenetic inference and batwing  <cit>  which focuses predominantly on coalescent-based population genetics of microsatellites. like these software packages, the core algorithm implemented in beast is metropolis-hastings mcmc  <cit> . mcmc is a stochastic algorithm that produces sample-based estimates of a target distribution of choice. for our purposes the target distribution is the posterior distribution of a set of evolutionary parameters given a set of molecular sequences. possibly the most distinguishing feature of beast is its firm focus on calibrated phylogenies and genealogies, that is, rooted trees incorporating a time-scale. this is achieved by explicitly modeling the rate of molecular evolution on each branch in the tree. on the simplest level this can be a uniform rate over the entire tree  with this rate known in advance or estimated from calibration information. one of the most promising recent advances in molecular phylogenetics has been the introduction of relaxed molecular clock models that do not assume a constant rate across lineages  <cit> . beast was the first software package that allows inference of the actual phylogenetic tree under such models  <cit> .

the purpose behind the development of beast is to bring a large number of complementary evolutionary models  into a single coherent framework for evolutionary inference. this building-block principle of constructing a complex evolutionary model out of a number of simpler model components provides powerful new possibilities for molecular sequence analysis. the motivation for doing this is  to avoid the unnecessary simplifying assumptions that currently exist in many evolutionary analysis packages and  to provide new model combinations and a flexible system for model specification so that researchers can tailor their evolutionary analyses to their specific set of questions.

the ambition of this project requires teamwork, and we hope that by making the source code of beast freely available, the range of models implemented, while already large, will continue to grow and diversify.

RESULTS
beast provides considerable flexibility in the specification of an evolutionary model. for example, consider the analysis of a multiple sequence alignment of coding dna. in a beast analysis, it is possible to allow each codon position to have a different substitution rate, a different amount of rate heterogeneity among sites, and a different amount of rate heterogeneity among branches, whilst sharing the same intrinsic ratio of transitions to transversions with the other codon positions. in fact, any or all parameters  can be shared or independent among partitions of the sequence data.

an unavoidable feature of bayesian statistical analysis is the specification of a prior distribution over parameter values. this requirement is both an advantage and a burden. it is an advantage because relevant knowledge such as palaeontological calibration of phylogenies is readily incorporated into an analysis. however, when no obvious prior distribution for a parameter exists, a burden is placed on the researcher to ensure that the prior selected is not inadvertently influencing the posterior distribution of parameters of interest.

in beast, all parameters  can be given informative priors . for example, the age of the root of the tree can be given an exponential prior with a pre-specified mean.

the model of evolution
the evolutionary model for a set of aligned nucleotide or amino acid sequences in beast is divided into five components. for each of these a range of possibilities are offered and thus a large number of unique evolutionary models can easily be constructed. these components are:

• substitution model – the substitution model is a homogeneous markov process that defines the relative rates at which different substitutions occur along a branch in the tree.

• rate model among sites – the rate model among sites defines the distribution of relative rates of evolutionary change among sites.

• rate model among branches – the rate model among branches defines the distribution of rates among branches and is used to convert the tree, which is in units of time, to units of substitutions. these models are important for divergence time estimation procedures.

• tree – a model of the phylogenetic or genealogical relationships of the sequences.

• tree prior – the tree prior provides a parameterized prior distribution for the node heights  and tree topology.

substitution models and rate models among sites
for nucleotide data, all of the models that are nested in the general time-reversible  model  <cit>  -including the well known hky <dig> model  <cit>  – can be specified. for the analysis of amino acid sequence alignments any of the following replacement models can be used: blosum <dig>  cprev, dayhoff, jtt, mtrev and wag. when nucleotide data represents a coding sequence  the goldman and yang model  <cit>  can be used to model codon evolution. in addition, Γ-distributed rates among sites  <cit>  or a proportion of invariant sites, or a combination of the two  <cit>  can be used to describe rate heterogeneity among sites.

rate models among branches, divergence time estimation and time-stamped data
the basic model for rates among branches supported by beast is the strict molecular clock model  <cit> , calibrated by specifying either a substitution rate or the date of a node or set of nodes. in this context, dates of divergence for particular clades can be estimated. the clades can be defined either by an enforced grouping of taxa or as the most recent common ancestor of a set of taxa of interest. the second alternative does not require monophyly of the selected taxa with respect to the rest of the tree. furthermore, when the differences in the dates associated with the tips of the tree comprise a significant proportion of the age of the entire tree, these dates can be incorporated into the model providing a source of information about the overall rate of evolutionary change  <cit> .

in beast, divergence time estimation has also been extended to include relaxed phylogenetics models, in which the rate of evolution is allowed to vary among the branches of the tree. in particular we support a class of uncorrelated relaxed clock branch rate models, in which the rate at each branch is drawn from an underlying distribution such as exponential or lognormal  <cit> .

if the sequence data are all from one time point, then the overall evolutionary rate must be specified with a strong prior. the units implied by the prior on the evolutionary rate will determine the units of the node heights in the tree  as well as the units of the demographic parameters such as the population size parameter and the growth rate. for example, if the evolutionary rate is set to  <dig> , then the node heights  will be in units of mutations per site . similarly, for a haploid population, the coalescent parameter will be an estimate of neμ, where ne is the effective population size and μ is the rate of mutation per generation. however, if, for example, the evolutionary rate is expressed in mutations per site per year, then the branches in the tree will be in units of years. furthermore the population size parameter of the demographic model will then be equal to neτ, where τ is the generation length in years. finally, if the evolutionary rate is expressed in units of mutations per site per generation then the resulting tree will be in units of generations and the population parameter of the demographic model will be in natural units .

tree priors
when sequence data has been collected from a homogenous population, various coalescent  <cit>  models of demographic history can be used in beast to model population size changes through time. at present the simple parametric models available include constant size n = ne , exponential growth n = nee-gt  and logistic growth .

in addition, the highly parametric bayesian skyline plot  <cit>  is also available, but this model can only be used when the data are strongly informative about population history. all of these demographic models are parametric priors on the ages of nodes in the tree, in which the hyperparameters  can be sampled and estimated. as well as performing single locus coalescent-based inference, two or more unlinked gene trees can be simultaneously analyzed under the same demographic model. sophisticated multi-locus coalescent inference can be achieved by allocating a separate overall rate and substitution process for each locus, thereby accommodating loci with heterogeneous evolutionary processes.

at present there are only a limited number of options for non-coalescent priors on tree shape and branching rate. currently a simple yule prior on birth rate of new lineages  can be employed. however, generalized birth-death tree priors are under development.

in addition to general models of branching times such as the coalescent and yule priors, the tree prior may also include specific distributions and/or constraints on certain node heights and topological features. these additional priors may represent other sources of knowledge such as expert interpretation of the fossil record. for example, as briefly noted above, each node in the tree can have a prior distribution representing knowledge of its date. this method of calibrating a tree based on specifying the date of one of the nodes has a long history  <cit> . a recent paper on "relaxed phylogenetics" contains more information on calibration priors  <cit> .

insertion-deletion models
finally, beast also has a model of the insertion-deletion process. this provides the ability to co-estimate the phylogeny and the multiple sequence alignment. currently only the tkf <dig> model of insertion-deletion  <cit>  is available. interested readers should refer to the paper on this subject for more details  <cit> .

multiple data partitions and linking and unlinking parameters
beast provides the ability to analyze multiple data partitions simultaneously. this is useful when combining multiple genes in a single multi-locus coalescent analysis  or to allocate different evolutionary processes to different regions of a sequence alignment . the parameters of the substitution model, the rate model among sites, the rate model among branches, the tree, and the tree prior can all be 'linked' or 'unlinked' in a analysis involving multiple partitions. for example in an analysis of hiv- <dig> group o by lemey et al  <cit> , three loci  were assumed to share the same substitution model parameters , as well as sharing the same demographic history of exponential growth. however they were assumed to have different shape parameters for Γ-distributed rate heterogeneity among sites, different rate parameters for the strict molecular clock and the three tree topologies and sets of divergence times were also assumed to be independent and unlinked.

model comparison and model selection
the most sound theoretical framework for model comparison in a bayesian framework is calculation of the bayes factor :

 bf=pp 

where p is the marginal likelihood of model m, averaged over the model parameter values θ:

 p=∫prpdθ 

so the bf is the ratio of the marginal likelihoods of the two models. generally speaking calculating the bf involves a reversible jump mcmc in which a markov chain is constructed that samples a state space containing both models. reversible jump mcmc has not been implemented in beast yet. however there are a couple of methods of approximating the marginal likelihood of a model  by processing the output of a beast analysis. a simple method first described by newton and raftery  <cit>  computes the bf via importance sampling . with this importance distribution it turns out that the harmonic mean of the sampled likelihoods is an estimator of the marginal likelihood:

 mhm=,m))−1;θ~p 

this estimator does not always behave very well, but there are number of modifications that can be used to stabilize it and bootstrapping can be employed to assess the uncertainty in the estimated marginal likelihoods. in general, a bf >  <dig> is strong support for the favoured model .

example
we demonstrate some of the key features of a bayesian analysis on a sample of  <dig> dengue virus serotype  <dig> sequences, isolated at dates ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> . like many rna viruses, dengue virus evolves at a rapid rate and as a result the sampling times of the  <dig> isolates can be used by beast as calibrations to estimate the overall substitution rate and the divergence times in years. we analyzed the data under both a codon-position specific substitution model , in which each codon position had a separate relative substitution rate parameter, as well as the standard gtr + Γ + i model. both of these models have the same number of free parameters. we also investigated two different models of rates variation among branches: the strict clock and the uncorrelated lognormal-distributed relaxed molecular clock. we used the constant population size coalescent as the tree prior. for each model the mcmc was run for  <dig> , <dig> steps and sampled every  <dig> steps. the first  <dig>  steps of each run were discarded as burnin. this resulted in effective sample sizes for the posterior probability of much more than  <dig> for all four analyses, .

as has been previously suggested to be generally the case for protein-coding sequences  <cit> , we found that the codon-position-specific model of rate heterogeneity among sites has a substantially superior fit to the data than the gtr + Γ + i model , and also supports a different consensus tree topology . however we find little difference  between the two models of rate variation among branches, indicating that this particular data can be treated as clock-like, as has been previously suggested  <cit> . under the strict clock model with codon-position rate heterogeneity and a constant-size coalescent tree prior the estimated date of the root of the phylogeny is  <dig> :  <dig> – 1936) and the estimated rate of substitution for this serotype was estimated to be  <dig>  × 10- <dig> .

the marginal likelihoods, the number of distinct tree topologies in the 50% credible set and the mean tree height  of the four substitution models that were analyzed in the example. the large improvement in marginal likelihood clearly indicates that the two codon-position substitution models  are substantially superior to the models in which rate heterogeneity among sites is modeled by a 3-distribution and a proportion of invariant sites. in contrast, in this example there is little difference in fit to the data between the strict clock and the relaxed clock analyses, suggesting that this data is clock-like.

one method of summarizing the posterior distribution of phylogenetic trees is to rank the tree topologies by posterior probability and consider the smallest set of trees that represents at least x% of the posterior probability. this set is termed the x% credible set of tree topologies  <cit> . for the purposes of hypothesis testing, a phylogeny can be rejected if it is not found in the 95% credible set of tree topologies. in this example we found that the size of the credible sets varied substantially for the different models. in table  <dig> we list posterior estimates of the size of the 50% credible sets for each of the four models. we chose 50% because both the gtr + Γ + i models sampled many singleton trees in the tail of the distribution so that an accurate estimate of the size of the 95% credible set was not feasible. nevertheless the table clearly indicates that the posterior distribution of the gtr + cp models is almost an order of magnitude more concentrated in tree space. this suggests that, for this data set, the gtr model is both a more precise estimator and a better fit to the data. in the case of the gtr + cp + strict model,  <dig> of the  <dig>  ×  <dig> rooted trees with  <dig> tips commanded half the total probability given the data.

CONCLUSIONS
beast is a flexible analysis package for evolutionary parameter estimation and hypothesis testing. the component-based nature of model specification in beast means that the number of different evolutionary models possible is very large and therefore diffcult to summarize. however a number of published uses of the beast software already serve to highlight the breadth of application the software enjoys  <cit> .

beast is an actively developed package and enhancements for the next version include  birth-death priors for tree shape  faster and more flexible codon-based substitution models  the structured coalescent to model subdivided populations with migration  models of continuous character evolution and  new relaxed clock models based on random local molecular clocks.

