BACKGROUND
ribosome biogenesis  is a primary function of the nucleolus  <cit> . in the nucleolus, rrna molecules are synthesized as precursors by dna-directed rna pol i and pol iii. nascent rrnas then undergo extensive chemical modifications and rna cleavage reactions. numerous ribi proteins are involved both in this enzymatic processing as well in assisting with proper rrna folding to produce functional ribosomal subunits  <cit> . synthesizing functional ribosomes requires immense coordination because gene products from all three dna-dependent rna polymerases are required to ensure proper stoichiometry of ribosomal components. this level of co-regulation is likely to be controlled through a highly-specific dna signature as seen in other gene regulatory systems  <cit> . such a signature would allow the appropriate factors to co-ordinately regulate the ribi genes as a distinct regulon. for example, in the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae two important regulatory motifs consisting of the pac  and rrpe  motifs have been identified in ribi genes  <cit> . in animals no known factor or motif is known to coordinate the entire ribi set. however, the metazoan transcription factor myc has been found to target at least some ribi genes.

myc is a bhlh dna-binding protein present in animals where it plays an important role in cell growth and proliferation by regulating gene expression during development and tumorigenesis  <cit> . myc functions by heterodimerizing with its obligate partner max to bind the sequence 5'-cacgtg  and transactivate target genes  <cit> . previous studies have implicated the myc transcription factor in rrna transcription  <cit> , but the possibility that myc could directly regulate the hundreds of gene products involved in ribi, as opposed to a few early genes or key steps  <cit> , has not been investigated. also unknown is when such an ribi circuit or other non-ribi targets of myc may have evolved and whether it was in the most recent common ancestor of bilateria , metazoa , holozoa , opisthokonta , or eukaryota.

here, we use a multi-genomic approach to show that the vast majority of genes implicated in ribosome biogenesis are associated with e-bearing core promoters in all holozoan genomes containing myc, and thus constitutes a uniquely holozoan ribi regulon. max, mad, and mnt, all members of the myc bhlh superfamily, are all either insufficient or dispensable in explaining the correlation of e with ribi as revealed by a comparison of multiple eukaryotic genomes, which differ in their bhlh repertoires. thus, in addition to known ribi targets of myc  <cit>  and the similar growth defects of both ribi and myc mutant alleles  <cit> , our comparative genomic results suggest that the characteristic ribi e core promoter architecture co-evolved with a proto-myc:max complex in a unicellular holozoan ancestor. this is consistent with the metabolic evolution of a unique, myc-max regulated, ribi growth signalling pathway in an ancient unicellular heterotroph.

RESULTS
overall approach
to gain insight into the regulatory control of ribosome biogenesis  in animals, we first wanted to characterize a co-regulated ribi gene set definable by a shared regulatory signature, a component of which would be the myc-max binding site e. a priori, we had no reason to expect whether a common regulatory signature would be found across the large number of known ribosome biogenesis genes or whether such a signature would be limited to only a subset . furthermore, we set no expectation on whether this signature would necessarily be present or absent in other non-ribi genes devoted to cell growth or other functions . for this purpose, we chose the drosophila melanogaster genome because of its relatively compact size and absence of genome wide duplications characteristic of vertebrates. both of these properties facilitate the identification of a sequence signature and the characterization of its sensitivity and specificity for entire biological functions because they simplify the ability to conduct and interpret computational queries of genome sequence.

having identified the list of genes in this fly regulon we would then utilize the many available eukaryotic genome sequences to identify shared sequence signatures associated with this regulon in each genome. because of the highly conserved nature of the protein functions associated with ribosome biogenesis, it is likely that this list of genes would remain co-regulated in other genomes despite evolution of the regulatory signatures associated with this regulon.

e is highly specific to the fly ribi regulon
an overwhelming majority of confirmed myc targets contain e near the transcriptional start site   <cit> . we therefore examined all fly genes with promoter proximal e sites to determine whether they were related by a common cellular function. we searched the drosophila melanogaster genome and identified only  <dig> promoter sequences containing an e site in the core promoter region  out of  <dig>  annotated transcripts . remarkably, these genes include most proteins known to be involved throughout ribosome biogenesis . to examine the relationship between the e motif and ribosome biogenesis in more detail, we used gene ontology  classification of the yeast genome to map  <dig> fly orthologs of yeast nucleolar genes. of these, ~75% possess e, indicating that the majority are under control of a common regulatory motif in drosophila . as explained below, many additional fly e-bearing genes, which are not conserved as orthologs in yeast, are likely to be related to ribosome biogenesis. furthermore, as detailed by multiple statistical tests conducted in this study, the rate of e motifs in the drosophila ribi gene promoters is significantly elevated relative to promoters of genes not known to be involved in nucleolar functions and/or ribosome biogenesis.

e-bearing, ribi-type promoters are unique
any examination restricted to gene orthologs precludes the identification of genes not conforming to a 1-to- <dig> orthology. to this end, it would be ideal to search the entire genome to provide a comprehensive analysis of the entire e fly ribi regulon. this method could identify novel fly ribi genes harboring e sites independent of a 1-to- <dig> orthology and ambiguous annotations of transcriptional initiation sites. to carry out this whole genome query, we first searched for additional motifs that comprised the full core promoter context of ribi genes. with additional motifs in hand, highly specific whole genome queries for promoter-linked e sites could be achieved, thereby identifying a more complete ribi regulon.

myc's known co-localization to core promoters  <cit>  suggests it may define or associate with a distinct core promoter architecture. we therefore looked for novel elements that may be specific to ribi promoters but infrequent across other promoters. we also investigated whether promoters bearing e are associated with specific core promoter elements such as tata-boxes, initiator sequences, downstream promoter elements , and other common motifs  <cit> . as detailed below, these results support the idea that the fly ribi-type promoter, uniquely characterized by the e site, defines a distinctive and highly specific promoter architecture, which is useful in identifying this gene set in drosophila.

by searching for novel motifs, we first noted that the flanks of the e site often match an extended consensus maacacgtgyg . three out of every four core promoters that contain this extended e consensus map to ribi genes . as a negative control for the specificity of the flanking sequence, we also searched the entire genome with an e motif in which the flanking pattern was maximally divergent from the observed, ribi-specific, cg-core e-box flanking pattern. this "anti-flank" e motif, kkycacgtgrmk , maps to almost 3-fold more sites than the extended e consensus, but nonetheless is absent from the core promoters of known nucleolar or ribi orthologs .

we also identified sequences corresponding to the dre core promoter element, 5'-ctatcgata, as previously reported  <cit> . dre  binds dref  and is associated with promoters involved in dna replication  <cit> . we observe a cluster of dre sites in many ribi gene promoters, where it occurs immediately upstream of e . when the fly genome is queried for regions containing at least  <dig> dre motifs and an e within an  <dig> bp window, this highly specific signature identifies  <dig> loci in the genome. over half of these are known to be associated with ribi . tellingly, dre motifs are not associated with e sites containing the anti-flank sequence .

this analysis provides enough information to distinguish most core-promoter linked e sites from the majority of ~ <dig>  e sites that lie outside of promoter regions and likely represent random background occurrences. we queried the entire drosophila genome for the different e-type core promoter signatures . the largest functional group of genes identified across the genome is the ribi gene set . these genes are involved at all steps of ribosomal processing including factors involved in rrna transcription , snorna processing , snornps , 90s particles , pre-60s particles , 40s particles , ribosome structure , unknown steps in ribosome biogenesis , and unknown functions of the nucleolus . some of these ribi genes have previously been implicated as potential direct or indirect myc targets  <cit> . some genes encode products that are only known to be localized to the nucleolus   <cit> . others participate in trna modification in addition to rrna modification  <cit> . altogether these results support the hypothesis that the many ribi genes are co-regulated and identifiable through a specific e-bearing promoter architecture.

characterization of the ribi regulon across eukaryota
to determine the evolutionary origins of the ribi regulon, we first measured the conservation of e motifs in the ribi genes of other bilaterian genomes, including humans and nematodes. of the human ribi genes, 77%, possess an e in a window ±  <dig> bp from the 5' annotated end, which is a significantly elevated compared to the ~20% background level in control promoters . in contrast with humans, there is no elevated level of e in ribi genes in the nematode genome of c. elegans despite the conservation of such genes . the presence of an e-ribi signature in both a deuterostome  and a protostome  suggests that the absence in another protostome  is a secondary loss.

 a list of all human genes with orthologous fly genes containing an e tightly linked to the core promoter in both orthologs. these genes have an e ±  <dig> bp and ±  <dig> bp from the transcriptional initiation site in the pair of human and fly orthologs, respectively. genes with asterisks are known to be involved in ribosome biogenesis. see additional file  <dig> for a more exhaustive list of genes described in this study.  a list of all human genes that have been evolutionarily maintained with e-bearing promoters across orthologous holozoan loci . these genes have an e ±  <dig> bp from the annotated 5'-end in each genome. missing from this list are genes that may be e-bearing in a genome but are not yet annotated by full-length transcripts. genes with asterisks are known to be involved in ribosome biogenesis. see additional file  <dig> for a more exhaustive list of genes described in this study.

to test whether components of the fly ribi regulon are conserved outside of bilateria, we analyzed the presence of the e signature in the ribi orthologous cohort in the genomes of more distantly-related organisms . for a metazoan outgroup to bilateria, we used the cnidarian genome of nematostella vectensis  <cit> . for a holozoan outgroup to metazoa, we used the choanoflagellate genome of monosiga brevicollis  <cit> . for an opisthokont out-group to holozoa, we used the baker's yeast genome of saccharomyces cerevisiae.

we identified all of the ribi orthologs between the fly, human, and yeast genomes and their apparent orthologs in the nematostella and monosiga genomes and were able to find at least  <dig> such genes in each genome. we found that each holozoan genome  possesses e sites across ~50% to 90% of its identifiable ribi genes in the region ±  <dig> bp from the 5'-most end . this corresponds to a statistically significant  two-fold to four-fold elevated level of e relative to the core promoter regions of adjacent control genes . as additional negative controls, we analyzed the frequency of e in the region ±  <dig> bp from the 3' end of the same test genes , or in the promoters of genes with mitochondrial go terms . we again found no enrichment over background .

importantly, we also failed to find elevated levels of e in yeast ribi versus control groups . of relevance, the yeast ribi genes are known to be regulated by motifs that are distinct from e  <cit> . we were also unable to find the e-ribi signature in other fungal and more distantly related eukaryotic genomes .

interestingly, there are a few fly e-bearing genes whose orthologs are e-bearing across humans, cnidarians, and choanoflagellates, but are not yet known to be related to ribosome biogenesis . one of these is the vasa  locus, which is an rna-binding protein and metazoan germline determinant. this gene is maintained as an e-bearing promoter in humans, ascidians, flies, cnidarians, and choanoflagellates, but not in the nematode c. elegans and could conceivably be another ddx/dhx-containing ribi gene, which was secondarily co-opted as a metazoan germline determinant. another corresponds to the dph <dig> gene, which is involved in the diphthamide modification of a histidine residue on elongation factor  <dig>   <cit> . dph <dig> is possibly required for frame-shift suppression during translation  <cit> , but could conceivably play a role in unknown ribosomal modifications.

in contrast to the highly conserved nature of the ribi regulon across holozoa, there is little evolutionary conservation of e sites for genes not known to be involved in ribi . this indicates that these fly e-bearing genes, including some known myc targets in flies and/or humans , acquired the e site either in a stem bilaterian or in subsequent independent occurrences. these sites could also represent background noise due to sequence drift in a particular lineage. many of these genes have fly e sites that are ±  <dig> bp of the initiation site, but are not as tightly linked to the core promoter  as ribi genes.

the e-bearing ribi regulon is found only in myc-bearing genomes
like the bilaterian genomes of flies and humans, the cnidarian nematostella, a non-bilaterian metazoan, possesses myc and max homologs  <cit> . nematostella myc homologs can also bind to e in vitro as well as rescue the proliferative defects of myc null mammalian cells . intriguingly, the non-metazoan choanoflagellate genome of monosiga also possesses clear orthologs of both myc and max . however, outside of holozoa, myc and max genes appear to be absent. yeast do not possess myc or max orthologs even though e-binding bhlh dimers are present  <cit> . moreover, the yeast ribi genes, which lack e sites, are known to be regulated by non-bhlh factors  <cit> . we were also unable to find members of the myc clade of genes in other fungal and more distantly related eukaryotic genomes .

secondary loss of myc is linked to secondary loss e ribi signature in nematodes
unlike flies and humans, the nematode represents a bilaterian that appears to have secondarily lost myc but not max   <cit> . this loss of a nematode myc together with the loss of the e signature in the ribi regulon is intriguing and suggests a few hypotheses and predictions. we explore these here because the loss of both an important metazoan transcription factor and a statistically significant association of e motifs with the holozoan ribi gene battery is noteworthy and instructive of myc function.

one major developmental hypothesis of nematode loss of both myc and e sites in ribi core promoters might stem from the relatively small number of  <dig> somatic cells in the adult nematode  <cit> . this extremely low quantity of adult cells and limited cell-proliferation may render myc's induction of the ribi regulon unnecessary. thus, under this hypothesis, the ribi regulon is under two modes of regulation in holozoa. first, there is a basal rate of low-level expression, and second there is a myc-dependent induced rate of elevated expression that is associated with proliferating cells. thus, nematodes with their particular small body sizes, and limited cell numbers, might have evolved to forgo myc-ribi induction. if this hypothesis is correct, we might expect to find further pseudogenization of the myc locus, in animals with similar character. other phyla known to include animals of such type include gastrotrichs, kinorhynchs, loriciferans, nematomorphs, and some priapulids.

an alternative molecular hypothesis of nematode-specific loss of both myc and e sites in ribi core promoters involves the nematode phenomenon of trans-splicing  <cit> . nematodes employ a distinctive 5'-mrna capping process that depends on trans-splicing of pre-capped 5' leader sequences expressed at independent loci. because myc has recently been found to upregulate mrna capping of target genes  <cit> , trans-splicing might have alleviated the need for keeping the myc gene.

yet a third hypothesis for loss of both myc and e sites in ribi core promoters involves novel shared motifs in c. elegans ribi genes. interestingly, as described further below our investigation analysis across opisthokont genomes, reveals several additional motifs resembling the rrpe motif that is present across opisthokonts . this could indicate a greater reliance on factors binding the rrpe motif or an augmented basal level of expression. several studies have documented the evolution of cis-regulatory signatures via substitution of transcription factors that regulate even highly conserved gene sets  <cit> .

all three hypotheses for loss of nematode myc along with loss of the e-ribi signature are mutually non-exclusive. for instance, loss of proliferative cells and the underlying myc genetic circuitry might have been permissive for the development of trans-splicing. alternatively, the evolution of nematode trans-splicing might have occured first and been permissive for loss of myc regulation.

mad and mnt are dispensable for the e-ribi core promoter signature
the loss of specific bhlh genes, such as the loss of myc in nematodes, results in different bhlh repertoires present across holozoan genomes. we therefore next examined genomic bhlh repertoires among different organisms in order to consider potential trans-factors other than myc that might correlate with e core elements in ribi promoters .

among the myc superfamily, max:max, mad:max, mnt:max, and myc:max dimers, can all bind to e  <cit> . the continued presence of both mad and max in nematodes  <cit>  suggests that mad:max or max:max complexes do not target the ribi regulon via the e target site, which is absent in nematode genomes . furthermore, a mad ortholog is not present in drosophila, whereas both mnt and mad are apparently absent in monosiga suggesting that both are dispensable for the function of the e-ribi signature . 

all of these genomic configurations suggest that e promoter signatures are direct targets of myc:max complexes and are consistent with both the known biochemically confirmed ribi targets of myc as well as the growth-related phenotypes of myc mutant alleles. nonetheless, these results do not exclude the possibility that other e-binding proteins potentially modulate the ribi regulon when they coexist with myc in the genome  <cit> . thus, in conjunction with our ribi-e genomic analyses, a consideration of the bhlh repertoire of holozoan genomes supports the hypothesis that the need for regulation by myc, but not by other bhlh genes, is responsible for the evolutionary maintenance of e sites across the ribi suite of genes.

evolution of ribi core promoter sequences across opisthokonts
while we were not able to find either myc or max orthologs in any available genome outside of holozoa, it is still possible that the e motif is still associated with ribi genes and controlled by other factors. for instance, saccharomyces cerevisiae possesses two e-binding bhlh complexes from its small repertoire of bhlh genes  <cit> . these correspond to pho2p/pho4p heterodimers and cbf1p homodimers. the pho2p/pho4p complex is involved in the regulation of phosphate biogenesis in responses to phosphate starvation, whereas cbf in involved in centromeric function, methionine biosynthesis, sulfur metabolism, and regulating ribosomal structural proteins,  <cit> . we therefore looked for the presence of e in the core promoters of ribi genes of  <dig> different fungal genomes . we specifically looked at the  <dig> ribi orthologs that are e-bearing across holozoa . we find that the average rate of e sites across all identifiable ribi orthologs in the  <dig> bp window immediately upstream of the start atg  is 16%. three separate fungal genomes have 0% e-bearing ribi core promoters , while ashbya gossipyi has the highest at  <dig> % . by comparison, in the  <dig> bp core promoter window of the  <dig> ribi genes in choanoflagellates the rate is 72% , while in flies it is 84% ; the few missing promoters have e motifs in the adjacent upstream  <dig> bp. thus, this core set of ribi genes is not likely to be regulated by e motifs in fungi as the majority of their promoters lack this site.

we next conducted a meme analysis of  <dig> bp core promoter fragments across multiple holozoan and fungal core promoter sequences for ribi genes to identify all potential motifs that might serve as common binding sites in each system. we find that the previously identified pac  ribi motif  <cit>  can be readily identified in almost all hemiascomycete fungi except the distantly related yarrowia lipolytica. this motif, when present, is usually found in 100% of all ribi genes analyzed in each species. thus, the same genes that are likely co-regulated by myc:max via e in holozoa are instead co-regulated by pac binding factors in the hemiascomycota sub-phylum. interestingly, among the myc targets identified in flies, we have found subunits of dna-dependent rna polymerases .

unexpectedly, the rrpe motif, which was identified as a co-occuring motif in yeast ribi genes along with pac motifs, appears in both fungal and holozoan ribi genes promoters. a yeast-specific factor, stb <dig>  has been proposed to promote cell growth by binding to at least some rrpes in target genes in a glucose-dependent manner  <cit> . however, not all rrpe-bearing yeast promoters appear to require stb <dig> for induction  <cit> . nonetheless, this motif may represent a more ancient and possibly conserved ribi binding motif than previously appreciated. in this case, holozoan-specific and hemiascomycete-specific modes of ribi regulation might be relatively more recent additions since their divergence. altogether, these analyses support the conclusion that e is uniquely associated with myc-bearing holozoan genomes and that different signatures and factors control the same regulon in distant taxa.

CONCLUSIONS
we successfully identified a specific core-promoter signature, partially composed of the myc:max binding site e, which is highly specific to the entire suite of genes devoted to ribosome biogenesis in holozoa but not in fungal genomes. based on these whole-genome analyses, and the confirmation of individual ribi genes as myc targets, we conclude that the entire ribi gene set constitutes a bona fide myc-targeted regulon. by analyzing a wide diversity of eukaryotic genomes, we show that this specific core-promoter signature is present only in holozoan genomes that still contain myc. furthermore, gene loss in other myc:max superfamily members, such as mad or mnt, while retaining myc, is apparently not sufficient for loss of the e signature in the ribi gene set. thus, nematode genomes, which lack myc, but not max or mad, do not possess the e signature across the well-conserved ribi gene set.

a toolkit of animal-specific genes, including the bhlh family of dna-binding factors, is thought to have been assembled early in pre-animal evolution. the bhlh family has been intriguing because of its diversification into cell-type specific functions modulating proliferation, differentiation, and metabolic programs across eukaryotes  <cit> . consequently, the evolution of animals is likely to have involved the establishment of a canonical set of bhlh transcription factors regulating these downstream genomic programs. here, we describe a large ribi regulon that co-evolved with myc:max in a stem-holozoan. significantly, myc and max mark the beginning of an animal-like bhlh repertoire in a pre-metazoan ancestor.

choanoflagellates represent the sister-group to animals. their ability to form colonies is indicative of a possible precondition in the evolution of multicellularity in metazoa  <cit> . furthermore, at least one receptor tyrosine kinase  has been identified in choanoflagellates  <cit> . rtks were once thought to be exclusive to animals, which use them in cell-cell communication and as signaling inputs into growth factor-mediated pathways of gene activation such as myc  <cit> . these results suggest a model for the origins of a myc-induced ribi regulon, which is commonly misregulated in diverse human cancers. around  <dig> to  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , a protozoan, heterotrophic ancestor of holozoa either adapted, or co-opted through duplication and divergence, a proto-myc:max bhlh heterodimer complex and evolved the capability to induce the primordial myc moiety in response to rtk-mediated growth signals. core promoter-bound myc:max complexes would then co-ordinately up-regulate the ribosome biogenesis regulon and thereby commit to cell growth and/or proliferation.

an alternative hypothesis would be that the ribi genes have always been inducible in diverse taxa, but that this mode of regulation has diverged and/or been supplanted by distinct mechanisms in different taxa. thus, the holozoan e ribi signature would not represent a new ability to up-regulate this gene set but rather a unique mechanism for inducing the ribi gene cohort. similarly, in the hemiascomycete fungi  the ribi gene set is co-regulated by non-bhlh factors via the pac motif.

a recent study has also identified e as present in a subset of core promoters of yeast ribosomal structural protein-encoding genes driven by cbf1p  <cit> . yeast are well known to have at least two e-binding bhlh systems in pho2/pho4p and cbf1p complexes, which are involved in phosphate biogenesis and methionine biosynthesis/translation, respectively. we also see a slight elevated level of e in some fungal genomes such as pichia and ashbya. thus, the holozoan myc and max system might have evolved out of an opisthokont ancestor in which e motifs might have been loosely tied to generic growth programs controlling both ribi and rp gene sets. under this scenario, a general cell growth pathway culminating in a bhlh induction of an undefined regulon might have existed in an ancient opisthokont ancestor. this pathway then diverged separately in fungi and holozoa. in holozoa, this bhlh gene evolved into a bhlh-zip encoding gene and subsequently duplicated and diverged to produce max, and a growth-inducible activating form with myc. the myc-max then specialized in induction of ribi genes. in fungi, this system perhaps retained its ancestral homodimeric form in cbf1p and controlled a more generic cell growth pathway that included ribosomal proteins, a few ribi genes, as well as other cell growth functions. furthermore, the ribi genes in hemiascomycetes evolved to be largely controlled specifically by pac-binding factors. future research will have to be conducted in both fungal and animal genomes to explore these ideas.

