BACKGROUND
since gould's publication of ontogeny and phylogeny  <cit>  a wave of renewed interest in the role of development in generating evolutionary novelties spread through biology. heterochrony, evolutionary modifications in the rates and/or the timing  of development  <cit> , become widely recognized as an important agent of evolutionary change  <cit> . the study of heterochrony, while interesting per se, does not take us any closer to understanding the developmental, genetic, and physiological processes underlying evolutionary change  <cit> . yet, the study of heterochrony, even when using size in place of time, may be quite helpful in understanding evolutionary diversification . allometry, the differential and relative growth of organismal parts may be conceived as a size-based "heterochrony"  <cit> . heterochrony addresses trait change relative to time and allometry examine trait change relative to others traits , the latter being a comparison of heterochronic results to one another  <cit> .

size and shape are important biological properties of organisms arising from their genetic basis in complex association and sometimes interaction with the external and internal environment. usually, a large fraction of the variability in morphometric data is due to size variation among individuals. scaling effects might result in shape changes associated with changing size due to allometric relationships among traits, unless all morphological components grow or scale at the same rates . a long tradition in morphometrics has been to regard size as a nuisance factor in comparisons of organisms with several methods being used to adjust size before comparisons . the rationale behind this approach is to regard size as a plastic feature of organisms and shape changes, unassociated with size , as adaptive  <cit> . another motivation for developing methods allowing the separation of size and shape was the need to compare forms with very different sizes  <cit> . yet, size is as much a property of organisms as is shape, with important functional and ecological implications. for example, a simple increase in skull size  might result in larger animals being able to handle larger and harder food items and therefore explore new resources or niches. here i present a study of size and shape variation in two new world primates, the squirrel  monkeys and capuchin  monkeys. the approach used here combines traditional and geometric morphometrics, comparative analyses of life-history data and statistical analyses of size and shape differences to understand the evolution of these two sister genera.

the subfamily cebinae, as used here, refers to the two modern genera, saimiri and cebus, which are united on the basis of dental morphology and proportions, overall cranial morphology and others skeletal features  <cit> . there is now a consensus that these two genera are indeed living sister clades based on recent phylogenetic studies  <cit> . adult squirrel monkeys weigh less than  <dig>  kg, on average  while capuchins usually weigh  <dig> times more . capuchins occur throughout the neotropical region occupying virtually all types of forested habitats, from mangroves and disturbed forests to well-preserved amazonian and atlantic forests. squirrel monkeys occur throughout the amazon region to central america, but not in the cerrado and atlantic forests, also occupying a great variety of forested habitats. group sizes usually range from  <dig> to  <dig> individuals in cebus while saimiri had group size ranging from  <dig> to up to  <dig> individuals, and sometimes both genera mix together in foraging parties. besides, both genera share some unique life-history patterns in new world monkeys , with relatively heavy brains for their body weight  <cit> .

here i present a study of the morphological variation in cebus and saimiri, focusing on the allometric patterns, differentiation and evolution of size and shape in cebinae. ontogenetic and static allometric patterns and shape  variation are compared in order to describe similarities and differences in skull variation between genera. finally, these results are compared to life-history traits and ecology of nwm to understand the cebinae morphological evolution. all these approaches converge to a simple picture: cebus and saimiri evolved from a common ancestor basically diverging in size. this divergence follows a common ontogenetic trajectory which is basically revealed by the fact that evolutionary allometry  and ontogentic allometry  are highly correlated and morphologically describe the same changes in the skull. this size evolution might be caused by life-history changes like a delayed on-set of reproduction in cebus.

RESULTS
static and ontogenetic allometry
multivariate allometry coefficients , theirs standard errors  and 95% confidence limits  for both genera based on the first principal component extracted from each genus within-group v/cv matrix. pc <dig> vectors were normalized and each coefficient divided by 1/ <dig> to obtain the ac. standard deviation estimates obtained from bootstrap analysis. allometric coefficients with l <dig> higher that one  were considered to be positively allometric with general size  and conversely, ac with l <dig> lower that one were considered to be negatively allometric  with size. acs with confidence limits encompassing  <dig>  were considered to be isometric with size . the last column show the first principal component extracted from the whole sample  and used in the mass transformation.

differentiation with and without size
a manova was performed on the  <dig> measurements using sex, genus, and sex by genus interaction as independent variables in order to determine whether sexual dimorphism needs to be accounted for in the analyses. five hundred sixty-four individuals were analyzed and significant multivariate  and univariate  differences between the genera were found. there was also significant multivariate differences in sex . thirty-five variables presented univariate differences in sex significant at p <  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  two were significant between 1% and 5%  and two were found non-significant . moreover, there was also significant multivariate sex by genus interaction  and  <dig> significant sex by genus interaction  in the univariate tests. there is strong evidence for differentiation between the two genera, the two sexes and for the interaction of sex with genus. additionally, an anova performed on size  show significant differences between the two genera , between the two sexes  and also significant interaction between effects , all effects with  <dig> degree of freedom . therefore all analyses below were done independently for both sexes, except where specifically noted, allowing also to properly control for interespecific variation within each genus.

the manova performed on the original unscaled variables using  <dig> complete male skulls with genera and species nested within genera as factors was highly significant  with the single canonical variate  separating completely the two groups . correlations between cv scores and skull measurements are also presented in table  <dig>  based on the correlations between variables and function, the cv is a size factor because all the significant correlations are positive, except for br-ld. cv has large contributions from both neurocranial and facial traits. the manova performed on the  <dig> complete female skulls with genera and species nested within genera as factors was also highly significant  with the single cv  also separating the two groups completely . correlations between cv scores and skull measurements are also presented in table  <dig>  the two cv's  are very similar with a vector correlation between them of  <dig> . the manova results with species nested within genus indicate that only one trait  does not show significant differences between the two genera  in the univariate f-tests for both, males and females .

the canonical variate obtained for both males and females using either unscaled or mass data are show. also the correlation of each trait to each cv is also show, with significant  correlations in bold.

results from the glm analyses for each sex using unscaled data with "genus" as a factor and "species" nested within genus as independent factors. for each trait is presented the sum of squares , degrees of freedom , mean square , f value and the associated probability . significant differences in bold.

results from the manova done upon the mass corrected data are quite different from the analyses upon the original unscaled data. while the cv  is also highly significant for males  the two genera are now widely overlapping . the same pattern holds for females, with the cv  being also significant , the scores of the two groups widely overlapping . moreover, correlations of the variables with the cv, for both males and females, are now very small with around half of them being significant . the manova results with species nested within genus shows only two traits  with significant difference for the females  and six traits with significant differences in the males .

results from the glm analyses for each sex using mass data with "genus" as a factor and "species" nested within genus as independent factors. for each trait is presented the sum of squares , degrees of freedom , mean square , f value and the associated probability . significant differences in bold.

interestingly, the manova performed upon the mass corrected data to test for genus, sex and sex by genus effects shows only a small interaction of the factors, with only  <dig> traits  deemed significant. also, few traits are significant between genera . conversely,  <dig> of the  <dig> traits show significance differences between the sexes using the conservative bonferroni threshold.

heterochrony and life-history
growth trajectories
i tested the assumption of size as a proxy for age by regressing size  against developmental age codes  separately for males and females. cebus data was used because the juveniles and sub-adult sampling is much more extensive in this genus and have sex information available. both regressions were highly significant  and the multiple r was  <dig>  for females and  <dig>  for males. similar analyses in saimiri  show also a similar multiple r . furthermore, for cebus apella at least there is available information for absolute age  for each age class based on dental eruption . therefore is possible to calculate the correspondence between absolute size, time and age classes. age classes and the natural log of age  present a correlation of  <dig>  for males of cebus apella. absolute time and size are also highly correlated  again indicating that size is a reasonable proxy to time. given that absolute age is not available for the genus saimiri, i use dental age classes here in the paper as a "developmental marker" and absolute size as an estimate of time.

comparison of the growth trajectories are summarized in figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  most traits present a linear trajectory in the ln-scale, but some exceptions occur. two general patterns are evident: 1) simple extension/truncation of the growth trajectory  2) a step along the size  axis causing a shift in the otherwise parallel trajectories with saimiri above . most traits conform to one of these two patterns with a few exceptions. a group of such exceptions correspond to those traits which present very low correlation with size  including traits ld-as, br-ld, opi-ld, ba-opi . twenty-six traits  can be assigned to pattern  <dig>  and nine traits  to pattern  <dig>  .

interpretation of the bivariate plots  relative to heterochronic processes.

geometric morphometrics
centroid size is highly correlated with pc <dig> score derived from the linear distances . also, centroid size and pc <dig> score are linearly related when both are in ln scale. therefore i use the natural log of the centroid size as a measure of absolute skull size. figure  <dig> show the plot of the first pc-3d against centroid size . this pc1-3d basically represents allometric variation in shape associated with size, accounting for  <dig> % of all variation in shape. starting from the smaller values , morphologically pc1-3d represents a lowering of the cranial vault with a large dislocation of landmark br to a more posterior position as well as a relatively smaller posterior cranial base with a large dislocation of landmark ld to a more anterior position. therefore, a major change described by this pc1-3d is that involving the neurocranium, with changes in the height of the vault associated with the base/back of the skull, involving landmarks ld, br and to a lesser extent as. these landmarks are dislocated from a more posterior  and lateral  position in saimiri babies to a more anterior  and medial position  in cebus adults. those changes in landmarks br and ld dominates the pc1-3d which can be easily observed from a vector of changes in landmarks coordinates comparing the upper and higher limits of variation described by pc1-3d . another change in shape associated with pc1-3d is in the face, being more prognathic  in the upper end , with a longer and slender palate  and the zygomatic arch . also associated with this pc1-3d is the dislocation of landmarks pt and tsp to a more medial position resulting in a more slender skull in cebus . figure  <dig> present the plot of the second pc-3d against size. this pc2-3d is basically an ontogenetic vector accounting for  <dig> % of all variation in shape. the pc2-3d represents  a relative decrease in the neurocranium region with landmark br once more involved but this time being dislocated to a forward and lower position. also, an enhanced prognathism resulting from landmarks is and pm being dislocated forward and upward. another change involves landmarks mt and zi being dislocated forward and to a lower position resulting in a palate region comparatively smaller, face more prognathic and with a more robust pre-zygomatic region. also, the cranial base is to some extent relatively smaller with landmark tsp being dislocated to a more posterior position and closer to landmarks apet, ba, ts and jp. contributing to pc2-3d is also, and again, a dislocation of landmarks ld to a more anterior position and as to a more medial position, exactly the same change described in pc1-3d. so, to some extent changes in shape described by pc1-3d and pc2-3d are similar .

only the pc1-3d presents significant differences between cebus and saimiri  and this difference holds for all age classes analyzed separately. all other pc's variables, that cumulatively account for 97% of all shape variation  do not present any significant differences between the two genera.

for each consecutive age  and for each of the two genera the vector of absolute change in landmark position is show. all vectors were normalized to one in order to be directly comparable. also, the magnitude of change in landmark position between the two extremes is each of the allometric vectors  is show.

both pc1-3d and pc2-3d are highly correlated with size variation within each genus . also, pc1-3d and pc2-3d are also highly correlated between them within each of the two genera. pc1-3d is also highly correlated with size among genera , while pc2-3d scores are uncorrelated  with both size and pc1-3d among genera . all other pc's variables are uncorrelated with size .

the pearson correlation and associated probability between absolute size, pc1-3d and pc2-3d are show for a conjoint analysis  and for each of the two genera.

discussion
sexual dimorphism in cebus and saimiri is well marked, either in the original traits or the mass corrected data. indeed,  <dig> of the unscaled traits show significant sexual dimorphism in cebus and  <dig> in saimiri, using the conservative bonferroni threshold. after removing scale differences, mass corrected data show  <dig> traits with significant sexual dimorphism in cebus and  <dig> in saimiri . males in both genera are larger than females, but skull size dimorphism is more evident in cebus  while in saimiri females are on average 82% of the males. besides, both sexes share a high similarity in their allometric vector correlation . altogether these results suggests that sexual dimorphism in cebinae is not simply a function of size related differences. in other words, if females were to grow to the same size as males in either saimiri or cebus, sexual dimorphism in shape would still be evident. therefore nearly all analyses were performed separately for each sex.

differences between the two genera are massive  considering the original data, with mahalanobis d <dig> distances pointing out the complete separation of the two groups in both sexes . conversely, there is a wide overlap between both genera considering the mass corrected data  with very low d <dig> distances . moreover,  <dig> of the  <dig> original traits show significant differences  between the two genera in both sexes. conversely, only two traits show significant differences between the two genera after correcting for scaling differences  in females. males present a slightly larger differentiation with  <dig> traits showing significant differences between the genera in the mass corrected data. taken together these results suggest that most of the differences between cebus and saimiri are related to size. indeed, the only trait in the original scale not showing significant differences between the two genera  is the only one not influenced by size . this is an interesting result given that these two landmarks br and ld are by far the most influential in the shape changes described by pc1-3d and pc2-3d. in fact, given that pc1-3d is the axis of major differentiation between saimiri and cebus, and that br is dislocated to a more posterior and lower position while ld is dislocated forward that explain why the linear distance between the two landmarks is basically the same in both genera, despite the huge size difference between them. this can also be observed in the additional on-line material , particularly on the lateral view. after removing scale differences from the data  the large differences between the two genera nearly disappear, with only a small differentiation being observed. these results from the euclidean distances analyses are totally consistent with the results obtained from the geometric morphometrics approach. moreover, these results also show that males are somewhat more differentiated than females, after removing scale differences. in short, for the most part, squirrel monkeys are scaled down versions of capuchins, or vice versa.

allometric vectors are much more similar than expected by chance in all comparisons as indicated by the comparisons of observed vectors correlations against its random permutations. this can be quantified by the angles formed between those allometric vectors, with observed angles ranging from  <dig> ° to  <dig> °, well below the minimum expected angle of  <dig>  ° from the random permutations. given strong similarity in the allometric vectors of cebus and saimiri, and that most of the differences between them are size-related, it is seems clear that during the evolutionary diversification of these two sister genera size plays a major role. conservation of allometric patterns in cebus and saimiri suggest that they simply follow the same growth patterns but evolved to attain different adult final sizes . this conclusion is reinforced by the results of the geometric morphometrics approach where the absolute magnitude of changes in landmarks position along pc1-3d and pc2-3d between consecutive age classes within saimiri and cebus are compared. all vectors of change are similar either within or between genus and present vectors correlation above  <dig> , which again is well above the expected range from the random permutation tests .

in a size-based scheme for heterochrony  this would suggest that saimiri evolved its small size by some sort of ontogenetic scaling or allometric progenesis or conversely, cebus evolved its larger size by hypermorphosis, or both processes were involved since the genera diverged from their last common ancestor. at present is impossible to know the direction of change or in other words, which is the ancestral condition and which derived. furthermore, both processes might have happen while both genera diverged from an ancestor of intermediate size.

yet, despite conservation of allometric patterns, a broader, and perhaps more interesting, picture arises when we look at the comparison of growth trajectories . comparison of growth trajectories suggests two general and diverse underlying changes in development . pattern one corresponds to an extension/truncation of the growth trajectory and occurs in 67% of all traits . pattern two corresponds to a translation  or height of otherwise parallel trajectories  and accounts for 23% of all traits. therefore, developmental changes involved in the cebus-saimiri evolution seem to be to a larger part mix of two different heterochronic patterns: progenesis-hypermorphosis and pre-postdisplacement if we take a classic morphometrics approach.

but, what light can be shed on this discussion by the results of the geometric morphometrics approach? first, is clear that the pc1-3d is an allometric size vector with a correlation of  <dig>  with absolute size . this is also the axis of major differentiation between the two genera and in fact the only one where they do not overlap and present a significant difference on a series of t-tests performed upon each of the first  <dig> pc's of the 3d analyses. these results are quite similar to the ones obtained with the canonical variate analyses done upon the original and the mass data and basically reinforce the point that cebus is a scaled-up version of saimiri.

also, the orientation of the pc1-3d is basically the same between the two genera . second, pc2-3d is also an allometric vector with a high correlation with size if the focus is the within genus variation . indeed, pc2-3d is also highly correlated with pc1-3d . furthermore, the orientation of the pc2-3d is also basically the same between the two genera . considering all these results both pc's 3d can be interpreted as allometric vectors. in other words, pc2-3d represents ontogenetic allometry  while pc1-3d represents evolutionary allometry . in fact, changes in both pc's seem to some extent similar involving basically the neurocranium, face and zygomatic regions and it is not a surprise that both represent allometric variation.

what these results inform us about the evolution of cebus and saimiri? first, almost all differentiation between these two genera is related to size/scaling. second, these differences either in scale  or shape associated with size  follow a common evolutionary trajectory . this last point is also totally supported by the correlation between absolute size, the axis of differentiation between the two genera , and pc1-3d . thirdly, ontogenetic variation in shape in one genus is parallel to the ontogenetic variation in the other. in other words, ontogenetic allometry follows a common and parallel trajectory between cebus and saimiri  while the latter genus obviously start from a different point due to the huge difference in absolute size among them . fourthly, ontogenetic and evolutionary allometries are correlated. considering all these findings together it seem correct to conclude that the evolution of these two genera results from developmental changes tweaking with body size and that nearly all differences observed among adult morphologies are a consequence of this size scaling. it is impossible at this time to polarize this change and in fact, it might well be the case that after the split from their common ancestor cebus and saimiri both diverges in opposite directions, cebus scaling up and saimiri scaling down.

what role might life-history evolution play in triggering those morphological changes? figure  <dig> show that cebus has a delayed on-set of reproduction. this is consistent with 67% of the traits growth trajectories and with the hypermorphic condition of cebus and suggests that the extension of the growth trajectory was attained by delaying the age of first reproduction. conversely, figure  <dig> shows that saimiri neonates are born heavier than expected for a nwm of its size and this suggests that the height observed in the trajectories, where saimiri is translated above cebus  might be explained by this larger starting point for the post-uterine growth period. figure  <dig> also add another piece in this puzzle, showing that cebus infants are weaned later than expected for a nwm of its size while the reverse is true for squirrel monkeys. delayed weaning and age of first reproduction suggests that cebus has a very slow developmental pattern compared to the rest of the nwm. early weaning in saimiri would suggest at first the reverse, but others factors should be considered here in judging whether or not saimiri present a "fast" or " slow" life-history pattern. saimiri neonates are born relatively heavy and represent almost 14% of the total weight of the mother, representing the largest pre-natal investment in nwm  <cit>  in a single newborn . squirrel monkey mothers also usually do not have support from group members in raising their infants which should impose a heavy burden on them. saimiri compensate for this burden by a prolonged interbirth interval  <cit> . garber and leigh also point out that in saimiri "an ontogenetic trajectory associated with large neonatal body size and rapid neurological development may facilitate early foraging independence, thus shifting metabolic costs away from the mothers and to the developing individual". after weaning, developing young follow a long and slow growth trajectory  <cit> , which in a way is similar to their sister clade, cebus. figure  <dig> sheds additional light on this point, because the cebus/saimiri clade is characterized by the highest pre-natal growth rates among nwm, after accounting for differences in adult body size . because most of neurocranial growth occurs during the pre- and peri-natal period, this faster growth in capuchins and squirrel monkeys accounts for the largest encephalization index in this clade within nwm  <cit> , which can also be observed in the very long neural region in saimiri and cebus young's . conversely, cebus and saimiri post-natal growth rates are among the lowest among nwm . therefore, summarizing all these life-history changes, the whole clade of capuchin/squirrel monkeys might be characterized by fast pre-natal growth and very slow post-natal growth. this is an interesting conclusion, because while obviously saimiri represents a paedomorphic  morphology and cebus a peramorphic  morphology when compared to one another, the whole clade might be considered paedomorphic relative to nwm as a whole.

age of first reproduction, adult weight, gestation length, age of weaning, birth weight, and pre- and pos-natal growth rates are presented for nwm.

CONCLUSIONS
saimiri and cebus represent a unique radiation within the nwm in many aspects. the differentiation of these two genera from their common ancestor is, to a large extent, due to size evolution. most morphological differences between these two genera are related to scaling. furthermore, this scaling is to a large extent due to a simple extension/truncation of growth, but also includes pre- and post-displacement. several life-history changes seem correlated to, or perhaps are even causal of the morphological diversification of cebus and saimiri; such as delayed on-set of reproduction in cebus, faster pre-natal growth rates and delayed weaning in cebus, and accelerated weaning in saimiri. post-natal life-history is also slow in both genera relative to other nwm.

