BACKGROUND
although the genetic and developmental mechanisms of nervous system organization in vertebrates have attracted considerable attention, relatively little is known about the evolutionary origins of the vertebrate central nervous system . in all chordates, which, in addition to vertebrates, comprise the tunicates and cephalochordates , the anterior end of the dorsal, hollow nerve cord is enlarged to form a  forebrain, a possible midbrain and a hindbrain
 <cit> . however, a definite midbrain and a midbrain–hindbrain organizer may have been vertebrate innovations
 <cit> .

amphioxus, with its vertebrate-like body plan and unduplicated genome
 <cit> , is a good model system to study cns development and neuronal cell type diversity. the amphioxus cns, which is composed of about  <dig>  neurons, consists of a cerebral vesicle, a swelling at the rostral end of the nerve cord that corresponds to the vertebrate diencephalon plus a short midbrain, a hindbrain and a spinal cord
 <cit>  . the gene networks for patterning the anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes of the neural tube are likely conserved between amphioxus and vertebrates
 <cit> . moreover, molecular and anatomical studies suggest that the amphioxus and vertebrate brain are characterized by several homologous structures: the frontal eye complex , the lamellar body , and the infundibulum
 <cit>  . unlike vertebrates, the neural tube of amphioxus does not possess morphologically segmented rhombomeres. collinear expression of hox genes as well as the segmental expression patterns of genes, such as islet and err, nonetheless suggest that the amphioxus cns contains a regionalized hindbrain
 <cit>  and some authors have proposed that the establishment of this hindbrain organization requires signaling from the segmented mesoderm
 <cit> . neurotransmitter chemistry has been relatively conserved through metazoan evolution, while brain size and cytoarchitecture have been altered considerably in different lineages, particularly in vertebrates. therefore, amphioxus, with its simple vertebrate-like cns, is a favorable model for studying the evolution of chordate and vertebrate neuroanatomy and neurophysiology. in a previous study, we have identified a gene encoding amphioxus tyrosine hydroxylase , the rate-limiting enzyme for dopamine  biosynthesis and studied the localization of dopaminergic neurons during amphioxus development
 <cit> . similarly, we have studied the appearance of cholinergic neurons by assessing the expression of choline acetyltransferase  and vesicular acetylcholine transporter 
 <cit> . by double whole-mount in situ hybridization, we demonstrated that vacht and chat are coexpressed in the same cells of the amphioxus neural tube. moreover, both amphioxus vacht and chat are alternative transcripts generated from a single gene locus 
 <cit> . moreover, the serotonergic system has been investigated by immunocytochemistry in amphioxus embryos and larvae
 <cit> . 

here, we use neurotransmitter markers in amphioxus to reconstruct a neurochemical map of the developing cephalochordate nervous system. using vesicular transporters and key enzymes for neurotransmitter biosynthesis as markers, we assessed the neuronal differentiation in the developing amphioxus nervous system focussing on the time of appearance of glutamatergic, gabaergic, glycinergic, cholinergic and serotonergic neurons. although we are aware that physiological and pharmacological assays are required to definitively demonstrate the utilization of a specific neurotransmitter by a given amphioxus neuron, our work nonetheless revealed the distribution of neuronal cell bodies engaged in synthesizing particular neurochemicals in the developing amphioxus cns and allowed us to construct the first neurochemical map of the amphioxus embryo.

RESULTS
in order to classify the neurons of the developing amphioxus cns on the basis of their neurotransmitter properties, we cloned genes encoding vesicular transporters and/or key enzymes for transmitter synthetic pathways and studied their expression by whole mount in situ hybridization . glutamatergic neurons were identified by using as marker the vesicular glutamate transporter , which in vertebrates is required for glutamate accumulation and transmission. in the genome of the florida amphioxus , we found four potential vglut-related sequences . phylogenetic analyses established that only one of the four sequences is a true ortholog of the three vertebrate vglut sequences . this amphioxus vglut gene was subsequently isolated by pcr and used to synthetize the riboprobe for in situ hybridization.

amphioxus possesses at least one ortholog of the mammalian genes encoding tryptophan hydroxylase , the rate-limiting enzyme in serotonin synthesis and a serotonin transporter  acting as both symporter and antiporter in the presynaptic membrane . amphioxus tph and sert served as molecular markers for locating the serotonin-producing neurons in the developing amphioxus nervous system. both markers show the same expression pattern and are likely expressed at very low levels, because, compared to the other neurotransmitter markers used in the present work, both required an extended development time with the alkaline phosphatase-mediated detection system. we were thus unable to obtain very strong signals in our double in situ hybridization experiments with these two markers.

to follow the differentiation of gabaergic neurons in amphioxus, we studied the expression of glutamic acid decarboxylase , the rate-limiting enzyme in gaba biosynthesis. moreover, we simultaneously assessed the developmental expression of the vesicular gaba/glycine transporter  that is responsible for the uptake into the synaptic vesicle of both gaba and glycine
 <cit> . we found that amphioxus possesses single genes encoding gad and vgat , both of which were cloned by pcr. however, since vgat is expressed in both gabaergic and glycinergic neurons
 <cit> , in order to identify the glycinergic neurons in the amphioxus cns, we needed to perform double in situ hybridization experiments with both gad and vgat. thus, gabaergic neurons are vgat-positive and gad-positive, while glycinergic neurons are vgat-positive and gad-negative.

finally, we used double in situ hybridization to obtain more synoptic maps of neurochemically-marked neurons . in addition to vgat and vglut, we also included the gene encoding the amphioxus vesicular acetylcholine transporter  as marker for cholinergic neurons. we hence analyzed embryos double-stained for vgat and vglut, vglut and vacht as well as vgat and vacht.

glutamatergic neurons
expression of amphioxus vglut is first detectable in the cns of the 14-hr neurula in three pairs of cells located, respectively, in the anterior tip of the cns, at posterior end of the cerebral vesicle and in close proximity of the first pigment spot . at this stage, vglut is also expressed in ectodermal cells located at the anterior tip of the embryo and ventrolaterally on both sides of the embryo . the latter ectodermal cells probably correspond to type  <dig> ectodermal sensory cells
 <cit> , which originate ventrally and migrate dorsally during the neurula stage. vglut expression remains essentially unchanged in the 16-hr neurula . at 22 hrs and 24 hrs, however, additional cells in the anterior cns begin to express vglut, including cells located dorsolaterally in the anterior tip of the cerebral vesicle . vglut expression is also found in dorsolateral and ventral cell bodies in proximity to the first pigment spot . moreover, scattered ectodermal cells along both flanks of the body are still labeled . at 36 hrs, vglut transcription is initiated in the neural tube just anterior to the first pigment spot . in 36-hr larvae, vglut-positive cells are also detectable in the anterior tip of the cns at level of the frontal eye, in the posterior cerebral vesicle, in the neural tube anterior and posterior to the first pigment spot and in ectodermal sensory cells . 

serotonergic neurons
tph- and sert-expressing neurons are located in 22-hr neurulae in the most anterior tip of the cerebral vesicle, where the frontal eye complex will develop . by 24-hr, tph-positive neurons are also detectable in ventrolateral cells of the cerebral vesicle . expression is essentially unchanged in the 72-hr larva , with the notable exception of a few sert-positive neurons that become detectable in the hindbrain region .

gabaergic and glycinergic neurons
gad expression is first detectable in the 16-hr neurula in three pairs of cells in the neural tube: one pair in the cerebral vesicle and two pairs in the hindbrain region . expression is unchanged in the 18-hr neurula . by 24-hr and 36-hr, the first two cell pairs have been replaced by two clusters of three cells each . gad-expressing cells are arranged ventrolaterally in the neural tube . by 48-hr, excepting the appearance of gad-positive neurons anterior and posterior to the first pigment spot, the expression of gad in the neural tube remains unchanged. at this stage, ectodermal sensory neurons around the oral cavity also express gad .

amphioxus vgat expression is first observed in the 16-hr neurula in five pairs of cells : one pair in the cerebral vesicle and four pairs, regularly spaced, in the hindbrain region. a cross-section shows expression of vgat in the ventral neural tube, which is identical to the localization of gad-positive neurons . the overall expression pattern of vgat is maintained at later developmental stages, but the total number of vgat-positive cells in each of the five cluster pairs increases with time . at the mid-neurula stage , glycinergic neurons correspond to the two posterior pairs of vgat-positive/gad-negative cells . by the late neurula stage , moving from anterior to posterior, the second cluster of labeled cells  contains a mixture of glycinergic and gabaergic cells, while the third cluster  is characterized by at least one pair of gabaergic and two pairs of glycinergic neurons . both the fourth cluster and the labeled cells posterior to the first pigment spot maintain only a glycinergic phenotype . the vgat and gad expression patterns observed in late neurulae are still present at larval stages .

construction of a neurochemical map in amphioxus by double in situ hybridization
we found that, at the neurula stage , the amphioxus cns contains different types of neurons. in the cerebral vesicle , we found two pairs of vglut-positive cells, one located anteriorly and one located posteriorly , and one pair of gad/vgat-positive cells located in the center of the cerebral vesicle . moreover, in the 14–18 hr neurula, there is also one pair of vacht-positive cells detectable in the cerebral vesicle . the more posterior regions of the neural tube, starting at the level of somite  <dig> and extending to the boundary of somites  <dig> and  <dig>  is characterized by a mixture of vacht-labeled neurons and gad/vgat-positive  or vgat-positive/gad-negative  neurons . importantly, the vacht-positive and gad-/vgat-positive or vgat-positive/gad-negative neurons are organized into alternating clusters of cells . at the junction between somites  <dig> and  <dig>  which corresponds to the region of the neural tube where the first pigment spot is forming, vacht-, vglut- and vgat-expressing neurons are organized into an anteroposterior array of cells .

these expression patterns are maintained in later neurula stages  , with the notable exception of the appearance of two groups of vglut-positive neurons: one located dorsally in the anterior cerebral vesicle  and one located posterior to the first pigment spot . moreover, we observed that the total number of neurons constituting the vgat and vacht clusters increased at these later stages . at larval stages, there is no substantial difference in the basic organization of neuronal cell types in the amphioxus cns except for an additional increase in the total number of neurons constituting the vgat and vacht clusters .

taken together, our in situ hybridization experiments yielded a neurochemical map of the developing amphioxus cns. surprisingly, this map suggests that, at least in the developmental stages examined, neurotransmitters do not colocalize in the amphioxus cns. this finding contrasts with some examples of neurochemical colocalization observed in mollusks and vertebrates
 <cit> .

discussion
in the present work, we have studied the development of specific neuronal groups defined by their neurotransmitter phenotype in the amphioxus b. floridae and have compiled a synoptic neurochemical map of the developing amphioxus nervous system . this is an advance over previous studies of amphioxus neurons, which were limited to elucidating only one neurotransmitter or neuropeptide at a time and which have demonstrated, for example, the occurrence in amphioxus of neurons containing cholecystokinin, oxytocin, vasopressin, luteinizing hormone and fmrfamide
 <cit> . more recently, serotonergic, dopaminergic and cholinergic neurons have also been reported in b. floridae embryos and larvae
 <cit> , and the distribution of dopamine, serotonin and gaba has been described in amphioxus adults
 <cit> . moreover, by using hplc, glutamate, aspartate, glycine, alanine, serine and gaba have been identified in the nervous system of the amphioxus b. lanceolatum  <cit> . 
 <cit> . a slender neck  region is present between the sv and vg. the anterior part of sv contains two sensory organs: the otolith , used for the perception of gravity, and the ocellus , for light reception. the left side of sv contains other sensory cells named coronet cells . the vg consists of at least  <dig> motoneurons and some interneurons, while the anterior nerve cord contains the anterior caudal inhibitory neurons . the ascidian tunicate tadpole peripheral nervous system consists of an adhesive organ with papillar neurons , ectodermal neurons in the head , trunk  and tail , and bipolar interneurons . the cns of an amphioxus larva includes an anterior cerebral vesicle , which, anteriorly, contains a frontal eye complex  and, posteriorly, the infundibular organ  as well as the lamellar body . the primary motor center  is located at the posterior end of the cv and thus significantly anterior to the first pigment spot . s, somite; n, notochord; m, mouth.

interpreting the organization of neuronal cell types in the developing amphioxus nervous system
previous ultrastructural studies on the architecture and cellular organization of the larval amphioxus cns have provided a detailed morphological map of different neuronal types
 <cit> . the majority of these transmission electron microscope -based neuroanatomical reconstructions in amphioxus have been carried out on 8-day and  <dig> -day larvae and thus on developmental stages older than the material used in the present study. comparisons of these morphological data with our neurochemical map will hence need to take these stage differences into account.

on the basis of morphological and topological features, three types of motoneurons have been identified in the ventrolateral nerve cord of amphious larvae:  dorsal compartment motoneurons  innervating the dorsal fast fibers of the myotome,  ventral compartment motoneurons  innervating the ventral slow fibers of the myotome,  visceral motoneurons  innervating all of the remaining body musculature . the dc motoneurons are confined to the most anterior somites and are generally organized as pairs of cells. according to lacalli and kelly
 <cit>  at least one pair of dc motoneurons is slightly offset and is located at the level of the center of somite  <dig>  whereas all the other pairs  are positioned at the junction of the somites. expression of amphioxus islet and err genes coincides with prospective dc motoneurons
 <cit> . vc motoneurons have no evident periodical arrangement along the nerve cord, although a cluster of five vc neurons is found at the level of the posterior end of somite 1
 <cit> . finally, vm motoneurons seem to be very scarce in young larvae, but at least two have been described located posterior to the junction of somites  <dig> and 3
 <cit> .

additionaly, different interneurons have been reported in the amphioxus ventrolateral nerve cord
 <cit> . at the ultrastructure level, four types of interneurons, described as large paired neurons , are present in the amphioxus cns . the first three at the level of the primary motor center  and the fourth at the level of the junction of somites  <dig> and 4
 <cit> . moreover, four ipsilateral projection interneurons  have also been described, located predominantly in the most rostral part of the hindbrain posterior to the first pair of dc motoneurons
 <cit> . no information is available on the presence of other kinds of interneurons in more posterior regions of the amphioxus nerve cord.

in a previous report on the expression of the cgl 
 <cit> , we have tentatively assigned a cholinergic neurotransmission to some of the ventrolateral neurons identified by tem, most of which are motoneurons. this correlation of cell types identified by tem and neurons expressing specific sets of neurotransmitters can now be expanded. we show, for instance, that cholinergic neurons are generally organized as discontinuous rows of cells starting anteriorly at the pmc and stretching posteriorly to the junction of somites  <dig> and  <dig> . some of the most anterior cholinergic cells, located in proximity of the posterior end of somite  <dig>  are probably vc motoneurons, whereas the pairs of cholinergic neurons at the junctions of the somites  are likely dc motoneurons, plus an additional pair of neurons located at the level of somite  <dig> . additionally, the cholinergic neurons located just posterior to the junction of somites  <dig> and  <dig> might correspond to vm motoneurons .

one subset of cholinergic neurons identified in the cns of developing amphioxus are most likely interneurons
 <cit> , which would correlate very well with the situation in vertebrates
 <cit> . for example, lpn <dig> located at the junction of somites  <dig> and  <dig> is a potential candidate for such a cholinergic amphioxus interneuron, although lpn <dig> could alternatively be interpreted as a pair of glutamatergic excitatory neurons located inside the pmc . in contrast, our data suggest that the anterior lpns  and ipns  are gabaergic and gabaergic/glycinergic, respectively .

in our neurochemical map, some neurons cannot be ascribed to one of the categories of motoneurons and interneurons identified by tem
 <cit> . this is, for instance, the case for the cluster of cholinergic, glycinergic and glutamatergic neurons located just posterior to the first pigment spot as well as for the aggregation of a number of different neuronal types  at the level of the pmc . the pmc is a major integrative center of sensory and motor stimuli controlling the early locomotory activities of the larva, which could explain this concentration of different neuronal types. moreover, the pmc interneurons  probably connect to rostral sensory cells and project towards the posterior nerve cord, which likely contributes to locomotion and the startle response
 <cit> .

gabaergic and glycinergic neurons in vertebrates and invertebrates
gaba is a major inhibitory neurotransmitter in both vertebrates and invertebrates
 <cit> . in comparison to other animals, the distribution of gaba in the cns of amphioxus embryos and larvae seems to be more discrete. in the cns of the ascidian ciona intestinalis, gaba is widely expressed and is associated with neural regions responsible for processing sensory information and motor integration, such as the sensory vesicle and the anterior visceral ganglion 
 <cit> . interestingly, while a majority of neurons of the sensory vesicle are gabaergic, only very few cells of the anterior visceral ganglion contain gaba
 <cit> . in the c. intestinalis peripheral nervous system , there are only very few gabaergic cells, the majority of which are associated with the palps .

unlike gabaergic cells, which are widespread in the vertebrate brain, most glycinergic neurons in the vertebrate cns are restricted to the rhombencephalon and the spinal cord. for instance, in embryos of the frog xenopus laevis the first glycinergic cells appear in the caudal hindbrain region and subsequently extend to the spinal cord
 <cit> , which was also observed in lamprey embryos
 <cit> . in c. intestinalis larvae, two pairs of glycinergic neurons have been reported in the tail
 <cit>  . these cells, called acins , are located in the anterior nerve cord, just posterior to the cholinergic motoneurons of the visceral ganglion, and act as a component of a neural circuit controlling alternative muscle contraction of the larva.

the distribution of glycinergic neurons in amphioxus is quite similar to that observed in the vertebrate cns. two pairs of glycinergic cells are visible in the hindbrain region at the neurula stage. at subsequent stages of development, two further clusters, intermingled with gaba cells, appear more anteriorly at the level of somites  <dig> and  <dig> . the present results thus reveal a dynamic developmental pattern of the glycinergic system in amphioxus, including early and late glycinergic neuron populations that might correlate with maturation changes occurring during brain differentiation.

comparison of glutamatergic neurons in vertebrates and invertebrates
glutamate is the predominant excitatory neurotransmitter in the cns of invertebrates and vertebrates
 <cit> . glutamate is also one of the major neurotransmitters used in the vertebrate retina pathway, with the three vgluts being differentially expressed in specific classes of retina neurons
 <cit> . glutamate is further known to be present in the vestibular hair cells of different vertebrates
 <cit>  as well as in mechanosensory neurons of invertebrates
 <cit> . in c. intestinalis, one vglut gene has been identified, which is expressed in both the central and the peripheral nervous system 
 <cit> . more specifically, vglut is found in sensory organs  and interneurons of the posterior sensory vesicle. moreover, most of the peripheral sensory neurons found in the larval head and tail are also glutamatergic.

in amphioxus, vglut is expressed at the neurula stage in a few cells of the nerve cord and in subpopulations of ectodermal cells. these ectodermal cells correspond to a subgroup of primary sensory cells expressing neural markers, such as hu/elav, err, β-tubulin, delta, brn <dig>  and synapsin <cit> . in the amphioxus cns, glutamatergic neurons are detected in the most anterior and the central region of the cerebral vesicle . moreover, whereas most of the amphioxus hindbrain is devoid of glutamatergic cells at least until 36-hr, a cluster of vglut cells is present in the pmc. the expression of vglut in some cells of the frontal eye complex of amphioxus suggests that, comparable to vertebrate retina cells, some of the photoreceptor cells and/or neurons in amphioxus are also glutamatergic. the posterior end of the amphioxus hindbrain, caudal to the first pigment spot, contains clusters of ventrolateral and dorsolateral vglut cells . the dorsolateral cluster has previously been homologized with rohon beard sensory neurons expressing the neural marker islet <cit> . since several anamniote vertebrates exhibit rohon beard sensory neurons with a glutamatergic phenotype
 <cit> , our data lend further support to this homology and suggest that glutamatergic transmission is likely to be a common feature of at least certain chordate sense organs.

the serotonergic and dopaminergic systems
serotonin  is one of the most widespread signaling molecules of metazoans
 <cit>  and probably even of single-celled eukaryotes, where it can modulate swimming behavior and growth
 <cit> . dopamine , a neurochemical molecule belonging to the catecholamines, has been identified in most metazoan phyla and hence represents another ancient neurotransmitter
 <cit> .

in tetrapod vertebrates, 5-ht neurons are located mainly in the raphe region of the hindbrain, whereas da-synthesizing nuclei are located within the forebrain and the midbrain
 <cit> . however, in teleosts, for example, 5-ht neurons are also conspicuous in the hypothalamus, where serotonin can modulate neurohormone secretion
 <cit> . it is well known that shh and fgf <dig> signaling provide essential information to specify the fates and initial positions of da and 5-ht neurons in the ventral midbrain and rostral hindbrain of vertebrates. these signaling cascades also seem to be important for the expression of early neural patterning genes, such as pax <dig>  pax <dig>  wnt <dig> and engrailed, which establish a fundamental organizing center at the boundary of the midbrain and the hindbrain
 <cit> . this midbrain-hindbrain boundary  acts as organizing center to direct the patterning of the adjacent neural territories and of the localization and size of the da and 5-ht cell populations
 <cit> .

in the c. intestinalis larva, the tph gene is expressed in cells of the visceral ganglion
 <cit> , whereas the th gene  is expressed in the coronet cells of the ventral sensory vesicle, a region possibly homologous to the vertebrate hypothalamus 
 <cit> . in amphioxus, 5-ht neurons are mainly located in the cerebral vesicle, whereas th-labeled cells were described in the lamellar organ and adjacent ventrolateral cells 
 <cit> . taken together, since in amphioxus the first serotonergic and dopaminergic populations appear very close together in the cerebral vesicle, the ontogeny of the serotonergic and dopaminergic systems in amphioxus seem to differ substantially from the ontogeny of these systems in vertebrates. this difference between amphioxus and vertebrates might not be surprising given the absence in amphioxus of a vertebrate-like mhb organizer, which, in vertebrates, is required for defining the size and localization of the da and 5-ht cell populations
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our neurochemical map of the amphioxus cns reveals that the developing amphioxus nervous system is characterized by a strict regionalization and segmented organization of discrete groups of neuronal cell types. at the neurula stage, gabaergic/glycinergic as well as cholinergic neurons show a segmented distribution in the hindbrain, while glutamatergic, serotonergic and dopaminergic neurons are detectable in very restricted groups of neurons with precise locations along the anteroposterior axis of the cns.

