BACKGROUND
changing climates are expected to have profound effects on the genetics of insect populations. one way to study such effects is to compare populations of a widely distributed organism across contrasting climates.

one of the main constraints on local genetic differentiation and adaptation is extensive gene flow between populations. reduced dispersal between populations can lead to genetic subdivision of populations  <cit>  and may facilitate local adaptation. environmental or physical barriers may promote isolation of populations. these include geographic distance  <cit>  and physical barriers like mountains, rivers and stretches of unsuitable habitat.

dna markers provide powerful and efficient tools to study genetic diversity in insect populations  <cit>  at both inter- and intraspecific level. amplified fragment length polymorphism  is a useful dna fingerprinting technique to study genetic diversity within a species  <cit>  because it allows detection of genetic variation of organisms based on dna from any source and complexity  <cit>  without prior knowledge of the gene structure or sequences. aflp markers have been used to infer the role of geographical distance and barriers to gene flow in shaping the genetic structure of population  in a variety of organisms. the results of aflp analysis can be translated to the genetic distances  <cit>  of populations. genetic distance of isolated population is the most fundamental information need to assess the role of geographical barriers and distances in genetic diversification of populations. mitochondrial markers have also been used in population genetic studies  of insects. for example, in the ant leptothorax rugatulus  <cit>  a mitochondrial marker was found to be more informative than microsatellites and discriminated significantly better between populations. using mitochondrial markers may provide valuable information on the migration of females between populations because mitochondria are maternally inherited.

insect parasitoids have been a favorite model in ecology and evolutionary biology  <cit>  studies. drosophila parasitoids have played a major role in these studies, because of their ease of maintenance in the laboratory, the enormous biological and genetic information on their drosophila host, which has been used as model organism for almost a century  <cit>  and because of their diversity which allows comparative studies. in the present study we used aflp markers and mitochondrial gene sequencing to investigate the role of geographical distance in shaping genetic variation in iranian leptopilina boulardi  populations. l. boulardi is a larval parasitoid of drosophila of african origin  <cit>  which is widely distributed over tropical and warm temperate regions. we used both aflp and coi gene sequencing to study the genetic structure among  <dig> populations of l. boulardi collected from five contrasting climate zones in iran . the zones were chosen to represent five distinct climates varying in precipitation, length of season and minimum and maximum temperatures. the main goal of this study was to investigate to what extent the genetic structure of these populations matched climatic and geographical patterns.

RESULTS
aflp analysis
the  <dig> primer combinations yielded  <dig> scorable bands of which  <dig>  were polymorphic. amova of the aflp results revealed that the main proportion of genetic variation resided among populations . pair-wise differences of fst values among populations ranged from  <dig>  -  <dig>  . no significant differences were observed between populations from different climate zones. however, a significant proportion of variation was explained by the distinction between central and northern populations . consistent with amova, upgma tree and bootstrap analysis indicated that the three populations from the central part of iran  clustered together, but were differentiated from the northern populations sampled along the caspian sea coast . one population from the very wet caspian sea coast  was considerably different from all other populations. in pair-wise comparison of population the highest fst values was observed when we compared this population with the others. upgma tree also separated this population strongly from all other with high bootstrap value . the sorkhabad population, collected from a mountainous region on the slope of the damavand mountain near mazandaran clustered together with the wet caspian sea coastal populations. consistent with upgma tree and pco plots, low fst values in pair-wise comparison were observed when we compared sorkhabad with other northern populations .

principal coordinates analysis  revealed informative separation of populations . the first three coordinates explained  <dig> % of aflp variation. by plotting the first two coordinates  the three populations from the dry central region of iran clustered separately from the northern populations. these two principal coordinates also separated the populations from the two northern zones , except nour - a population from zone  <dig> clustered as zone  <dig> and astaneh - the most divergent population which stood apart from all others. the other two pco plots showed further evidence for divergence among the populations along the caspian sea coast. by plotting the first and third coordinates and second and third coordinates  two clusters were evident among the populations from the caspian sea coast, while astaneh, the most divergent population, again stood apart from all other groups. furthermore, the zamankhan population from a mediterranean climate  appeared separated from the two other central populations from zone  <dig> . consistent with the upgma analysis, the sorkhabad population from the mountain region clustered with populations from the geographically close, but ecologically different wet caspian sea coast.

isolation of populations by distance
a significant positive correlation between genetic and geographic distance was observed among the l. boulardi populations . the result of this test showed that a considerable part of the genetic variation was explained by geographic distance and supported the upgma and principal coordinate analyses since all geographically-close populations resembled each other. the only exception was the population from astaneh, which was highly distinct from all others populations, even from those collected from a distance of less than  <dig> km. a partial mantel test including all populations found no significant effect for isolation by the deserts of central iran . however, by excluding the astaneh population from the partial mantel test, we found a significant effect for isolation by dry desert . after correcting for the effect of isolation by desert, the partial correlation between geographic and genetic distances decreased somewhat, but still remained highly significant .

variation in cytochrome oxidase i 
coi sequence was found to be highly conserved among the iranian l. boulardi populations. only two bases were found to be different in two caspian sea coast populations and four insertions and one replacement were found in the out-group compared to the iranian populations .

discussion
the aflp analysis provided enough information to allow a clear distinction among l. boulardi populations originating from different climatic zones in iran. with the exception of one population , the genetic distances between populations correlated closely with geographic distances. a partial mantel test revealed a significant correlation between habitat isolation and genetic diversification. amova also indicated diversification of populations originating from distinct dry or wet regions. populations collected within short proximity tended to resemble each other genetically , as expected because of the high likelihood of gene flow. this was true even for populations that were ecologically very different: the mountain population of sorkhabad was genetically indistinguishable from populations from the nearby coastal plain. the partial mantel test showed significant effects of geographical barriers as well as the distance on genetic divergence. the positive correlation between genetic and geographic distances in our study is consistent with several other genetic structure studies  <cit>  on insect populations. however, studies on the genetic structure of drosophila parasitoid populations are rare. a comparison of l. clavipes populations in western europe found distinct genetic differentiation between sexual and asexual populations  <cit> , but no correlation between geographic and genetic distances.

the different climatic environments we sampled  undoubtedly impose different selection pressures on the life history of parasitoids. the genetic differences we observed between geographically isolated populations imply low gene flow. this will facilitate genetic response to such selection.

in addition to geography and climate, human activity also appears to affect the genetic structure of l. boulardi populations. parasitized fruit fly larvae may be transported with fruits and give rise to populations dissimilar from the neighbouring ones, in particular in urban areas. we found unexpected genetic divergence in two northern populations astaneh  and nour . both populations originated from urban areas and could have arrived with fruit transports.

in addition to geography and climate, variation in hosts may result in adaptation and genetic differentiation of parasitoids  <cit> , due to the intimate relationship between host and parasitoid. however, we found no evidence of the differentiation caused by hosts in this study.

populations in the central part of iran were sampled from isolated locations surrounded by dry desert. the relatively high genetic divergence over relatively short geographic distance between these central populations compared to northern populations implies that the barrier formed by unsuitable habitat may contribute to genetic diversification independently of geographic distance .

sequence data on the cytochrome oxidase i gene were less informative in our study than alfps. mitochondrial markers are potentially informative markers in genetic studies of insect populations  <cit> , sensitive to differences in the rates of male and female migration  <cit>  between populations. however, most studies using co i and ii as molecular markers in insects have used them in phylogenetic and taxonomic contexts to discriminate between higher taxa  <cit>  than populations. our results demonstrate a highly conserved pattern for coi among l. boulardi populations.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this study provides strong evidence for genetic divergence of geographically isolated populations of l. boulardi from different climate zone of iran. geographic distance by itself explained a large amount of the variance in aflp profiles. the two most distinct clusters, namely populations from central iran versus those from the north, are also separated by a large area of unsuitable habitat, suggesting that such barriers may further contribute to genetic divergence. the mountain population from sorkhabad showed that differences in ecology by themselves are not enough to overcome the homogenising effect of gene flow over short geographic distances. climate may drive host distribution patterns and select for differences in life-history traits of parasitoids. the reduction in gene flow between geographically isolated populations will facilitate genetic adaptation to such selection pressures.

