BACKGROUND
island floras are often characterized by high levels of endemism and groups of closely related but morphological and ecological divergent species that are mostly the result of single colonisation events followed by radiation e.g.  <cit> . new caledonia was cited as one of the  <dig> biodiversity hotspots recognized by conservation international  <cit> . nearly 75% of the native flora is endemic  <cit> , which is the fourth highest for an island  <cit> . while the continental part of new caledonia  was entirely submerged during the eocene , a thick layer of heavy-metal-rich oceanic mantle accumulated  <cit> . today, around one-third of the main island, grande terre, is still overlaid with ultramafic substrates. generally, grande terre is a substrate mosaic  <cit> , which is cited as one reason for the high level of endemism found there e.g.  <cit> . the climate in new caledonia ranges from tropical to subtropical, and the main island is split by a mountain range into a humid eastern and a dry western part with prevailing winds and rain coming from the south-east. taking climatic and geological factors together, grande terre has a wide range of environmental diversity. the main vegetation types in new caledonia are evergreen humid forests, maquis, dry forests, littoral vegetation, and savannah  <cit> .

one plant group that has taken advantage of many available habitats on new caledonia is diospyros, which is the largest genus  of ebenaceae, a pantropical family of woody plants. in new caledonia diospyros species range from sea level up to ca. 1250 m , and species are found in all vegetation types except mangroves, with several species co-occurring in micro-sympatry .
diospyros 
species in different habitats in new caledonia

habitats are grouped according to vegetation type and substrate. note that several species are co-occurring and that a few species are found in several habitats.

diospyros colonised new caledonia via long-distance dispersal at least four times  <cit> . in previous studies based on low-copy nuclear and/or multiple plastid markers  <cit> , it was possible to resolve phylogenetic relationships for the majority of diospyros species, except for one group of endemics from new caledonia. of the  <dig> new caledonian diospyros species,  <dig> belong to this clade of closely related endemics. in previous analyses, this strongly supported group is related to species found on islands throughout the indian and pacific oceans as far east as hawai’i  <cit> . however, due to extremely low levels of sequence divergence, it was not possible to tease apart relationships between these species . most of these closely related species are morphologically and ecologically clearly differentiated , and several species are narrow endemics restricted to small areas.

amplified fragment length polymorphism  is a fingerprinting technique that has proven to be useful for revealing phylogenetic relationship among closely related taxa . in contrast to standard phylogenetic markers, aflp variation is spread across the whole genome, spanning both coding and non-coding dna regions and may therefore be more representative of overall genetic patterns present as well as being highly informative for phylogenetic analyses at the low phylogenetic level  <cit> . compared to other fingerprinting techniques aflp shows increased reproducibility and does not require any prior knowledge of the analysed genomes. however, there are some detrimental issues to consider when working with aflp data; these include potential non-homology and non-independence of fragments, asymmetry in the probability of loss/gain of fragments, and problems in distinguishing heterozygote from homozygote bands e.g.  <cit> . despite these difficulties, several authors have used aflps to reveal phylogenetic relationships corroborated by analyses of other types of data, especially for species that have diverged recently or radiated within a short period of time e.g.  <cit> .

in this study we focus on this group of closely related species of diospyros endemic to new caledonia . our aim was to clarify species boundaries as well as phylogenetic relationships between these new caledonian diospyros species. integrated in a broader context, the outcome of our research should help us better understand the factors behind and mechanisms of speciation and radiation on islands.

RESULTS
after excluding  <dig> replicates the final matrix used for analyses contained  <dig> individuals and  <dig> fragments. the aflp profiles showed good reproducibility with a mean error-rate of  <dig> % across all replicated samples. because the focus of this study was on the phylogenetic relationships between species and species limits rather than intra-specific population genetics, we are presenting and discussing mostly the results of inter-specific relationships. we are presenting here only unrooted trees due to the low resolution of their backbone. we analysed the data using neighbour-joining  dendrograms and principal coordinate analysis  with different distance methods, and in both cases the dice distance gave the highest resolution of relationships between species.

the nj analysis resulted in a star-like dendrogram with a backbone of short branches lacking bootstrap support greater than 75%. all species except d. minimifolia, d. parviflora and d. vieillardii form single clusters in the nj tree . however, only eight  of the  <dig> included species form clusters with bootstrap higher than 80%. the bayesian inference  produces a similar result. all species except d. labillardierei, d. minimifolia, d. pancheri and d. parviflora form single clusters in the bi tree . apart from d. flavocarpa, d. revolutissima, d. tridentata and d. vieillardii, all clustered species have high  posterior probabilities.

pco separated accessions into two main groups  that can be subdivided into six subgroups . within the “white” group  subgroup one includes d. vieillardii , subgroup two d. calciphila  and subgroup three the rest of the individuals from this group . in the “grey” group  subgroup four included d. flavocarpa, d. umbrosa and d. vieillardii , subgroup five d. erudita and d. glans  and subgroup six the remaining individuals . a pco of populations  based on the pair-wise f
st
 distances obtained from the amova resulted in similar groups and subgroups of populations as those obtained from the individual-based pco. structure analysis gave the highest value of ∆k for k =  <dig> plus few other suboptimal k values . however the latter contained clusters with negligible membership . both k =  <dig> and k =  <dig> resulted in three visible clusters, with one cluster being only found in significantly admixed samples . visualisation of k = <dig> and k =  <dig> showed two clusters only and both analyses are highly similar to each other . it has been argued the ad-hoc evanno method  <cit>  favours by default k = <dig> over k =  <dig> when searching for the correct number of clusters  <cit> . however, pco separated individuals included in our analyses into two groups as well, and therefore we consider k =  <dig> as representative for our sample set. for k =  <dig>  the allele-frequency divergence between the two groups was  <dig> . one group  includes the majority of accessions . the other group  includes d. calciphila, d. labillardierei , d. minimifolia , d. pustulata, d. sp. pic n’ga, d. tridentata , d. veillonii  and d. vieillardii . seven individuals appear to be admixed ; most of those are d. vieillardii. several species  and even some populations comprise individuals belonging to each of the two groups.

in order to quantify the amount of genetic variation between species we have performed a non-hierarchical amova with species assigned as “populations”. this analysis showed as little as 30% of the variation to occur among the species. however, in the structure, pco, nj and bi analyses several species seemed to be formed by genetically distinct populations assigned to different clusters and coming in distinct positions in the tree. to avoid mixing up of cryptic variation within a group, we run further amovas with populations assigned as sample localities, despite the relatively low sample size per locality. results of non-hierarchical amova in this case indicate a higher level of differentiation between populations, resulting in an f
st
 of  <dig> . there was no visible difference in gene diversity between stands of co-occurring species and isolated populations. several hierarchical amovas  were not significantly more informative than the non-hierarchical amovas . grouping populations according to geography or ecology, explains a surprisingly low amount of the variation . furthermore, allocating populations to the  <dig> included species assigns a relatively high percentage of variation at the between-species level , but with a highly similar f
st
 value to the non-hierarchical amova results. when higher-level groupings paralleled the structure results, we obtained the highest f
st
 value , albeit the percentage of variation between the two clusters as defined by structure was only  <dig> %, lower than the percentage of differentiation shown between species. removing seven admixed samples  from the amova gave nearly the same results as the analysis including them .

f


st

p 
in the non-hierarchical analysis, no grouping was applied. in the species-wise analysis, samples were grouped according to taxonomic features .

in the structure analysis, samples were grouped according to the results of structure analysis ; in the analysis without admixed samples seven samples with less than 90% identity to one of the two groups were removed. in the geography analysis the samples were grouped according to their origin . the analysis based on water availability was structured into two groups – humid and dry. in the soil-type based analysis, species were grouped according to the substrate on which they were found .

the average gene diversity over loci within populations ranged from  <dig>  in d. erudita  to  <dig>  in d. parviflora . contrary to predictions, the highest number of polymorphic sites, pair-wise differences and average gene diversity were not found in the admixed populations  but in d. parviflora .

discussion
“explosive” radiations featuring rapid opportunistic morphological and ecological diversification are phenomena previously reported for some islands . extreme ancestral bottlenecks, together with on-going hybridization and incomplete lineage sorting, can prevent phylogenetic reconstruction in cases of island radiations if they have been recent and produced many species  <cit> . however, a good understanding of phylogenetic relationships within radiating groups is key for further evolutionary studies into mechanisms and whether change is adaptive, due to drift in small populations or other phenomena  <cit> .

for the endemic new caledonian diospyros species, previous studies, based on multiple plastid  <cit>  and low-copy nuclear  <cit>  markers, showed  <dig> species to be closely related  and were not able to clearly resolve phylogenetic relationships among them. in the combined data set  only seven of the  <dig> species included were found to form highly supported groups of accessions from single species. individuals belonging to each of the remaining  <dig> species failed to cluster according to their taxonomic circumscription. dating analysis based on plastid and low-copy nuclear markers showed that the common ancestor of this clade of endemic new caledonian diospyros species has arrived in new caledonia around nine million years ago  <cit> . diospyros vieillardii has been shown to be sister to the rest of this endemic clade and separated from the rest of the species around  <dig>  million years ago.

results of the current study using genome-wide aflp markers reveal that most species form unique groups paralleling recognised species. around one-third  and one-half  of the species, are genetically distinct with high support . however, the overall aflp results prove unable to clearly resolve the backbone of trees, similar to previous results obtained from analyses of dna sequence data  <cit> . intra-specific variation was greater  than that found at inter-specific level . this low ratio of among- versus within-species divergence in the context of considerable morphological and ecological divergence is indicative of a recent diversification  <cit> . such a process can explain why we were able to get clear species boundaries for most species but were unable to clearly resolve phylogenetic relationships between them.

two species that did not form well-defined clades  were previously considered by white  <cit>  to show variability in leaf morphology that may indicate that they are in fact a collection of several species. for d. minimifolia white  <cit>  mentioned that the type population  has smaller leaves compared to other populations of this species. in our results this population clusters together with the majority of the d. minimifolia accessions; the population that is separated from the rest  is from gaji. according to white  <cit> d. parviflora is a wide-spread species, showing considerable variability of leaf morphology even within populations, making it impossible to differentiate these into different species. our results show all accessions of d. parviflora, except those from plateau de tango , to form a group. all included accessions from d. parviflora are from ultramafic localities.

to our surprise, the aflp results do not show any significant grouping according to ecological , geographical or morphological factors . the two weakly differentiated groups revealed by structure and pco also do not correspond to any conspicuous phenotypic characteristics. the allele-frequency divergence between the two groups found by structure is low, which explains why we did not observe the two groups in the bayesian and nj tree-building results. taken together, these results indicate that positive selection has perhaps acted on few genomic regions  <cit>  and has resulted in phenotypic diversification of new caledonian diospyros. variation in copy number of specific genomic regions may be an additional aspect of molecular variation that, although invisible to aflp markers, could form the basis of adaptation to different environmental conditions  <cit> .

the individuals of d. vieillardii, d. umbrosa and d. flavocarpa form a minimally isolated group  in the pco . previous phylogenetic analyses  showed these three species to be sister to the rest of the taxa. due to its morphological and ecological features d. sp. pic n’ga from Île des pins could be a hybrid between d. calciphila and d. vieillardii, but d. vieillardii is now not known from this island. in pco, individuals of this putative species are located between individuals of d. calciphila and d. vieillardii . the split between the two groups observed  could be relatively old, separating two lineages that developed in isolated regions. for instance, dry periods of the pleistocene caused aridification in many areas, and some vegetation types persisted only in local refugia e.g.  <cit> . after climatic conditions became more favourable, the two groups probably expanded rapidly into newly suitable habitats where they overlapped; the time scale of these fluctuations  was probably not enough to allow woody species with long generation time such as diospyros to diverge and become permanently reproductively isolated  <cit> . there are a few admixed individuals in the structure analysis , which implies that hybridization might have played a role in evolution of this group.

accelerated rates of evolution at few genes as a result of positive selection could have resulted in the morphological and ecological diversification apparent today in this group of new caledonian diospyros species. furthermore, in addition to retention of ancestral polymorphisms, frequent gene flow could have acted against genome-wide genetic differentiation between the species. barriers to gene flow between these species may be highly porous, with only few genes responsible for ecological and morphological adaptations evolving on distinct trajectories under strong selection, which leaves the rest of their genomes open to gene flow  <cit> . finding these few genes with aflp is realistically improbable because they are a miniscule component in comparison the rest of these genomes. in the case of a recent and rapid radiation in plants, it could be argued that the bulk of regions sampled by aflp have not evolved quickly enough to accumulate substitutions that could indicate species relationships. our results are similar to those found in various other island genera .

diospyros vieillardii, which is sister to the rest of the taxa belonging to this group of new caledonian endemics  <cit> , is confined to ultramafic soils, which supports the hypothesis of this being an exaptation of the progenitor of this new caledonian diospyros clade to ultramafic soils when the whole island was still covered by heavy-metal-rich substrates; similar findings have been made in other plant groups in new caledonia e.g.  <cit> . later, erosion reduced the extent of this geological layer to one third of the island  <cit> , and existing species began to move onto other substrates where they subsequently diverged, forming distinct species. such observations have been made in various other new caledonian groups . a few studies have examined the adaptive basis and processes involved in rapid radiations in new caledonia e.g.  <cit>  and hawai’i . linking ecological parameters and/or phenotypic traits associated with speciation has to be done with caution because range alterations, subsequent evolution, and species extinctions might have erased initial signals found in only a few genes. therefore, the associations observed today may be misleading, and the specific conditions/traits that were indeed linked to speciation, if any, may no longer be present  <cit> .

further work involving common garden experiments would provide insights into the effect of environmental conditions on morphological traits and therefore plasticity of genomes of the new caledonian diospyros species. unfortunately, such experiments are time and cost intensive. it is difficult to obtain ripe fruits of all diospyros species, and in addition it is difficult to germinate and grow them, which is a crucial aspect of conducting such experiments. reciprocal transplantation of seedlings across environments are of course more easily conducted than common garden experiments, but they are still time consuming and costly; in addition species adapted to one soil type often will not survive when transplanted to other soil types.

CONCLUSIONS
although new caledonian diospyros are morphologically and ecologically diverse, they show little genetic divergence . in this case of the endemic clade of new caledonian diospyros, aflp data did not provide enough information to resolve phylogenetic relationships between the species, but it was sensitive enough for testing for the presence of genetic species boundaries. however, the aflp results exhibit a good correlation with morphology-based species concepts. further studies of this new caledonian diospyros group with deeper sampling of the genome using next generation sequencing methods are needed to get a clearer picture of the processes that formed this group.

