BACKGROUND
hydrophobins are surface-active proteins produced by filamentous fungi  <cit> . they are small secreted proteins with eight cysteine residues arranged in a strictly conserved motif  <cit> . the cysteine residues form four disulfide bridges connecting beta strands and stabilizing the protein structure. another important feature of hydrophobins is their ability to self-assemble into amphiphilic films at hydrophilic/hydrophobic interfaces  <cit> . hydrophobins have been reported in filamentous fungi belonging to the phyla ascomycota and basidiomycota  <cit> . they are often secreted extracellularly but can also be found inside fungal structures such as fruiting bodies and hyphae  <cit> . based on solubility and sequence characteristics, hydrophobins can be classified into two major classes: class i and class ii  <cit> . although the two classes are similar in many ways, class i hydrophobins have larger size and more diversity in amino acid sequence than class ii  <cit> . hydrophobins are expressed at different stages of fungal life cycle: sporulation, fruiting body formation and during growth of vegetative hyphae  <cit> . studies have shown that hydrophobins play important role in fungal pathogenesis where they act as virulence factors to enhance fungal infection  <cit> . they have also been reported to be involved in the attachment of fungal structures  <cit>  and the emergence of aerial hyphae from submerged conditions  <cit> . hydrophobins have been implicated in diverse fungal interactions such as symbiosis  <cit> , mycorrhiza formation  <cit> , and antagonistic interactions  <cit> . evidence of hydrophobin involvement in cell wall assembly during pathogenic interactions where the monomers act as elicitors and toxins have been reported  <cit> . recent gene expression studies have shown that p. gigantea hydrophobin encoding genes  <dig> and  <dig>  are highly transcribed in the interaction zone between the biological control agent p. gigantea and the tree pathogen h. annosum s.l.  <cit> . however, the actual roles of these genes in the interaction are not known. previous studies have demonstrated a high level of sequence divergence in p. gigantea hydrophobin-encoding genes pgh <dig> and pgh <dig> <cit>  and the hydrophobins from the pathogenic fungus h. irregulare hah <dig> and hah <dig> <cit> . these observations raised crucial questions on the evolutionary forces driving the rapid differentiation of this gene family. available data also indicate a considerable amount of variation in the numbers of hydrophobin-encoding genes across other fungal taxa, ranging from  <dig> gene in acremonium alcalophilum to  <dig> genes in trametes versicolor. this may suggest that hydrophobin genes could be under a dynamic evolutionary process across most fungal taxa.

gene duplication is an important evolutionary process that plays a crucial role in an organism’s complexity, adaptation and diversification to closely related strains and species  <cit> . reports have shown that duplication of genes results in functional diversification and gene expression patterns observed in different fungi and other organisms  <cit> . paralogous genes resulting from duplication events create genetic redundancy, which may be vulnerable to selection pressure  <cit> . genome-wide analysis of gene duplication has shown that this biological phenomenon occurs at a very high rate. however, the fate of duplicated genes and the forces driving their fixation and divergence still remain unknown  <cit> . there has been increasing number of evidences showing that mutated genes with deleterious effects are purged from the genome through purifying selection whereas copies with enhanced functions are fixed in the population through positive or diversifying selection  <cit> . furthermore, evidence of duplication and losses among stress-related genes has been documented in the literature whereas growth-related genes have been shown to be selected against change in the copy number  <cit> . gene contraction through gene loss and expansion through duplication are common processes in gene family evolution and it has been documented in chitinases  <cit>  and glycosyl hydrolases   <cit>  gene families. however, the mechanisms driving these evolutionary processes in fungal hydrophobins are poorly understood.

in this study, we investigated hydrophobin gene family evolution in several diverse fungal groups, we also analyzed recombination events in h. annosum s.l. by examining the ratio of non-synonymous  to synonymous substitutions per site . we tested correlation between number of hydrophobin-encoding genes, overall genome size and their ecological strategy. the transcript abundance of sixteen hydrophobin genes from h. annosum s.s. during saprotrophic growth on pine wood as well as on culture filtrate from p. gigantea was further evaluated using micro-array. the results from this study have further highlighted the possible involvement of hydrophobin genes in fungal ecological lifestyle.

RESULTS
hydrophobin sequence identification and alignment
sequence alignment of selected fungal hydrophobins
alignment of the manually curated sequences of hydrophobin encoding genes from representative fungal species screened in this study showed eight conserved cysteine residues necessary for disulfide bridge formation, a characteristic feature of all fungal hydrophobins . there was high sequence diversity in the multiple alignments. a comparison was made between the aligned sequences and already published sequence consensus of class i, c-x5-7-c-c-x19-39-c-x-8–23-c-x5-c-c-x6-18-c-x2- <dig> <cit>  and class ii, c-x9-c-c-x11-c-x14-16-c-x8-c-c-x10-c-x6- <dig> <cit>  hydrophobins. based on the consensus, sequences were clearly separated into two different groups, class i and class ii. hydrophobins from h. irregulare and p. brevispora were found to be class i members. there was a long stretch of amino acids , 26– <dig> amino acid residues between the c3/c <dig> position in the hydrophobins from the class i proteins. however, class ii hydrophobins showed a short stretch of amino acids at this region  with all members investigated in this study having  <dig> aa at position c3/c <dig> . the hydrophobins from the thermophilic fungus thielavia terrestris and the corn smut fungus ustilago maydis deviated from the remaining analyzed hydrophobins in the length of the region between cysteine residues c <dig> and c <dig> . the hydrophobin from t. terrestris had very short c3/c <dig> stretch consisting of only  <dig> amino acids residues, while the one from u. maydis had unusually long c3/c <dig> regions of  <dig> amino acid residues.

a = positions of conserved cysteine residues. cysteine residues c2/c <dig> and c6/c <dig> are adjacent in all characterized hydrophobins.

domain structure, hydropathy pattern and homology modeling of selected hydrophobins
a comparison of the domain structures of hydrophobins from a subset of the fungal species screened in this study was made to determine if the differences in their ecological habits could be explained by different domain patterns. furthermore, the hydropathy profile of hydrophobins from class i was compared with the profile from class ii members as well as hydrophobins from t. terrestris and u. maydis . class i hydrophobins showed higher hydrophobicity stretch  , when compared with the pattern from class ii members . the cysteine doublets in the class i hydrophobins are followed by a long stretch of hydrophilic residues, whereas in the proteins belonging to the class ii, the cysteine doublets were followed by hydrophobic residues. for u. maydis and t. terrestris, the hydropathy patterns were similar to that of class i proteins . the signal peptides of the hydrophobins screened in this study lie in the region of the first  <dig> amino acids, although in some cases the signal peptide was missing. homology modeling of a subset of hydrophobins sequences revealed the distribution of the hydrophobic residues and conserved cysteine residues . this clearly shows that the residues are arranged as patches. the models only cover parts of the relevant hydrophobins, as construction of complete models was hindered by the lack of template structures.

phylogenetic analysis of the fungal hydrophobins and ecological strategy
basidiomycetes and ascomycetes
in order to understand the evolutionary relationships of the fungal hydrophobins from both ascomycetes and basidiomycetes screened in this study , species based trees were reconstructed using the nj method with jtt matrix-based model  <cit> . two distinct separations along the two classes of hydrophobins were evident, all the class i hydrophobins clustered in clade a whereas class ii members grouped together in clade b . other subclades such as c, d, e, f and g were evident. subclade c is a mixed group containing class i proteins from both ascomycetes and basidiomycetes. most of the basidiomycetes in this group are from the order polyporales except few species like auricularia delicata and schizophyllum commune which were from the orders auriculariales and agaricales, respectively. it was also interesting to see that all the hydrophobins from a. delicata, a basidiomycete, are closer related to the class i proteins from the ascomycetes than to the remaining members of class i hydrophobins from basidiomycetes . hydrophobins from u. maydis and t. terrestris which showed a deviation from the general consensus of classes i and ii  respectively, were nested within the class i hydrophobins  in our phylogenetic analysis and thus, most likely, they are just two extreme examples of the variation in length of c3/c <dig> region in the class i hydrophobins. furthermore, the hydrophobin from t. terrestris with unusually short stretch of amino acids between cysteine residues c <dig> and c <dig> appeared within group c. subclade d contains white rot fungi of the order polyporales except wolfiporia cocos, a brown rot fungus. most of the hydrophobins from p. brevispora clustered in this group. however sequences of hydrophobins from h. irregulare could not be resolved into a distinct clade. groups e, f and g consisted of class i hydrophobins from basidiomycetes of different systematic positions and ecological lifestyles . another interesting observation from the phylogenetic grouping is that many ascomycetes such as magnaporthe grisea, trichoderma virens, neurospora discreta, neurospora crassa and neurospora tetrasperma appeared to have both classes i and ii proteins and the two classes separated into different clades .

basidiomycetes
a similar trend was observed for the phylogenetic tree involving only hydrophobins from basidiomycetes. seven main clades and two smaller clades were formed . members of clades h, i and j were mostly hydrophobins from fungi of the order polyporales, all the fungi in this group except w. cocos and punctularia strigosozonata are white rotters. most of the sequences of hydrophobins from p. brevispora were resolved in clade j. however, sequences of hydrophobins from h. irregulare have not formed a distinct clade. clade k consists of hydrophobins from fungi of diverse systematic positions  and ecological strategies. clades l and p are relatively smaller clades with hydrophobins from fungi representing different orders and lifestyles. in clade m, sequences of hydrophobins from s. commune, a white rot fungus dominated the group with hydrophobins from a. delicata. group n is a relatively small group comprising of hydrophobins from fungal species of the orders agaricales, boletales and dacrymycetales. fungal species in this group have mixed lifestyle, while some are saprotrophic in nature , others are brown rotters. in addition, some sequences of hydrophobins from the mycorrhizal fungus, laccaria bicolor were found in this clade. in clade o, all the hydrophobin sequences separated into fungal species with brown rotting habits. the fungal species  in this group are from the order boletales.

ascomycetes
three major clades q, r and s were evident in the phylogenetic tree reconstructed with the ascomycetes . the branches were strongly supported with relatively high boothstrap values. clades r and s formed monophyletic groups with members of the group being class ii hydrophobins from trichoderma and aspergillus species respectively, except one sequence of hydrophobin from m. grisea that nested with the members of clade s. clade q is a mixed clade with class i proteins from different fungal species. members of the group include sequences of hydrophobins from the pathogenic fungi . other members of the group are hydrophobins from the saprotrophic fungi  and the mycoparasitic fungi, trichoderma species.

distribution, genome size and hydrophobin gene family evolution in ascomycetes and basidiomycetes
a survey of the distribution of hydrophobin-encoding genes and genome sizes of the fungi analyzed in this study revealed considerable variation in the copy number of hydrophobin genes ranging from  <dig> in a. alcalophilum to  <dig> copies in t. versicolor . there were  <dig> functional copies of hydrophobin-encoding genes in p. brevispora with a genome size of  <dig>  mb. although previous studies have reported  <dig> copies of hydrophobin encoding genes in h. irregulare <cit> , our analysis revealed  <dig> predicted gene copies of hydrophobins in the genome of h. irregularre, out of this number, only  <dig> are functional proteins. this difference in the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes observed in h. irregulare could be a result of automatic annotation problem. however, among the basidiomycetes screened in this study, hydrophobins were completely absent in the pucciniales. the absence of hydrophobins in rust fungi may be either linked with their life style or with their relatively simple life forms . the second explanation seems more probable as hydrophobins are missing both in parasitic  and free-living  members of pucciniomycotina. in the ascomycetes group, there was no evidence of hydrophobins in all the saccharomycetales/yeast screened in our study . also the genome size was variable across the different fungal species screened, ranging from  <dig>  mb in pichia membranifaciens  to  <dig>  mb in melampsora laricis-populina, a basidiomycete with biotrophic lifestyle . a considerable expansion of hydrophobin-encoding genes was observed in basidiomycetes  while a contraction of the same gene family was evident in the ascomycetes. a comparison of the genome size and the number of hydrophobin encoding genes of a subset of the fungal isolates used in this study was made using pearson’s partial correlation, although a correlation between genome size and the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes exist, it was not statistically significant . furthermore, there was no significant relationship between genome size and ecological strategy , however, there was a statistically significant relationship between ecological strategy  and the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes . the fungi with non-pathogenic lifestyle tend to be more favored by higher numbers of hydrophobin-encoding genes . however, fungi with pathogenic lifestyles showed no statistically significant relationship between the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes and their ecological strategies.

gene clusters and inventory of hydrophobins in p. brevispora and h. irregulare hydrophobins
the  <dig> class i hydrophobin-encoding-genes found in the genome of p. brevispora, were arranged in a relatively clustered pattern . a good number of the proteins  were located in scaffold  <dig>  whereas  <dig> proteins each where found in scaffolds  <dig> and  <dig> respectively. scaffold  <dig> had  <dig> proteins, while scaffolds  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> contained  <dig> proteins each. other scaffolds,  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> had one protein each.

in h. irregulare,  <dig> putative class i hydrophobin encoding gene sequences were identified,  <dig> appeared to be functional proteins whereas  <dig> were probable pseudogenes. a similar clustering pattern of hydrophobin-encoding genes was observed in the genome of h. irregulare , most of the genes  clustered in scaffold  <dig>  scaffold  <dig> had  <dig> genes, whereas  <dig> genes were found in scaffold  <dig>  scaffolds  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> had  <dig> gene each.

selection tests for h. irregulare hydrophobins
a selection test was carried out in a subset of hydrophobins from h. irregulare. a high dn/ds ratio  was observed in all the tested hydrophobin genes. this result was supported by the d test statistics . only one recombination event was observed in h. irregulare.
h. irregulare


microarray analysis of hydrophobin expression in h. annosum s.s
to investigate the transcriptional regulation of hydrophobins in h. annosum s.s. during growth in culture filtrate from p. gigantea and to see the biocontrol potentials of the culture filtrate from p. gigantea, microarray analysis was conducted. also microarray analysis of hydrophobins from h. annosum s.s. was carried out during saprotrophic growth on wood. sixteen transcripts of class i hydrophobin-encoding genes with different regulatory patterns were observed . among the  <dig> hydrophobin transcripts identified, high expression of transcript number  <dig> was observed mostly during saprotrophic growth of h. annosum s.s. on bark, sapwood and heartwood. however, transcript number  <dig> was highly up-regulated during growth on sapwood and heartwood but showed low expression during saprotrophic growth on bark. the abundance of transcript number  <dig> was observed during saprotrophic growth on bark, sapwood and heartwood as well as during growth on culture filtrate produced by p. gigantea.
h. annosum 
s.s. during growth on wood and growth on culture filtrate from 
p. gigantea


a= expression data normalized to liquid hagem media.

b= fold changes calculated as the expression value of the experimental sample over the control.

discussion
hydrophobins are surface-active proteins with diverse roles in fungal life cycle  <cit> . hydrophobins are grouped into class i and class ii based on the following criteria: minimum of eight cysteines arranged in a conserved pattern, solubility of the formed aggregates, hydropathy pattern and the differences in the spacing of amino acids between the cysteine residues  <cit> . although we did not carry out solubility test in this study, a clear separation of the hydrophobins screened in this study into class i and ii was observed. although h. irregulare and p. brevispora have different ecological lifestyles, the domain structure of hydrophobins from these two fungi did not differ considerably, an indication that the differences in nutritional lifestyle could not be explained by their domain structures. separation of hydrophobins into various classes based on hydropathy pattern has been reported in other studies  <cit> .

the most prominent feature of the phylogenetic grouping of hydrophobins from all the fungal species is the separation of the sequences along the two classes of hydrophobins . similar results based on phylogenetic grouping of class i and ii into the two major fungal taxa have been reported  <cit> . some fungal species such as m. grisea, t. virens, n. discreta, n. crassa and n. tetrasperma have both class i and class ii proteins which were resolved into distinct clades . similar findings have been reported in other studies where both class i and class ii hydrophobins were identified in a single fungal species  <cit> . class i hydrophobins were common among the members of the basidiomycetes, while both class i and ii were present in the ascomycetes. this is in line with findings from other studies  <cit> . the absence of class ii proteins in basidiomycetes may indicate that only the class i proteins may be important in basidiomycetes for fruit body formation. however, despite the high level of sequence conservation between the hydrophobins from p. brevispora and h. annosum s.l., the two fungi appeared to be phylogenetically distant from each other .

numerous clusters of hydrophobins were found in our analysis; paralogous genes with high bootstrap support were also nested together in the generated trees. the presence of these clusters provides additional evidence in support of our hypothesis about important role of gene duplication in the evolution of hydrophobin-encoding genes in fungi. paralogous sequences of hydrophobins from p. brevispora clustered together and they appeared to be phylogenetically closer to hydrophobins from w. cocos, b. adusta and f. mediterranea . sequences of hydrophobins from h. irregulare were not clearly resolved into distinct clades. it was interesting to note that hydrophobins from a. delicata, a basidiomycete were closer relatives to the class i proteins from ascomycetes than members of the same class basidiomycetes . hydrophobins of a. delicata differ from hydrophobins of most remaining basidiomycetes in our analysis by having shorter region between the conserved cysteines c <dig> and c <dig> . this structural feature might influence the results of the phylogenetic analysis. at the same time, auricularia is the most basal member of basidiomycetes in our analysis, and it is possible that hydrophobins of auricularia retained the similarity to the hypothetical ‘ancestral’ type of hydrophobins that were present in the common ancestor of ascomycetes and basidiomycetes, whereas in evolutionary more advanced species of basidiomycetes they are more diverged from that type, e.g. by having longer stretch of amino acids between c <dig> and c <dig> positions. the phylogenetic relationships between class i hydrophobins from ascomycetes and the same class of proteins from the basidiomycetes may suggest that the ancestor of these genes may have been formed very early during evolution. furthermore, it is possible that the gene products may have a role in the life style or ecology of the fungal species. based on this result, a complete survey of genome sizes and copy numbers of hydrophobin-encoding genes was made on several fungal species with varied ecological strategies . a considerable variation in the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes exists in all the fungi screened, ranging from  <dig> in a. alcalophilum to  <dig> in t. versicolor. in h. irregulare  <dig> hydrophobins have previously been reported  <cit> . in our analysis,  <dig> functional class i proteins and  <dig> putative pseudogene were identified. this difference in the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes observed in our study could be a result of automatic annotation problems. however, our microarray studies identified only the  <dig> functional proteins. in p. brevispora,  <dig> class i hydrophobin-encoding genes have been identified. accumulation of several copies of duplicate hydrophobin genes from a single copy of ancestral sequence may have resulted in the variation in numbers of hydrophobin genes in the different fungi. an interesting finding in this work is the absence of hydrophobins among the members of hemiascomycetous yeasts, an indication that species like s. cerevisiae, pichia stipitis, hansenula polymorpha and wickerhamomyces anomalus with yeast-like or monocentric growth pattern  may not need hydrophobins. in addition, the complete absence of hydrophobins in the pucciniales may suggest that hydrophobin genes may have undergone relaxed selection after evolution. it is also possible that hydrophobins were completely lost during evolution. among the basidiomycetes screened in this study, a significant expansion of the gene was observed  whereas ascomycetes appeared to have witnessed a massive contraction of the gene during evolution. the expansion of hydrophobin-encoding genes among the members of basidiomycota may not be unconnected with fruit body formation  <cit> . it is also possible that the increase in the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes may have been positively selected for in basidiomycetes, but not in ascomycetes. relationship between the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes and ecological strategy  was further investigated. there was a well-supported link between the number of hydrophobin genes and ecological strategy with the non-pathogenic fungi having higher numbers of hydrophobins than the pathogenic ones , this may suggest that although hydrophobins may be needed in fungal pathogenesis  <cit> , higher numbers of the gene may have more ecological role in non-pathogenic conditions such as symbiosis  <cit> , mycorrhiza formation  <cit>  and interspecific fungi-fungi interactions  <cit> , fruit body formation  <cit>  and emergence of hyphal structures  <cit> . this result is in contrast with other studies that have shown massive expansion of gene families in pathogens as compared with non-pathogenic relatives  <cit> . differences between ecological strategies and genome size were also tested. genome size had no significant effect on ecological strategy .

evolutionary forces operating at a genomic scale may have some influence on gene family expansion or contractions, implying that the fungal species with larger genome sizes may have a correspondingly higher number of hydrophobins. however, there was no significant relationship between genome size and the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes in this study. to understand the evolutionary forces driving hydrophobin gene family evolution in h. irregulare, a selection test was carried out. a high dn/ds ratio  was observed in h. irregulare hydrophobins, an indication that hydrophobin genes may be under positive selection. it is also possible that the evolution of these genes could be a result of recombination and duplication events. evidence of duplication events have been reported in hydrophobins from p. gigantea <cit>  and h. irregulare <cit> . these finding may therefore suggest that this group of proteins may have evolved through the so called birth and death model  <cit> . in the birth and death model, new gene copies evolve through duplications followed by diversification due to accumulation of spontaneous mutations; new duplicates with vital functions are retained in the genome while those with deleterious effects are purged from the genome through purifying selection. we identified  <dig> transcripts of class i hydrophobin encoding genes that were differentially regulated during growth on bark, heartwood and sapwood as well as during growth on culture filtrate produced by p. gigantea. furthermore, the differences in expression pattern of these class i proteins during saprotrophic growth may suggest that different hydrophobin genes are employed by h. annosum s.s. during growth on diverse wood components. in addition, the low transcript abundance observed during growth in the submerged medium containing culture filtrate from p. gigantea may suggest that the induction of these genes could be inhibited due to the presence of the secreted molecules from the biocontrol agent . p. gigantea is the biological control fungus for the control of h. annosum s.l. infection. it is possible that one of the mechanisms for action of the biocontrol fungus against the pathogen is by repression of genes such as hydrophobins through its secreted molecules or metabolites. other studies have reported the upregulation of hydrophobin encoding genes at the zone of interaction between the biocontrol fungus and the pathogen  <cit> . due to lack of protein structure of hydrophobins from h. annosum s.l., hydrophobins from selected fungal species were modeled alongside hydrophobins from p. gigantea. the models revealed the surface patches of hydrophobic residues , which are possibly important in the formation of amphiphilic membranes as reported earlier  <cit> . the conserved cysteine residues confirm probably a preserved structural feature of the protein.

CONCLUSIONS
we have surveyed the distribution and evolution of hydrophobin genes in p. brevispora and h. irregulare as well as in other fungi. we have also examined the relationships between the number of hydrophobin-encoding genes and ecological strategy in the examined fungal species. from our results, hydrophobin genes have witnessed a considerable expansion in p. brevispora as well as in other basidiomycetes while contraction of the same gene family has occurred in the ascomycetes. in addition, although different numbers of hydrophobins have been reported in p. brevispora, h. annosum s.l. and other fungal species, each gene has different regulatory pattern in the pathogenic fungus  during growth on wood and in culture filtrate produced by the antagonistic p. gigantea. the results from this study have also given some insights on some of the factors underlying the ecological habits of the fungi screened in this study.

