BACKGROUND
faced with a continuous stream of afferent data, somatosensory processing requires not only the analysis of the properties of tactile stimuli, but also the extraction and encoding of novel, relevant information  <cit> . the integration of tactile information retrieved from cutaneous afferents, traditionally attributed to the primary  and secondary somatosensory cortices , has been extensively studied  <cit> . in contrast, the neural basis of tactile working memory and tactile selective attention is less well known. these higher-level cognitive processes are nevertheless crucial for managing many challenges of every-day life. pulling out a key from a coat pocket in the dark requires, amongst others, exploratory finger movements, attention to tactile information derived from the exploring hand , storage of this information in working memory, and integration of the successively obtained tactile information. studies on patients with focal lesions suggest that the prefrontal cortex  <cit> , right parietal cortex  <cit>  and thalamus  <cit>  are involved in the inhibition of task-irrelevant tactile information. lesions of the medial temporal lobe, in contrast, have been shown to impair tactile working memory in patients  <cit> .

building on this small body of literature, the current report describes investigation of the neural substrates of vibrotactile memory and selective attention in healthy volunteers using event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging . participants performed a two-alternative forced choice frequency discrimination task. for this task, participants had to determine whether the second of two consecutive vibratory stimuli was of identical  or higher frequency . this task involved not only somatosensory processing, but also other brain functions, including somatosensory working memory, selective attention and planning and execution of a motor response. to assess the effect of working memory, a short  or a long  interstimulus interval  between the first  and the second  stimulus was used, similar to auditory distraction experiments published previously  <cit> . to test the influence of selective attention, the task was also performed in the presence or absence of a concurrent vibrotactile distractor presented contralaterally. it is hypothesised that delayed vibrotactile frequency discrimination, following a probe presented  <dig> s after the cue in contrast to a probe presented  <dig> s after the cue, is associated with mainly dorsolateral prefrontal activation, reflecting working memory  <cit> . in addition, it is hypothesised that vibrotactile frequency discrimination under distraction mainly involves a right-hemispheric prefrontal-posterior parietal network  <cit> .

RESULTS
behavioural data
the average accuracy of vibrotactile frequency discrimination without distractor was 65% . in the presence of a simultaneous distractor, the accuracy decreased  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ) and the response time increased significantly  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). delayed presentation of the probe  significantly reduced the accuracy of vibrotactile discrimination compared to an isi of  <dig> s  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). the chance level in this forced choice two-alternative decision task was 50%.

functional magnetic resonance imaging
fig.  <dig> depicts brain activation related to the processing of the probe, regardless of its frequency, in all conditions. vibrotactile frequency discrimination by button press was associated with widespread activation in cortical and subcortical areas. activation was seen in the bilateral thalamus , the hand area of the left  si and the left primary motor cortex , adjacent to the activation in the postcentral gyrus. activation was also found in the bilateral anterior insula , the anterior cingulate cortex , the right posterior parietal cortex  and the right inferior frontal cortex . in addition, the bilateral basal ganglia , in particular the caudate nucleus and the globus pallidus, and the left cerebellar hemisphere  were activated. deactivation was found in the right parahippocampal gyrus , the bilateral medial frontal gyrus , the right cuneus , the bilateral posterior cingulate gyrus , the bilateral precuneus  and the left superior frontal gyrus .

vibrotactile frequency discrimination with an isi of  <dig> s was associated with stronger activation in the bilateral anterior insula , the right caudate nucleus  and the right inferior parietal cortex  as opposed to the conditions with an isi of  <dig> s.

comparing frequency discrimination with and without distractor, the distractor condition was characterised by significantly stronger activation in the right middle temporal gyrus , the right anterior insula , the left precuneus  and the bilateral posterior parietal cortex . deactivation was seen in the right posterior cingulate gyrus , the left medial frontal gyrus  and the left precentral gyrus .

discussion
the results of the present study demonstrate that vibrotactile frequency discrimination is associated with the activation of distributed neural networks, in particular the central somatosensory pathways, the motor system, and the polymodal frontal, parietal and insular cortices . under challenge by a simultaneous distractor or a delayed probe, the accuracy of responses decreases in both conditions. the activated brain areas corresponding to distracted or delayed frequency discrimination are partly overlapping, albeit distinct. bilateral activation of the anterior insula is present in conditions with delayed presentation of the probe , whereas strong and widespread activation in the bilateral posterior parietal cortex can be found in trials involving a distractor . the findings of this study are subsequently discussed in light of these sensory and cognitive components. in addition, the significance of the findings is considered for a better understanding of tactile impairments in stroke.

vibrotactile frequency discrimination
sensorimotor processing
the chosen vibrotactile stimuli with a frequency around  <dig> hz activate primarily meissner's corpuscles, located in the dermal-epidermal junction of the superficial glabrous skin  <cit> . meissner's corpuscles are highly sensitive mechanoreceptors. on the tip of the index finger, perceptual  thresholds, measured as the peak-to-peak displacement of the vibrating probe, are approximately  <dig> microns in the frequency range studied here  <cit> .

as expected  <cit> , vibrotactile frequency discrimination was associated with activation of the somatosensory system, including the contralateral si and sii, and the bilateral thalamus in the present study . as the experiment involved button press, cortical and subcortical activation in areas attributed to the planning and execution of voluntary movements was found .

temporal processing
the present results demonstrate that vibrotactile frequency discrimination is associated with a robust activation of the bilateral anterior insula . the insula is a highly multimodal area which integrates information from several distinct regions of the brain  <cit> . converging evidence shows that the insula is functionally separated along the anterior-posterior axis. in the sensory domain, a direct comparison of painful thermal and innocuous tactile stimulation using fmri revealed that the perception of pain was associated with activation of the anterior part, while the perception of tactile stimuli was associated with activation of the posterior part of the insula  <cit> . in addition to the perception of pain, the anterior insula is involved in the processing of innocuous, but unpleasant stimuli  as well as of visceral  <cit>  and gustatory afferents  <cit> .

for the interpretation of the present findings, however, the involvement of the anterior insular cortex for the processing of temporal aspects of stimuli  and for the preparation of highly time-dependent movements  might be important. in addition, lesion studies in cats demonstrated that the temporal operculum and the underlying insular cortex are involved in vibrotactile temporal pattern discrimination  <cit> . based on these reports, it is hypothesised that the bilateral anterior insula is involved in the analysis of the temporal aspects of vibrotactile stimuli. in support of this hypothesis, passive vibrotactile stimulation without discrimination between stimuli of different frequency  <cit>  did not activate the anterior insula.

default mode network
compared with baseline, vibrotactile frequency discrimination was associated with deactivation in the frontal cortex , the cuneus, the precuneus, the parahippocampal area and the posterior cingulate gyrus . these areas probably reflect a widespread neuronal network that is consistently activated during rest or during less demanding tasks, termed the default mode network  <cit> . in a highly demanding task, such as the frequency discrimination task used here, the putative default mode network is expected to be deactivated when comparing task vs. rest. this interpretation is corroborated by the results of several investigations on cognitive and sensory processing. in a study on visual and auditory processing, the default mode network, similar to the deactivated areas in the present study, was supposed to consist of medial frontal areas, the posterior cingulate, the hippocampus and the parahippocampus  <cit> .

vibrotactile working memory
in the present study, the function of vibrotactile working memory was selectively probed by varying the interval between the first and the second stimulus. comparing the conditions with long vs. short isi uncovered activation of the bilateral anterior insula, the right head of the caudate nucleus and the right inferior parietal cortex .

working memory refers to the ability to maintain and manipulate information temporarily and has been widely investigated in the visuo-spatial, auditory, and verbal domains. traditionally, the prefrontal cortex has been regarded as an important neural correlate of working memory  <cit> . in the present study, the inferior frontal cortex is activated in the analysis of all events , but is not differentially active when increasing the isi from  <dig> s to  <dig> s , probably due to the lower statistical power of the subgroup of events.

knowledge about the neural correlates of vibrotactile working memory, however, is limited. there is evidence that the neural correlates of tactile working memory include areas involved in the sensory processing of tactile stimuli  <cit> . using vibrotactile frequency discrimination tasks similar to the  <dig> s isi task employed here, but without conditions with longer isi, single-cell recordings in primates  <cit>  and transcranial magnetic stimulation in humans  <cit>  demonstrated that vibrotactile memory traces are maintained in si. the present study did not reveal stronger activation in si or sii when increasing the isi from  <dig> s to  <dig> s.

the data presented here suggest that areas found active in previous studies on cognitive and sensory working memory are also involved in vibrotactile memory. an investigation of working memory using a sequential letter  task and fmri revealed activation in the bilateral inferior parietal cortex  and the bilateral frontal operculum, along with activation of the bilateral inferior frontal gyrus and other areas  <cit> . the results here imply that the bilateral anterior insula is not only involved in analysing temporal properties, but also subserves as a neural correlate of working memory for temporally complex stimuli. because of the dense connections between the prefrontal cortex and the caudate nucleus, the caudate is thought to be involved in working memory as well  <cit> .

selective attention
the effect of selective attention was investigated by simultaneously applying a distractor stimulus to the contralateral thumb in 25% of the epochs. selective attention is often regarded as a cognitive process selecting a subset of information for further processing. vibrotactile distraction through a contralateral vibrotactile stimulus is associated, on the behavioural level, with a decrease of response accuracy and, on the neuronal level, with an increase of activation in the bilateral posterior parietal cortex, the right anterior insula, and the middle temporal gyrus . the observed decrease of accuracy confirmed a previous pure behavioural experiment  <cit> .

converging lines of evidence support the notion that a widespread, mainly right-hemispheric fronto-parietal network is involved in selective attention. in the tactile domain, the posterior parietal cortex has been found active during tasks involving selective attention using fmri  <cit>  and somatosensory evoked potentials  <cit> . the present results, showing bilateral posterior parietal activation, corroborate these findings. moreover, processing of a sensory stimulus is enhanced by selective attention to the stimulus. this has been shown in the visual  <cit> , auditory  <cit> , and somatosensory domain  <cit> . the posterior parietal cortex, however, contains neurons with bilateral receptive fields  <cit> . activation of those neurons by bilateral vibrotactile stimulation during the distractor conditions might contribute to the bilateral posterior parietal activation seen here.

increased activity in the right anterior insula under distraction is hypothesised to represent increased analysis of temporal stimulus properties as discussed above. activation of the right middle temporal gyrus has previously been related to language functions, such as semantic processing  <cit>  and processing of affective prosody  <cit> . in addition to these reports, the present study indicates that the right middle temporal gyrus is also involved in selective attention to vibrotactile stimuli. this interpretation is supported by a high-density eeg study in which the bilateral middle temporal gyri were involved in selective spatial attention  <cit> .

comparing the brain activity between delayed  and distracted  frequency discrimination, the right anterior insula and the posterior parietal cortex are active in both conditions. this finding supports the idea that working memory and attention are represented by distributed, partly overlapping neuronal networks  <cit> .

relevance for tactile deficits in stroke
tactile working memory and selective attention are important cognitive processes for complex sensory processing in humans, beyond the experimental situation of vibrotactile frequency discrimination. tactile working memory and selective attention are crucial for object recognition or manipulation without visual feedback or in situations where somatosensory information from different body parts  or information from different sensory modalities compete.

for the present study, a forced-choice vibrotactile frequency discrimination task has been developed that is also applicable to future investigations of stroke patients. deficits of somatosensory processing are frequent symptoms of stroke and often have far-reaching consequences for the independence and the quality of life of stroke patients  <cit> . although impaired motor or language functions often impose a higher burden on the individual patient, the integrity of tactile functions is an important predictor for the long-term recovery of stroke patients  <cit> . many functional abilities, such as the control of grip force  <cit> , and gait  <cit>  can be affected by deficits of tactile processing.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study demonstrates that vibrotactile frequency discrimination is associated with the activation of distributed neural circuits including the somatomotor system, and polymodal frontal, parietal, and insular areas. brain networks involved in distracted or delayed frequency discrimination are partly overlapping, albeit distinct. bilateral activation of the anterior insula is present in conditions with delayed presentation of the probe, while strong and widespread activation in the bilateral posterior parietal cortex can be found in trials involving a distractor. the novel findings of this study on healthy adults and the partial differences between our findings and the results of lesion studies warrant further investigations of brain activity associated with impaired somatosensory processing in stroke patients.

