BACKGROUND
alzheimer's disease  is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder affecting the elderly and is the most common form of dementia  <cit> . synaptic pathology is an early indicator of neurodegeneration in the brains of patients with ad  <cit>  and in amyloid precursor protein  transgenic  mice  <cit> . damage to the nerve terminals is strongly correlated with the severity of the cognitive impairment in patients with ad  <cit> . a key mediator of this disease is believed to be the accumulation of amyloid-β  peptides, produced by proteolytic processing of the app, in the central nervous system  <cit> . most recent studies indicate that aβ oligomers rather than fibrils are responsible for the synaptic pathology in ad  <cit>  and other lines of investigation also support a role for intraneuronal accumulation of aβ in neurodegeneration  <cit> .

extracellular and intracellular accumulation of aβ peptides might result from alterations in the balance between production, aggregation and degradation  <cit> . mutations in the app and presenillin- <dig>  genes have been found to be associated with familial/heritable forms of early-onset ad by increasing the production of aβ peptides, which has greatly added to our understanding of potential mechanisms leading to aberrant anabolism of aβ  <cit> . however, the mechanisms of catabolism and clearance of aβ are less well understood. endopeptidases, which directly degrade aβ, have emerged as important players in the homeostatic control of this peptide. neprilysin  is a zinc metalloendopeptidase that can degrade aβ  <cit> , and has been identified as a critical aβ degrading enzyme in the brain  <cit> . several groups have also reported an inverse correlation between the presence of nep at the protein or rna levels and vulnerability to amyloid deposition in both mice and humans  <cit> .

the genetic linkage of the nep gene to ad is currently unclear as several groups have reported no association  <cit> , while more have identified an association with the disease  <cit> . furthermore, chemical inhibition of nep was shown to result in rapid accumulation of aβ and pathological deposition in rodents  <cit> . previously we and other groups have shown that the overexpression of nep in app tg mice by gene transfer  <cit> , transgenesis  <cit> , or induction  <cit>  resulted in a reduction of aβ accumulation, neurodegeneration and behavioral deficits. moreover, the upregulation of nep by somatostatin or by environmental enrichment has been reported to reduce aβ levels in vitro and in vivo  <cit> . conversely, reduced nep expression results in amyloid plaque deposition and amyloid angiopathy  <cit>  as well as accumulation of aβ in the synapses and behavioural deficits  <cit> .

these findings outline the potential application of nep augmentation to treat ad. however, most previous gene transfer studies with nep have been for short or intermediate periods of time  <cit>  and the effects of long-term nep gene transfer on other aspects of aβ-associated pathology need to be explored in app tg mice. among them, recent evidence suggests that accumulation of intracellular aβ might also play a role in neurodegeneration in transgenic models and in ad  <cit> . we show that the sustained expression of nep with a lentiviral vector  for up to  <dig> months, in addition to lowering the amyloid plaque load, reduced the levels of intracellular aβ immunoreactivity. this was associated with improved behavioral performance in the water maze and ameliorated the dendritic and synaptic pathology in the app tg mice. these data support the possibility that long-term nep gene therapy improves behavioral and neurodegenerative pathology by reducing intracellular aβ.

RESULTS
long-term neprilysin gene transfer reduces the accumulation of intracellular aβ
our previous study has shown that nep gene transfer reduces synaptic damage  <cit> ; however, the long-term effects of nep in other aspects of aβ pathology and neurodegeneration are less well known. first, to verify that nep was expressed for the term of the study, immunocytochemical analysis was performed. this study confirmed that in mice that received bilateral injections with lv-nep at  <dig> months of age, high levels of nep expression from the lentiviral vector were detected after  <dig> months  in the frontal cortex and hippocampus . double labelling studies confirmed that in app tg mice that received lv-nep injections, the neuronal cells over-expressing app also expressed nep from the lentivirus . the immunoblot analysis confirmed higher levels of nep immunoreativity in the mice that received the lv-nep injections compared to lv-empty vector control . the expression of nep in the mice injected with lv-nep resulted in reduced aβ levels but no effects were observed in full length app or c-terminal fragments . the increased levels of nep immunoreactivity  in the lv-nep injected mice were associated with increased nep activity compared to the lv-empty vector control and the lv-nepx . the difference in the increase of nep protein  and the increase in nep activity  probably represents the kinetics of the enzyme activity of neprilysin cleavage of aβ.

neuropathological analysis showed that long-term treatment with the lv-nep reduced levels of amyloid deposition by 48% in the neocortex and 25% in the hippocampus, compared to app tg mice treated with lv-empty or lv-nepx . although reduced amyloid load is a good indicator of the effects of nep in this model, amyloid plaques are poorly correlated with cognitive deficits  <cit> . since recent studies suggest that in addition to the oligomers, accumulation of intracellular aβ might contribute to neurodegeneration  <cit> , we analyzed the levels of neuronal aβ immunoreactivity with the 4g <dig> antibody. image analysis demonstrated that compared to lv-empty and lv-nepx, the lv-nep had a profound effect in reducing intracellular aβ immunoreactivity in pyramidal neurons in the neocortex and hippocampus . an antibody against the n-terminus of aβ  showed similar effects of the lv-nep reducing levels of intracellular aβ . to differentiate the intracellular app from the aβ immunoreactive granules, double-labelling studies in the brains of the app tg mice were performed. about 45% of the neurons that displayed human app  contained abundant aβ immunoreactive  granules, that in some cases co-localized . however, there were also neuronal cell bodies with abundant aβ immunoreactive granules and few or no human app immunoreactive granules . this may reflect differences in cellular expression of the β-secretase enzyme involved in the production of aβ. similarly results were obtained with the antibody against the n-terminus of aβ  and happ  . thus the reduction in 4g <dig> immunostaining we observed in the lv-nep treated app tg mice correlates with a reduction in intracellular aβ.

long-term treatment with lv-nep ameliorates water maze deficits in app tg mice
app tg mice received bilateral injections into the frontal cortex and hippocampus with lv-nep, or controls  and were analyzed in the water maze  <dig> months later. during the training part of the test when the platform is visible, mice from all  <dig> groups performed at comparable levels . consistent with results from previous studies  <cit> , at this age app tg mice injected with lv-empty or the inactive lv-nepx construct displayed performance deficits in the spatial learning part of the test compared to non-tg controls when the platform was hidden . in contrast, mice that received lv-nep showed improved performance . at the end of the test when the platform was visible again, mice from all groups performed similarly . similarly in the probe test, when the platform was removed from the pool, mice that received lv-nep stayed in the target area for a longer time compared to app tg mice injected with lv-nepx or lv-empty .

the effects of lv-nep on water maze performance and neurodegeneration are associated with reduced intracellular aβ accumulation
previous studies have shown that this line of app tg mice undergo a progressive loss of dendrites  and pre-synaptic  nerve terminals over time  <cit> . therefore, we investigated the possibility that long-term treatment with lv-nep might ameliorate this neurodegenerative pathology. in app tg mice injected with lv-nep, map <dig> immunoreactivity was 21% higher in the neocortex and 28% in the hippocampus compared to app tg mice treated with empty lv-vector or lv-nepx  . synaptophysin immunoreactivity was increased by 18% in the neocortex and 21% in hippocampus of mice infected with lv-nep as compared to app tg mice treated with empty lv-vector or lv-nepx  . this improved density of immunoreactivity for map <dig> and synaptophysin was similar to age matched non-tg mice . moreover, increased levels of map <dig> and synaptophysin immunoreactivity correlated with the performance in the water maze . the levels of amyloid load were poorly correlated with the average performance in the hidden platform phase; in contrast, improved performance in the water maze was significantly correlated with reduced levels of intracellular aβ immunoreactivity in pyramidal neurons .

discussion
the present study showed that long-term gene therapy with lv-nep for up to  <dig> months improved behavioral performance and ameliorated the dendritic and synaptic pathology in app tg mice by reducing the levels of intracellular aβ immunoreactivity. previous studies have been focused at analyzing the short-term effects  of nep in behavioral deficits and amyloid accumulation in app tg mice. these studies have shown that delivery of nep into the hippocampus of app tg mice by lv, adenoviral-associated viral vectors  or herpes simplex viral  vectors can reduce numbers of plaques as well as overall aβ levels in the cns  <cit> . aav delivered nep showed localization of the protein at the presynaptic sites whereas with the lentivirus we observed localization to the cell soma and the er. the reason for this difference in cellular localization is not clear, however it may have to do with the presence of the wpre translation signal present in the lentivirus vector we used that was not used in the aav experiments  <cit> . similar protein localization differences have been observed for gfp when comparing these two vectors  <cit> .

the vector-delivered nep resulted in behavioral improvements in the mice. in addition to these studies, recent studies where lv-nep was delivered into the hippocampus of 3-month old mice showed a reduction in plaques and overall aβ levels in the cns as well as improvements in behavior after  <dig> months  <cit> . the latter study was performed in mprp-app <dig> mutant mice crossed to presenilin  <dig> mutant mice  <cit> . these mice develop plaques and accumulate aβ at a much greater rate than previous mouse models utilized in the field. for the present study we utilized a more clinically relevant app tg mouse model  <cit> . although mice do not develop the full spectrum of ad, they mimic the human disease in that they develop plaques and display aβ accumulation and age-dependent synaptic pathology  <cit>  and behavioral deficits at a slower rate compared to a recent study  <cit> .

the effects of neprilysin gene therapy might be reflected in a number of compartments, not only in the extracellular aβ. although the intracellular pool might represent a small proportion of the total aβ it might be important in terms of mediating neuronal cell damage  <cit> . the reduction of intracellular aβ could also be related to a reduction of the extracellular aβ, with less being endocytosed. in contrast to previous studies that focused on the numbers of plaques and total accumulated levels of aβ  <cit> , we focused our study on the levels of intracellular aβ. while some studies have suggested that post-transcriptionally-modified aβ fragments  <cit>  and oligomers  <cit>  might be responsible for the neurotoxic effects, others have suggested that accumulation of intracellular aβ might also play a role  <cit> . this is a concern because recent evidence suggests that accumulation of intracellular aβ may play a role in neuronal dysfunction and degeneration by disturbing erk-creb signalling and increasing intracellular calcium levels  <cit> .

we found that levels of intracellular aβ were reduced in areas where the lv-nep was injected. moreover, the reduction in intracellular aβ immunoreactivity correlated with the improved behavioral performance in the mice. this is consistent with a study in drosophila that showed that overexpression of nep reduces the pathology associated with tg expression of intracellular aβ1– <dig>  <cit> . the mechanisms through which nep might reduce intracellular aβ are not clear, however nep is a membrane-bound enzyme that is distributed both in the plasma membrane and endo-membrane system  <cit> . thus, interactions might occur at the endoplasmic reticulum where previous studies have shown that intracellular aβ accumulates  <cit> .

it has become increasingly clear in recent years that nep may be an important player in the treatment of ad. several genetic linkage studies have now reported an association between nep polymorphisms and risk for ad  <cit> . furthermore, a potential mechanism has been identified by which nep down-regulation with age can increase vulnerability to amyloid pathology via reduced levels of somatostatin  <cit> . in addition, nep levels and activity are significantly reduced in the brains of ad patients  <cit> . therefore, replacement therapy might require long-term nep delivery, which might raise concerns about possible toxic effects. for this reason, we extended our studies to a 6-month duration of therapy. it is important to emphasize that compared to others, in our study injections were placed both in the hippocampus and neocortex and we also analyzed the integrity of the neuronal structure with antibodies against synaptophysin and map <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
the present study confirmed that long-term lv-nep ameliorated the neurodegenerative pathology in app tg mice that was associated with improved water maze performance. it is worth noting that the local levels of the lv-driven transgene expression are relatively low and it is unclear if much higher levels of expression for a long time might have undesired side effects. future studies will be needed to address this issue.

in conclusion, these data support the possibility that long-term nep gene therapy improves behavioral and neurodegenerative pathology by reducing intracellular aβ and support the potential for nep augmentation in the treatment of ad.

