BACKGROUND
over the past  <dig> years, there has been increasing concern about the impacts of the plethora of natural and anthropogenic chemicals discharged into the aquatic environment that disrupt the endocrine system of wildlife  <cit> . typically, these endocrine disrupting chemicals  exert their actions via interactions with the nuclear steroid hormone receptors. the most well characterised, and of greatest current concern, are edcs which bind to and activate the estrogen receptor: so-called environmental estrogens . the international research effort on chemically-induced endocrine disruption has been driven by unequivocal evidence that environmental estrogens alter sexual development and function in fish , and effects on other physiological processes, including growth, development, osmoregulation, and stress and immune responses, have also been reported . an improved understanding of the mechanisms by which these effects occur is critical if we are to fully assess the potential health implications of exposure to environmental estrogens, both for fish and for other vertebrates.

attempts to develop a mechanistic understanding of the effects of environmental estrogens in the body are increasingly being conducted at the level of gene expression . real-time reverse transcription pcr is presently the most sensitive method for the detection of mrnas  <cit> , and is also often employed for the validation of gene expression data from high-throughput array experiments  <cit> . quantitative analysis of gene expression using real-time pcr typically requires the use of a constitutively expressed 'housekeeping' gene as an internal control to normalize for differences in starting cdna template between samples . the fundamental requirement for validation of the expression stability of an internal control gene prior to its use in the system being studied is also well-defined. nevertheless, in contrast to the situation for many mammalian experimental systems , studies investigating the effects of environmental estrogens on gene expression in non-mammalian vertebrates have used 'housekeeping' genes more or less randomly as internal controls, and without any validation of their expression stability in the system being studied, which may have serious implications for the interpretation of the effects data.

this study, therefore, set out to assess different 'housekeeping' genes for their potential use as internal controls to normalize for expression of genes of interest in experimental treatments with estrogen in fish. eight 'housekeeping' genes were selected for assessment, including 18s ribosomal rna , ribosomal protein l <dig> , elongation factor  <dig> alpha , glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase , beta actin , glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase  <dig> , and tata box binding protein  in the fathead minnow . these genes were chosen based on their previous use as internal controls in gene expression studies, the availability of 'housekeeping' gene sequences in fathead minnow and related teleost species, and because they have roles in different cellular functions , and transcription initiation ) thus reducing the likelihood that they exhibited regulated covariation. the genes of interest chosen to quantify responses to estrogen were vitellogenin , which encodes a protein that acts as a precursor of yolk, and cytochrome p <dig> 1a , that codes for an enzyme involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics, both of which are frequently used for studies on environmental estrogens in fish.

our results showed that the expression of some 'housekeeping' genes typically used for studies on environmental estrogens is altered by exposure to the environmental estrogen 17α-ethinylestradiol  and that control gene validation prior to experimental work is critical to the interpretation of environmental estrogen-related gene expression profiles derived using real-time pcr techniques. our findings on the use of control genes for estrogen exposure studies in fish are likely to apply to other experimental/chemical manipulations.

RESULTS
general expression levels of candidate 'housekeeping' genes
we first  calculated the general expression levels of the candidate 'housekeeping' genes, since extremely high or low expression levels may preclude the usefulness of these genes as internal controls . 18s rrna was by far the most highly expressed gene in both tissues studied. ef1a and rpl <dig> were also consistently among the most highly expressed 'housekeeping' genes, while tbp, hprt <dig> and g6pd were consistently among the lowest expressed genes. gapdh was highly expressed in liver, but among the lowest expressed 'housekeeping' genes in gonad, while the opposite was true for bactin, which was highly expressed in gonad but had a low level of expression in liver.

expression of candidate 'housekeeping' genes following exposure to estrogen
the expression levels of some of the candidate 'housekeeping' genes were altered in adult fathead minnow following  <dig> days exposure to ee <dig>  but the effects of ee <dig> in some cases differed depending on the tissue type  and/or the gender of the fish. in liver , there was no effect of this exposure on the expression of 18s rrna, rpl <dig>  hprt <dig> or tbp in either males or females . however, expression of ef1a, g6pd, and gapdh in liver was down-regulated following exposure to ee <dig> in both males and females  . expression of bactin in liver was also down-regulated following exposure to ee <dig> but only significantly so in males  .

in gonad , the expression levels of 18s rrna, rpl <dig>  ef1a, g6pd, hprt <dig> and tbp were unaffected following exposure to ee <dig> in both males and females. however, the expression levels of bactin  and gapdh  were reduced following exposure to ee <dig> .

the effect of using the different 'housekeeping' genes to normalize data for genes of interest
when the expression data were normalized to the amount of input cdna, vtg was, as expected, shown to be substantially  up-regulated in liver of male fathead minnow exposed to ee <dig>  but not in females. vtg expression in male liver  was also shown to be significantly increased by ee <dig> exposure, and by a similar fold, when the data were instead normalized using 'housekeeping' genes whose expression were unchanged by estrogen in this tissue . although vtg expression in male liver was also shown to be up-regulated by ee <dig> when ef1a, g6pd, bactin or gapdh  were used for the normalization , the fold-increases in vtg expression compared to control males using these 'housekeeping' genes were  <dig> ± 19-fold for ef1a,  <dig> ± 75-fold for g6pd,  <dig> ± 2758-fold for bactin, and  <dig> ± 3211-fold for gapdh, which were significantly higher values compared with those obtained using the 'housekeeping' genes not affected by the ee <dig> treatment. a further difference observed when normalizing to ef1a, g6pd or gapdh was that vtg expression in female liver was over-estimated and shown to be increased significantly with ee <dig> treatment .

when the expression data were normalized to the amount of input cdna, cyp1a was, as expected, shown to be down-regulated in liver of fathead minnow exposed to ee <dig> in both males and females . similarly, cyp1a expression in liver was also shown to be significantly decreased by ee <dig> when cyp1a expression was instead normalized to the expression of either 18s rrna, rpl <dig>  or hprt <dig> in both males  and females   and tbp in males  . cyp1a expression was also reduced in males exposed to ee <dig> when ef1a and g6pd were used for the normalizations, but to a smaller extent . . in contrast, in females ee <dig> had no significant effect on cyp1a expression when ef1a or g6pd was used for the normalization. moreover, when bactin and gapdh were used for the normalization, cyp1a expression apparently increased with ee <dig> exposure in males  or in both males and females  .

discussion
in this study, we investigated a suite of eight 'housekeeping' genes that represent different functional classes and gene families for use as internal controls to normalize real-time pcr data in experimental treatments with an estrogen  in fish. specifically, these genes comprised 18s rrna, rpl <dig>  ef1a, g6pd, bactin, gapdh, hprt <dig>  and tbp. these 'housekeeping' genes have been validated previously for use as internal controls in many experimental systems, particularly in mammals , gapdh: e.g.  <cit> ; hprt1: e.g.  <cit> ; tbp e.g.  <cit> ), but have not been validated for work on estrogens in fish. the development of the required real-time pcr assays for some of the target 'housekeeping' genes, whose sequences were not publicly available in the study species , first required the cloning of the full- or partial-length sequences for these genes.

a wide range of 'housekeeping' genes have been used as internal controls in expression profiling following exposure of fish to estrogens, including bactin , 16s rrna , 18s rrna , ef1a , and ribosomal proteins  ethylene :  <cit> ). however, very few of those studies provided any validation of these genes for use as internal controls prior to their application.

our data clearly show that the expression levels of some 'housekeeping' genes are regulated by estrogen in fathead minnow. in particular, ef1a, g6pd, bactin, and gapdh were found to be strongly regulated by estrogen, and this is consistent with data published for other teleosts. down-regulation of bactin was shown to occur in array analyses conducted on liver tissue from male sheepshead minnow  exposed to the environmental estrogens e <dig>  ee <dig>  diethylstilbestrol , np, and methoxychlor  <cit> . this concurs with the observations that e <dig> and several other estrogenic compounds disrupt cytoskeletal compounds in vitro  <cit> . in contrast, bactin expression has been shown to be increased in liver of plaice  and zebrafish  exposed to ee <dig>  <cit> , and in pituitary of atlantic salmon  exposed to e <dig> and np  <cit> . expression of gapdh in livers of plaice and rainbow trout  has also been shown to be repressed by various environmental estrogens, including ee <dig>  <cit> . further evidence of estrogen-regulation of bactin and gapdh coming from mammalian studies  <cit>  strengthens the case that their use as internal controls for studies for quantification of gene expression with estrogen treatment is probably inappropriate. the down-regulation of hepatic ef1a and g6pd by ee <dig> observed in the present study also concurs with data from zebrafish embryos  <cit> , where two ef1a isoforms were down-regulated by estrogen, and from the european flounder , where e <dig> inhibited activity of the g6pd enzyme in hepatocytes by 30% in males and 80% in females  <cit> . in fact, estrogen-regulation of g6pd provides a likely explanation for differences we observed in hepatic g6pd expression between the sexes in this study , since female fish have higher circulating levels of endogenous estrogens than males. the effect of estrogen on gapdh and g6pd expression observed here likely results from their involvement in metabolism, since estrogens, like other sex steroids, are well known to have roles in the regulation of the metabolic processes associated with altered energy demands during gonad development and reproduction in fish  <cit> . moreover, several other metabolic enzymes are also known to be controlled by sex steroids including estrogens in fish  <cit> .

interestingly, for some of the candidate 'housekeeping' genes, the effects of estrogen were tissue- and/or gender-specific. for example, ef1a and g6pd expression were only altered by ee <dig> in liver and not in gonad. moreover, the expression levels of gapdh in gonad and bactin in liver were only down-regulated by ee <dig> in males and not in females. complex effects of estrogens  have been demonstrated for many estrogen-regulated genes, including 'housekeeping' genes, in fish and higher vertebrates  and this suggests that these genes may have different roles in different tissues, and different roles in males compared with in females in these tissues. the tissue- and gender-specific nature of these effects of ee <dig> on 'housekeeping' gene expression emphasises the need for caution if extrapolating data from one tissue/gender to another when choosing an internal control gene.

four of the candidate 'housekeeping' genes  were found to be unaffected by estrogen treatment in both tissues examined in this work and are, therefore, considered valid for use as internal controls in such experiments. the high stability of rpl <dig> expression following estrogen treatment conforms with data from largemouth bass , where the expression of a suite of  <dig> ribosomal proteins, including rpl <dig>  did not fluctuate appreciably  in response to estrogenic compounds, and ribosomal proteins were thus recommended for use as internal control genes in microarray experiments involving estrogen treatments  <cit> . however, the results of another study on rainbow trout demonstrated ee2-induction of the ribosomal protein ribosomal protein s <dig>   <cit> , emphasising that not all ribosomal proteins may be estrogen-independent. although there is no other data currently available concerning possible estrogen regulation of hprt <dig> and tbp in fish, hprt has been described as an estrogen-independent 'housekeeping' gene in mammals  <cit> , supporting our findings here.

the lack of regulation of 18s rrna by ee <dig> in this study  concurs with the findings for an exposure to ee <dig> conducted on zebrafish   <cit> . in that study however, and based on array analyses, 18s rrna was up-regulated in a concentration-dependent manner in zebrafish liver after a shorter term  exposure to ee <dig>  suggesting that any 18s rrna regulation by estrogen may occur in a temporal manner. although rrnas have been advocated for use as internal controls in many other experimental systems and their levels are thought to be less likely to vary under conditions that affect the expression of mrnas , there is some evidence that another rrna, 28s rrna, is also regulated by estrogen in fish  <cit> . moreover, some clear disadvantages in the use of rrnas as internal controls have been highlighted by other researchers  and cannot be used when an oligo reverse transcription has been carried out. the use of rrnas, which constitute 80–90% of total rna, has also been criticised due to their very high general expression level which far exceeds that for mrnas . a very high general level of expression of 18s rrna was also observed in the current study . it is imperative, therefore, that these issues are considered if selecting 18s rrna as an internal control for studies on environmental estrogens in fish.

to assess the importance of selecting an appropriately validated 'housekeeping' gene for use as an internal control, in our final analyses we measured the expression of two genes of interest, vtg and cyp1a, in the livers of fathead minnow exposed to ee <dig> and compared the relative expression results obtained using the different housekeeping genes to those obtained when the amount of input cdna was normalized. vtg and cyp1a were selected for this analysis because of their biological roles in oocyte development and xenobiotic metabolism, respectively, because they are well characterised as estrogen-inducible and estrogen-downregulated genes, respectively, and because they are frequently included as genes of interest in studies on the effects of environmental estrogens . when the amount of input cdna was normalized, vtg mrna expression in liver was highly  up-regulated by ee <dig> in males , while cyp1a mrna expression was down-regulated by ee <dig> in both sexes , and these findings were as expected and in agreement with the current literature . we then alternatively normalized vtg and cyp1a expression using a 'housekeeping' gene approach, with each of the eight different 'housekeeping' genes.

depending on the 'housekeeping' gene used for the gene of interest normalization, vtg mrna levels were either unchanged or increased , and cyp1a mrna levels were either down-regulated, unchanged or increased . as expected, the use of appropriate 'housekeeping' genes  for the normalizations, gave very similar results to the data generated when the input cdna amount was normalized, demonstrating that the use of these genes is valid and effectively normalizes for differences in input cdna. in contrast, when 'housekeeping' genes down-regulated by the ee <dig> treatment  were used, the expression levels of the genes of interest were overestimated, which lead to inappropriate conclusions about the manner in which these genes were regulated, or not regulated, by estrogen, and/or the degree to which they were estrogen-regulated. likewise, if a 'housekeeping' gene which was up-regulated by ee <dig> had been used for normalization, the expression levels of the genes of interest would have been underestimated. these findings have major implications for studies on the effects and potential impacts of environmental estrogens in fish that use internal control genes that have not been validated for the specifics of the experimental system, and in particular for studies which require to detect small changes in the expression of the gene of interest. an interesting aside from this work has been to show that an environmental concentration of ee <dig> is capable of disrupting expression of a suite of genes that play key roles in general cell function and maintenance, adding further to the concern about the potential impacts of this estrogen in the aquatic environment.

CONCLUSIONS
our results have shown that, in fish, the expression levels of some of the most commonly used 'housekeeping' genes are, in fact, regulated by estrogen treatment, and based on the data presented, we therefore recommend against the use of ef1a, g6pd, bactin, and gapdh as internal controls in real-time pcr studies of estrogen-exposed fish. in contrast, based on their estrogen-independency in this study, we recommend 18s rrna, rpl <dig>  hprt <dig> and tbp as likely appropriate internal control genes in this experimental setting. given that these data have shown that choosing an inappropriate 'housekeeping' gene as an internal control to normalize expression data for a gene of interest can potentially lead to inaccurate conclusions on estrogen effect pathways, we strongly recommend that most appropriate 'housekeeping' gene for use as an internal control is first established for the specifics of each estrogen experiment. this selection should take into account the fact that estrogen-regulation of 'housekeeping' genes may vary with factors such as chemical, dose and, exposure length, in addition to gender and tissue type.

