BACKGROUND
reverse transcription  followed by polymerase chain reaction  is at present the most sensitive method for the detection of specific rna molecules. quantification of nucleic acids using the pcr has been significantly simplified by the development of the real-time pcr technique, where the fluorescent signal reflecting the pcr product accumulation is detected in every amplification cycle. in biological applications examining gene expression, it is mostly not necessary to know the absolute amount of the measured mrna . relative mrna quantification is an approach determining the amount of target mrna in samples relative each to other. to compensate for differences in the rt-pcr input quality and quantity, the target mrna amount in each sample is normalized to one or more internal controls. selection of an optimal normalization strategy has been widely discussed  <cit>  and is out of the scope of the present study.

fluorescent data obtained from real-time pcr must be processed by some method of data analysis to obtain the relative quantity of target mrna. there are several techniques used for real-time pcr data analysis and adequate attention should be paid to the selection of the appropriate method. skern et al. <cit>  demonstrated that quantification results can vary dramatically depending on the method chosen for data analysis, and different analytical approaches may even lead to opposing biological conclusions. methods for analysis of fluorescent real-time pcr data used in relative mrna quantification can be classified in various ways, depending on the criteria applied. all methods determine the rt-pcr template quantity  from the accumulation of the pcr product during the amplification process. most techniques utilize exclusively the exponential phase of pcr to determine the amplification efficiency  and the r <dig> value  <cit> . the methods can be based on the determination of a "crossing point" between the pcr product fluorescence and a chosen benchmark. the benchmark is a point in the amplification curve  that represents the same amounts of pcr product in every amplification. the number of amplification cycles needed to reach the benchmark is usually denoted as cp  <cit> . the most commonly used form of the benchmark is the threshold fluorescence , and the number of amplification cycles needed for reaching the threshold fluorescence is usually denoted as "ct". the basic principle of the "threshold-based" methods is the same – the lower the rt-pcr template amount, the more amplification cycles are needed to reach the threshold fluorescence. apart from the "threshold-based" methodologies that currently predominate, there are methods which use linear regression analysis of the fluorescent data from the exponential phase of pcr to determine the e and/or r <dig> values  <cit> . moreover, a method that utilizes fluorescent data from the whole course of the amplification curve has been developed  <cit> .

to compare the performance of six techniques which are currently used for analyzing fluorescent data in real-time pcr relative quantification, we determined the mrna levels of four pro-inflammatory cytokines  in mice with trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid  – induced colitis. tnbs-induced colitis is a widely used experimental model for studying gut inflammatory processes such as ulcerative colitis and crohn's disease  <cit> .

RESULTS
relative standard curves, determination of amplification efficiency
relative standard curves of the analyzed targets are shown in figure  <dig>  the difference in ct between duplicate reactions of the standard dilutions did not exceed 1% and it was in the range  <dig> % –  <dig> % for actb and in the range  <dig> %– <dig> % for other genes. one exception was the 800-fold dilution of il- <dig> template where the difference in ct significantly exceeded 1%  indicating less reliable quantification at this dilution of the il- <dig> template. in gm-csf , the 800-fold template dilution did not produce a measurable fluorescent signal.

amplification of the added luciferase mrna showed very similar ct values in all six dilutions of the standard rna  indicating a similar efficiency of reverse transcription in all dilutions. moreover, high correlation coefficients of the standard curves  indicate that both, the efficiencies of reverse transcription and the pcr amplification efficiencies are similar in all dilutions.

amplification efficiency  representative for each gene was determined from equation  <dig> in the relative standard curve method . amplification efficiency for each individual reaction was calculated using equation  <dig> in the dart-pcr and linregpcr methods; in the liu & saint-exp method, the amplification efficiency of each reaction was calculated from equation  <dig>  table  <dig> shows average amplification efficiencies determined for each gene using the dart-pcr, linregpcr and liu&saint-exp methods. on the whole, e values determined with the linregpcr and liu &saint-exp methods were rather lower and the ones determined with the dart-pcr method were rather higher than the e values determined from relative standard curves. in genes with low- and medium- ct values, the average amplification efficiencies determined by the four methods were close to  <dig> ; in genes with high-ct values , the efficiencies were lower. however, the amplification efficiency of the gene with the highest ct values  was higher than the efficiency of the other „high-ct“ gene .

determination of target mrna quantity in known sample dilutions
linear regression analysis generated by plotting values of target mrna quantities  against diluting factors of the total rna preparation was performed to evaluate the accuracy how the r <dig> values determined by different methods of real-time pcr data analysis reflect the rt-pcr template dilutions. the relationship between determined r <dig> values and sample dilutions was closest in the standard curve method, comparative ct method, dart-pcr method with average e values, liu & saint-exp method with average e values and the combined linregpcr-ct method using average e values, where average pearson's correlation coefficients  reached value at least  <dig>  . in the sigmoid curve-fitting method the average pearson's correlation coefficient was  <dig> ; manual selection of the cut-off cycle  was necessary in sdha, improving the value of the pearson's correlation coefficient from  <dig>  to  <dig> . in the remaining three methods  the average pearson's correlation coefficients reached values between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . in most cases, the pearson's correlation coefficients in the gene with the highest ct values  were lower than in other genes.

we normalized the quantity of cytokines  with the quantity of one reference gene  or with the normalization factor to test the influence of the normalization on the accuracy of the evaluated methods. normalization factors were determined in all dilutions of the rt-pcr template using the genorm software. the parameter "m", calculated by the software, is a measure of the gene expression stability; the lower is the m value the higher is the gene expression stability. the parameter "v2/v3"  represents pairwise variations determining the optimal number of reference genes which should be included for calculation of a reliable normalization factor  <cit> . parameters of the genorm software calculated for the three reference genes  are shown in table  <dig>  values of the m parameter for actb, sdha, and hprt were similar within all methods of analysis. however, comparison of the m values between individual methods of analysis showed that the m values were  <dig> –  <dig> fold higher in the three methods utilizing individual e values  than in other methods. similarly, values of the v2/ <dig> parameter were higher in the three methods utilizing individual e values than in other methods indicating a requirement of higher amount of reference genes to calculate a reliable normalization factor.

since the determined quantity of cytokines and reference genes should reflect the template dilutions by the same manner, the same normalized quantity of cytokines should be determined in each dilution. variability of the normalized quantity between the known template dilutions can then be used as a measure of the quantification accuracy – the lower the variability between dilutions the higher the accuracy of quantification. figure  <dig> shows coefficients of variation  for normalized quantity of il-1β in six rt-pcr template dilutions . in most methods, similar cv values were found after normalization to the normalization factor, to the „low ct“-gene or to the „high ct“-gene ; differences detected by the three methods utilizing individual e values were not consistent nor among the three methods neither among the four measured cytokines. on the other hand, comparison of cv values between individual methods of analysis showed markedly higher coefficients of variation in the three methods utilizing individual e values  than in other methods .

intra-assay and inter-assay variability
reproducibility of the tested methods for real-time pcr data analysis was evaluated by performing experiments where the intra- and inter-assay variability was measured. two genes were selected for the measurements – il-1β, representing a target with low ct values and il- <dig>  representing a target with high ct values. results from the experiment measuring the intra-assay variability are shown in table  <dig>  in both genes, the lowest coefficients of variation were obtained when the following methods of real-time pcr data analysis were used for the determination of target mrna quantity : standard curve method, comparative ct method, dart-pcr method with average e values, liu & saint-exp method with average e values and the combined linregpcr-ct method . using the sigmoidal curve-fitting method, the coefficients of variation were markedly higher. the highest coefficients of variation were obtained using the linregpcr method, dart-pcr method and liu & saint-exp method with individual e values. similar results  were obtained in the experiment measuring the inter-assay variability . coefficients of variation calculated from ct values of  <dig> replicate pcr reactions in the intra-assay experiment were  <dig>  for il-1β and  <dig>  for il-6; in the inter-assay experiment, the coefficients were  <dig>  for il-1β and  <dig>  for il- <dig> 

in the standard curve method, comparative ct method, and the three methods using average e values , the intra-assay variability was higher in il- <dig> than in il-1β; a similar trend was found for the inter-assay variability . the three methods  utilizing individual e values  gave inconsistent results and in some cases, the determined intra-assay variability was even higher than the inter-assay variability. the cv values obtained in the intra- and inter-assay experiment with the scf method were comparable, and they were higher in il- <dig> than in il-1β which is in accordance with the five well-working methods .

normalized cytokine expression in the experimental samples
in tnf-α and gm-csf, significant differences were found only between the group of untreated colitic animals  and the group of sham control animals . in tnf-α, all the tested methods of real-time pcr data analysis showed significantly higher amount of the cytokine in the group un than in the group sh. in gm-csf, the difference between the group un and sh was detected as significant only with the standard curve method, comparative ct method, and the three methods utilizing average e values ; the methods which used individual e values  did not detect the difference as statistically significant .

discussion
to compare the methods currently used for analyzing fluorescence data in real-time pcr relative quantification, we determined mrna levels of four pro-inflammatory cytokines in the in vivo model of colonic inflammation, using six different techniques. three housekeeping genes were also quantified to serve as reference genes for the normalization of cytokine mrna quantity. the compared methods differ principally in the mathematical function used for modeling the pcr process, in the necessity to create a dilution series of the rt-pcr template, in the necessity and means of amplification efficiency  determination, in the way of calculation of the target mrna quantity .

most of the methods utilize fluorescence data only from the exponential phase of pcr amplification  and require setting a threshold fluorescence  to determine the ct value . the relative standard curve method determines target mrna relative quantities in samples from known relative quantities of standard rna or cdna. to obtain correct results, amplification efficiency in the dilutions of the standard preparation and in samples must be similar. the e value determined from the slope of the standard curve  can be utilized for the calculation of the target mrna quantity  in techniques of relative quantification, which can be denoted as "comparative ct methods". equation  <dig> can be used for the transformation of ct values to the r <dig> values; the only parameter which differs among the compared samples is ct. the term "comparative ct method" is most frequently used for the " 2-ΔΔct " method introduced by livak  <cit> ; in this method e is assumed to be equal to  <dig> and the formula for the r <dig> calculation can be modified to r <dig> = 2-ct. pfaffl's model of the comparative ct method  <cit>  incorporates a correction for amplification efficiency differing from the optimal value  <dig>  most published versions of the comparative ct method use normalization of the target gene quantity to a reference gene quantity, very often referring to one of the samples , and the formula for calculation of the target gene relative quantity is more complicated  <cit> . in any case, formulas used in comparative ct methods for calculation of the normalized relative amount of target gene quantity can be derived from equation  <dig>  pfaffl et al. <cit>  developed the software named rest  which can perform the comparative ct quantification in two experimental groups  followed by a statistical test. in the present study, we used e values determined for each gene from the relative standard curves and calculated the r <dig> value for each gene in each sample using the equation  <dig>  the cytokine genes quantity was then normalized with the factor obtained from the quantities of three reference genes.

in the method proposed by liu and saint  <cit> , the amplification efficiency for each sample is determined from the amount of fluorescence and the number of cycles at two arbitrary fluorescence thresholds along the exponential phase of the pcr amplification . the fluorescence thresholds can be set individually for each amplification, or a threshold level common for all reactions can be set. in the first case equation  <dig> is used for the r <dig> calculation, and in the second case equation  <dig> or equation  <dig> can be used. we compared the quantification results obtained with this method using either individual e values  or using an average e value.

ramakers et al. <cit>  developed a computer program entitled linregpcr, which determines the target mrna quantity  and amplification efficiency  by linear regression analysis  of fluorescence data obtained from real-time pcr. like the above-mentioned methods, linear regression exploits only the exponential phase of pcr amplification, but the method is not "threshold-based" – no benchmark  is needed for the calculations. we analyzed our fluorescence data with the linregpcr software and with a technique which combines linear regression analysis and the threshold-based methodology. the combined technique  utilizes e values determined by the linregpcr software  and ct values determined by the mx3000p real-time pcr instrument. a similar strategy was applied by karlen et al. <cit>  and schefe et al. <cit> . the dart-pcr program developed by peirson et al. <cit>  provides an automated analysis of real-time pcr fluorescence data utilizing the combined approach . similarly as for linregpcr, we compared the quantification results obtained with dart-pcr using individual or average e values for the r <dig> calculation.

the method in which a sigmoid mathematical model that fits the kinetics of the whole real-time pcr process is applied  <cit> , represents an approach completely different from the above-mentioned techniques. the sigmoid curve-fitting  method utilizes all fluorescence data recorded during the amplification process  for determination of the r <dig> value. moreover, the method can carry out quantification without the knowledge of amplification efficiency and without determination of ct. rutledge  <cit>  found that amplification cycles within the plateau phase of pcr deviate from that predicted by sigmoid curve-fitting, and their exclusion from the curve-fitting process is necessary. he proposed the selection of a cut-off cycle beyond which further cycles are excluded from the fitting of the amplification curve. the criterion used for the selection of the cut-off cycle was based on repetitive curve-fitting in which the last cycle was sequentially excluded and the r <dig> value was calculated at each individual curve-fitting. plotting the calculated r <dig> values against the cut-off cycle revealed a highly regular pattern in which the calculated r <dig> value decreased with subsequent cycle removal, and after reaching a minimum a small increase in the r <dig> value appeared; the minimum-calculated r <dig> value was selected as the resulting r <dig>  in our work, we found that the shape of the graph of r <dig> dependency on the cut-off cycle can be influenced by fluorescence data provided by the real-time pcr system. using background-subtracted fluorescence data from the mx 3000p system , we were not able to identify the regular trend of the curve r <dig> vs cut-off cycle as described by rutledge  <cit> ; background-subtracted data from opticon <dig> dna engine  were used in rutledge's study. on the other hand, raw fluorescence data from mx 3000p provided a regular pattern of the r <dig> value as a function of the cut-off cycle  in most curves. in some instances the cut-off cycle with the minimal r <dig> value was determined in the region of the amplification curve which contained an insufficient amount of fluorescent data, and manual selection was necessary. karlen et al. <cit>  testing the performance of several methods for real-time pcr data analysis found the sigmoid curve-fitting method  as the least suitable for quantitative pcr analysis. on the contrary, our results indicate that the scf method can provide reasonable results. similarly, qiu et al. <cit>  obtained comparable results using the scf method and a classic threshold-based method. the differences in the scf method performance were probably caused by different number of amplification cycles included into the fitting process. an appropriate selection of the optimal cycle number  is probably the key factor for obtaining satisfactory performance of the scf method, but the choice of a suitable criterion for determination of the "cut-off cycle" can be difficult .

in our study, we determined amplification efficiencies  of seven genes using four methods of real-time pcr data analysis, and found some differences in the determined e values. on the other hand, all the methods were capable to identify the two genes whose e values significantly differed from the others. interestingly, the amplification efficiencies determined by the two methods which employ linear regression for the calculation  were less close each to other than to efficiencies determined by the relative standard curve or liu & saint-exp method. this can be caused by differences in the way the two methods determine the exponential phase of amplification. lower amplification efficiency found by all tested methods in two genes with high ct values  could suggest some influence of ct value on the determination of the e value. however, the comparison of e and ct values in the two „high-ct genes“ indicates that a higher ct value is not necessarily leading to obtaining of a lower e value. this finding is in accordance with results of karlen et al. <cit>  who did not find a dependency of e value on ct value; the authors defined the amplicon and primer sequences as the main factor influencing the efficiency of amplification.

to compare the accuracy of relative quantification conducted with application of different methods for real-time pcr data analysis, we determined quantities of seven target mrnas in serially diluted preparation of total rna. we found that r <dig> values determined with the relative standard curve method, comparative ct method and with the three methods using an average e value for the calculations  most accurately reflected the rt-pcr template dilutions. less effective was the scf method, and the worst results were obtained with the three methods which used individual e values . normalization of cytokines mrna quantity  did not influence the differences in the performance of the methods for real-time pcr analysis tested in our study. on the other hand, our results indicate that targets with high ct values can be quantified with a lower accuracy than targets with medium and low ct values. reproducibility of the tested methods was estimated by determination of the intra- and inter-assay variability and showed the same result as the accuracy test. the highest reproducibility was found in the relative standard curve method, comparative ct method and in the three methods using an average e value for calculations. the scf method was less precise, and the worst results were obtained with the three methods which used individual e values. our results also showed a negative effect of higher ct values on the reproducibility of the tested methods.

comparing results of normalized expression of il-1β and il- <dig> in the experimental samples, all the tested methods were able to detect significant changes between the control animals, untreated colitic animals, and animals undergoing treatment b. the effects of treatments a or c on the il-1β mrna level were detected as statistically significant only by some of the tested methods. in tnf-α and gm-csf, all the tested methods showed higher amount of the cytokines in untreated colitic animals than in control animals, hovewer the three methods which utilized individual e values  were not able to detect the difference in gm-csf expression as statistically significant.

application of corrections for individual sample efficiency should theoretically improve the accuracy and reproducibility of the quantification. but our results showed that, on the contrary, the use of individual e values for the r <dig> calculation impaired the quantification. similar findings were presented in studies where linear regression was utilized for the calculation of individual amplification efficiencies  <cit> . we used two approaches for determination of the individual amplification efficiencies – linear regression  and the method which utilize setting of two fluorescence thresholds along the exponential phase . independently on the way used for the calculation of e values, all the three methods showed the negative effect of the individual e values on the quantification which indicates that this is probably a feature connected with the limited precision of individual data and not with the mathematical approach used for e value determination. the individual e values  are derived from individual sample kinetics represented by the fluorescence values obtained in particular amplification cycles. above mentioned results suggest that fluorescence values detected by real-time systems do not reflect the reaction kinetics with the precision which would be sufficient for reliable e value determination from the exponential phase of the individual amplification. the average e value obtained from the group of amplifications eliminates individual imprecisions enabling to find a reliable value of the amplification efficiency.

CONCLUSIONS
choosing the appropriate method for real-time pcr data analysis can depend on conditions in a particular application. the relative standard curve method is widely used and can provide reliable results, especially in the case when the same quality of rt-pcr template is ensured in standards and samples. sometimes this is not possible, for instance if the quantification is performed on different tissue types, or if the amount of tissue is limited . similar restrictions apply also for comparative ct methods. these methods require serial dilutions of a representative sample to determine the e value which is usually done in a validation experiment preceding a series of measurements. this approach enables to measure more samples in a pcr run , but identical conditions for all measurements must be ensured. the other three methods tested in the present study  do not require serial dilutions of the rt-pcr template for e value determination. we found that these methods provide more reliable results when an average e value and not individual e values  are used for the r0calculation. the liu & saint-exp method is simple – the formula for e value calculation can be easily implemented into spreadsheet programs such as microsoft excel and the selection of the exponential phase of amplification is not difficult . our results with the liu & saint-exp quantification showed that although the criterion for selection of the exponential phase is subjective, reasonable results can be obtained if the same criterion is applied for all compared samples. the linregpcr and dart-pcr methods use a more complicated calculation  for the e value determination. the dart-pcr software combining the linear regression analysis with threshold-based methodology enables r <dig> values to be calculated using an average e value; the linregpcr software do not enable the automated use of an average e value, but manual combination with a threshold-based technique is possible. the scf method differs from all the other methods in the mathematical model used for the calculations – it is not necessary to look for the exponential phase of amplification and to determine the e value. for reliable quantification with this method, fluorescence data including at least the beginning of the plateau phase are needed, which can be a disadvantage when genes with low expression are quantified or when low sample amounts are available. in summary, our results show that all the tested methods for real-time pcr data analysis can provide quantitative values reflecting the amounts of measured mrna in samples, but they differ in their accuracy and reproducibility. although selection of the appropriate method can be limited by the design of a particular experiment  the use of more than one analytical method is recommended for validation of results.

