BACKGROUND
since the advent of recombinant dna technology, transgenic model organisms have become powerful tools for the study of the basic biology of proteins or to generate in vivo models for diseases  <cit> . the expression of transgenes in complex organisms is accompanied by the need for a specific and sensitive detection of the protein. one approach is the use of a protein specific antibody. however, antibodies raised against a protein of interest are not always available, are costly and time-consuming to produce and are usually not transgene specific. moreover antibodies are often not suitable for several applications and immunohistochemical detection is a frequent bottleneck. these drawbacks can be overcome by the use of epitope tagging. the fusion of an immunoreactive epitope tag to a protein provides the possibility to detect any transgene product in a very specific and sensitive manner with well-characterized commercially available antibodies. moreover, it allows discriminating endogenous from overexpressed proteins.

the performance of an epitope tag in a detection experiment is dependent not only on the epitope used but also on the anti-epitope antibody  <cit> . the selection of the optimal tag/antibody combination is complicated and depends on the target protein and the application. the large variety of combinations allows selecting the appropriate tag/anti-tag antibody for a particular application; however this optimization may be a time-consuming process. despite the extensive documentation on the use of epitope tagging for in vitro or cellular applications, very little information is available concerning the use of epitope tags for in vivo applications  <cit> .

in the comparative study presented here, we aimed to characterize different commonly used small epitope tag/antibody combinations in cell culture as well as in vivo. in the selection of different tags, preference was given to those tags with broad versatility: au <dig>  <cit> , ha  <cit> , myc  <cit> , v <dig>  <cit> , flag and 3flag  <cit> . in order to evaluate the different tag/antibody combinations, epitope tags were n-terminally fused to egfp and overexpressed by means of locoregional lentiviral vector-mediated gene transfer  <cit> . we evaluated detection of the epitope tags in cell extracts as well as in the rat striatum in comparison to detection of egfp. as proof-of-principle, we evaluated the indirect detection of fluc protein fused to a v <dig> or 3flag tag after locoregional overexpression in the mouse striatum.

RESULTS
evaluation of epitope tag expression in cell extracts
hek293t cells were transduced with lentiviral vectors encoding different tag-egfp fusion proteins or egfp alone . the amount of vector was normalized for expression based on functional titers  as described in materials and methods. western blot analysis confirmed a clear expression and detection of all different fusion proteins and egfp to comparable levels. our in-house anti-egfp antibody  <cit>  as well as the different commercially available antibodies detected the appropriate fusion protein with high specificity. as shown in fig.  <dig>  no notable proteolytic cleavage of the fusionproteins was observed. in order to avoid saturation of the western blot signal, the anti-v <dig> antibody had to be used at a 1: <dig> dilution, indicating a very sensitive detection of v5-egfp by this antibody. to obtain bands with comparable intensity for cell lysates overexpressing 3flag-egfp and flag-egfp; the former had to be diluted  <dig> times, showing increased detection efficiency of the 3flag tag compared to flag alone.

peptide sequences of evaluated small epitope tags. all tags were n-terminally fused to an egfp sequence in which the start codon had been replaced, a rdppvat sequence was used as linker. untagged egfp was included as control.

evaluation of epitope tag/antibody combinations in vivo
using the same lentiviral vectors, stereotactic injections in striatum of adult rats were performed. the use of tag-egfp fusion proteins allowed us to use egfp detection levels as internal control. animals were sacrificed  <dig> weeks post-injection, a time point at which expression levels reach a maximum  <cit> . adjacent sections were subjected to dab-based immunohistochemical staining with our in-house anti-egfp antibody or the different tag-specific antibodies. dilutions were optimized as described in materials and methods to obtain the optimal signal-to-noise ratio .

 <dig> affinity purified iggs using a column bearing the inmmunizing peptide

 <dig> affinity purified iggs using a column bearing protein a

 <dig> purification method not specified

 <dig> not purified

in order to compare antibody dilutions, the optimal dilutions  for ihc reckoned with the antibody concentration are mentioned in this table.

comparison of the transduced regions revealed that all antibodies can detect the corresponding tag-egfp fusion protein to varying degrees, although the maximum detection levels reached by the evaluated anti-tag antibodies were in all conditions lower than the corresponding egfp detection with our in-house anti-egfp antibody . in order to evaluate the sensitivity of the different tag/antibody combinations, we determined the ratio of tag immunopositive surface to egfp immunopositive surface through the transduced region . this quantification demonstrates that the v5/anti-v <dig> and ha/ha <dig> combinations show the highest sensitivity. the polyclonal anti-myc antibody on the other hand detects its antigen, under the conditions tested, with very low sensitivity.

next, fluorescent immunohistochemical stainings were performed to further characterize detection sensitivity as well as to evaluate specificity at the cellular level . panels with egfp show primary egfp fluorescence without additional staining, detection with the tag-specific antibodies was performed as described in materials and methods. this data confirms that all antibodies can detect the corresponding tag in vivo. quantification of the percentage of egfp-positive cells that stained positive using the corresponding anti-tag antibody were performed within the centre of the transduced region . in this area, where transgene expression levels are high, all but one of the evaluated tag specific antibodies detected the corresponding protein with a similar sensitivity between  <dig> - 90%. the polyclonal anti-myc antibody could only detect 10% of the egfp-positive cells. aspecific detection, i.e. presence of tag immunoreactivity that was not egfp positive, was negligible in all cases.

detection of firefly luciferase using epitope tagging
as proof of principle, we tested immunohistochemical detection of tagged firefly luciferase  following locoregional overexpression in mouse striatum. luciferase, frequently used as in vivo imaging reporter gene, can generate photons in the presence of its substrate d-luciferin and atp. these photons can be detected by a light sensitive device. however, immunohistochemical confirmation of luciferase expression is often crucial. although anti-luciferase antibodies are commercially available, their sensitivity for immunohistochemical detection in brain is very low  <cit> . as the v <dig> tag/anti-v <dig> antibody showed the highest sensitivity for v5-egfp in vivo, we tested the detection of v5-tagged luciferase. as a control for transduced cells, v5-luciferase was co-expressed with egfp using a t2a peptide sequence  <cit> . the western blot presented in fig. 5a confirms expression of our construct. the v5-luciferase fusion protein could be detected with both the luciferase antibody and the anti-v <dig> antibody in cellular extracts. to evaluate the detection of v5-luciferase in vivo, we injected the lentiviral vector encoding v5-luciferase-t2a-egfp in the striatum of mice. to assess the expression, functionality and stability of luciferase protein after lentiviral transduction, mice were imaged by bioluminescence imaging  at  <dig> days and  <dig> weeks post-injection  . images of both time points demonstrated a signal originating from the injected side of the brain. animals were sacrificed  <dig> weeks post-injection and brains were processed for immunohistochemical analysis. in order to evaluate detection efficiency, adjacent sections were incubated with either the anti-v <dig> antibody, anti-luciferase antibody or the in-house anti-egfp antibody . despite confirmation of luciferase activity by bli, the anti-luciferase antibody failed to detect the transgene, while the anti-v <dig> antibody clearly detected v5-luciferase in the transduced region visualized by egfp.

discussion
exogenous gene transfer into the brain is an important strategy to study in vivo protein function, investigate pathogenic mechanisms of diseases as well as develop new therapeutic strategies. however, the study of exogenously expressed proteins requires rigorous assessment of transgene expression, preferentially distinct from the corresponding endogenous protein. in this study, we have used lentiviral vector-based expression of small epitope tags  n-terminally fused to egfp in rat brain to evaluate immunohistochemical detection of several commonly used epitope tags in floating sections. in this way, we have evaluated the performance of several commonly used epitope tag/antibody combinations.

first, we evaluated the detection of the different epitope tags in hek293t cell extracts after transduction with lentiviral vectors encoding the different tag-egfp fusion proteins. western blot analysis shows a distinct and specific detection using our in-house anti-egfp antibody as well as all examined anti-tag antibodies. especially the v5/anti-v <dig> antibody and 3flag/flagm <dig> antibody combinations allow a very sensitive detection in cell extracts .

the main goal of this study was to compare in vivo detection of different frequently used epitope tags using commercially available antibodies. chromogenic dab-based as well as fluorescent immunohistochemical detection of the overexpressed tags revealed that all epitope tag/antibody combinations, with the exception of myc/polyclonal anti-myc, meet the requirements of a specific and sensitive detection in rat brain . the specificity of the v5/anti-v <dig> and ha/ha <dig> combinations are comparable with the other combinations; however the sensitivity seems to be higher since lower antibody concentrations were used for optimal immunohistochemical detection . these differences were most apparent for the immunohistochemical detection with dab. the polyclonal anti-myc antibody on the other hand, detects its antigen with low sensitivity as well as low specificity. therefore, using the presented protocol, our findings show that all tag/antibody combinations, with the exception of myc/polyclonal anti-myc, show sufficient sensitivity and specificity for immunohistochemical analysis in brain tissue.

based on the strong increase in sensitivity in western blotting detection, we expected the detection of the 3flag tag in vivo to be more sensitive compared to the flag tag; however no significant differences in sensitivity were observed between these two tags using either the monoclonal flagm <dig> antibody or a polyclonal anti-flag antibody.

in terms of sensitivity, our in-house egfp antibody was superior to all tested tag antibodies. however by using a large protein such as egfp itself as tag for a protein of interest, caution should be exercised since egfp fusion might interfere with the normal protein function, especially for small proteins. an alternative strategy could consist of a bicistronic construct using a t2a-like peptide  <cit> , although a minor fraction of fusion protein might be produced with this system.

as proof-of-principle experiment, we overexpressed firefly luciferase tagged with v <dig> and co-expressed with egfp in mouse striatum. luciferase activity was confirmed via bioluminescence imaging. the enzymatic activity of fluc was not affected by tagging with v <dig> since the bli signal per injected transducing unit vector does not differ from untagged fluc . however, immunohistochemical analysis using a commercial anti-luciferase antibody failed to detect the transgene. in contrast, we were able to clearly detect the v5-luciferase using the v <dig> antibody . the detection sensitivity with the v <dig> antibody appears somewhat lower than in the case of the v5-egfp fusion protein . this may be attributed to differences in stability of the two proteins  since initial protein levels of v5-luciferase and egfp are identical when co-expressed using a t2a sequence  <cit> . this example clearly underlines the advantage of epitope tagging for sensitive and specific detection of an exogenous protein which is otherwise not readily detectable with ihc.

in order to confirm the previous data with another tag, 3flag-luciferase-t2a-egfp was injected and bli signals were measured. we could confirm that the activity of tagged fluc is maintained and even slightly increased . we therefore conclude that tagging of luciferase with either a v <dig> or 3flag tag does not adversely affect sensitivity of bioluminescence imaging in the brain.

one of the main concerns fusing a small epitope tag to a protein of interest is the potential impact on properties such as biodistribution, stability, enzymatic activity and binding capacity. since such effects cannot be predicted, control studies comparing the tagged protein with the wild-type counterpart should always be included  <cit> . however, interference with the tertiary structure and bioactivity can be minimized by using short peptide sequences fused to the terminus of the protein  <cit> .

besides immunohistochemical detection evaluated in the present study, fusing a small peptide to any gene of interest also offers great benefit in several other applications. for instance, epitope tags can be used as an affinity tag to perform protein purification when using stringent purification conditions or to identify interacting proteins when combining non-stringent affinity purifications and mass spectrometry analysis of co-purified proteins  <cit> . moreover, modifications of the small peptide sequence may further enlarge the range of applications  <cit> . an interesting new development is for example the generation of a drug-controllable tag  <cit> .

it should be noted that since the choice of tag/antibody combinations is endless and the ideal epitope tag may vary for every transgene and every application, there is still a need for optimization and characterization studies when tagging a new protein  <cit> . the evaluation of several commonly used tag/antibody combinations in vivo presented here can be used as an aid in the selection of tags to assess in priority. moreover, we offer a straightforward protocol for immunohistochemical analysis of tagged exogenous protein expressed in rodent brain which can be readily applied for any new protein of interest.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the present study provides an extensive overview of small epitope tags and corresponding antibodies for immunohistochemical detection of transgenes in vivo. using the presented protocol, v5/anti-v <dig> and ha/ha <dig> are the preferable tag/antibody combinations for immunohistochemical analysis in brain tissue while detection of myc-tagged proteins by polyclonal anti-myc antibody is not an ideal candidate. our study yields a straightforward protocol for sample preparation and immunohistochemical staining in floating sections of brain tissue. we show in this study that tagging a protein with a small epitope tag is a powerful approach to obtain sensitive and specific detection of overexpressed proteins while reducing the risks of altering the transgene's function.

