BACKGROUND
the extant sloths comprise six species of medium-sized slow-moving mammals of central and south america. they are represented by two distantly related genera bradypus, three-toed sloths, and choloepus, two-toed sloths. the genus bradypus has four extant species: bradypus variegatus, b. tridactylus, b. torquatus and b. pygmaeus. bradypus variegatus, the brown-throated sloth, is the most widespread species and inhabits central and southern american rainforests, whereas b. tridactylus, the pale-throated sloth, is restricted to northern south america. bradypus torquatus, the maned three-toed sloth, occupies a diminishing area of coastal forests of eastern brazil, and b. pygmaeus, the pygmy three-toed sloth, only recently described, is endemic to the small island, isla escudo de veraguas on the atlantic coast of panama  <cit> . the genus choloepus is represented by two living species: choloepus hoffmanni, the hoffmann's two-toed sloth, and c. didactylus, the southern two-toed sloth. choloepus hoffmanni occurs in central america, and in south america close to the equator, and c. didactylus is restricted to northern south america  <cit> .

sloth hair is long and coarse and that of two-toed sloths is unique in having a number of deep grooves running the length of each hair, whereas three-toed sloth hair has irregular transverse cracks that increase in number and size with age  <cit> . a wide variety of organisms have been reported to occur in the grooves and cracks of sloth hair, including cyanobacteria and diatoms; and among their fur, moths, beetles, cockroaches and roundworms  <cit> . however, the greenish color of the hair, which is most evident in three-toed sloths, is due to green algae, which in most cases have been identified as trichophilus welckeri  <cit> . it is a popular assumption that the association between the three-toed sloth and the alga embedded in its hairs is a symbiotic relationship with the alga obtaining shelter in the cracks of the hair while providing green camouflage for the sloth. it also has been proposed that the alga offers no benefit to the sloth, but is able to survive in the hair because the sloth does not prevent the alga growing  <cit> . the hair of the three-toed sloth absorbs water like a sponge, perhaps making it an even more ideal habitat for algae, and prompting speculations that the sloth perhaps receives nutrients from the alga via diffusion along the spongy outer portion of the hairs, followed by absorption into the skin  <cit> . the algae growing on sloth hair may also produce exopolymeric substances that may give the hair a desired texture or allow beneficial bacteria to grow. karsten et al.  <cit>  found uv-absorbing mycosporine-like amino acid  from a green alga found in sloth hair. reduced exposure to uv-light could also be seen as beneficial to the sloth over the long run. however, there is no clear evidence supporting any hypothesis at present.

here we collected  <dig> sloth hair samples from all six extant sloth species as well as  <dig> environmental samples from tree trunks to survey the diversity of eukaryotic organisms present there. we found evidence for the acquisition of green algae from the environment as well as retention of green algae in the hair independent of the sloths geographic location.

RESULTS
hair samples were examined from  <dig> sloth individuals, which originated from french guiana, panama, costa rica and brazil . clone libraries were constructed and  <dig> eukaryotic 18s rrna gene sequences were obtained from a total of  <dig> taxa . the number of eukaryotic taxa per sample varied between  <dig> and  <dig>  except in c. didactylus where the only two sequences recovered turned out to represent the same taxon . the estimated total number of taxa  varied between  <dig> and  <dig> being  <dig> for the total dataset. the shannon diversity index with 95% confidence intervals was equal in the sloth species containing a minimum of  <dig> taxa. the shannon diversity index for the total dataset was  <dig> . the coverage, which estimates whether the clone library reflects the actual diversity in the samples, was  <dig> % for the complete dataset. in the comparison of different geographical areas the highest number of taxa was found on isla escudo de veraguas, panama, where the number of taxa was  <dig> and the estimated number of taxa was  <dig> . the shannon diversity was lower in costa rica  and paulo seike fragment  than in other areas . more than half of the taxa consisted of ciliates, apicomplexans and dinoflagellates . one third of the sequences were green algae. fungi also were present in larger numbers and in addition a few 18s rrna gene sequences from arthropods, euglenozoa and red algae, were found. 10% of sequences could not be attributed to a known eukaryote .

*the number of taxa, estimated number of taxa and the shannon diversity index from each sloth species. shannon index values include the 95% confidence intervals. coverage estimates if the clone library reflects the actual diversity in the samples. a taxon is defined here as having greater than 97% similarity. acoverage not calculated for c. didactylus due to the low number of sequences.

*the number of taxa , estimated number of taxa and the shannon diversity index from each study area. shannon index values include the 95% confidence intervals.

pco analysis of all eukaryotic 18s rrna gene sequences from the sloth hair grouped most samples together, excluding the naos and augusto ruschi samples and the barro colorado island bradypus variegatus -samples . the first two pco axes explained  <dig> % of the variability. however, the canonical analysis of the three species of sloths that had been sampled from several locations showed a separation of the different sloth species with squared canonical correlations of δ <dig> =  <dig>  and δ <dig> =  <dig>  . the canonical test statistic  was significant . the cap program determined the optimum amount  of principal coordinates for the canonical analysis to be  <dig>  which achieved maximum proportion of correct allocations  and which explained  <dig> % of the variability. correlations of taxa with both cap axes are shown graphically in fig. 3c. we did not include in the figure any taxa with correlations to both axes < <dig>  nor ones which occurred only once. the analysis showed that c. hoffmanni, b. torquatus and b. variegatus harbour different taxa in their hair . due to small amount of data from dry season we could not test the separation of samples in relation to dry and wet season. however, naos island c. hoffmanni and over half of barro colorado b. variegatus sequences were collected on dry season and the position of those samples in pco indicates some degree of separation.

fifty-two of the  <dig> sloth hair samples studied contained green algae, as observed either directly due to the greenish color of the hair, or by using light microscopy, which in some cases revealed algae even if the color of the hair was dark but not green. green algal sequences were obtained successfully from  <dig> of the  <dig> samples. we were not able to get a pcr product for the remaining  <dig> samples that contained visible green algae. green algal 18s rrna gene sequences were obtained from five extant sloth species. despite all efforts no green algal 18s rrna gene sequences were obtained from the two hair samples of choloepus didactylus. green algae were neither found in microscopic examinations of these two samples. an average of 27% of the sloth samples for which 18s rrna gene clone libraries were constructed contained green algae .

the majority of the green algal sequences obtained from the hair samples formed a clade of their own within the green algal class ulvophyceae, distinct from other publicly available taxa. this group received high support  for its monophyly in all phylogenetic analyses that were employed . based on the morphological characters, small  thick-walled cells without pyrenoids , the clade is likely to correspond to the green algal genus trichophilus, which has been described by weber-van bosse in  <dig>  <cit> . interestingly, there were no other green algal species found in the same hair samples in which trichophilus was found. the clade was subdivided into three subclades that received moderate to high internal node support. two clades, a and c in  were formed by rrna gene clones originating from choloepus hoffmannii hair samples. clones in the clade b originated from the hair of bradypus. within clade b, the sequences from b. tridactylus were different from those of other bradypus species; there were four synapomorphic positions at the 5'-end of the 18s rrna gene that distinguished the b. tridactylus hair alga from the corresponding alga of other bradypus species. the bootstrap values for the clade b, originating from hair samples of bradypus, was high  in mp, nj, garliml analyses and 69% in me analyses . clades a and c, which originated from choloepus, were also supported by high bootstrap support . separately from the ulvophycean green algal clade, green algae from sloth hair grouped with several trentepohlia-species, including trentepohlia annulata, as well as with prinzina lagenifera, myrmecia sp., asterochloris sp. and chlorella-like algae. the bootstrap supports for these clades were up to 100%. these samples all came from bradypus torquatus from brazil and choloepus hoffmanni from panama. one of the brazilian samples, bt <dig>  contained two taxa that clearly grouped separately in the phylogenies .

we obtained  <dig> sequences from the  <dig> environmental samples from barro colorado island. half of the sequences were green algal or from higher plants. fungi were also abundant and 10% of sequences were from ciliates and other alveolites . all green algal sequences from tree bark were attributable to the genus trentepohlia, a terrestrial green algal genus occurring both in temperate regions as well as in tropics. they formed several independent lineages within the trentepohliales clade of the 18s rrna gene phylogeny .

discussion
we found evidence for three different patterns of algae that occur in the hair of five sloth species: 1) the green alga in the fur of the brown-throated sloth, bradypus variegatus, and the pygmy three-toed sloth, b. pygmaeus, is a unique species and no other green algal species were found in their fur. microscopy of the alga on the hair revealed characteristic features to the description of trichophilus , which has indeed been described from the hair of bradypus. 2) the maned three-toed sloth bradypus torquatus was shown in our study to host a variety of algae belonging to genera known to be terrestrial, e.g. trentepholia and myrmecia. 3) the hoffmann's two-toed sloth choloepus hoffmanni and the pale-throated sloth bradypus tridactylus, showed both patterns; they hosted terrestrial green algae from their surroundings, as well as the unique genus trichophilus.

the green alga trichophilus that was found in b. variegatus, b. pygmaeus and b. tridactylus was separated in the phylogenetic trees from the trichophilus occurring in c. hoffmanni. the bradypus-clade was supported by high bootstrap values and as bradypus variegatus and choloepus hoffmanni inhabit the same geographic area and habitat  <cit> , the separation of trichophilus inhabiting bradypus suggests co-evolution between trichophilus and bradypus species. this is further supported by the cell sizes of trichophilus in bradypus and trichophilus in choloepus being different.

trichophilus welckeri  <cit>  has been described from sloth hair and generally has been thought to be the only green alga infesting sloth hair  <cit> . however, in former phylogenetic studies  <cit> t. welckeri  was shown to group with prasiolopsis ramosa, which is contrary to our study. we suspect earlier studies to be erroneous species identification, made because of its habitat and the morphological investigation of the strain supports this. the strain sag  <dig>  resembles prasiolopsis by forming irregular cushion-like tufts of pseudoparanchymatous filaments and cells with single, stellate, pyrenoid-containing chloroplast typical of the prasiolales  <cit>  rather than numerous small, discoid chloroplasts without pyrenoids described for trichophilus  <cit> . therefore our understanding is that trichophilus welckeri has been found previously in nature  <cit>  but has not yet been isolated into pure culture and sequenced before. it is likely not to occur in any other environment besides sloth hair given that tropical terrestrial green algal species like t. welckeri have not been found before. its restricted occurrence may be explained by it being host-specific and possibly thermophilic.

among all  <dig> sloth individuals studied, 73% hosted algae in their fur. it was either observed by the greenish color of the fur or seen under the microscope in closer observation. seven of the  <dig> individuals in which we found no evidence of algae were babies still at the age of clinging to their mothers suggesting that at least trichophilus is gained in childhood, most likely from the mother. this observation is supported by an earlier study noting that sloths gain the algae and other parasites by the time they are a few weeks old  <cit> . besides trichophilus, other green algae found in sloth hair were terrestrial trentepohlia, prinzina, myrmecia and trebouxia -species as well as chlorella-like algae. among these, only trentepohlia has been reported previously from sloth hair  <cit> . it is possible that sloths gain these algae from the environment and host them in their fur. however, they may also represent sloth-inhabiting specialists at a finer evolutionary level, e.g. species level, than trichophilus does. that there were  <dig> hair samples containing visible green algae but for which we were unable to get pcr-product, suggest that there were either too few algae in the sample or there were pcr inhibitors present in the dna extracts. this problem could be overcome by culturing the microbial community from fresh hair samples. the diversity of other eukaryotic organisms in the hair was high, as expected, based on previous studies, which have observed a wide range of animals, e.g. moths, beetles, cockroaches, and roundworms  <cit> . however, a surprising number and diversity of ciliates and fungi were also found in the hair of all sloth species, excluding c. didactylus, for which only two sequences were analyzed. all geographical areas studied, except costa rica, had similar levels of eukaryote diversity. the similar diversity is likely to be explained by the similar habitat of sloths, regardless of the geographical area they inhabit. however, regardless of the similar diversity, the species composition of eukaryotic organisms varied as was seen in the pco and cap-analyses . the eukaryotes in b. variegatus, b. torquatus and c. hoffmanni were different . partly this separation can be explained by the differing green algae inhabiting the hair as was seen in the phylogenetic tree in which trichophilus in bradypus was separated from trichophilus in choloepus . similarly, ciliates were different on the three compared species. this can be due to differing hair structure and possibly chemistry as well as differing ecology of the species. it may also reflect the divergence of the two sloth genera about  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , which may have led to the separation of the cohabiting eukaryotes as well.

the species composition of naos island c. hoffmanni was clearly different from other choloepus samples from panama. this may be due to the environment where the sloths are living and the fact that samples were collected on dry season. naos island is a small and dry island on the pacific coast of panama, receiving on average  <dig> mm rainfall per year  <cit> . barro colorado island and isla colón, are located closer to the atlantic coast of panama, and therefore are moister, receiving rainfall of 2600- <dig> mm per year  <cit> .

the difference in the species composition in barro colorado island choloepus and bradypus was striking  as the samples were collected from the same area, although the majority of bradypus sequences were obtained from sloths on dry season. in contrary, choloepus and bradypus samples from isla colón were collected from the same area both on wet season being close to each other in the pco-analyses . this suggests that the alteration of dry and wet season may have an effect on the eukaryotic species composition in the hair of sloths.

despite the differing species compositions on sloth hair, the results  show that besides primary producers , there are also heterotrophic organisms  as well as decomposers  in the fur, suggesting that sloth fur supports a versatile small-scale ecosystem. this was not seen in the environmental samples  in which 87% of the organisms are primary producers  or decomposers .

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first comparative survey of the algae and other organisms found in the fur of all six extant species of sloths, and the first study to use molecular methods to explore evolutionary relationships among the algae. we confirm that a great variety of eukaryotes live in sloth fur in addition to the various green algae. we also show the presence of an alga, attributable to at least three species of the genus trichophilus, that has been found only in sloth hair, and thus apparently is passed directly from the mother to the offspring. that finding adds strong support to the idea that the relationship between sloths and at least one particular alga, trichophilus spp., is a symbiotic one.

