BACKGROUND
miniaturisation, an evolutionary process that leads to dwarfed sexually mature organisms, is widespread among vertebrates and best documented in amphibians and fishes  <cit> . miniaturized taxa are frequently characterized by a trend towards reduction and simplification of various structures and organs. in a number of cases such miniature taxa, in the example of fishes, species maturing at sizes under  <dig> mm  <cit> , have defied various attempts over a number of decades to determine their phylogenetic position with any confidence. the two most prominent examples among bony fishes in this context are schindleria, which had previously been assigned to various higher level taxa among teleosts and even been put in its own order, until it was shown to be a gobioid  <cit> , and sundasalanx, which was first described as a salmoniform  <cit> , but later demonstrated to be a clupeoid  <cit> .

we recently described a new genus of miniaturized cyprinids, paedocypris, with two new species p. micromegethes and p. progenetica, both from southeast asia  <cit> . although clearly a member of the cyprinidae among the cypriniform otophysi, the simplified anatomical structure of paedocypris, combined with a number of highly derived autapomorphic characters, have made it difficult to develop a convincing hypothesis about its phylogenetic position among the subfamilies of this largest teleost family  <cit> . a phylogenetic framework, however, is essential to evaluate the number of evolutionary transitions from non-miniature to miniature among cyprinids, and thus, to determine whether paedocypris is part of a larger group of miniaturized taxa or the consequence of an independent evolutionary event of miniaturization. among cyprinids,  <dig> species from nine genera in south and southeast asia can be considered miniaturized  <cit> . miniature cyprinids are absent from north america and eurasia , however,  <dig> species in three genera are known from africa  <cit> . to determine the phylogenetic position of paedocypris among cyprinids, we performed a phylogenetic analysis based on dna nucleotide sequence data from a large range of cypriniform representatives including many miniaturized taxa.

RESULTS
cyprinid phylogenetics
the phylogenetic analyses were based on an alignment of  <dig> nucleotide sites excluding some positions at the 3' end of the cytb gene. we were unable to amplify the 5' end of the cytb for nine taxa despite designing several new primers located in the trna-glu and internal reverse primers . the cytochrome b  in the analysed taxa consists of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> amino acids, with  <dig> amino acid positions being the most common length of the orf in cyprinids . most cyprinids show an incomplete t–– stop codon that is completed to a taa stop codon posttranscriptionally by polyadenylation of the mrnas  <cit> . we noted that a few cyprinids had either a taa or tag stop codon and up to  <dig> base pairs  of noncoding region before the 5' end of the trna-thr. changes of the 3' end of the cytochrome b, the stop codon, noncoding region, and the beginning of the trna-thr of the taxa used in this study are shown in additional file  <dig>  in this regard it is noteworthy to mention that both paedocypris sp "pulau singkep" and "banka" from islands near sumatra show a complete taa stop codon, whereas p. sp "kalimantan tengah" and "pontianak" from borneo show an incomplete t–– stop codon .

the 50% majority-rule consensus tree recovered from the partitioned bayesian analysis of the complete cytochrome b is depicted in figure  <dig>  as the focus of our study was to place paedocypris within a larger phylogenetic framework, a detailed treatment of cyprinid intrarelationships based upon complete cytb is beyond our scope. we are aware that some nodes in figure  <dig> are poorly supported or unresolved but this does not affect our conclusions. clearly, more nucleotide sampling both from mitochondrial and nuclear dna is needed to fully resolve the complex phylogenetic history of cyprinids.

paedocypris was placed as sistergroup of sundadanio with high support . the paedocypris-sundadanio clade c was resolved with moderate support as sistergroup to clade d , which consists of an additional  <dig> rasborine taxa forming the rasborinae clade a . other taxa commonly classified as rasborinae were not resolved in clade a, rendering the rasborinae non-monophyletic . the rasborinae clade a was resolved as sister group of clade b  consisting of the remaining cyprinid taxa with high support. the monophyly of the cyprinidae received a posterior probability of  <dig>  . ml gave identical results regarding the main cyprinid intrarelationships as bi . the maximum observed pairwise genetic distance  between paedocypris individuals sampled from sumatra and borneo were  <dig> %, whereas the genetic distance between the two sundadanio individuals  was  <dig> %.

cyprinidae divergence time estimates
the ml phylogram used for the pl analyses is depicted in figure 2a. in both approaches, calibration based on substitution rate or fossil record, stem and crown group calibrations gave nearly identical results regarding cyprinid divergence time estimates . we therefore focus on the results obtained using the crown group calibration. applying the cyprinid cytb molecular clock of  <dig>  substitutions per site per million year resulted in a cyprinid crown group age of  <dig>  my , while the age of the mrca of rasborins  was  <dig>  my , that of paedocypris and sundadanio was  <dig>  my , and that of paedocypris was  <dig>  my  . the inferred standard deviation  of the substitution rate was  <dig> . in contrast, when the cyprinid tree was calibrated with fossil data constraining the crown group age to  <dig>  my , the mrca of rasborines  was found to be  <dig>  my old , that of paedocypris and sundadanio  <dig>  my , and that of paedocypris  <dig>  my , respectively . the inferred mean substitution rate with this calibration was  <dig>   substitutions per site per million years.

this table lists inferred ages in million years for selected cyprinid nodes , mrca paedocypris and sundadanio, and mrca paedocypris are labelled 1– <dig> in figure 2c), substitution rates, standard deviation and smoothing parameters used for the alternative calibration of a relaxed cyprinid molecular clock  with penalized likelihood . the chronogram resulting from the substitution rate calibration  is shown in figure 2c.

a = fixed root age; b = clades a and c refer to clade designations given in figure 1; c = fixed substitution rate ; d = inferred substitution rate.

evolution of miniaturization in rasborines
the ml topology from the rasborine data set was used to perform character-state reconstruction for the evolution of miniaturization among rasborinae clade a . using both, unweighted parsimony and ml ancestral character state reconstruction we found that a miniature body size has evolved recurrently among rasborines from clade a . we note, however, that the topology of clade d is not well resolved  and that additional mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequence data as well as an increased taxon sampling is needed for a better understanding of the evolution of miniaturization in rasborine clade a.

discussion
molecular phylogenetics
to place paedocypris within a larger phylogenetic framework we had to depend to a large degree on published cytb sequences, by far the most commonly used molecular phylogenetic marker for cyprinids thus far . while most of the cyprinid subfamilies are rather well represented in the genbank/embl/ddbj database, complete rasborine cytb sequences are scarce. this is surprising, since the rasborinae is a particularly speciose and widespread subfamily. only one representative of the rasborine clade a  could be obtained from genbank  whereas the other  <dig> species  were sequenced specifically for this study. we were unable to amplify the 5' end of the cytb for nine of these taxa . it is therefore possible that in some rasborines the trna-glu is not located directly 5' of the cytb or that it shows an unusual structure compared to the consensus teleost trna-glu. this might partially explain the absence of published complete rasborine cytb nucleotide sequences.

divergence time estimates
the results derived from the substitution rate calibration and those obtained under the fossil calibrations vary widely in the inferred cyprinid root ages . while the root was fixed at an age of  <dig>  my based on fossil evidence, using the substitution rate calibration we obtained a root age of  <dig>  my . a possible source of error in this calibration is the cyprinid cytb substitution rate used. recently, it was shown that there is a problem of extrapolating molecular rates across different evolutionary timescales caused by marked differences between short-term and long-term substitution rates  <cit> . it is therefore likely that the cyprinid substitution rate we employed is inflated  and hence, the divergence time estimates have been underestimated.

miniaturization
the evolution of small size is a recurrent theme among teleosts and especially striking in cyprinid and gobioid fishes, which include the record holders for smallest vertebrates  <cit> . the recently described cyprinid genus paedocypris contains the smallest fish and vertebrate species, p. progenetica, with females maturing at  <dig>  mm standard length  <cit> . so far, the phylogenetic relationships of paedocypris among the cyprinidae are unclear due to its highly developmentally truncated anatomy. the mtdna based phylogenetic analyses, reported herein are part of a dual approach to resolve this issue. an ongoing morphological study looks at non-truncated characters of paedocypris and compares them with other cyprinid representatives . our phylogenetic analyses of a large number of cyprinids consistently recovered sundadanio as the sister group of paedocypris. sundadanio is a genus established for a single miniature species, s. axelrodi, originally described as a member of the genus rasbora  <cit> . sundadanio  has a maximum size of  <dig>  mm sl  <cit>  and occurs on sumatra, banka, riau archipelago, and different parts of borneo.

both sundadanio and paedocypris are part of a larger clade  comprising taxa that have been referred to in the systematic literature as rasborinae  <cit>  or danioninae  <cit> . among those, the genera esomus, luciosoma, rasbora, nematabramis, chela, inlecypris, danio , brachydanio , bengala, pseudorasbora, and possibly thryssocypris, were considered by howes  <cit>  to form a monophyletic group, the rasborini. the only more recent comprehensive phylogenetic study looking at relationships among some rasborine taxa is fang  <cit> , who focused on the so-called danionins. regarding the position of sundadanio, fang  concluded: "the genus is obviously well characterized, and it is apparently a danionin taxon, but a precise phylogenetic placement is presently elusive." based on our molecular results sundadanio is the closest relative of paedocypris.

judging from the number of very small species, miniaturization seems to be much more frequent in the rasborine clade a cyprinids than in any other subfamily . in the taxa we have studied, miniaturization occurs in the sundadanio/paedocypris clade , in danionella, 'danio' erythromicron, microrasbora, horadandia, boraras, chela dadiburjori and in rasbora kalbarensis. based on our tree, we hypothesize that miniature taxa evolved at least seven times independently in rasborine clade a . the only other miniature cyprinid outside rasborinae in our analysis is the african barboides britzi, which groups with the other african barbus-like cyprinids . other miniature cyprinid taxa, which we were unable to include in the study, are sawbwa resplendens, an asian member of the cyprininae, tanichthys micagemmae, sometimes considered a rasborine, although its sister taxon t. albonubes was not resolved in the core rasborine clade a in our analyses , and nine african species of the genus 'barbus' .

our results indicate that paedocypris is the sister genus of the miniaturized sundadanio and part of a larger clade, the rasborinae clade a . paedocypris is thus not the result of an independent miniaturization event, but an extreme of the trend towards miniaturization in the sundadanio – paedocypris clade . although miniature fishes, by definition, share the character 'maturing at sizes under  <dig> mm'  <cit> , the anatomical outcome of the process of miniaturization can be very different. two extreme results are possible with various intermediate stages in between  <cit> : the miniaturized species may just be a dwarfed but otherwise identical image of its larger ancestor , or it closely resembles an early developmental stage of the larger ancestor . among the miniature cyprinids, an example for the first case is boraras, which, except for a few reductions, closely resembles its larger relatives of the genus rasbora  <cit> . two clearly developmentally truncated miniature cyprinids are danionella and paedocypris that have the appearance and anatomical structure of larval cyprinids  <cit> .

hanken  <cit>  noted that miniaturization is often not only associated with the reduction of characters, but also with the evolution of morphological novelties and some of the developmentally truncated miniature cyprinids offer fascinating examples for this claim. danionella is characterized by an anterior shift of the genital pore and anus in males so that both open between the enlarged pelvic fins  <cit> , and by novel flanges, cartilages, and processes on the weberian apparatus with unknown function. males of the genus paedocypris have a highly modified pelvic girdle, and pelvic fin rays and associated muscles that along with a conspicuous, keratinized knob of skin in front of the fins possibly function as a clasping organ, although its precise biological role is still unclear  <cit> . in contrast, species of the genus boraras, the proportioned dwarfs, which are in roughly the same size class as danionella and paedocypris, reveal no such evolutionary novelties. morphological novelties also seem to be lacking in some of the other miniaturized, but hardly developmentally truncated, cyprinids, like horadandia, sawbwa, microrasbora, and 'danio' erythromicron. with the establishment of danio rerio, a member of rasborine clade a, as a model organism for vertebrate developmental genetics  <cit>  the proportioned dwarfs and the developmentally truncated miniatures offer a challenging system of "natural mutants" to study the loss of characters and the evolution of morphological novelties comparatively at a genetic level.

kottelat et al.  <cit>  pointed out that peat swamp forests in southeast asia house an unusually high number of miniature fishes. regarding cyprinids only, this still holds true, as six out of the  <dig> miniature cyprinids occurring in southeast asia live in peat swamp forests and of these five exclusively so . the continued study of these and other miniaturized fish is in jeopardy as their preferred habitats in southeast asia are being lost at an alarming rate  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our phylogenetic analyses that include representatives of all major cyprinid lineages show a strongly supported sister group relationship between sundadanio and paedocypris, two developmentally truncated taxa. they were resolved as part of a larger clade containing small rasborines . relaxed molecular clock analyses revealed unexpectedly old ages for the mrcas of the sundadanio – paedocypris clade  and the paedocypris and sundadanio clades, respectively . miniaturization seems to be a much more frequent event in the rasborine clade a than in any other cyprinid subfamily. based on our phylogenetic hypothesis, miniature taxa evolved at least seven times independently in rasborine clade a including developmentally truncated taxa and taxa characterized by proportioned dwarfism. the rasborine clade a is not only an ideal group to study the evolution of miniaturization among vertebrates, but also to investigate the evolution of morphological novelties. while those miniature cyprinids that hardly show any developmental truncation generally lack morphological novelties, they are common in miniature, developmentally truncated cyprinids.

