BACKGROUND
sequences derived from the mitochondrial genome are commonly used both in species delimitation and historical phylogeography. for example, deep divergence in mitochondrial dna sequences  between related individuals is often taken as evidence for the existence of cryptic species  <cit> . the discovery of cryptic species-level variation has important implications for characterising biodiversity and for studies of speciation. nonetheless, it is now well recognised that inference of evolutionary processes and species boundaries from mitochondrial sequences alone can be problematic  <cit> . for example, similar patterns of divergence can be due to host-parasite interactions, whereby selection leads different molecular markers to show different histories  <cit> . mitochondrial lineages may also be retained through admixture between divergent species or populations  <cit> , or perhaps due to unusual population structures  <cit> . indeed, in diverse tropical radiations, mtdna 'barcoding' may perform rather poorly as a species identification tool  <cit> . it is therefore of general interest to pursue individual cases of deep mtdna divergence in order to determine how often such divergence is indeed an indicator of cryptic species-level variation.

heliconius butterflies are an excellent ecological and genetic system for studying speciation. these unpalatable butterflies are recognized for their diversity of wing color patterns associated with mimicry  <cit> . the classical example of this adaptive radiation occurs between the comimetic species h. erato and h. melpomene. these butterflies co-occur in central and south america and show convergent changes in their color pattern. they are represented by more than  <dig> different geographic forms which are considered subspecies  <cit> . neutral molecular markers show geographic structure among subspecies of h. erato and h. melpomene, and most named races fall within a particular geographic clade  <cit> . however, in h. erato two forms: h. e. hydara and h. e. chestertonii are polyphyletic in the mitochondrial phylogeny  <cit> . individuals of h. e. chestertonii fall into two distinct mtdna clades that show over 2% divergence, with no clear biogeographic explanation  <cit> . h. e. chestertonii is found in the western colombian andes on disturbed, dry habitats and forms a hybrid zone with the geographically closest subspecies: h. e. venus. although h. e. chestertonii is a member of the erato clade, it has an unusual wing color pattern compared with the characteristic red/yellow/black pattern of h. erato. h. e. chestertonii has an iridescent and melanic forewing while the hindwing displays a broad yellow band. the co-mimic for this wing color pattern is h. cydno weymeri f. gustavi, a member of the h. melpomene clade.

rapid evolution in the early stages of the speciation process is expected to lead to incongruence between morphological and molecular markers  <cit> . however, in h. e. chestertonii the deep divergence in the mitochondrial haplotypes is not readily explained through ancestral polymorphism or hybridization. such mtdna division has not been observed in any other heliconius taxon to date. one possible explanation might be that structure is due to the presence of endosymbiotic bacteria  <cit> . wolbachia are intracellular bacteria and infect numerous species of arthropods and nematodes  <cit> . interactions between these microorganisms and their eukaryotic hosts often has consequences for host reproduction, leading in some cases to breaks between populations or species  <cit> . wolbachia are inherited maternally, so their evolutionary fate is tightly linked to that of the mitochondrion  <cit> . furthermore, hybridization between h. e. chestertonii and its nearby relative, h. e. venus, produces partially infertile eggs  <cit> . hybrid sterility of this form can also be generated by endosymbionts where parental populations are infected by different strains.

however, an alternative hypothesis for the mtdna break within the continuous distribution of h. e. chestertonii is cryptic reproductive isolation, unrelated to endosymbionts. given the emphasis on wing color pattern in heliconius speciation, a potential case of cryptic speciation would be of considerable interest. to investigate these possibilities we first extend previous mtdna sampling to better document the distribution of mtdna lineages. in order to test for cryptic speciation, we have then complemented these data with nuclear amplified fragment length polymorphisms  markers, to provide a comparison with nuclear biparentally inherited markers. finally, we have tested for a variety of endosymbiotic bacteria to investigate whether mtdna structure could be a result of patterns of infection among populations.

RESULTS
mitochondrial relationships
our expanded sampling of mitochondrial sequences confirms the deep divergence within h. e. chestertonii, with a similar topology obtained with either bayesian or parsimony analyses . as expected, both taxa studied here are members of the e <dig> clade, containing h. erato species from costa rica, panama, colombia and west ecuador  <cit> . h. e. venus forms a monophyletic group together with some members of h. e. hydara, while individuals of h. e. chestertonii showed a complex relationship with other subspecies and is a polyphyletic taxon. three principal clades are observed. the first primarily includes individuals collected in populations north of the hybrid zone in calima river valley . these haplotypes form a sister group to the other subspecies of the western clade e1: h. e. petiverana, h. e venus and h. e. hydara . the second principal clade includes the west ecuadorean race h. e. cyrbia and primarily individuals of h. e. chestertonii collected in southern populations . the third clade, with only three northern individuals, is sister to all races of h. erato in the western e <dig> clade and south clade of h. e. chestertonii. the different clades involving members of h. e. chestertonii has strong bootstrap support  and a high posterior probability  . a haplotype network analysis revealed the same relationships among populations . three main star-like species/geographical clusters, h. e. venus, h. e. chestertonii-north and h. e. chestertonii-south. a topology test showed that monophyly of h. e. chestertonii could be strongly rejected .

genetic analysis of mitochondrial dna  within populations, showed that h. e. chestertonii is more polymorphic than h. e. venus . we then subdivided h. e. chestertonii to compare polymorphism within  northern and southern populations and  the two principal clades obtained in the phylogenetic tree. the northern and southern populations had similar levels of dna polymorphism  with no fixed difference between groups and  <dig> shared mutations . nonetheless, the comparison between clades showed  <dig> fixed differences and just three shared mutations . the analysis of molecular variance  showed that the maximum variability is within populations  and only  <dig> % of the total variability was due to geography, and a further  <dig> % explained by species . when the species were analyzed separately, we found higher genetic structure among localities of h. e. chestertonii than between h. e. venus populations .

the symbols in the table represent: number of segregating sites , number of haplotypes , nucleotide diversity per site , average number of differences between pair of sequences  and genetic diversity per site .

aflp analysis
of the  <dig> loci examined, we found that  <dig> were polymorphic, representing 97% of loci. genetic diversity statistics estimated from aflp data showed that populations are differentiated within and among species . both h. e. venus and h. e. chestertonii had values of genetic diversity of  <dig> %, while the hybrid zone populations  were more diverse than in any allopatric locality  = 29% and h. e. venus  = 30%).

the aflp-based bayesian population assignment test identified two clusters which correspond to h. e. chestertonii and h. e. venus . we compared the mean likelihood values for all runs with the statistic Δk and confirmed that k =  <dig> is the best estimate for this data. additionally, the pca analysis gave a consistent result, with 56% of the variance in the data explained by differences between species . in addition, all the populations used in this study showed significant genetic structure for aflp markers . the amova showed that 48% of the total variation in the aflps was explained within populations and the 42% among groups, which correspond to species in our analysis. when we excluded h. e. venus and repeated the amova grouping data for northern and southern populations of h. e. chestertonii, only 9% of the variation was accounted for by geography. in order to test for congruent differentiation between aflp and mtdna markers, we ran a structure analysis using only those individuals with data for mtdna and assuming k =  <dig> . this analysis showed no evidence for any population structure associated with the mtdna clades .

interactions with endosymbionts
pcr analysis of  <dig> wild caught h. e. chestertonii did not identify any positive results for ricketsia and spiroplasma infection. all screens were run with a positive control of dna from known infected individuals of other insects, so this failure is unlikely to be due to technical pcr error, although we cannot completely rule out the presence of a divergent strain of one of these bacterial taxa. in contrast, 7% of individuals screened  were infected with wolbachia. there are two major clades within wolbachia, both of which are known to infect insects. interestingly, the sequences derived from our samples fell into both clades, with  <dig> in clade-b and the remaining two in clade-a . the presence of this endosymbiont is almost exclusive to h. e. chestertonii, with just one female h. e. venus from the hybrid zone infected. most of these butterflies were collected in northern populations of h. e. chestertonii . however not all individuals of the same population were infected and some localities did not show the presence of wolbachia.

population
the asterisk indicates the only infected individual of h. e. venus.

discussion
it is generally accepted that genetic differentiation between subpopulations can lead to the formation of new reproductively isolated species over time  <cit> . phylogeographic analysis can be useful in identifying both cryptic species and incipient subpopulations on the way to becoming new species  <cit> . the analysis of this cryptic population structure can show how genetic, behavioral and ecological processes have acted during the earliest stages of speciation  <cit> . studies that include independent sources of evidence, such as morphological comparisons, reproductive biology and phylogenetics, are necessary to understand the history of diverging lineages and to resolve species identification  <cit> .

in this study, we first confirmed the unusual degree of mitochondrial divergence within h. e. chestertonii. our analysis was based on a broad sampling of h. e. chestertonii which enabled the confirmation of two principal groups of mitochondrial haplotypes . our broader sampling showed that these clades are not completely associated with the geographic distribution of the populations, as had been suspected previously   <cit> . the principal haplotype groups  were on average  <dig> % divergent, similar to that estimated in previous studies  <cit> . this is considerably more divergent than within any other race of h. erato, apart from the trans-andean biogeographic break which occurs within the distribution of the race h. e. hydara as described above. however, here there is no clear biogeographic context for this population structure. nonetheless, the haplotypes do show some geographic structure, with 87% of northern individuals being clade  <dig> and 78% of southern individuals clade  <dig> 

cryptic speciation
if cryptic speciation was occurring, whereby two species are considered as one based on wing pattern morphology, we would expect the mtdna haplotypes to be associated with a detectable level of genetic differentiation at nuclear markers. such cryptic species have been identified in a diversity of organisms such as bryophytes, fungi, elasmobranches and arthropods  <cit> . within heliconius, a case of cryptic speciation has been recently discovered in two closely related species: h. timareta and h. melpomene  <cit> . however, in h. e. chestertonii we have found that despite deep divergence in mtdna between two principal clades , the aflp analysis shows h. e. chestertonii to be a genetically homogeneous species .

endosymbionts infection
discordance between maternally inherited genetic markers and those transmitted biparentally, can often be explained by the spread of endosymbionts such as wolbachia, spiroplasma, rickettsia, arsenophonus, cardinium, and others  <cit> . in most of the cases, these parasites are transmitted together with the mitochondrial genome through the egg cytoplasm, so associations over time can be detected when the mitochondrial genome is analyzed  <cit> . some of these endosymbiont microorganisms can lead to reproductive alterations in their arthropod hosts and will lead to divergence between populations  <cit> . this is the first published study in which the presence of endosymbionts is tested in heliconius, and we have identified two distinct lineages of wolbachia within h. e. chestertonii. however, neither of the principal mitochondrial clades of h. e. chestertonii is directly associated with the infection . we did not find evidence of presence of other endosymbionts in populations of h. e. chestertonii. we should add a caveat to our results, which is that our pcr assay might not have detected all possible infected individuals. indeed, the stage of development of the host can lead to over or underestimates of the real density of wolbachia within populations  <cit> . this study was limited to adult butterflies, and future analysis might include other stages such as egg, larvae and pupae. nonetheless, the density of wolbachia estimated within h. e. chestertonii populations  would be considered "very low" according to a recent classification  <cit> . in the future it would be interesting to further investigate the phenotypic effects of this infection. it is also of course possible that another endosymbiont is present, which was not sampled with the pcr assays described here. however, for the moment there is no evidence that the mitochondrial structure in h. e. chestertonii is a result of endosymbiont infection. in summary, we have provided no evidence that mtdna structure in h. e. chestertonii is due to either cryptic speciation or endosymbiotic bacteria. this leaves historical processes within the species as the most likely cause for the pattern.

historical processes
climatic changes during glacial and interglacial periods can lead to contractions, expansions and fragmentations of populations  <cit> . the 2% divergence between lineages within h. e. chestertonii suggests divergence within approximately the last million years. even without such vicariance, isolation by distance can lead to genetic structure within species. intriguingly, recent work on h. cydno has shown that this species similarly has a marked genetic break in the center of its cauca valley range . in both species, southern cauca populations are more closely related to subspecies on the pacific coast than those in the north. a plausible scenario is that the cauca valley has been subject to a double colonization first from the central andean valleys and subsequently from the pacific populations in the west. nonetheless, we are not aware of any geological evidence that would support this hypothesis.

CONCLUSIONS
our genetic analysis shows that northern and southern populations of h. e. chestertonii are genetically differentiated, but with only frequency differences in mtdna clades, and no corresponding genetic structure at nuclear markers, despite the deep divergence  between the two principal mtdna clades. our results support the assertion that mtdna evidence alone should be used with caution in delimiting species boundaries. in this case, divergent haplotype groups within populations could not be explained by either cryptic speciation or endosymbiont infections.

