BACKGROUND
microarray experiments have become an indispensable part of modern biological and biomedical research. as the number of studies using microarrays is growing all the time, it becomes increasingly important to compare and integrate data from multiple experiments and thereby improve the ability to make meaningful biological conclusions. collections of microarray data from thousands of samples are emerging, but proper normalization methods are to a large extent lacking. to make optimal use of these datasets, improved methods for normalizing data from different studies in different laboratories are urgently required.

there are studies where gene expression data from different studies are systematically combined together. for example, computational models for defining modules in the transcriptional data  <cit>  have been suggested. in addition, oncomine, a database for gene expression data in cancer tissues including over  <dig>  samples have been introduced  <cit> . furthermore, a celsius data warehousing system aggregates affymetrix cel-files and associated metadata  <cit> . these studies have included several thousands of samples from separate studies. since different array types and normalization methods have typically been carried out for each study, the integration and direct comparison between the samples is difficult. most of these meta-analyses are performed one-study-at-a-time, summing up the results together. there are also some publications describing the integration of data between different affymetrix array generations. these methods are often based on the normalization of oligonucleotide microarray data using sequence overlaps between the individual oligos on the same slide  <cit> . however, the drawback of these approaches is that the non-overlapping probes need to be discarded. therefore, particularly in the comparisons across multiple platforms, the number of informative genes is significantly reduced.

here, our main objective was to test several known normalization methods for integrating gene expression values across thousands of experiments to be able to select a suitable method when combining datasets across affymetrix array generations and experiment series. even though the methods presented in this study are shown to work with the affymetrix gene expression microarrays, they should be applicable also for integration experiments of other microarray platforms.

RESULTS
we compared and assessed the accuracy of five normalization methods for affymetrix gene expression data using  <dig>  affymetrix experiments from five array generations. the methods that we compared include 1) standardization , 2) housekeeping gene based normalization , 3) equalized quantile normalization , 4) weibull distribution based normalization  and 5) array generation based gene centering . these were tested in the following ten combinations: pure preprocessed data  without any further normalization, z-, hk-, q-, wbl-normalizations, and all of these normalization methods combined with the agc method: masagc, zagc, hkagc, qagc and wblagc. the mas, z, hk, q and wbl methods normalize the data within the samples, while the agc method normalizes the data gene-wise between the samples.

goodness of normalization can be measured in many ways. here, we applied five different ways to estimate the degree of comparability between data from different array generations, including: 1) correlation between technical replicates, 2) correlation between randomly selected genes, 3) classification of the samples based on the anatomical classes, 4) comparison of correlations between the samples computed based on the anatomical classes and array generations, 5) stability of the house-keeping genes.

the data collection used in this study contained samples from affymetrix array generations hu <dig> , hg-u95a, hg-u95av <dig>  hg-u133a, hg-u <dig> plus  <dig>  these array generations were selected as there were more than  <dig> samples hybridized on each of them in the database by the time of the comparison. at least half of the genes were in common between the array generations.

correlation between technical replicates
the first metric for comparing the goodness of the normalization methods is to study the correlation between technical replicates. we have utilized an experiment series from st. jude university  <cit>  with  <dig> replicated rna samples, each analyzed with both hg-u95av <dig> and hg-u1331a. we calculated the correlations between these samples with each normalization method. this comparison method has been used in several studies in which data from different generations of affymetrix arrays are combined and compared  <cit> . here, the results are identical for mas, z and hk methods, since the correlation is linearly invariant. when comparing the methods without the agc correction, the wbl gave the best results. we calculated the significance of the results using one-way anova and performed the multiple comparison with tukey's hsd. when agc was merged with any of the normalization methods, the correlations increased significantly as compared with the first level normalization alone, with a significance level of α =  <dig> . the wblagc gave the best results from the agc methods, but the difference with the other agc normalization methods was not significant .

correlation of randomly selected gene pair
another method for comparing the goodness of the normalization methods is the comparison between the correlations of randomly selected genes  <cit> . since it is unlikely that two randomly chosen genes are correlated with each other, the expected value for their correlation is zero. now, the hypothesis is that e) =  <dig> for genes k <dig>  k <dig> where k <dig> ≠ k <dig>  the different array generations are known to induce some biases to the gene values that may further cause systematic errors in the data. these kinds of systematic array-wide variations may increase the correlation between randomly selected genes.

we selected randomly  <dig> genes that had values in each array generation and computed the correlations between each gene pair in the data normalized with the different methods. further, we tested the mean values of the distributions of randomly selected correlations with one-way anova and a utilized multiple testing procedure tukey's hsd. the results showed that with significance level α =  <dig>  the zagc, hkagc, qagc and wblagc had smaller mean values than the other methods. agc correction was again found more robust than the other normalization methods, as these agc-correction methods did not significantly differ from one another and were closer to zero .

samples to profiles classification
third way to estimate goodness of normalization was the use of anatomical classes with the evoc anatomical system ontology  <cit> . an anatomical profile is the mean value of the logarithmic values of healthy samples of each tissue type. the profiles were calculated independently between the array generations. to obtain the profiles we used  <dig>  samples from healthy tissues and cells including  <dig>  genes from  <dig> anatomical classes. all the samples were annotated based on the evoc anatomical system ontology and the profile for the anatomical classes was created only if there were more than ten samples from that tissue. the  <dig>  healthy samples were classified to the anatomical profiles with the nearest neighbour algorithm.

we used pearson correlation as the metric in the classification. we computed the distance d = 1-ri, j, where ri, j is the correlation between the logarithmic values of the sample i and the profile j. each sample was classified to the profile with the smallest distance. with the agc normalized data the number of correctly classified samples increased substantially . obviously, there will always be some biological variability within a tissue, as well as sampling errors, methodological variability, and lab-to-lab variability that will render 100% classification accuracy unattainable. nevertheless, the significant improvement of classification accuracy again testifies for the value of the agc-based normalization methods.

correlations between samples from the same anatomical class
the correlation between samples from same anatomical class should be high indicating the similarity of samples in question. however, often the experimental conditions, preprocessing and array generation may cause high correlation, even if samples have very little in common based on the anatomy. this causes problems if the technical details of the experiments have more effect on the final data than the biological properties of the samples.

we assume that the expected value of correlation between the samples from same anatomical class is higher than the expected value of correlation of samples from different anatomical class, even if the samples were from the same experiment series or from same array generation. we calculated the correlations of gene expression levels between all the  <dig>  healthy samples in the dataset and analyzed the values of them. based on the array generation and the anatomy of samples, we divided these correlations into two groups: 1) correlations from healthy samples from the same array generation but from different anatomical class, and 2) correlations of healthy samples from the same anatomical class done with different array generations.

when agc was not used, the array generation was superior to biological origin in defining the identity of the sample. in such cases the correlation between samples from the same array generations was significantly higher than the correlations between samples from the same anatomical class. when the data were agc normalized, the correlations from the same anatomical origin were significantly higher than the correlations from different anatomical classes within the same array generation. the significance was tested with one-way anova and multiple comparisons performed with tukey's hsd with α <  <dig> . as evidenced by the significance analysis, the agc-normalization method reduced noise due to different array generations .

stability of housekeeping genes
if the data are normalized properly, the housekeeping gene values should be stable between experiments. this is based on the assumption that the housekeeping genes are expressed similarly in all samples across the array generations and tissues. however, it is known that the array generation can impact also on values for housekeeping genes, and the expression values of housekeeping genes in our material also seemed to differ based on the array generation.

we investigated the effects of different normalization methods on similarity of distributions of housekeeping genes from different array generations. the housekeeping genes under consideration were the same ones than used in the hk-normalization. the similarities were quantified with the kullback-leibler measure. we assumed that the values for each housekeeping gene from one array generation should be distributed similarly with the distribution of the gene across all the array generations. we divided the range of the gene value into  <dig> bins so that within each bin there are 2% of the gene values of the gene:

 aj = f, 

where f is the empirical cumulative density function of the gene. we define d to be a set of all expression values measuring the expression of gene k and array generations to a <dig> ..., ap. now, for every array generation i, di ⊆ d is a set of all expression values of the housekeeping gene that are measured with the array generation ai. the probability density function of distribution q for each array generation i is constant:

 qi=##, 

where # is the number of values in the data set d. we assume that the data values within each percentile group are distributed along this constant distribution. we compute the discrete distribution of the gene values from all array generations within each of these percentiles of the data:

 pi,j=##, 

where i is the array generation and j the percentile group. thus, it is assumed that the distribution p is similar with the distribution q. the distance between these distributions for each array generation i is calculated with the kullback-leibler distance:

 di=∑jpi,jlog⁡, 

where j goes through the percentiles. the smaller the distance is between the distributions, the closer the distributions are to each other.

we calculated these distances for each of the  <dig> housekeeping genes  <cit>  from each array generation. the agc method greatly reduced the distance between gene values from one array generation and gene values from all array generations .

discussion
an important step to integrate affymetrix data is to develop methods that result in comparable values for a wide spectrum of array generations. further, it is crucial to use different measures for goodness of the normalization as the objectives for the normalization may vary between studies. the methods we have developed will significantly facilitate data comparisons across thousands of samples, with minimal loss of informative genes, which was a serious limitation in earlier studies.

we have applied five different normalization methods for affymetrix gene expression data. the array-generation based gene centering method   <cit>  can be merged together with any within-slide normalization method. here, we tested the values normalized with the agc method combined with five different normalization methods and observed significantly improved results. all the normalization methods compared here are based on different assumptions and therefore also the effect on normalization strategies may vary. the traits of the normalization methods are collected into table  <dig> 

we have employed five different criteria to measure goodness of the normalizations. the results showed that the agc method improved the results systematically and that the agc normalized data became comparable across the array generations, as suggested by the classification accuracy of different anatomical samples, and the improved correlation of the data from the same samples analyzed on two different array generations. the agc method combined with the q normalization is used in for almost  <dig>  samples in genesapiens database  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the gene expression data from  <dig>  samples were analyzed together in order to find computationally effective and well-performing method to normalize a large number of the data samples to be directly comparable with each other. all the samples were measured with affymetrix microarrays, but the various array generations hinder the comparability. ten different combinations of five normalization method were utilized. the array generation based centering of gene values was found to perform the best, especially if utilized together with the equalized quantile normalization or wbl-normalization.

