BACKGROUND
hybridization arrays are widely used in research, clinical, and commercial applications involving humans, mice and other organisms to genotype single nucleotide polymorphisms . software is used to infer discrete genotypes using continuous intensity data from bi-allelic probes. however, existing methods are imperfect leading to incorrect calls and uncalled genotypes .

the mouse diversity array  <cit>  is a high-density genotyping platform similar to the affymetrix genome-wide human snp  <dig>  array. it contains probes for  <dig> snps and  <dig> invariant genomic probes  designed to broadly sample diversity within the mus musculus species. snp probes occur in sets of eight: two forward-strand and two reverse-strand probes for both an a allele, which corresponds to the reference sequence, and a b allele, which corresponds to the known variant. opposite-strand probes are potentially offset by up to  <dig> bp. igp probes occur in pairs, with one probe targeting each strand, and are not offset. the mouse diversity array and similar platforms use genome-wide sampling to reduce genomic complexity by size-selective amplification of restriction fragments  <cit> . efficient hybridization requires genomic dna targeted by a probe set to fall within at least one restriction enzyme fragment in the selected size range . the mouse diversity array was designed to use a combination of two restriction enzymes, nspi and styi, and fragment sizes were predicted based on the mouse reference genome .

genotype calling programs use a variety of methods to infer discrete genotypes from continuous intensity data. many methods, including the brlmm-p algorithm developed by affymetrix  <cit> , employ clustering of multiple samples based on the contrast between allelic probe intensities. samples belonging to the two clusters with a large absolute contrast are called as homozygous genotypes and samples with low contrast are called heterozygous. samples that do not fall within any of the three clusters in the contrast dimension remain uncalled.

in an earlier study we genotyped  <dig> laboratory mouse strains using the mouse diversity array  <cit> . we used these data to determine the subspecific origin and haplotype diversity of the laboratory mouse. as a model organism, the laboratory mouse has several distinct features that are key for this study. laboratory strains sample the genetic variation present in genetically divergent species and subspecies. most strains are fully homozygous as a result of dozens to hundreds of generations of inbreeding. f <dig> hybrids obtained by crossing two inbred strains have genotypes that can be accurately predicted from the parental genotypes. finally, the mouse has a whole-genome reference sequence based on a single inbred strain  and  <dig> additional strains have been sequenced recently as part of the sanger institute's mouse genomes sequencing project   <cit> .

contrary to our expectation of homozygosity at all snps in inbred mouse strains, we observed a substantial number of heterozygous genotype calls  <cit> . furthermore, the rates of both no-calls and unexpected heterozygous calls were positively correlated with divergence from the reference genome. the highest rates were observed in strains derived from species of the mus genus other than mus musculus, such as m. spretus and m. spicilegus  <cit> , followed by strains derived from the m. m. musculus and m. m. castaneus subspecies . these findings illuminate problems affecting all hybridization arrays, genotype calling software and studies that use these genotype data for a variety of goals. our studies of well-characterized inbred strains have brought these issues to the forefront and provide an opportunity for investigating the underlying causes of genotyping errors.

at any given time, only a subset of the genetic variation within a species is known. this creates a bias in snps available for array designs in favor of variants present in the best-studied individuals, populations or clades  <cit> . furthermore, many arrays are designed using an iterative process that selects only probes that perform well across a screening set of samples. this is done to ensure low miscall and no-call rates, but can introduce further bias. miscall and no-call rates can vary greatly depending on the composition of samples. as we have observed, and as noted in other studies  <cit> , miscall and no-call rates are positively correlated with genetic divergence from the reference sequence used to design the array. furthermore, when snp probes are excluded from analyses due to post-hoc filtering based on no-call rate, unexpected heterozygosity or departure from hardy-weinberg equilibrium, important information is lost  in addition to the introduction of further bias. in a recent genome-wide analysis of a large number of dog breeds, over 50% of snps were excluded for such reasons  <cit> . the cumulative effect of these snp selection procedures can potentially skew the interpretation of experimental results and limit researchers' ability to effectively study genetically divergent samples. the mouse diversity array was designed with attention to the phylogenetic origin of snps  <cit> , but snp selection will still introduce some biases, especially in studies that include wild-derived strains or wild-caught mice  <cit> .

essentially, a no-call or incorrect genotype call is the result of abnormal hybridization intensity for a sample at a given snp and may be due to technical or biological causes. technical issues, such as array manufacturing or dna processing, would result either in systematic errors that affect all samples at that snp  or all snps from a single sample . errors of this class should be detectable. in addition, non-systematic stochastic errors may affect a small subset of genotype calls.

an additional source of genotype calling errors is biological in origin and can be attributed to previously uncharacterized variation in genomic dna, either in the sequence targeted by a probe set or in the proximal or distal restriction sites used for genome-wide amplification. these variants can reduce hybridization intensity sufficiently to eliminate or reverse the contrast between allelic probes such that an incorrect genotype call  is made. we term such variants "off-target variants"  to distinguish them from the expected variant targeted by the snp probe set. we term probe sets affected by otvs as variable intensity oligonucleotides  due to the dynamic effect of otvs on hybridization intensity.

genotyping errors due to uncharacterized sequence variation have been observed in microsatellite genotyping  and were recently subjected to systematic analysis  <cit> , however they have gone largely unaddressed in snp genotyping studies. in this study, we investigated the effect and extent of otvs in a diverse collection of inbred strains and intercrossed mice using the mouse diversity array. we conclude that otvs are the primary cause of miscalls and no-calls. furthermore, we determined that a substantial fraction of vinos can be reliably identified, and we have developed mousedivgeno  <cit> , a novel genotype-calling algorithm implemented as a package for the r language  <cit> . we demonstrate the accuracy of our algorithm by comparison with other genotype calling software and with whole-genome sequence of the sanger strains. the ability to recognize vinos and treat samples having otvs as a distinct genotype class will enable snp discovery, increase the power of evolutionary and association studies, and lend itself to potential clinical applications. finally, we investigated the extent of off-target variation and its effect on genotype calls. our findings suggest ways to improve both array design and genotype calling algorithms.

RESULTS
identification of vinos
we hybridized  <dig> mouse dna samples on the mouse diversity array . we have made the raw data available in the affymetrix cel format  <cit> . this sample set included classical inbred strains, wild-derived strains with varying degrees of inbreeding, consomic strains, recombinant inbred strains, samples from early generations of the collaborative cross  <cit> , f <dig> hybrids created by crossing classical and/or wild-derived strains and wild mice  <cit> . among the  <dig> inbred strains in this sample , we observed a significant increase in both heterozygous calls and no-calls as a function of genetic distance from the reference genome . all of these strains are expected to be fully homozygous based on previous studies   <cit> , therefore we assume that most of the heterozygous calls are errors .

to further characterize these putative genotyping errors, we developed a tool for visualization of probe set hybridization intensities in which intensity contrast is plotted against average intensity  <cit> . these plots revealed that most heterozygous calls in inbred strains are easily distinguished from true heterozygous calls by greatly reduced average intensity . these initial findings suggested that genotyping algorithms that discriminate based only on contrast  would be unable to detect vinos.

the term vino refers to a probe set that displays a low-intensity cluster such as the one shown in figure  <dig> and it applies to a probe set in the context of the collection of samples being genotyped. identification of vinos can be hampered by several factors including the underrepresentation of genotype classes in a sample set, batch effects, and probe-sequence-specific effects that increase intensity variability within genotype groups. we have applied a stringent set of criteria to detect vinos but, as discussed below, the impact of otvs is not limited to only those probe sets that are declared to be vinos.

vinos indicate the presence of otvs
manual inspection of intensity data led to the identification of multiple vinos. to test whether previously unknown genetic variants were present in the target genomic dna of these probe sets, we sequenced genomic regions surrounding  <dig> snps in different subsets of  <dig> strains selected to ensure that each genotype class would be present in a minimum of four samples . of these,  <dig> probe sequences contained at least one to as many as three otvs among the strains sequenced. the single probe that did not contain any otvs  was notable due to the presence of a snp in each of its distal nspi and styi restriction sites and, as a result, both fragments fell outside of the optimal size range for whole genome amplification. we have also observed that a restriction fragment length polymorphism  in only one of the flanking cut sites can reduce hybridization efficiency. the effect may be negligible or substantial depending on the size of the other fragment. thus otvs in the probe sequence or rflps in the flanking restriction sites explain all of the vinos in this small set.

mouse diversity genotyping software
the discovery, prevalence and distribution of vinos among our sample set motivated us to create mousedivgeno  <cit> , an implementation of our genotype-calling algorithm as an r package. mousedivgeno uses a novel combination of gaussian mixture modeling and hierarchical clustering followed by a vino detection step . we used mousedivgeno to genotype the  <dig> samples  for  <dig> autosomal snp probe sets that were above thresholds based on performance indices. mousedivgeno produces two sets of calls: genotypes, which include standard calls for homozygous , heterozygous  and no-calls ; and vinotypes, which substitute vino  calls for standard genotype calls when the vino criteria is satisfied . in the  <dig> samples set, mousedivgeno made  <dig> vino calls .

among the  <dig> inbred samples, the rate of vinos is  <dig> % with a per-sample range from  <dig> to  <dig> . the largest fraction of vino calls were originally genotyped as ab , followed by aa, bb and n calls . however, within each genotype class, n calls were most commonly converted to vino calls , followed by ab, bb and aa calls . only a fraction of heterozygous calls are converted to vinos, which explains why the positive correlation between genetic distance and miscalls and no-calls remains even after vinotyping . the vinotyping algorithm is intentionally calibrated to be conservative in order to minimize the loss of correct genotype calls.

the reference strain c57bl/6j has only a small number of vino calls. examination of the global distribution of the intensity-contrast values  confirms that there are few probes with low contrast values and low mean intensity . cast/eij  has a large number of vinos and there is a corresponding high density of probes in the lower left region of figure 3c. the majority of probes for both of these two inbred strains have high contrast values reflecting the predominance of homozygous genotypes. on the other hand the f <dig> hybrid  has a large proportion of low contrast probes indicating high levels of heterozygosity. the vinos that are apparent in the cast/eij strain are "rescued" by the c57bl/6j allele in the f <dig> hybrid and many of them appear as an incorrect homozygous call with moderate mean intensity but high contrast values.

mousedivgeno genotyping is highly concordant with existing methods and with snp discovery by whole genome sequencing
we compared mousedivgeno genotype calls with two other methods: alchemy  <cit>  and brlmm-p 2d  <cit>  . genotype calls for the set of  <dig> samples were highly concordant in homozygous  and heterozygous  classes . the majority of discordant genotypes were due to homozygous calls using one of the methods that were called heterozygous using another method. conflicts with opposite homozygous genotypes were very rare . the overall rate of ab genotypes was slightly lower for mousedivgeno  compared to alchemy  and brlmm-p 2d . of the vino calls from mousedivgeno,  <dig> % and  <dig> % were called ab by alchemy and brlmm-p 2d, respectively, while  <dig> % and  <dig> % were called as n.

of the sanger strains,  <dig> are m. musculus inbred strains that were genotyped with the mouse diversity array. we obtained and filtered snps and small insertions/deletions  at autosomal typed loci . as expected due to the inbred status of these  <dig> strains, there are no heterozygous calls in the filtered sanger genotypes. heterozygous call rates among these  <dig> samples were  <dig> %,  <dig> % and  <dig> % for mousedivgeno, alchemy and brlmm-p 2d, respectively . among homozygous snp calls, we observed  <dig> % concordance between each of the three array-based methods and the sanger genotypes. mousedivgeno made  <dig> vino calls , a proportion similar to the one observed in the larger set of  <dig> samples. among vinos,  <dig> % correspond to an aa or bb homozygous genotype calls in the sanger data. because sanger snps were identified by alignment to the reference sequence, regions that could not be aligned were inaccessible to snp discovery and thus not comparable with array genotypes. as expected, the inaccessible fraction of the genome increases with a strain's divergence from the reference. we observed an enrichment of vino calls in inaccessible regions of the sanger data   <cit> , in probes with a deleted target base  and unaligned or non-uniquely aligned probes .

location of otvs determine effect on intensity
to identify the region of a probe in which we can reliably detect otvs, we quantified the effect of otvs on hybridization intensity . we categorized snp probes by whether they contained an otv, and, if so, the offset of the otv from the nearest end of the probe . we then calculated the mean intensity of the probes for the best hybridizing allele for each probe set and plotted the distribution of intensities for each otv position. we found that, as reported previously  <cit> , otvs located within the first  <dig> bp of either the 5' or 3' end of a target sequence  had relatively minor effect on hybridization intensity. in contrast, otvs within the central region of the probe  have pronounced effect on hybridization intensity, with mean intensity differing by more than one standard deviation from that of probes having no otvs .

we similarly examined the effect of rflps on intensity  using probes with rflp that lead to suboptimal fragment size but with no evidence of otvs within the probe sequence. we found that mean intensity degrades as minimum fragment size increases above the maximum optimal size of  <dig> kb, and differs by more than one standard deviation from the mean of probe sets within the optimal size range when minimum fragment size increases above  <dig> bp.

genomic features explain most vinos predicted by mousedivgeno
we identified all probe sets that had otvs in the sanger data. we excluded  <dig> probe sets  for which both strand probes were either unaligned or at least one strand probe was non-uniquely aligned . in the majority of these cases , mousedivgeno called a vino or n. of the remaining of probe sets,  <dig> % had at least one event with the potential to disrupt hybridization . in more than half the cases where we observed one of these events, the event was present in both the forward and reverse strand probes, and mousedivgeno was much more likely to call a vino than when the event was present in only one strand probe . mousedivgeno detected vinos at the highest rates in probe sets with central otv and low-coverage events . when there was no evidence of an otv, mousedivgeno called a vino at a rate of only  <dig> % and made a concordant genotype call or no-call in most cases .

we compared the rate of vino calls to otv position  and minimum restriction fragment length . we found that otvs within the first or last  <dig> bp of the probe  are less often recognized as vinos compared to otvs in the center region of the probe . mousedivgeno called only  <dig> % of all probes having an edge otv as vinos, compared with  <dig> % of all probes having a central otv. rflps alone  have a smaller effect on intensity than do otvs within a probe, and thus mousedivgeno has a lower call rate . there is a distinct threshold for rflp length at  <dig>  kb, above which we call vinos at a substantially higher rate . in subsequent analyses we separated rflps into two categories based on this threshold.

we classified each vino called by mousedivgeno as having a central otv, edge otv, rflp , within-probe cut site , low sequencing coverage, multiple, or none of these features . there are  <dig> vino calls for which there is no high-confidence evidence of otvs in the sanger data and thus remain unexplained in our analysis. we expect that a significant number of these are due either to poorly performing probe-sets that were just above the threshold of exclusion from our analysis, incomplete snp discovery in the sanger strains, larger insertions or deletions or unresolved problems with the reference sequence assembly  <cit> . we examined the performance of alchemy and brlmm-p 2d and found a more than 30-fold increase in no-call rates for unexplained vinos .

we broke down vino calls by strain . the effects of genetic distance from the c57bl/6j reference genome are dramatic. at the time that the mouse diversity array was designed, the reference sequence was available  but snp discovery was conducted using only a handful of strains and with significant strain differences in the false negative rates  <cit> . this had a direct impact on our ability, at the time, to filter candidate snps for the mouse diversity array, eliminating those with known otvs. as result,  <dig> % of vinos were identified in cast/eij and  <dig> % in pwk/phj, the strains that are most genetically distinct from c57bl/6j. similarly, the majority of otvs are found in these strains.

effect of heterozygosity on vino calls
to investigate the effect of otvs in heterozygosity we analyzed f <dig> hybrid mice included in our  <dig> samples. these f1s were generated by crossing two inbred strains for which we should be able predict the genotypes at every locus in the hybrid based on the genotypes of the parental strains. here we describe analysis of the f <dig> hybrid mouse . similar results were obtained on other f <dig> hybrid combinations .

otvs in heterozygosity in the f <dig> hybrid are preferentially  genotyped by mousedivgeno as homozygous for the allele present in the non-vino carrying parental strain . this result is expected based on the same principles that determine the behavior of vinos in homozygosity. a parental strain with an otv causing a small reduction in hybridization that does not lead to a vino call may have an offspring with a true heterozygous genotype that is incorrectly called homozygous for the non-otv allele. for example, the maternal strain has an aa genotype and the paternal strain has a bb genotype in addition to an otv. the paternal strain is properly genotyped as bb because the otv does not reduce intensity sufficiently for mousedivgeno to consider it a vino. the f <dig> offspring has an ab genotype and an otv in heterozygosity but is called aa . these cases, which we term "cryptic" vinos, can be detected by analysis of discordant genotypes between parental strains and f <dig> hybrids. central otvs are over-represented in cryptic vinos, but to a lesser degree than in called vinos . an edge otv that is unlikely to result in a vino call in a homozygous parent may nonetheless provide enough contrast in a heterozygous f <dig> to result in an incorrect homozygous genotype call. in cases where discrimination between genotype clusters is poor, f <dig> offspring may be called as n's .

the concordance rate between predicted and observed genotypes in the f <dig> hybrid is very high  at snps genotyped as homozygous for the same allele in both parental strains. the majority of discordant calls are n or v , and only a very small number are due to incorrect heterozygous calls  or the wrong homozygous genotype . in contrast, the concordance rate is much lower  at predicted heterozygous snps. based on the sanger data, we know that the parental genotypes are correct and thus most of the discordance is due to erroneous genotype calls in the f <dig> hybrid .

mousedivgeno can detect vinos in human genotyping arrays
in order to assess our ability to identify vinos in other organisms that are routinely genotyped with affymetrix arrays, we applied mousedivgeno to  <dig> human hapmap  <dig> samples from the ceu , chb , jpt  and yri  populations that have both sequence and genotype information available  <cit> . we further investigated  <dig> randomly chosen vinos on chromosome  <dig> . there were  <dig> *  <dig> =  <dig> probe/sample combinations, of which  <dig> had no genotype called in sequencing data due to a single allele being fixed within a population. in  <dig> of these cases, genotypes from the hapmap array calls were substituted.

in the  <dig> cases where a hapmap genotype was available, mousedivgeno calls that had no otvs were  <dig> % concordant . of the  <dig> discordant cases,  <dig> were in areas of below-average sequencing depth, which suggests that off-target snps may indeed be present but not detectable. thus, the discordance rate could be as low as 59/ <dig> =  <dig> %.

when at least one off-target snp was present, a vino was called in 17% of cases. in  <dig> % of cases, mousedivgeno instead called the concordant target allele. in another  <dig> % of cases, both the target and off-target snps were heterozygous and mousedivgeno called a homozygous allele . this behavior is expected, as intensity will be reduced only in the probe for the allele carrying the otv, leading to a large intensity contrast between the alleles that will be interpreted as a homozygous call for the allele not carrying the otv. for comparison, the discordant rate between hapmap sequencing genotypes and array genotypes is 4% in the  <dig> snp/sample combinations that had a non-n call in both data sets.

in outbred populations such as humans, genotyping of parents would be required to reliably detect heterozygous otvs. vinos are enriched in yri samples, providing better discrimination and counteracting ascertainment bias toward populations of european ancestry .

vinos counteract ascertainment bias
the conclusions of genetic research based on genotyping arrays can be influenced by snp selection  bias. distances between consecutive snps are expected to follow a geometric distribution , with a significant proportion in the 0- <dig> bp range in species with high levels of variation and large populations size such as the house mouse. here we demonstrate that this variation can be identified from array intensity data. variation within genomic dna targeted by an array probe or a nearby restriction site can alter hybridization intensity sufficiently that we can discriminate the samples harboring previously undetected variation from those that do not. unlike existing methods that cannot correctly treat these events and may provide an incorrect genotype, mousedivgeno flags them as vinos. vinos are biased in favor of more divergent samples in reverse proportion to the degree to which the genetic variants in a given sample were known and represented on the array at the time of design. thus vinos can be used to counteract snp selection bias.

the mouse diversity array was designed to capture the genetic diversity in the laboratory mouse  <cit> , but the snp selection was limited to known snps and biased due to much deeper knowledge of the variation present in one of the three major subspecies  of m. musculus. one method of quantifying this type of ascertainment bias is using snps and vinos with diagnostic alleles that are able to discriminate one subspecies from the other two  <cit> . there is a significantly larger number of snps with diagnostic alleles for m. m. domesticus than for the other two subspecies . conversely, vinos with diagnostic alleles for m. m. castaneus are more than triple those for m. m. domesticus .

we used snps and vinos with diagnostic alleles to assign a local subspecific origin to each of  <dig> laboratory strains  <cit> . for each of these snps and vinos, we determined if a given strain carries the diagnostic allele. then, using a hidden markov model, we identified the subspecific origin of each genome segment. diagnostic snp information alone might be sufficient to assign the m. m. domesticus origin in most regions, however for regions of m. m. musculus or m. m. castaneus origin diagnostic vinos enrich the information and help to refine interval boundaries and avoid incorrect assignment .

vinos are also important for their ability to counteract snp ascertainment bias when performing phylogenetic studies. this is dramatically illustrated by phylogenetic analysis of several different species of the mus genus . we constructed maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees using strains derived from m. musculus, m. spretus, m. spicilegus, m. cypriacus and m. macedonicus . when only the standard genotypes are used, the discrimination between non-m. musculus species is poor. furthermore, the length of the m. m. domesticus branch is grossly overestimated while non-m. m. domesticus branches are underrepresented due to the prevalence of no-calls in these samples . the opposite result is observed when only vinotypes are used to construct the tree by converting all genotypes to binary for the presence or absence of a vino . when genotypes and vinotypes are combined, discrimination between taxa increases and a more accurate representation emerges . these findings are further supported by the approximately 2: <dig> bias of vinos in human yri samples compared the other three hapmap populations . this is consistent with the greater number of genetic variants in african populations that were unknown at the time of the design of the human snp array.

CONCLUSIONS
we developed the mousedivgeno package  <cit>  for genotype calling with the mouse diversity array. the genotyping and vino identification functions can be applied to other hybridization-based genotyping arrays. genotype calling with mousedivgeno involves several steps, each of which is reasonable but ad-hoc. the algorithm was derived from a pragmatic process of problem solving, but it is difficult to determine if the approaches used for individual steps and their joint implementation are optimal. in contrast, a modeling based approach, such as that implemented in alchemy software, is appealing because it provides a principled basis for optimization of parameters, and the quality of the genotype calls is encoded in a probability distribution. however, as we have illustrated here, genotype calling with hybridization arrays is an inherently difficult problem that is unlikely to satisfy the strict assumptions of any fully probabilistic model of data generation. there will always be present a subset of loci that fail to conform to modeling expectations but for which visual inspection can provide a reasonable explanation. an advantage of mousedivgeno lies in the recognition of a frequently occurring anomaly of hybridization intensity .

our ability to identify a vino is directly correlated with the degree to which otv decrease hybridization intensity, which depends on a number of factors: the number of otvs within the genomic target of a probe, the size of the smallest restriction fragment containing the target sequence and whether the target snp and/or otv are in heterozygosity. in general otvs can produce complex intensity patterns with four, five or more distinct clusters  that are highly reproducible but may be difficult to interpret as simple genotype classes because several tightly linked variable loci are involved. however, the reproducible patterns of intensity can be highly informative about the local haplotype that is assayed by the snp probes. additional file  <dig> shows two examples of snps for which we have direct sequencing evidence of different haplotypes among otv-carrying strains . the allelic contrast, although reduced, can still be used to determine the target allele for each vino sample.

mousedivgeno also enables downstream analyses that can provide important information on copy-number variation  and phasing. we have used mousedivgeno genotypes to determine sample-specific thresholds for cnv detection. we used these thresholds to identify deletions, which are characterized by consecutive vinos, and have confirmed them using the sanger data . tools for haplotype phasing could also be developed for non-inbred samples that rely on probes in which a sample is heterozygous for both the target snp and the otv.

our ability to estimate concordance of whole-genome sequencing data with any genotyping software is limited by several factors including coverage depth, reference quality and methods used for assembly and variant identification. we found an enrichment of vinos within inaccessible regions in the sanger sequences, however we are unable to determine the validity of these vinos . keane et al.  <cit>  reported a higher proportion of inaccessible regions in wild derived strains and noted that divergence from the mouse reference is a major contributor to inaccessibility. furthermore, in direct sequencing of bacs from nod/shiltj, they found  <dig>  times more snps per base in regions inaccessible to high-throughput sequencing than in accessible regions. they concluded, "at least 30% of all snps in the genomes of the strains we sequenced remain to be discovered." thus, the presence of an otv or some other hybridization-disrupting feature is likely in these regions, and vino calls are probably appropriate.

the process of converting continuous data into discrete categories provides the benefit of simplifying information and reducing noise. however, categorization necessarily results in the loss of information and if the underlying model that describes the mapping of genotypes into intensity data is flawed, the resulting genotype calls may be misleading. these considerations suggest that future applications of genotyping array data may benefit from bypassing the genotype-calling step or by augmenting this step and focusing on the direct analysis and interpretation of the hybridization intensity data. for instance, using intensity data for ancestry inference may be advantageous in regions where one haplotype contains otvs when absent genotype classes may prevent a traditional genotype calling algorithms from differentiating between ancestral strains. in this case, modeling the target intensities as a combination of the intensities of its two ancestral strains would yield more information than inferring ancestry with genotype calls, since there usually is no predefined genotype class for an animal heterozygous between a v or n genotype and another genotype.

we have shown that the methods presented here are generalizable to other affymetrix arrays in addition to the mouse diversity array. we predict that these methods can be further generalized, with some modification due to differences in chemistry and probe length, to any hybridization array platform. for example, we examined hybridization intensities of common laboratory strains genotyped with the mouse universal genotyping array  <cit> , a low density illumina infinium array with  <dig> snp markers and  <dig> bp probe sequences. we identified many markers with one or more clusters beyond the standard aa, bb, ab, and n clusters, suggesting otvs also alter hybridization intensities on the illumina platform sufficiently for the detection of vinos .

