BACKGROUND
osteosarcoma is a highly metastatic cancer of bone seen primarily in pediatric patients. approximately 800- <dig>  children develop osteosarcoma yearly, with peak incidence during the adolescent growth spurt  <cit> . for patients with localized disease, the use of chemotherapy following surgery, introduced in the 1970s, improved long-term survival from approximately 20% to over 60%. these outcomes have been largely unchanged despite intensification of adjuvant therapy over the last  <dig> years  <cit> . for patients who present with metastatic disease, the prognosis is even more grave with survival rates of less than 20%  <cit> . advances are needed in our understanding of metastasis biology and therapy to improve outcomes for patients.

an increasingly considered modeling approach in cancer biology and therapeutic development is the study of naturally occurring cancers in pet dogs . the features of cancers in pet dogs that may uniquely contribute to our understanding of cancer pathogenesis, progression and therapy have been recently reviewed  <cit> . companion  dogs develop osteosarcoma at similar sites as human patients, with identical histology, response to traditional treatment regimens such as surgery and chemotherapy, and proclivity for metastasis  <cit> . similarly, many of the candidate genes implicated in the pathogenesis or progression of osteosarcoma in children have also been characterized in the canine disease, notably pten: phosphatase and tensin homolog, rb: retinoblastoma, ezrin; villin- <dig>  c-met: mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor, erbb-2: v-erb-b <dig> erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog  <dig>  neuro/glioblastoma derived oncogene homolog  and p53: tumor protein  <dig>  <cit> . the incidence of osteosarcoma in dogs is higher than children, with > <dig>  dogs diagnosed yearly  <cit> . the canine disease is considered to be more aggressive than the human disease. the use of surgery alone is associated with long-term survival in 5% of dogs  <cit> . in the era before adjuvant chemotherapy for pediatric patients long-term survival ranged from 17-30%  <cit> . differences in disease prevalence and the more aggressive disease biology in the dog further argues the opportunity for this approach to inform our understanding of this highly aggressive pediatric cancer. although limited in scope, pet dogs with osteosarcoma have been effectively integrated into the development of novel treatment approaches for human patients, most notably pioneering limb-sparing techniques  <cit> . in  <dig> the first public draft of the canine genome sequence was released  <cit> . this milestone provided the opportunity for dogs with cancer to lend additional insight into the biology of human cancers, and to more rigorously evaluate and translate novel therapies to human trials.

based on these opportunities we employed a cross-species gene expression approach based on the hypothesis that the identification of conserved and distinctive genes, gene families and functions across cross-species would provide a unique perspective to view the determinants of osteosarcoma biology. using identical oligonucleotide microarray platforms we compared expression signatures for osteosarcoma primary tumors and normal tissues from both dogs and humans. the similarities between canine and human osteosarcoma were strong. cluster analysis of  <dig> orthologous transcripts could not distinguish the cancers based on species alone. these data strengthened the scientific rationale for the inclusion of dogs with osteosarcoma in the study of cancer biology and therapy. based on the similarities between the expression profiles of human and canine osteosarcoma, we then asked whether the more aggressive biology of osteosarcoma in the canine disease could help identify subsets or candidate genes important in the metastatic progression of osteosarcoma that would have been overlooked if the human disease was studied alone. four genes were identified that were consistently overexpressed in canine osteosarcoma  but had variable and/or low expression in humans. evaluation of the dog-like genes in a distinct population of human osteosarcoma patients, which were linked to clinical outcome, confirmed that two genes ) were potentially associated with a more aggressive clinical course in human patients. this is the first non-candidate comparative genomic analysis of spontaneous disease between dog and man. these data support the inclusion of canine osteosarcoma as a clinical intermediary in the study of novel anti-cancer therapeutics destined for use in man. furthermore, the strength of the similarity between species, coupled with the more aggressive biology of the disease in dogs allowed the identification of new genes that may be relevant targets or predictors of metastatic outcome in human osteosarcoma.

RESULTS
within species osteosarcoma gene expression profiling
comparison of osteosarcoma versus normal tissues gene expression in each species was determined using limma software   <cit> . the cancer signatures consisted of  <dig> and  <dig> probesets in the canine and human analyses, respectively. high level, unsupervised hierarchical clustering conducted in each species separately resulted in osteosarcoma samples clustering together and distinctly from normal tissues.  not surprisingly the normal tissues clustered with organ replicates. clustering of cancers was not associated with histologic subtype or primary tumor location. quantitative rt-pcr was used to validate the results of the microarray. the pattern and magnitude of expression for each validation gene  compared to house keeping controls was identical using pcr and microarray techniques .

within species functional assessment of osteosarcoma gene signature
using expression analysis systematic explorer  analysis  <cit>  we linked each species-specific osteosarcoma gene signature to descriptors of gene function/ontology. the osteosarcoma signature was most significantly associated with extra cellular matrix, structural components, calcium ion binding elements and skeletal development processes . significant functional association with morphogenesis and development  was also seen.

 <dig> categories with significant expression analysis systematic explorer  scores  are presented here.

 <dig> lh represents number of genes in gene list assigned to a category.

comparison of gene expression in human and canine osteosarcoma
comparative genomic analysis was performed with orthologues between species osteosarcoma gene expression profiles . after entrez gene id alignment,  <dig> genes were used to cluster the human and canine osteosarcomas, normal tissues and cell lines. hierarchical clustering resulted in complete branching of normal and tumor samples, and normal organs could be further defined based on species of origin.  among the  <dig> primary tumor samples there was no distinct branching of human and canine osteosarcoma, suggesting that similarities between cancers in both species was high.

canine osteosarcoma as a model of progression
the compelling likeness between canine and human osteosarcoma expression profiles prompted us to ask if new insights could be gleaned using our cross-species approach that would be overlooked if only the human data set was examined. based on the fact that canine osteosarcoma may be associated with a more aggressive clinical course than human osteosarcoma, we hypothesized that genes that were more "dog-like" but nonetheless expressed in human osteosarcoma, would be more likely to be linked to metastatic progression or poorest clinical outcome in human patients. using a fold expression approach we identified  <dig> genes with greater expression in the dog vs. human. from this list  <dig> strongly "dog-like" osteosarcoma defining genes  were highly linked to dog osteosarcoma  but were nonetheless expressed in human osteosarcoma  . next, expression consistency in all affymetrix probe sets, defined as concordant direction of differential expression for all probesets associated with a given gene, yielded four "dog-like" genes of interest: il- <dig>  slc1a <dig>  tfpi <dig>  , and rbp <dig> . each of these "dog-like" genes were examined in a distinct population of  <dig> human osteosarcoma patient samples  that had previously undergone gene expression analysis and were linked to clinical outcome. the median survival time for this population of human patients was  <dig>  years ). high expression of two of the four "dog-like" genes  linked to poor outcome in human osteosarcoma using kaplan meier analysis . this finding of two potentially informative genes is noteworthy since the survival signature generated via cox regression of the entire dataset suggested it was unlikely that individual genes would be predictive of clinical outcome . fisher exact analysis supported the strength of the association between these "dog-like" genes and survival when compared to  <dig> previously identified cancer candidate genes  where no association with survival was found. after multiple test corrections, using random permutation testing, increased il- <dig> expression was continuously linked with poor survival . .

 <dig> expression values represent log <dig> ratios of canine os samples:canine normal tissues

 <dig> expression values represent log <dig> ratios of human os samples:human normal tissue

to validate the relevance of il- <dig> and slc1a <dig> in human osteosarcoma, we evaluated their protein expression in a third and distinct set of human osteosarcoma tissues by tissue microarray  immunohistochemistry, obtained from primary biopsy, definitive resection and metastases. results show low to moderate tumor cell expression intensity for il <dig> and slc1a <dig> in most samples  and 54/ <dig>  samples have intensity scores < <dig> respectively) . slc1a <dig> exhibited cytoplasmic staining in tumor and stromal cells; whereas il <dig> staining was found in both osteoclasts and osteoblasts.

discussion
our cross-species genomic analysis of osteosarcoma is the first to compare global gene signatures of any spontaneously occurring disease state with the same disease in humans. two important findings have emerged from this work:  there are very strong similarities in gene expression patterns between canine and human osteosarcoma. these similarities further support the inclusion of pet dogs as a translational model in studies of osteosarcoma therapy; and  that these similarities, coupled with the more aggressive biology of the canine disease provides a new perspective from which genes and pathways integrally related to the metastatic biology of this disease may be assessed. indeed, we identified four specific genes that were defined as "dog-like" genes to be expressed in humans. expression levels of two of these "dog-like" genes  were associated with poor outcome in human osteosarcoma patient samples. it is unlikely that these potential progression associated genes would have been considered without the perspective provided by the cross-species approach.

the public release of a high-quality sequence covering 99% of the canine genome  has confirmed remarkable similarities between the genomes of dog and man and has provided the opportunity for the cross-species studies conducted here  <cit> . the implementation of such approaches is feasible through commercially available canine oligonucleotide and snp arrays, first by affymetrix and now by others. it is now possible for high throughput interrogation of canine tissues and disease states, using platforms and processes previously limited to the mouse and human  <cit> . work by several groups has begun to use the canine genome as a means to understand basic biology and genetics of health and disease, including cancer  <cit> . past comparative genomic studies in cancer have included work in rodents and humans  <cit> . there are many challenges to cross-species comparative genomics that include the dog, including incomplete gene annotation and the lack of methodologies for orthologous gene assessment. we used a comparative genomics methodology, entrez gene id alignment, similar to that described by sweet-cordero et al. and lee et al. to study gene signatures in murine models of cancer, in our canine-human analysis of osteosarcoma progression. improved cross-species genomic analyses will be possible with further genome annotation and sequence similarity assessments  <cit> .

past studies that have sought to define targets linked to metastatic progression in osteosarcoma, a highly metastatic pediatric malignancy, have been hampered by the overwhelming bone signature of osteosarcoma, heterogeneous and karyotypic complexity of the disease, relative paucity of tumor samples available before exposure to chemotherapy, and the small number of patient samples available given the rarity of this disease. baird et al., used expression profiling to define and distinguish osteosarcoma from other similar pediatric cancers, but this signature was highly influenced by its association with bone  <cit> . since initial response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy is a recognized prognostic factor in osteosarcoma. mintz et al. and ochi et al. used expression analysis by microarray to define classifiers of a poor response to chemotherapy  <cit> . the starting material for these studies were tumor samples obtained following chemotherapy at the time of definitive resection of the tumor  <cit> . the greater number of dogs who are diagnosed yearly with osteosarcoma, along with the more accelerated progression to metastasis compared to pediatric osteosarcoma, provides a greatly needed resource for the study of this rare pediatric cancer and may be necessary for optimal progress to be made.

using cluster analysis of human-dog orthologous genes that were differentially expressed between canine cancers and canine normal tissues we were unable to segregate the gene expression signatures of canine from human osteosarcoma. previous candidate studies of the genetics and biology of osteosarcoma in both species have been limited but supported the similarities between the diseases. we were nonetheless surprised that the expression of orthologous genes could not distinguish the cancers by species. it is important to note that the normal canine and normal human tissue expression signatures were clearly distinguished using this same approach. these data suggest that the osteosarcoma gene expression pattern was dominant over the gene expression patterns of species. since normal bone was not included as a comparator in normal tissue panel for both, it is reasonable that the dominant expression pattern, common to both species is their association to bone. however, the abundantly expressed biological themes found in canine osteosarcoma are similar to the previously published work describing human osteosarcoma  <cit> .

additionally, it is important to note that the canine normal tissue samples used for this cross-species analysis are true biological replicates and not pooled samples or single samples assayed multiple times. this contrasts the normal human gene expression data derived from the online gnf-gea database that has batch effects that may introduce bias that differs from expression data obtained from canine osteosarcoma, canine normal, and human osteosarcoma tissues. limitations exist when harvesting normal human tissue for gene expression analysis due to the fact that most, if not all samples, are attained at various times post mortem. the canine normal tissue samples used in this current study were harvested promptly minimizing sample degradation and bias that may negatively influence gene expression quantification. it is possible that previous genomics studies of human osteosarcoma failed to capture the true biological variability between individuals due to normal sample pooling. therefore, the ability to collect individual, high-quality canine normal and tumor samples may unmask superior and distinct relationships and improve upon the opportunity to detect biological differences between normal and diseased tissues.

the strength of the similarities between the dog and human gene signatures allowed us to extend the use of the comparative data to identify progression-associated genes. since dogs have a more aggressive course of disease than humans we hypothesized that "dog-like" genes may define a more aggressive phenotype of human osteosarcoma that could not be previously identified in human genomic evaluations. by identifying genes with the highest expression in a population of canine osteosarcoma and marginal expression in a population of human osteosarcoma patients, two of four "dog-like" genes, il <dig> and slc1a <dig> , were defined that were negatively associated with survival in a distinct human osteosarcoma data set. il- <dig> is a major mediator of the inflammatory response. it functions as both a chemo-attractant for a variety of cell types as well as an angiogenic factor. both functions have been mechanistically linked to cancer progression in a number of histologies including human melanoma, breast, prostate, pancreatic, head and neck, bladder, ovarian and colorectal carcinomas  <cit> . in a study by rutkowski et al., elevated serum levels of a variety of cytokines including il- <dig>  il- <dig> , il- <dig>  and tnfr <dig>  were linked to tumor extent and poor prognosis in adult patients with bone sarcomas  <cit> . il- <dig> up-regulation has also been implicated as a possible pathway for doxorubicin resistance in a drug resistant human osteosarcoma cell line , although its impact in paclitaxel resistance in less clear in other in vitro assessments  <cit> . if indeed an indicator of future progression in human osteosarcoma patients, this gene is of particular interest, as it is a druggable target for inhibition because monoclonal il- <dig> antibodies are already in clinical development  <cit> . slc1a <dig>  is a high affinity glutamate transporter that normally regulates neurotransmitter concentrations, although it has also been found outside of the cns. it has been linked to motility and is highly expressed in aggressive glioma cell lines versus less aggressive variants  <cit> . interestingly, it has been recently described by kalaiti et al. to be present in mg- <dig>  an osteoblastic osteosarcoma cell line, and functionally can be up regulated by glucocorticoids  <cit> . therefore it may also have implications in bone pathophysiology and as a target for further evaluation in osteosarcoma. the value of the comparative approach  in the studying human osteosarcoma progression associated genes was supported when the predictive value of the dog-genes was compared to candidate non-dog genes previously linked to cancer biology or progression. furthermore, the demonstration of il- <dig> and slc1a <dig> expression at the protein level in human osteosarcoma patient  samples validated the potential relevance of this comparative approach across platforms. future studies will include functional analysis of these poor outcome genes within in vitro and in vivo models and evaluation of their expression in larger outcome-linked patient datasets. such data sets are not currently available but are a focus of work by several collaborating groups.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the genetic signatures of canine and pediatric osteosarcoma cluster together and are not divided by species. these data, along with the increased incidence of osteosarcoma in dogs provides additional support for the consideration of dogs as a valuable translational model for the study of this cancer. close evaluation of specific genes more defining of canine osteosarcoma helped identify new genes potentially associated with poor survival in human osteosarcoma patients. the validation of these potential targets in preclinical models and larger human data sets should be prioritized. collectively the cross-species comparative approach supports the use of the dog as a model for the study of cancer biology, progression and therapy with the long-term goal of improving clinical outcome for human cancer patients.

