BACKGROUND
inflammation is a reaction of the immune system to tissue damage and infection and represents a key component in normal tissue homeostasis. consequently, deregulated inflammatory reactions result in severely detrimental chronic conditions. one of the hallmarks of the innate inflammatory response is infiltration of the affected tissue by leukocytes of the innate immune system . inflammatory cells are recruited to the site of wounding or infection by proinflammatory mediators such as hydrogen peroxide, cytokines and chemokines  <cit> . studying the molecular and cellular basis of inflammation in vivo is often hampered by the opacity of the tissue, and, to date, most studies have relied on in vitro assays or on analysis after tissue fixation. given the transparency of the zebrafish during early developmental stages, the availability of transgenic fluorescent reporter lines and the conservation of the principal components of the innate immune system, it is now possible to study immunity by following the behavior of infiltrating cells in the living animal. green fluorescent protein -labeled leukocytes can be observed in larval or adult models of inflammation, which involve wounding or exposing fish to infectious agents. in this animal model, it was recently discovered that hydrogen peroxide is an important immediate signaling molecule required for the rapid recruitment of leukocytes to wounds  <cit> . given the simplicity with which these assays can be carried out in the zebrafish and a limitless and cheap supply of animals, it has been proposed as a useful system for high-throughput small-molecule screens aimed at detecting immunomodulatory activity in vivo  <cit>  or for genetic screens aimed at identifying key molecular components of the innate immune response  <cit> . the small size of fish larvae offers the added advantage of testing candidate molecules by directly dissolving them in small volumes of fish water; usually dimethyl sulfoxide  is added as a solvent to allow penetration of the compounds to all tissues. previous reports have proposed laser damage directed to the yolk surface of embryos  <cit>  and localized nicks in fin tissue or amputation of the entire tail fin in larvae  <cit>  to induce inflammation. these treatments are one of the bottlenecks for performing large-scale screens, as the animals have to be manipulated individually prior to distribution into microtiter well plates for phenotypic analysis.

we have been studying the induction of cell death and regeneration in neuromasts of the lateral line system of zebrafish larvae. neuromasts, small clusters of mechanosensory hair cells enclosed within a compact group of accessory cells, are regularly distributed over the body surface and can be damaged by exposure to physical or chemical insults  <cit> . we have found that copper sulfate added to the incubation medium rapidly induces cell death in neuromasts  <cit> , though they are able to rapidly regenerate and reach full functionality  <dig> day after the damaging agent is removed  <cit> . in the present work, we have discovered that damage to neuromasts is followed immediately by migration of cells that express high levels of matrix metalloproteinase  <dig> , a marker of myeloid lineage cell populations  <cit> . using transgenic lines that label myeloid leukocytes  in vivo, we observed a specific, extremely rapid and highly reproducible innate immune response to copper-induced neuromast damage. since the wounds are localized and are elicited chemically, no invasive manipulation of fish is required and the treatment can be applied massively. exploiting this observation, we developed a quantitative measure for inflammation by counting leukocytes migrating to the lateral line neuromasts in transgenic lines or with immune cell-specific stains upon copper-induced neuromast damage. we further tested the method by using known anti-inflammatory drugs, and we demonstrate detection of their activity as they potently inhibit leukocyte infiltration of the neuromasts. resolution of the response can also be scored if drugs are added after damage. furthermore, analysis of fish that are mutant for the wiskott-aldrich syndrome  gene  <cit>  exemplifies the power of this approach for recovering mutations in genes involved in leukocyte migratory behavior. finally, we show that the procedure can be massively scaled up by automation of distribution of individual larvae in microtiter wells, liquid handling, image acquisition and quantification of the inflammatory response in real time. thus, we introduce a new method for high-throughput screens aimed at detecting immunomodulatory activity of small molecules. we anticipate that chemically induced inflammation assays  will make it possible to achieve different types of high-throughput compound screens as well as genetic screens, focusing on aspects of the wound-induced inflammatory response , analyses of various types of infection-induced responses, investigation of tissue regeneration and specific cell subtype migration assays.

RESULTS
myeloid leukocytes migrate to damaged neuromasts
zebrafish larvae establish the primary lateral line system by  <dig> days postfertilization . addition of copper sulfate to the water rapidly destroys hair cells of the lateral line system by inducing oxidative stress followed by cell death  <cit> . among genes induced in larvae by copper exposure, we detected strong stimulation of the mmp <dig> gene . when we carried out in situ hybridization to detect mmp <dig> transcripts in control animals, we detected very low levels of expression in a few cells located within the posterior blood island  or caudal hematopoietic tissue , the areas where most myeloid leukocytes reside at this developmental stage. however, the same analysis carried out in copper-exposed larvae showed strong speckled signals in discrete clusters along the flanks of the trunk and tail, a distribution that suggested that immune cells expressing mmp <dig> actively migrate toward the damaged neuromasts .

to visualize the presence of leukocytes of the innate immune system and to follow their behavior in vivo after copper treatment, we used fish carrying the myeloperoxidase or lysozyme c promoters driving the expression of gfp or red fluorescent protein in myeloid leukocytes , bacmpx::gfp and lysc::dsred <dig>  respectively  <cit> . both transgenic lines produced identical results in our assays.

we exposed transgenic zebrafish larvae at  <dig> hours postfertilization  to  <dig> μm cuso <dig> for a period of  <dig> hours and monitored the behavior of fluorescent leukocytes immediately after beginning the treatment. in control  fish, most of the immune cells remained in the pbi or cht . in contrast, examination of zebrafish larvae exposed to copper showed a general dispersal of these cells, suggestive of active migration from their initial location. most striking was the rapid coalescence of labeled cells to form regularly spaced clusters in the midline of the trunk and tail of treated animals . this cell clustering can be observed for up to  <dig> hours after removal of copper from the medium . we next confirmed that migratory immune cells home specifically toward damaged neuromasts. we generated compound transgenic fish by mating the lysc::dsred transgenic zebrafish line, labeling leukocytes in red  <cit> , with the cldnb::gfp transgenic zebrafish line, in which neuromast cells are labeled green  <cit> . in these double-labeled fish, we observed that clustering of leukocytes occurs specifically around neuromasts that have suffered damage . whereas in the absence of copper treatment immune cells patrol the area near the neuromasts only occasionally, in treated fish numerous immune cells concentrate in neuromasts and remain in their vicinity for several hours. similar results have been obtained with red fluorescent or vital dye-labeled neuromasts and gfp-labeled leukocytes .

to examine the dynamics of the inflammatory process under these conditions, we captured time-lapse images of the trunk and tail of bacmpx::gfp fish beginning immediately after the addition of copper . the cells began to respond to the damage around  <dig> minutes after the addition of copper to the medium, and the first labeled cells reached the neuromasts at around  <dig> minutes. in the presence of copper sulfate, leukocytes remained in the neuromast area, maintaining a circulatory patrolling movement within it for 2- <dig> hours, after which they began to disperse and no longer concentrated exclusively near neuromasts. six hours after the removal of copper, treated larvae were indistinguishable from controls, indicating resolution of inflammation.

neuromasts consist of centrally located hair cells surrounded by mantle cells on the surface and supporting cells at the base, all forming a compact rosette  <cit> . after the addition of copper, the arrival of macrophages, neutrophils and possibly other immune cells coincided with a progressive disruption of the rosette-like structure . this disruption is likely caused by a combination of cell death  <cit>  and the invasion of immune cells, which continuously traverse the interstitial space between neuromast cells, separating them from one another.

the two transgenic lines used in this study label myeloid leukocytes, most likely neutrophils. however, up to  <dig> hpf, the lysc::dsred <dig> line labels early macrophages in addition to neutrophils. to learn whether the cell populations labeled in both lines showed similar dynamics in their response, we used a lysc::dsred2/bacmpx::gfp compound transgenic line. at 48- <dig> hpf, most labeled cells expressed both transgenes, but some cells labeled only with dsred <dig>  however, both double-labeled cells and dsred2-labeled cells migrated toward the damaged neuromasts . thus, it is likely that both neutrophils and macrophages participate in the inflammatory response elicited by copper in neuromasts, and the deciphering of specific roles for either population in real time would require the availability of additional subpopulation-specific transgenic reporter lines.

to determine whether copper-induced damage in other tissues also stimulated an inflammatory response, we exposed lysc::dsred <dig> zebrafish larvae permanently for up to  <dig> days with  <dig> μm cuso <dig>  prolonged exposure resulted in a general dispersal of leukocytes compared to controls and, in addition to lateral line neuromasts, leukocyte infiltration was observed in the gills and nose . we conclude that waterborne exposure of larvae to copper sulfate causes lesions to superficial tissues followed by specific inflammatory responses at the sites of damage.

quantification of immune cell infiltration in the lateral line after chemical damage
taking advantage of our findings, we aimed to develop a simple but robust quantitative method to measure the degree of leukocyte infiltration in damaged neuromasts. using such a protocol would allow us to reveal the effect of molecules that modulate the inflammatory response elicited by copper exposure, opening the door for chemical or genetic high-throughput inflammation screens. our first approach  requires only visual inspection of treated and control larvae and can thus be carried out using low-power magnification. it is necessary to have a method for detection of innate immune cells; the optimal way is to use transgenic lines such as bacmpx::gfp, lysc::gfp or lysc::dsred <dig>  though we have successfully used sudan black  and diaminobenzidine  staining to label leukocytes histochemically, with identical results in all cases. for quantification, it is not critical to label the neuromasts as the primary lateral line is always localized along the horizontal myoseptum and two or three neuromasts are predictably located above the dorsal aorta, posterior to the cloaca, at the larval stages used . two hours after addition of copper sulfate to the water, immune cells reproducibly and robustly congregate near the neuromasts. given the highly dynamic nature of the immune cells' behavior, we found it most convenient to fix the larvae at this time to examine all individuals at a similar stage in the response. the gfp or dsred <dig> label remains visible for at least  <dig> day after fixation, allowing sufficient time for quantification of a large sample of larvae. larvae were observed under a fluorescence dissecting scope, and we established an arbitrary area of approximately five cell diameters above and below the horizontal myoseptum, which runs from the first somite to the end of the tail . fluorescent cells were counted within this area on one side of  <dig> larvae for each treatment, and averages were calculated. control fish were either untreated or incubated in dmso . we first designed an experiment using two concentrations of copper  that are toxic to neuromast cells after  <dig> hours of exposure, and one of cadmium chloride , which causes no damage to neuromast cells at that concentration and exposure time  <cit> . quantification by two independent observers showed that there was a significant difference in the number of leukocytes localized to the lateral line in copper-treated fish compared to control  fish . this experiment provides proof of principle that a quantitative inflammation assay can be carried out using copper-induced damage and leukocyte cell counts in the lateral line. we next carried out a series of experiments to explore variations of the method that would yield improved results. we first determined that the inflammatory effect of copper sulfate is concentration dependent and that significant leukocyte infiltration can be seen beginning at  <dig>  μm cuso <dig> . of other metals known to affect the viability of neuromast hair cells, only silver, albeit less effectively, yielded significant infiltration at concentrations comparable to copper. zinc requires a 25-fold higher concentration to result in a significant effect, while nickel was ineffective at the evaluated dosages . we had previously determined that these other metals have additional toxic effects and that fish survival is compromised  <cit> . therefore, we find that copper sulfate remains the most effective and reproducible damaging agent for neuromasts. interestingly, neomycin, a potent ototoxic aminoglycoside antibiotic known to ablate hair cells in zebrafish neuromasts  <cit> , generated a significant but modest inflammatory response . we confirmed that hair cells are eliminated in our neomycin treatments by using a hair cell-specific transgenic line . whether this fourfold difference reflects a specific property of metal vs. antibiotic-induced damage or whether neomycin somehow affects immune cell migration remains to be determined.

as treatment with  <dig> μm copper for up to  <dig> hours does not affect the viability of the larvae, we used this concentration of metal as the inflammation-inducing dose for all subsequent experiments. to determine the optimal developmental stage at which to carry out the inflammation assays and the times at which to obtain the best response after treatment, we exposed fish of different ages  and performed immune cell counts at the myoseptum between  <dig> and  <dig> minutes after the addition of copper. all ages tested showed comparable response curves, whereas significant infiltration of the lateral line by leukocytes was always detected by 20- <dig> minutes after initiating copper treatment . however, fish at ages from  <dig> hpf to  <dig> hpf yielded slightly more robust responses. we thus established our basic protocol using 56-hpf larvae that spontaneously hatched, incubating the larvae for  <dig> minutes in  <dig> μm copper, followed by fixation and evaluation of leukocyte infiltration into the myoseptum . we suggest a 40-minute incubation with copper only as a matter of convenience, as there is no significant difference from a 2-hour long incubation. we have called this method the chemically induced inflammation, or chin, assay.

effect of anti-inflammatory drugs and inhibition of reactive oxygen species
previous reports have shown that well-established anti-inflammatory drugs behave as predicted in zebrafish inflammation assays that rely on physical wounding  <cit> . we wanted to test whether the chin assay is also able to detect the activity of these and other molecules that are known to act at different points during inflammation. selected compounds  were added to fish medium containing 1% dmso  <dig> minutes to  <dig> hour prior to the addition of copper, allowing for effective drug penetration of larval tissues. of the  <dig> drugs tested using the manual chin assay,  <dig> of them exhibited statistically significant inhibition of leukocyte infiltration at varying concentrations ranging from  <dig>  μm to  <dig> μm . for a large-scale, small-molecule screen, we would thus recommend use of a two-concentration standard assay . for the panel of compounds tested in this study, such an experimental setup would identify more than 90% of effective compounds. only hydrocortisone required a higher concentration  to yield significant inhibition of inflammation. a quantitative analysis for a subset of the drugs tested in the manual chin assay is shown in figure  <dig> 

aselected drugs were added to the incubation medium  <dig> hour prior to addition of copper and were tested at the indicated concentrations for inhibition of leukocyte migration using bacmpx::gfp larvae in chemically induced inflammation assays  . up to four concentrations were chosen to provide an overview of drug activity in the chin assay. we aimed at identifying a concentration yielding significant results with p <  <dig> . in some instances, this was not possible  as higher concentrations were lethal or showed reduced significance compared to lower concentrations. all drugs were used in medium containing 1% dimethyl sulfoxide, as were control fish. asterisks indicate significant leukocyte migration inhibition. ***p <  <dig> . ** <dig>  <p <  <dig> . * <dig>  <p <  <dig> . minus sign indicates no significant difference. gr, glucocorticoid receptor; ns, nonsteroidal; cox, cyclooxygenase; jnk, c-jun n-terminal kinase; ppar-γ, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ.

to further assess the benefit of the chin assay for detecting novel mechanisms guiding inflammation, we were curious whether we would be able to identify the recently described role of reactive oxygen species  in this process. formation of a gradient of h2o <dig> has been shown to be required for leukocyte recruitment toward wounds inflicted by tailfin transection in zebrafish  <cit> . to evaluate whether copper-induced wounding also involves ros signaling and whether such a role can be detected using the chin assay, we tested the nadph oxidase inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium  using the chin assay . indeed, pretreatment of larvae with dpi significantly reduced the number of leukocytes infiltrating the lateral line, confirming that ros gradient formation is also critical for leukocytes to respond to copper-mediated lesions and the potential of the chin assay to link unexpected molecules to leukocyte infiltration.

as innate immune leukocytes abandon the wounded neuromast a few hours after the response, we next wished to learn whether it would be possible to also detect molecules that affected the resolution phase. nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  act as nonselective inhibitors of the enzyme cyclooxygenase , inhibiting both the cyclooxygenase- <dig> and cyclooxygenase- <dig> isoenzymes . cox enzymes are proinflammatory during the early phase of inflammation, but aid resolution at the later phase by generating an alternative set of prostaglandins  <cit> . resolution of inflammation was analyzed by carrying out copper damage for  <dig> minutes as before, adding the drugs immediately after copper removal and scoring for leukocyte infiltration  <dig> hours after that. hence, if inflammatory resolution was impaired, we would observe an increase in leukocyte numbers at neuromasts compared to controls. when diclofenac and ibuprofen were added after copper treatment, the number of infiltrating leukocytes after  <dig> hours was significantly different from control fish, indicating that inflammation was not resolved in these cases . the number of leukocytes in drug-treated fish was, in fact, almost identical to the number observed immediately after copper removal, suggesting that drug-exposed cells were blocked from exiting the wounded area.

the chin assay can detect mutations that affect the inflammatory response
to explore the full versatility of the chin assay, we investigated its potential for detecting genetic mutations within critical pathways of an innate immune response. to this end, we used the zebrafish was mutant  <cit> . the wiskott-aldrich syndrome  family of proteins is involved in transduction of signals from receptors on the cell surface to the actin cytoskeleton. was protein deficiency underlies a severe human condition characterized by recurrent infections and autoimmunity caused at least in part by perturbed leukocyte migration toward chemotactic cues  <cit> . we exposed larvae obtained from a cross between homozygous was mutant male fish and heterozygous female fish to copper and carried out a chin assay; as controls, wild-type fish were used. the sensitivity of the chin assay allowed a clear identification of larvae that were either homozygous or heterozygous for the mutation on the basis of infiltration of leukocytes toward neuromasts after copper treatment . subsequent genotyping further confirmed our correct phenotypic identification of homozygous mutants from larvae heterozygous for the mutation . as shown previously, was gene dosing correlates with the degree of leukocyte migratory impairment, as heterozygotes show an intermediate effect compared to homozygous mutants and wild-type larvae  <cit> . the chin assay may thus also be used for genetic screens to identify mutations in genes critical for an inflammatory response.

automated detection of anti-inflammatory activity
while manual quantification of migrating leukocytes using the chin assay is an improvement over other methods for analysis of selected molecules or for recovering mutations, it is still unrealistic as a method for high-throughput screening of hundreds to thousands of candidate chemicals or mutants with reasonable efforts and within reasonable time. therefore, we sought to transform the chin assay into a scalable method that could be used in large-format screens. we developed a custom software script enabling us to map fluorescent expression domains in zebrafish larvae and combined it with automated microscopy. to put the automated system into operation, we used compound transgenic cldnb::gfp/lysc::dsred <dig> larvae, as green fluorescent neuromasts facilitated computer-aided automatic examination of the area surrounding the damaged tissue for the presence of red fluorescent leukocytes . the assay was carried out essentially as described previously, except that the larvae were distributed in 384-well plates and drugs or copper were added directly to the individual wells using multichannel pipettes. larvae were preincubated with drugs for  <dig> minutes and then exposed to copper treatment. forty minutes after addition of  <dig> μm cuso <dig>  plates were placed under a fluorescence microscope equipped with a × <dig>  lens and three channels per well were automatically captured . images were then automatically processed using our custom script to first identify the neuromasts  and subsequently to quantify infiltrated leukocytes in their surrounding area by fluorescence intensity . to validate the automation of the chin assay, we first performed a control experiment testing different concentrations of cuso <dig> and cdcl <dig> . as with manual chin, the results of the automated assay revealed a significant increase of leukocytes in the vicinity of the neuromasts upon copper treatment as compared to control or cadmium treatment . furthermore, automated chin evaluation of a selected panel of drugs yielded results identical to those seen using the manual assay. the immunosuppressive effect for all compounds tested was detected with sensitivity comparable, or superior, to manual screening . these results show that the chin assay provides sufficient robustness to be applied to automated detection and evaluation and will thus allow further upscaling by, for example, removing any remaining manual steps, including the introduction of robotic liquid handling.

discussion
we describe a new method, the chin assay, which will be of value for the initial detection of lead compounds exhibiting immunomodulatory activity as well as genes with roles in the different stages of the inflammatory response. in zebrafish, myeloid leukocytes develop during the first day of life, while molecular markers and cellular components of adaptive immunity arise well after the third day  <cit> . thus, assays carried out in early larvae allow specific analysis of the innate immune system. these assays are facilitated by the transparency of the larvae and the availability of fluorescent tags in specific immune cell types in transgenic fish. however, nontransgenic zebrafish can also be used because histochemical stains  are equally useful for chin assays.

the inflammatory response in this species has been well characterized  <cit> . however, studies carried out to date have relied on physical damage  <cit>  or on a genetically induced chronic inflammatory condition  <cit>  to observe the behavior of myeloid leukocytes. our approach takes advantage of noninvasive tissue damage and induction of an acute inflammatory response in specific areas of the larva. the principal advantages of this method are its robustness and scalability: physical manipulation of individual larvae is unnecessary, thus avoiding the introduction of variability and limitations to the number of individuals that can be screened. using the chin assay, larvae are distributed singly into microtiter well plates, but can then be treated simultaneously with automated liquid-handling devices for induction of chemical damage, a procedure that is highly reproducible between individuals. the inflammatory reaction occurs within minutes. thus, live treated larvae should be analyzed shortly after the addition of copper to the medium. analysis of live transgenic animals allows for continuous or repeated monitoring of the immune cells' behavior, a useful condition for examining sequential arrival of different cell types or resolution of inflammation, for example. alternatively, larvae can be fixed at the desired time point after treatment, allowing analysis of large sets of fish subjected to an identical treatment. in the latter case, the use of transgenic zebrafish lines is optional as it is possible to label leukocytes using histochemical stains, antibodies or in situ hybridization . nonetheless, fluorescent lines greatly facilitate the analysis and, in our hands, were essential for automation. we combined transgenic backgrounds that label the neuromasts in one color and immune cells in another , which made the image recognition software highly efficient in selecting the area to analyze.

we applied several known anti-inflammatory drugs to test the chin assay. the selected molecules affect diverse pathways implicated in inflammation such as the cox, c-jun n-terminal kinase  or peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor -γ responses. in addition, we confirmed that ros gradient formation is critical for leukocyte recruitment upon copper-induced inflammation as chemical inhibition of nadph oxidase significantly decreased the leukocyte recruitment toward neuromasts. copper-mediated inflammation thus mechanistically recapitulates classical wounding assays without the need for manual manipulation of larvae. we caution that a primary large-scale, small-molecule screen carried out using the chin assay would not distinguish  a specific anti-inflammatory effect,  an inhibitory effect on general cell motility and  protection of hair cells from undergoing cell death, as all of these events would result in the same net effect: recruitment of leukocytes to neuromasts would be altered. candidate leads need to be subjected to secondary screens to distinguish the specific aspect of immune cell behavior that is affected.

using the chin assay, we have obtained comparable results with two transgenic lines and two histochemical stains . new tools currently under development that will allow the in vivo identification of distinct subpopulations of immune cells will further enhance the benefits of the chin assay in the near future. for example, preliminary results using lck::gfp transgenic larvae, a lymphocyte reporter line, showed no behavioral change in these cells after copper exposure, as expected given the role of these cells in adaptive immunity .

other types of screens feasible with the chin assay
a major application of the chin assay will be the identification of immunomodulatory activities of small molecules. however, we foresee additional applications using this strategy. first, mutant screens aimed at detecting genetic components of the inflammatory response will be facilitated with this approach. the high-throughput advantage of the chin assay can be used for efficiently screening mutagenized fish, as well as for gain of function screens or antisense screens using morpholino oligonucleotides. genetic mutations or knockdowns can be identified, given that their phenotypic consequence regarding leukocyte behavior during inflammation lies within the sensitivity threshold of the chin assay. here we provide proof of principle for the identification of mutations using was mutant zebrafish as an example. the was mutant larvae exhibited a significant reduction of leukocytes infiltrating the lateral line neuromasts upon copper treatment. on top of identifying homozygous mutants, the level of sensitivity of the chin assay even allowed for discrimination between heterozygous and homozygous larvae.

second, the localized damage induced in the superficial neuromasts could be used as a model for inflammation mediated by infection. most models of bacterial infection, for example, require injection of the pathogens to study the immune response . larvae in which neuromasts have been damaged may be susceptible to infection through the sites of injury with waterborne pathogens, or likewise stimulated with pathogen-associated molecular patterns  such as lipopolysaccharides or viral nucleic acids added to the water. it may even be possible to distinguish the acute inflammatory response induced by wounding from that mediated by infectious agents using the chin assay in different transgenic backgrounds.

the highly specific migration of leukocytes to the neuromasts offers an excellent opportunity for a detailed examination of the molecular players involved in directed cell migration and immune cell homing. in this case, immune cells can be imaged in vivo before and during the generation of the attractive signal, allowing the monitoring of cell behavior during the key transition between random walk and chemotaxis. likewise, the path followed by these cells can be observed in living tissue, as well as in the diffusion of signals through interstitial space, for example, using hydrogen peroxide reporters  <cit> . as opposed to tail wounding or sectioning, damage to the neuromast generates a focal point of chemoattractants with radial diffusion, which could provide a more adequate scenario for analysis of leukocyte homing.

our laboratory is particularly interested in the regeneration of lateral line hair cells, a model for sensory regeneration in general. the contribution of the immune system to regeneration has been well documented, as has the potential impediment to regeneration caused by prolonged tissue inflammation and fibrosis. we believe that the chin assay can be used to investigate the molecular mechanisms of immune system involvement in regeneration. whether the arrival of immune cells to damaged neuromasts promotes or inhibits regeneration of sensory hair cells is currently under study. interestingly, time-lapse observation of a neuromast during copper-induced damage shows that patrolling neutrophils and macrophages  provoke disorganization of the surviving cells, separating them from one another . as migrating leukocytes contain and release matrix-degrading enzymes, such as mmp <dig>  that diminish adherence and tissue integrity, they could assist in the reconstruction of the damaged organ by facilitating the rearrangement, proliferation and differentiation of regenerating cells. obviously, hair cell death or the regeneration process itself could be the subject of high-throughput screens , as has been done previously with damage induced in hair cells by neomycin  <cit> . finally, molecules that protect neuromast hair cells against damage by copper would preclude immune cell migration to these organs. pretreatment of fish with antioxidants protects hair cells from the effects of waterborne copper  <cit> , and thus this type of activity could also be uncovered in a small-molecule screen using the chin assay.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the chin assay represents a new tool that will contribute to the understanding of the pathways that lead to homing and migration of innate immune cells, as well as providing a discovery model for molecules that may yield new leads to therapeutic treatment of immune disorders.

