BACKGROUND
there has been a growing interest in the prediction of dna-binding sites in proteins which play crucial roles in gene regulation  <cit> . we have previously developed a method of predicting dna-binding sites of proteins from the sequence information  <cit> . we reported development of a neural network and corresponding web server to predict amino acid residues which are likely to bind dna. the only input to the neural network in this algorithm was the identity of the amino acid residue and its two sequence neighbors on c- and n- terminals. we also developed a method to identify dna-binding proteins using electrical moments from structural information of proteins  <cit> . on the other hand, several investigators have reported that the use of evolutionary information in sequence-based predictions of secondary structure and solvent accessibility can improve the prediction capacity of a neural network  <cit> .

here we report the use of such evolutionary information in improving the prediction of dna-binding sites of proteins. we note that one of the major problems in applying evolutionary information by way of position specific scoring matrices  for sequence based prediction is that such matrices are generated over large data sets and take a long time to complete. thus large scale predictions remain inaccessible to moderately capable computers. this is a serious limitation in the portability of neural network based predictions using pssms  <cit> . in this work, we report that evolutionary profiles or pssms against much smaller representative reference data sets may be utilized to achieve almost the same levels of prediction as would be obtained from alignments with large sequence data sets representing entire available sequence space. we have used four different reference data sets of pssms for  <dig> representative protein sequences. these are  pdna-rdn: a data set of protein sequences from all protein-dna complexes from the pdb,  pdna-nr90: a non-redundant data set compiled from pdna-rdn,  pdb-all: a data set of all amino acid sequences from pdb and  ncbi-nr: a non-redundant data set of all protein sequences taken from sequence and structure databases and compiled by ncbi . we find that the net prediction  of the best of these systems  improves to  <dig> % from the value of  <dig> % reported earlier for a sequence-only prediction. we also report that a small reference data set of  <dig> sequences  can give a  <dig> % net prediction – just  <dig> % poorer than the best- while reducing the pssm calculation time from more than two hours  to just about one minute. a better compromise could be the use of pdna-rdn data for which  <dig> % net prediction #150;  <dig> % less than the best- was obtained, while about  <dig> and a half minutes are taken to generate their pssms. it is also reported that the presence of redundancy is helpful in improving the prediction whereas presence of data not relevant for dna-binding may in some cases reduce predictive performance.

RESULTS
position specific iterative blast  is a strong measure of residue conservation in a given location. in the absence of any alignments, psi blast simply returns a 20-dimensional vector representing probabilities of conservation against mutations to  <dig> different amino acids including itself. a matrix consisting of such vector representations for all residues in a given sequence is called position specific scoring matrix or pssm. when a residue is conserved through cycles of psi blast, it is likely to be due to a purpose i.e. biological function. it has been established by several authors cited in the introduction that the prediction of structural properties is significantly enhanced by the use of pssms compared to predictions based on unique representations of amino acid sequence and its environment. protein structure universe is vast and a prediction of structural properties should span the entire range of this diversity. however, the question of predicting dna-binding sites is much narrower and hence the significance of conservation of residues at specific locations may be limited to a subset of this protein space. such reduction in the protein search space or the reference data sets against which pssm-based predictions should be attempted is desired for a rapid prediction of binding sites as well as portability of prediction methods. compact reference data size can not only answer these questions of speed and portability but also try to minimize noise in information contents and improve prediction quality.

in terms of cpu time, it may be noted that the time taken by  <dig> protein sequences used here is about one hour for the best  data sets. these times are prohibitively large for making predictions at a genomic scale or for providing rapid web services. a compromise could be obtained by using pdna-rdn instead, which reduces the cpu time by a factor more than  <dig>  the loss of net prediction for this compromise is about  <dig> %, which is still  <dig> % better than the predictions obtained from sequence information only. pssms against this data set for a typical protein of  <dig> residues can be generated in about  <dig> s, making it possible to run large scale predictions. a smaller size of reference data and high speed of pssms also make this method portable and light weight with a strong predictive ability.

binary decision function of the neural network  assigns a value of zero  or  <dig>  based on a threshold on the real value output received at the output node. most of the accuracy scores presented here have been obtained by using  <dig>  as the cutoff . by changing this threshold from  <dig>  to higher and lower values, the balance between sensitivity and specificity can be adjusted. in our online prediction we also present the scores obtained for a roc analysis of such adjustments . roc for only one reference data set has been shown here as most other graphs show a similar behavior.

online predictions
we have provided online predictions based on the above method at our web site  <cit> . the raw probability scores, their annotations at different sensitivity thresholds, and a reference scale for expected sensitivity and specificity have been provided. in addition, results of sequence alignments obtained after psi blast iterations against a reference data  are also provided. this allows us to have a complete picture of similarity of a given sequence with known dna-binding proteins and predictions based on neural network using alignment profiles in the form of pssm. the only input to this neural network is the amino acid sequence of the protein. the web server will automatically generate pssms of the given sequence against a reference data and use them as the input to a neural network, trained for predictions of  <dig> dna-binding proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
a pssm-based neural network method for predicting dna-binding sites in proteins has been developed. pssms were developed against different data sets and it was observed that significant computer time can be saved by replacing the reference data sets with much smaller reference data sets without loss of much prediction ability. redundant reference data sets show a better prediction than the non-redundant data sets. a web server was developed to provide prediction of dna-binding sites based on this method. in addition, the web server provides blast alignments against a reference data set of known dna-binding proteins.

