BACKGROUND
gene expression microarrays have served as a useful tool for assaying large-scale similarities and differences among conditions including tissue types  <cit> , stages of development  <cit> , and disease states in humans  <cit>  and model organisms  <cit> . initial microarray classification studies such as those presented in  <cit>  were able to characterize similarities and differences among samples based on mrna expression level for large gene sets. more recent studies have made use of biological annotation, such as gene ontology  or kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways  <cit>  to project changes in individual genes onto biological functions  <cit> . existing biological annotation is also a useful supplement to machine learning techniques used for determining regulatory connections  <cit> . these techniques are sensitive to differential expression as well as small concerted changes in levels of gene expression, yet they may not adequately address changes with respect to the global behavior of gene expression – where transcript levels may either be tightly regulated within a narrow range, or fluctuate widely as a function of environmental cues or tissue specialization.

efforts to explain biological functions associated with single genes or sets of related genes often focus on variations of gene expression across diverse tissue types. identification of genes as tissue-selective and tissue-specific is useful for highlighting their biological function, as well as providing reference/context for disease states. identification of tissue-specific and tissue-selective genes is commonly based on present/absent calls, requiring a global threshold  <cit> . tissue-specific behavior has also been identified using statistical tests to compare sample distributions between tissue types  <cit> . other approaches have used a numeric value representing the degree of tissue specificity within one tissue or tissue subset versus all others  <cit> . these studies are typically performed on a small number of samples within each tissue type; they nevertheless effectively describe genes with large variation between distinct tissues.

efforts have been made to place gene expression in context of global behavior using descriptors such as breadth of gene expression  <cit>  and distributions characteristics that represent ubiquitous, binary, or graded regulation  <cit> . ubiquitously expressed "housekeeping" genes are defined as those highly expressed with little variation across conditions, and have been identified in humans using large-scale microarray studies  <cit> . while breadth of expression and housekeeping behavior have been established using genome-scale measurements, present descriptions of graded and binary genes have typically been produced using single-gene studies  <cit> . these studies have demonstrated that changes in gene expression levels can occur continuously or in a binary switch-like manner in response to extracellular changes. binary modes of gene expression potentially correspond to those proteins with tight regulation at the transcript level. as such their identification is useful in the exposition of the multiple modes of gene expression regulation observed in eukaryotes.

in this study, we expand on the existing literature on gene expression profile distributions and determine a comprehensive list of bimodal genes along with their functional annotation. our preliminary computations based on large collection of human microarray data indicated difficulties identifying profiles of bimodal expression due to a great degree of subject variability and noise. for this reason, the present study focuses on murine microarray data containing approximately  <dig> samples, all obtained using the affymetrix mg-u74av <dig> platform   <cit> . this new database allowed us to effectively apply a two-component mixture model to hundreds of data points for each gene and identify bimodal profiles. moreover, bimodal genes with altered modes of expression were identified in microarray data for type i and type ii diabetes   <cit> . results point to important roles that bimodal  genes play within the extracellular environment in health and disease. bimodal genes, because they are tightly controlled around two distinct modes at the transcript level, serve as targets in drug development. moreover, bimodal genes encoding for extracellular proteins may serve as biomarkers in targeted proteomic studies.

RESULTS
identification of bimodal genes in the mouse genome
our method identified  <dig> bimodal genes out of the  <dig> unique genes  on the mg-u74av <dig> array . the total number of bimodal genes was not sensitive to the p-value cutoff for bimodal versus skewed normal representations of the gene expression distribution within the ranges considered: the bimodal gene list increased by only three genes when the p-value was increased from  <dig>  to  <dig> . similarly, gene expression outliers were not important contributors to the bimodal gene list. when we deleted the three largest gene expression values from the gene expression profile of each gene and ran our procedure for identification of bimodal genes, the resulting bimodal gene list turned out to be identical to our standard set of genes minus five genes. see additional file  <dig> for a table that provides a comprehensive list of bimodal genes for the mouse genome. columns of this table are composed of the following entities: affymetrix probe id, entrez gene id, gene symbol, human orthologs, log likelihood test statistic, estimated p-value, and maximum overlap a, representing the misclassification area between modes. also listed for each gene in this table are parameters indicating the standardized distance between means d, the mixture parameter π, and the log rma gene expression threshold value xt separating high and low expression modes. the information on this table constitutes a priori data needed to identify the high expression or low expression modes of each gene in any given sample. the table can be used to identify altered modes of expression in disease states provided that these genes preserve their bimodal expression patterns. the human orthologs of the bimodal mouse genes are listed in this table  for reference and their bimodal behavior in humans would have to be verified in future studies.

tissue similarity based on common modes of expression within bimodal genes
next we considered similarity of the nineteen tissues for which we had extensive microarray data. as detailed in the methods section, we based our criteria of tissue similarity on the lists of tissue-selective bimodal genes in common within each unique pair of tissues. figure  <dig> indicates that commonality in the set of tissue-selective bimodal genes is indicative of tissue similarity. the number of tissue-selective bimodal genes in the "high" mode for each tissue type is provided as the bottom number in the diagonal of figure 1a, while the top number represents genes that may be considered tissue-specific; they are expressed in the "high" mode for that single tissue and the "low" mode for all others. the remaining matrix elements of figure 1a are the number of bimodal genes in the "high" mode for both of the two tissue types designated in the row and column headings. we performed hierarchical clustering of the nineteen tissues based on sets of bimodal genes shared between them, to further demonstrate the role bimodal genes may play in tissue similarity. the dendrogram in figure 1b was computed using hierarchical clustering with average linkage, using one over the number of bimodal genes shared between two tissues  as the distance metric. in several examples, tissues with similar function cluster together, such as stomach and small intestine, heart and skeletal muscle, thymus and peripheral blood, and the reproductive tissues ovary and testis, while brain clusters distinctly apart from all other tissues. other groupings such as adipose, lung, adrenal, and epidermal tissue may occur because of signaling motifs shared among these tissue types. our predications of tissue similarity are consistent with previous results that group human tissues by hierarchical clustering  <cit> .

functional enrichment analysis indicates bimodal genes' involvement with the extracellular environment
interaction with the extracellular environment appeared to be a common theme when we tested our bimodal gene subsets for enrichment among kegg pathways and go terms. our findings for enriched kegg pathways and go categories are summarized in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. the tables include enrichment scores, defined as the ratio of the observed number of genes over the expected number of genes from the subset of interest, and p-values for each entry calculated from a hypergeometric test  <cit>  for the bimodal gene set against all unique genes on the mg-u74av <dig> array. kegg pathways that were enriched for bimodal genes include cell communication, ecm-receptor interaction, focal adhesion – all pathways that mediate cell communication with the extracellular environment . figures  <dig> and  <dig> identify the placement of bimodal genes  in ecm-receptor interaction and focal adhesion pathways, respectively. structural proteins that are bound by integrin receptors – collage, laminin and fibronectin subunits – are largely encoded by bimodal genes, confirming the fact that the multiple signaling roles of integrins are coupled with the extracellular environment  <cit> . the focal adhesion pathway shown in figure  <dig> illustrates bimodal genes that mediate cell communication at the interior of the cell including genes that encode proteins involved in phosphorylation . bimodal genes populate go cellular component categories such as axons, basal lamina, basement membrane, cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix, and they are principally involved in the biological processes for ion transport, synaptic transmission, cytoskeletal organization and cell adhesion . the abundance of genes with bimodal expression within the cell communication, focal adhesion, and ecm pathways suggests aspects of these activities are enabled and disabled at the transcript level. additionally, kegg pathways for sugar metabolism are enriched with bimodal genes, reminiscent of the switch-like regulation of lactose metabolism in bacteria.

altered modes of bimodal genes in diabetes
we identified bimodal genes that are expressed in an alternate mode within disease states for type i and type ii diabetes. comparisons of microarray samples for diabetes against samples for healthy tissue yielded nearly  <dig> genes with expression changes from "low" to "high" and "high" to "low" expression modes in skeletal muscle . changes were dominated by switching from "high" to "low" in skeletal muscle in both type i and type ii diabetes. the bimodal genes with altered states in diabetes type i and ii are enriched in pathways involved in communication and natural killer cell mediated cytotoxicity . additional file  <dig> provides a list of all bimodal genes with altered modes of expression in diabetes. the bimodal genes altered in diabetic skeletal muscle are mapped onto the ecm-receptor interaction and focal adhesion pathways, shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. as shown in these figures, collagen, fibronectin and tenascin are downregulated in diabetes type i and ii transitioning from "high" to "low" expression whereas collagen receptor cd <dig> is switched from "low" to "high" expression in diabetes, perhaps as compensation for lower expression of extracellular matrix proteins. the list of bimodal genes association with diabetes may provide clues as to the changes that occur in gene regulation pathways as a result of the disease. bimodal genes have also been implicated in congestive heart failure, alzheimer's disease, arteriosclerosis, breast neoplasms, hypertension, myocardial infarction, obesity, and rheumatoid arthritis. future studies are needed for a comprehensive portrayal of their roles in these various diseases.

transcription factors and bimodal gene expression
approximately 15% of transcription factors are bimodal. comparison of our bimodal gene list with the transcription factor list obtained from the transfac professional database  <cit>  revealed  <dig> out of a total  <dig> transcription factors on the mg-u74av <dig> array as bimodal . in turn, binding sites for these transcription factors have been identified for  <dig> genes with entrez gene ids,  <dig> of which were on the mg-u74av <dig> array. only  <dig> out of these  <dig> genes were bimodal, indicating that the set of bimodal transcription factors may not be solely responsible for their regulation. nevertheless, genes that are regulated or co-regulated by bimodal transcription factors are enriched in some of the same kegg pathways as bimodal genes , including cell communication and ecm-receptor interaction. the go categories for the genes co-regulated by switch-like transcription factors also intersect with go categories of switch-like genes that are not transcription factors . additional file  <dig> shows that genes coding transcription factors that are involved in development such as the homeo box genes are switch-like. as the list of known transcription factors and their binding sites grow in the near future, more definitive relationships between bimodal genes and transcription factors are likely to emerge.

discussion
this article presents a comprehensive list of bimodal genes in the mouse genome. we used an automated statistical algorithm that is similar to the approach used in the detection of bimodality in blood glucose distribution  <cit>  in order to identify bimodal, switch-like genes in a large-scale microarray database for murine tissue. bimodal gene expression is either in a "high" or "low" expression mode, indicating switch-like regulation at the transcript level. our automated analysis revealed over 15% of the genes in the mouse genome as bimodal . these bimodal genes are enriched in cell communication pathways and are also enriched in such biological processes as cell adhesion, synaptic transmission, and ion transport. moreover, bimodal genes associate with a large number of disease types including diabetes type i and ii, hypertension, and cancer. because a large portion of bimodal gene products are positioned in the extracellular region, the list we present in this study provides potential biomarker targets for early detection and accurate classification of complex diseases.

although we have paid considerable attention to the statistics of identifying bimodal genes from the large-scale microarray data, our list of bimodal genes may change with time as microarray data obtained with the same affymetrix system expands to include tissue types not considered in this study. nevertheless, the list that we present in this article is stable under deletion of gene expression outliers from the data. although, as discussed in the background section, a number of genes from various species have been identified in the literature as bimodal or switch-like previously, to our knowledge, the list that we present  is yet the most comprehensive and contains important information on gene regulation in health and disease at the transcript level. although the list annotates bimodal genes for the murine genome, their orthologs presented for the human genome provide a core candidate list for the bimodal genes in the human genome. our automated method for annotating bimodal genes will yield a comprehensive list for the human genome with the availability of a comprehensive set of standardized microarray data for large numbers of well controlled tissue samples.

recent literature points to examples of bimodal genes involved in feedback and feedforward motifs in gene regulation networks  <cit> . bimodal gene expression associated with switch-like regulation was shown to be a direct consequence of dna methylation at cis-regulatory sequences at least in the case of e-coli metabolic gene circuitry  <cit> . this observation is consistent with our finding that only a small number of transcription factors are bimodal and those transcription factors in turn only regulate a small portion of the remaining bimodal genes.

our study indicates that in a number of complex diseases such as diabetes type i and ii, the stable inheritance of the normal mode of expression in bimodal genes is compromised. for example, bimodal genes coding for collagen subunits are "low" rather than "high" in skeletal muscle for diabetes type i and ii relative to healthy samples. in addition, type ii diabetes has the fibronectin subunit gene "low" rather than "high" in the same tissue. perhaps, in compensation, collagen receptor cd <dig> becomes highly expressed in both diabetes types. our comprehensive list of bimodal genes in the mouse will be useful in identifying disease-phenotypic alterations in gene regulation in diseases such as cancer, hypertension and diabetes.

for the interest of assessing the diagnostic potential of switch-like genes as biomarkers, we compared our switch-like gene list with previously published lists of serum proteins and disease genes. mouse orthologs were obtained for serum proteins identified in the hupo ppp, including the  <dig> two-plus peptide list and  <dig> high-confidence lists  <cit> . we found that nearly a quarter of the high-confidence plasma proteins were bimodal. although these results may change as more accurate proteomic measurements are available, it indicates the potential of switch-like genes as biomarkers for the classification of disease subtypes.

we compared our list of bimodal genes with disease gene sets for mouse obtained from the rgd disease portal  <cit> . on the average, we identified that bimodal genes account for 15% of the genes within disease gene lists for congestive heart failure, alzheimer's disease, arteriosclerosis, breast neoplasms, cerebrovascular accident, hypertension, myocardial infarction, obesity, rheumatoid arthritis, and diabetes mellitus types i and ii. among these bimodal genes, 30% were serum protein encoding genes, suggesting their potential to serve as biomarkers.

CONCLUSIONS
this research identified a large set of mouse genes as switch-like by assembling and analyzing a large collection of microarray data encompassing diverse tissue types. genes with bimodal, switch-like control were shown to be enriched within the cell communication pathways and the extracellular environment. the modes of expression for a large majority of such genes were tissue-selective. moreover, a significant number of these switch-like genes switched between modes of expression in diabetic compared to healthy samples in a number of tissue types. these findings comprise an important first step in identifying altered states of gene switches in complex diseases such as hypertension, obesity and cancer.

bimodal expression implicates strong regulation at the transcript level. switch-like regulation can influence protein activity in cases where protein abundance parallels transcript level, as is observed with proteins such as cytokines  <cit> . bimodal gene expression provides a means for the cell to enable and disable pathway functions at the transcript level. genes with bimodal, switch-like control are involved in communication pathways that play crucial roles in determining cell phenotype through interaction with the extracellular environment in health and disease. because their expression is tightly regulated at the transcription level, they comprise a candidate set of biomarkers for a large number of disease states.

