BACKGROUND
while the recent boom in genome sequencing projects has provided a wealth of information about bacterial metabolism and evolution, we know little about interstrain variation. a firm understanding of the rates and sites of variation is useful in determining genotypic differences associated with phenotypic traits and in formulating control strategies for a number of pathogens. further, knowledge about the pan-genome of organisms will aid in determining the core genomic requirements, as well as shed more light on events that occur in the various environmental niches bacteria occupy.

most studies of bacterial diversity to date have either utilized specific genomic loci  <cit>  or have examined metagenomics of specific environmental niches  <cit> . while these types of studies help elucidate the extent of diversity, there is still a key component that has not yet been investigated – a measurement of diversity within bacterial species. obtaining a true measure of species diversity is difficult, as the strains selected for whole-genome sequencing are generally chosen to examine a particular phenotypic trait, subjecting any resultant measures of diversity to selection bias.

the level of interstrain diversity can have a significant impact on the direction of research. selection of pathogen strains for sequencing is typically based on differences in virulence  <cit> , host preference  <cit> , or tissue tropism  <cit> . using these selection criteria may artificially skew the level of diversity in the studied genome sequences, resulting in a biased level of diversity which does not accurately reflect the true genetic diversity of the species. however, since the diversity among strains has only been examined in a small number of species, determining if there is a skew is difficult. for example, analysis of several genome sequences of bacillus anthracis found a low number of single-nucleotide polymorphisms   <cit> , which led to development of other techniques for examining the epidemiology of outbreak strains  <cit> . b. anthracis is an example of a "closed core" genome – that is, after sequencing several strains , no strain-specific genes are added to the pan-genome  <cit> , which may be a result of a clonal population split of b. anthracis from b. cereus. thus, the closed-core genome may be the result of small evolutionary distance, and may be a rare finding for organisms with larger evolutionary distance. the alternative is an "open core" genome, where each new sequenced strain adds at least one unique gene to the pan-genome. this is exemplified by streptococcus agalactiae, which has approximately  <dig> new strain-specific genes for each additional genome sequenced, regardless of the total number of strains compared.

what influences the pan-genome? is the pan-genome content fixed, or does it drift with time? do all non-clonal populations have open-core genomes, or is this influenced by the environment a bacterium occupies? while answering all of these questions will require sequencing many more genomes, anaplasma marginale makes an excellent system for studying the last question for a number of reasons. a. marginale is a member of the order rickettsiales and a well-established obligate intracellular bacterial model. a. marginale is the most globally prevalent vector-borne pathogen of cattle, causing cyclic anemia, decreased production, and possibly death  <cit> . a previous genome sequence for the st. maries strain  <cit>  establishes that this organism has a small genome size due to reductive evolution, and is related to several other intracellular pathogens, including those in the genera anaplasma, ehrlichia, and rickettsia  <cit> . in addition, a. marginale has a number of characterized strains, with each strain defined by msp1α genotype  <cit> . while previous studies have utilized specific genes to examine differences between these strains  <cit> , no studies have examined the species diversity of a. marginale. a number of studies have described strains that vary in geographic location and phenotypic traits  <cit> , and these are available for determination of the true level of genetic diversity in this species, subsequent analysis of the status of core genes, and determination if these are correlated with the intracellular lifestyle, geographic location, tick-transmissible status, or other characteristics of these organisms.

to answer this question, we obtained genome sequences for four strains of a. marginale that have differing abilities to be transmitted by dermacentor andersoni, with each phenotype represented by at least two geographically distinct isolations. we sequenced the florida strain to completion using a bac-based clone by clone approach, and obtained high coverage genome sequence data for three additional strains. the resulting dna sequences were then analyzed and compared to both the previously sequenced st. maries genome  <cit> , as well as other bacterial species in the order rickettsiales. further, the genomes of several other non-rickettsial bacteria were examined with similar genome comparison techniques to determine if diversity and pan-genome content are related to pathogenicity or an intracellular lifestyle.

RESULTS
microbial genome diversity
previous studies  <cit>  have shown high levels of variation between the genomes of different strains of obligate intracellular bacteria. to compare the levels found in a. marginale to other genomes, similar comparisons were made for organisms meeting the following criteria: organisms with 1) a single chromosome, 2) more than one sequenced strain, and 3) assembled and finished genome sequences deposited in genbank, including free-living, facultative intracellular, and obligate intracellular bacteria . single-factor analysis of variance  finds no significant differences in the level of variation between obligate intracellular, facultative, and free-living bacteria. the number of snps ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> % of the larger genome, with significant intraspecies and intragenera variation.

general genome features and comparison of the st. maries and florida strains
the anaplasma marginale florida strain genome is composed of a single  <dig> , <dig> bp circular chromosome predicted to contain  <dig> coding sequences  . similar to most other previously sequenced anaplasmataceae, there are no plasmids and no identifiable insertion sequences. compared to the previously sequenced st. maries strain genome  <cit> , there are seven fewer cdss despite the larger genome size, due primarily to differences in split open reading frames  and annotation differences. the high degree of synteny between these two strains is disrupted by two inversions; one approximately  <dig> kb long is flanked by repeat elements , while the other is a single gene flanked by short duplicated hypothetical genes.

split orfs were first described in the rickettsia conori genome  <cit> , and are postulated to represent genes that are in the first stage of reductive evolution. the idea that these orfs have split recently is consistent with the findings in anaplasma, as different orfs are split in the two completely sequenced strains. the four split orfs annotated in the st. maries genome   <cit>  are intact in the florida genome, and two tandem genes annotated as hypothetical in the st. maries genome  are fused in the florida genome . only one split orf, peta, is found in the florida genome. four small orfs in the st. maries genome , ranging in size from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp are not present in the florida genome. these orfs are flanked by repetitive dna sequences, and appear to be missing due to recombination events.

genes mediating genome plasticity
the msp <dig> superfamily is a group of related a. marginale genes encoding surface proteins  <cit> . msp <dig> encodes a highly antigenic protein that varies over time during infection by gene conversion of functional pseudogenes into a single expression site, to create new antigenic variants capable of evading the existing immune response. compared to the st. maries genome, the florida genome has one additional msp <dig> functional pseudogene. of the eight florida msp <dig> functional pseudogenes, four are identical to those in the st. maries genome. the florida genome has two sets of duplicated functional pseudogenes, ttv 4f15/ttv 1o <dig> and kav 4f15/kav 1f <dig> ; while st. maries was found to have duplicated functional pseudogenes, this was not noted in a functional pseudogene-targeted examination of other strains  <cit> . florida has a set of duplicated functional pseudogenes in the same genome positions as st. maries . as obligate intracellular bacteria are not thought to undergo lateral gene transfer, identical functional pseudogenes indicates the sequence is either evolutionarily conserved or has been selected independently in both strains due to a fitness advantage. interestingly, both copies in florida have a change encoding  <dig> amino acids at the 5' end of the hypervariable region compared to their st. maries counterparts; either both strains duplicated a functional pseudogene after this change occurred in an ancestral strain, or both copies in one of the strains acquired identical changes after the ancestral strain duplicated the original functional pseudogene. in contrast, only two of the seven msp <dig> functional pseudogenes are identical between florida and st. maries . the omp1- <dig> genes are present in both genomes, with a high degree of conservation between the predicted amino acid sequences  as previously reported  <cit> .

aaap gene family
the aaap gene was first recognized and characterized as an anaplasma appendage associated protein  <cit> . subsequently, additional related genes were identified that appear to be tandemly-duplicated copies that have diverged to have relatively low levels of sequence identity . there is expansion of this locus in the florida strain relative to the st. maries strain, with a duplicated copy of the aaap gene. because of the repetitive nature of this gene family, these sequences tend to be missing from pyrosequenced genome assemblies; therefore, we examined the status of this locus in several the strains via southern analysis, revealing that this locus is highly plastic both within and between strains .

high density sequence coverage of additional strains
an additional two transmissible strains  and one non-transmissible strain  were subjected to genome-scale pyrosequencing  <cit>  , which provided at least 96% genome coverage when compared to either florida or st. maries . most of the missing sequences corresponded to repetitive regions   , and reflects the limitations of assembling short sequence reads  without additional scaffolding. no new genes were detected in the pyrosequenced contigs of any of the strains.

diversity of a. marginale strains
global comparison of all strains with the florida strain revealed  <dig>  total sites with a single nucleotide polymorphism  in at least one of the compared strains. of these,  <dig>  were different in the florida genome and identical in the other four strains, and  <dig>   were unique to one of the four strains . the remaining  <dig> % of snps represent those snps relative to florida that were present in two or three of the strains. there were  <dig>  snps between the florida and st. maries strains, comprising  <dig> % of the larger florida genome. the snps were distributed evenly throughout the genome, which is similar to both ehrlichia ruminantium and rickettsia bellii , and are proportionally distributed throughout coding and non-coding regions. the numbers of polymorphisms in the puerto rico, virginia, and mississippi strains  are minimums, as the gaps are regions predicted to have significant numbers of snps. when the genome size was corrected for the gaps in coverage, the snp rates for the puerto rico, virginia, and mississippi genomes were  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> % of the florida genome, respectively.

discussion
this study illustrates the dangers of drawing universal conclusions when strains are selected based on specific criteria, such as phenotypic differences. no two strains in this study are truly representative of the population as a whole. additionally, the large number of differences in pair-wise comparisons of any two strains illustrates the difficulty of associating genes with phenotypic differences, and the utility of sequencing multiple strains to increase the power of these associations. while our initial selection of the florida strain was based on a phenotypic difference – that of tick transmissibility, the selection of subsequent strains  were made to try and minimize the effect of bias based on that phenotype, as well as select a wider geographic range of isolates to increase interstrain diversity. interestingly, when the pyrosequenced strains are compared to florida, there are more high-quality polymorphisms  between florida and the mississippi strain, despite the fact that neither is tick-transmissible by d. andersoni  <cit> . further, st. maries appears to be an outlier sequence, as there are at least  <dig>  differences between st. maries and all other sequenced strains.

the level of snp diversity in these strains coupled with the high degree of gene content conservation also sheds an interesting light on the concept of the "core genome", described for streptococcus agalactiae  <cit> . for s. agalactiae, approximately  <dig> % of genes were considered part of the "core genome", or constant between strains, and each new strain added additional strain-specific genes to the "pan-genome". this is contrasted with bacillus anthracis, which had no new strain-specific genes after four strains were compared. the strains of a. marginale sequenced here present an interesting data point, as a. marginale has not been hypothesized to be a clonal population derived from another organism , and yet has a closed core genome. the accumulation of large numbers of snps might indicate a greater evolutionary distance; however, the closed-core genome could be due to other factors. these could include the isolated nature of the intracellular niche occupied by a. marginale, causing the organism to undergo reductive evolution to the point it is approaching the minimal gene complement, or may be, despite our efforts, related to the strains selected for sequencing. however, if this is due to long-term reductive evolution, it calls into question the source of the six split orfs between the florida and st. maries genomes, as these are thought to be early reductive changes. another possibility is that transmission of the organism among animals in a relatively restricted geographic area  promotes a relatively clonal population of organisms through isolation in a similar environment.

analysis of the level of snp diversity in several bacterial genomes brings into question previous conclusions about the variability of obligate intracellular pathogens. previous studies  <cit>  have found relatively large numbers of snps between intracellular organisms. it was therefore hypothesized that the relatively isolated intracellular niche limits opportunities for genetic exchange and increased numbers of snps provides a compensatory mechanism for providing diversity to drive evolution. our results suggest this is unlikely, as there is no correlation between intracellular, facultative intracellular, and free-living organisms and the level of diversity. with few exceptions, there is a large range in the degree of variability in all the strains compared. additionally, the organisms with the two highest rates of variability, pseudomonas syringae and rhodopseudomonas palustris, are both free-living. there is also significant variation at the genus and family level. these data suggest that the factors for retention of snps leading to bacterial diversity are likely multifactorial and complex.

while the composition of the gene content of the pan-genome is obviously important, this study reveals another characteristic that needs examination: the level of diversity in the pan-genome. the minimum of  <dig>  variable sites found among these five genomes is approximately  <dig> % of the estimated size of the pan-genome. the large number of unique snps in each strain  suggests that while a. marginale has a closed core genome, the snp profile of the core genome is moderately "open". when several strains of streptococcus agalactiae  are compared to the  <dig> vr strain,  <dig> % of the  <dig>  total detected snps are unique to an individual strain, while zero snps are common to all four strains. similarly, 100% of snps between three strains of bacillus anthracis  and mycobacterium tuberculosis ,  <dig> % of snps between three strains of neisseria meningitides , and  <dig> % of snps between four strains of chlamydophila pneumoniae  are unique to one strain. this suggests that these genomes have open snp profiles regardless of being open or closed-core at the genome level. further, there is no correlation between snp diversity and lifestyle, with high levels of variation between strains and within genera, with limited exceptions. however, given that the majority of strains were selected based on phenotypic traits or previous work with each strain, it is unlikely that this represents the true diversity of these organisms. additionally, the majority of organisms have only two sequenced strains, making analysis of variation within a species impossible to determine. additional work will be required to build a picture of genomic diversity.

the genome of a. marginale is highly recombinogenic, which, in spite of the highly conserved gene content, leads to increased plasticity. there are between five and nine functional msp <dig> pseudogenes in the strains examined to date  <cit> , and these can recombine in whole or in part into the msp <dig> expression site  to generate new antigenic variants  <cit> . symmetrical inversions around the origin are thought to be quite common in bacteria  <cit>  and have been noted in anaplasmataceae, often utilizing repeated genes such as msp <dig> to mediate the inversion. these inversions are highlighted by comparisons between a. marginale and ehrlichia ruminantium  <cit>  and anaplasma phagocytophilum  <cit> . many of these repetitive sequences flank ori, as does another duplicated gene, rho. while not around the origin, a smaller scale inversion was found between two strains of a. marginale flanked by msp <dig> pseudogenes close to ori. another highly plastic genomic region is the aaap locus  <cit>  that appears to be expanding and contracting within and between strains. in addition to changes in gene number, the sequences are highly variable . further research will be needed to determine the significance of these differences, as well as the function of this locus.

CONCLUSIONS
sequencing of multiple strains of bacteria, as well as sequencing multiple isolates from the same strain, will yield a tremendous amount of information about natural rates of variation in bacterial populations, which in turn will influence our views of bacterial evolution, epidemiology, and vaccine strategies. this study reveals that interstrain snp diversity does not appear to be influenced by the environmental niche an organism occupies, nor is it generally consistent throughout a specific family or genera. comparison of multiple strains of a. marginale finds few changes at the gene level, while there is robust diversity at the nucleotide level. finally, multistrain snp analysis appears to be a more powerful tool for a. marginale phylogenetic studies than genotyping of the major surface proteins  <cit> , and this strategy should be useful for epidemiologic studies of other species of bacteria.

