BACKGROUND
metagenomic studies generate a massive amount of sequence information of communities of organisms living in different physicochemical conditions. this allows, for the first time, to search for the molecular and genetic basis of adaptation through the comparison and the study of genomes of different species sharing the same environment, and of similar species living in different conditions. the comparative studies of the potential protein content in many of these datasets have already provided interesting examples of specific functions that correlate with specific characteristics of the environment. for example, in the search of functional fingerprints related to specific habitats, a comparative analysis between soil, and deep and superficial aquatic environments found abundant orthologous groups specific of these particular habitats
 <cit> . in this case, the examination of higher order processes reveals differences in energy production between these three niches, such as starch and sucrose metabolism in soil or photosynthesis in oligotrophic surface waters
 <cit> .

more recently, metagenomic studies have gone beyond the sequencing of dna and the counting of genes, and have incorporated techniques and protocols to detect, measure and analyze their transcriptome. while the sequencing of metagenomes provides an overview of the genes present in specific environments that can potentially play a role in adaptation, the analysis of expression provides a more precise picture of what functions are expressed and active in a particular moment of the environment. even though the techniques for mrna isolation and sequencing from metagenomic samples are still not able to provide comprehensive pictures of expression profiles, there have been important progresses in this direction and some interesting findings. for example, one of the first studies of metatranscriptome, despite it covered a small fraction of the expressed genes, identified specific biological processes active in bacterioplankton communities that could be correlated with either marine or freshwater conditions
 <cit> . as the coverage and accuracy of these analysis increased , more active processes have been linked to variable environmental conditions. for instance, an expression time-series performed on microbial communities living in surface oceanic showed that processes of energy production were active in hours with light, while anabolic housekeeping processes were predominant during the night
 <cit> . despite the underlying methodology behind, metatranscriptomics still needs to overcome several challenges
 <cit> . but the rapid progress in this field is promising and we will soon have the opportunity of building accurate expression profiles and compare them across environments, as well as exploring the interaction of processes of different organisms within specific environments.

in the present study we have conducted a novel approach that complements and bridges metagenomic and metranscriptomic concepts. the rationale behind this study relies on the hypothesis that the regulation of the expression of those biological functions that confer adaptation to variable environmental conditions will show higher complexity, i.e. they will have complex regulatory regions.

previous studies
 <cit>  have shown that genes with complex regulation requirements show higher number of transcription factor binding sites  in their upstream cis-regulatory regions compared to housekeeping genes. for example, stress-response genes in yeast need a precise regulation of their expressions patterns to adapt to drastic changes of environmental conditions and also show a significantly higher number of different tfbss in their upstream regulatory regions. beyond the extensive analysis of the regulatory characteristics of particular functions
 <cit> , up to now, there are not global approaches and studies on how the regulatory potential of entire microbial communities is influenced and organized in natural habitats.

in particular, and using the same rationale, we have measured and compared the complexity of gene regulation in bacteria and archaea living in environments with distinct underlying physico-chemical conditions. for that purpose, we searched within each of the environments for specific functional signatures predicted to have high regulatory potential. these are correlated with specific and also dynamic physico-chemical stress factors of each of the niches. the functional significance of the differences detected highlights the existence of adaptation strategies that rely on the regulatory potential of regions that control the expression of specific fitness genes.

RESULTS
with the ultimate goal of identifying and characterizing the extend, to which environmental factors influence the organization of the regulatory potential of particular microbial communities, we have studied and compared the regulome of three fundamentally different ecological niches using whole metagenomic data. we next provide details on the major results and findings of this study:  the development of a new pipeline for the identification and prediction of proximal regulatory regions and their tfbs from metagenomic data;  and the generation of a collection of regulatory regions from three well studied and reference metagenomic samples . the comparative analysis of this data has shown that, while  the overall distribution of tfbs on promoters is the same across environments, their distribution across their functional space is significantly different, as  promoters with higher number of tfbs tend to regulate environment specific functions, and  a fraction of these are environment specific and can be linked to characteristic external physicochemical factors .

identification and classification of proximal regulatory regions from metagenomic data
we first characterized and analyzed the gene regulatory space from metagenomic data obtained from three well-known sequenced environments with clearly different physico-chemical properties: whale fall community, acid mine and waseca county farm soil
 <cit> . for that, we started by identifying and defining gene regulatory regions to later characterize them, as to their levels of tf binding, i.e. their regulatory potential. for the design of a search strategy, we followed two major considerations: first  avoiding biases in favor of most abundant and well-known bacteria , as well as,  ensuring an equal coverage through all the phyla detectable in those samples. as a result, we developed a pipeline that consists of two major steps:  first the identification of proximal regulatory regions and then, within each of them,  the prediction of potential regulatory transcription factor binding sites. the complete pipeline is detailed in the methods and summarized graphically in figure 
 <dig> figure  <dig> 
computational pipeline generated for the identification and characterization of proximal regulatory regions from metagenomic data. the figure summarizes the methods used and results obtained in each step of the study.



through extensive homology searches, our procedure identified putative proximal regulatory regions in waseca farm soil, in acid mine drainage, and in the whale falls sample . a first and basic taxonomical analysis of these sequences shows that these promoters cover all phyla  that were previously described in these environments
 <cit> .

next, we estimated the level of regulatory potential for each of these promoter regions through the prediction of their transcription factor binding sites. in order to minimize possible biases favoring promoters from well-studied bacteria , we did not consider tfbss prediction strategies that rely on the homology mapping of described tfbss. instead, we used a de novo prediction protocol that relies on the identification of palindromic repeats
 <cit> , which have been previously determined as preferred binding sites for transcription regulators in bacteria and archaea
. because this method was originally developed for the analysis of single genomes
 <cit>  and, although it has been applied to a wide variety of bacterial sequences and studies
, we needed to adapt it to cope with the heterogeneity and redundancy of metagenomic data by including some modification in the scoring system.

evaluation of predicted promoters and tfbss
like any other de novo prediction method in sequence analysis, we have to initially assume the presence of false positive tfbs models among correct predictions. to assess for the reliability of all of our predictions and to put our strategy and results into the context of our goals and of the current knowledge about regulatory regions in prokaryotes, we performed different quantitative and qualitative comparisons with available independent data and methodologies.

from a quantitative point of view, we  first observed that the global average of  <dig> tfbs per promoter  that we identify from all three environments is in agreement with previous estimates obtained with different bacterial species and methodologies. for example, using genome comparative analysis, an average of 11– <dig> tfbs motifs per promoter was found for shewanella <cit> . in addition, a study of the transcription regulatory network of e. coli k <dig> predicted up to  <dig> sites per promoter
 <cit> , and up to  <dig> through the identification of half-sites motifs
 <cit> .  we also evaluated the performance of our methodology by comparing our results with those obtained with an independent method, motifclick, that predicts cis-regulatory regions using a graph-based polynomial-time algorithm
 <cit> . after running both predictors over intergenic e. coli regions, we observed that the densities of tfbs resulting from one or the other strategy showed high correlation values .

from a qualitative point of view, we first  assessed the biological significance of our predictions by carrying out a randomization test consisting in applying the same prediction pipeline to our collection of promoters with their nucleotide sequence completely shuffled, i.e. with no biological information. we observed that the distributions of the number of motifs per promoter were significantly different between the real and the randomized sample .  furthermore, we screened for coincidences between our predicted tfbss and those reported in the regprecise database
 <cit> , which consist on manually curated site reconstructions in various bacteria genomes. this comparison showed that 28% of our predicted binding sites include, at least, one possible binding sequence of the matrices for each of the  <dig> tfs included in regprecise .  finally, we also searched for a particular type of false predictions, which consist on regulatory palindromic repeats with no binding potential, named clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
 <cit> . the results that we obtained using the crisprfinder web tool
 <cit>  showed a negligible amount of these regions , which were subsequently removed from the analysis.figure  <dig> 
distribution of regulatory regions predicted per each environments analyzed in this study according to their content of tfbss. solid lines represent the distributions of tfbs obtained using real data, whereas dashed lines show predictions using randomized dna sequences, i.e. with no biological information. three major groups of regulatory potential are also shown: low, medium and high, which corresponds to the three bins analyzed in additional file 1: figure s <dig> 



in summary, all these evaluation tests suggest that our set of promoters is both, quantitatively and qualitatively reliable, as they show a significant fraction of reported tfbs, and a small portion of false positives. but, most importantly, the presence of this small fraction of false positives is not expected to affect our final conclusions, as these come from comparisons within and between environments and do not rely on absolute tfbss counts.

functional organization of regulatory potentials within each environment
we then studied how microbial communities living in these environments organize and distribute their regulatory potential through the different biological functions and to which extend this could obey to specific adaptation needs. it is interesting to observe that, whereas the range of density of predicted sites per promoter is wide within each of the environments, the overall distribution and the averages are similar:  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig>   for acid mine drainage, waseca farm soil and whale falls samples, respectively . this indicates that, although these three environments present  different sequence coverage,  different physicochemical characteristics and  different species composition, the overall regulatory potential, as to the total number of different tfbs, and their distribution across the promoters follow a similar pattern.

to go beyond simple counts and to explore whether or not this regulatory potential is distributed equally through all the functions of each of the metagenomes, we first identified the functions under the control of our collection of proximal regulatory regions. for this, we assigned to each promoter the functional category 
 <cit>  of the corresponding downstream coding region using megan
 <cit>  see . we first investigated whether the regulatory potential is organized differently over the functional space of each of the environments. for this, we ranked all promoters of each sample according to their tfbs density and count, for each density group, how many associated functions are specific of that particular environment, or co-occur in one or in the other two samples. this analysis showed significant differences between promoters. interestingly, the functions under the control of promoters with high number of tfbss show significantly less co-occurrences between environments, than those regulated by promoters with lower regulatory potential. the fact that promoters with high density of tfbs are enriched in environment specific functions provides the first hint that processes that require complex regulation might provide adaptation to environment specific variable external factors. . we expect that a large fraction of functions that showed a higher co-occurrence among environments likely correspond to housekeeping roles.

to study this further, we next investigated which functions are specifically enriched among the highly regulated ones in each of the environments. for this, we zoomed into the fraction of the 33% highest regulated promoters  and subdivided it further into subgroups covering the  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> top percentages of tfbs density, to finally analyze the functional enrichments within each of them. this analysis highlighted different enriched functions in each of the environments , s <dig> , s <dig> ). these enriched functions cover different types of processes, the majority of them involved in sensing and buffering external factors, such as, receptors and transporters in acid mine and stress response systems in whale falls.

potential environment-gene regulation relationships
in order to finally highlight potential points of interaction between highly regulated functions that could provide adaptation to variable conditions specific to each of the environments, we first selected for each habitat, those functions that show stronger enrichment, i.e. with pvalue <  <dig> , among the top  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 20% groups and with clear orthologous functions in the other two samples. this subgroup of functions include , which we then compared among environments and evaluated their relationship with the niche specific variable factors. for this, we carried out extensive literature searches on different biochemical mechanisms of adaptation guided by these functions and the characteristics of the environment. despite the limited information about the environment physico-chemical factors characteristic of available metagenomic studies, we propose in the following sections potential adaptive scenarios by correlating highly regulated functions with known variable external factors in each of the environments.

waseca farm soil
in waseca farm soil, carbohydrates metabolism related functions appear as highly regulated, more precisely di and oligosaccharides metabolism  =  <dig> × 10− <dig> for fisher’s exact test between groups). this fact could be in concordance with the fluctuations in organic matter concentrations in the soil, such as, plant debris, which has also been previously proposed as an explanation for the presence of other carbohydrate metabolism functions specific of this environment
 <cit> . this further agrees with the behavior observed in lower eukaryotes abundant in soil, like yeast, where high complexity in their transcriptional regulation were found upstream of genes that play a role in carbohydrates metabolism
 <cit> ; and with the fact that, in this niche, the upstream region of the frur gene, a known tf that regulates carbohydrate metabolism, appears as highly regulated, with the highest number of predicted tfbs .

whale falls samples
a different scenario is observed in whale fall where, even though each of the subsamples were collected in a specific moment of decomposition from two different whales and at different depths, they all share similar general physico-chemical patterns, predominating the drastic fluctuations of nutrient availability
 <cit> . in agreement of what would be expected for microorganisms living in these kind of environments, most of the highly regulated functions that are enriched in whale falls samples are related to adaptation capabilities to starving periods . particularly, we found tfbs rich promoters upstream of genes that are involved in cell cycle and growth, i.e. the control of basic macromolecular synthesis operon. this is in contrast to what happens in waseca and acid mine, where the same functions present lower density of tfbss .figure  <dig> 
box-plots showing the tfbss density per promoter related to highly regulated process in acid mine, waseca soil and whale falls samples. the * indicates pvalue ≤  <dig> , and the ** indicates pvalue ≤  <dig>   between the groups where the line is drawn. the numbers and functions listed at the right side represent the genes with highest regulatory potential. their respective positions in the box-plot obey to their average level of regulation in a particular environment. in the x axis, are written the parental  and specific enriched group of functions  according to seed classification.



moreover, bacterial communities living in cold water are also exposed to high concentrations of oxidant reagents
 <cit>  causing an increase in the metabolic costs associated with the activation of antioxidant defenses. in fact, functions related with the response to oxidative stress appear specifically enriched in this environment compared to others. these functions comprise, for example, the hydrogen peroxide-inducible gene activator and a hem and copper containing membrane protein , that needs to respond to external no concentrations. additionally, parts involved in the machinery that protects genomic dna during prolonged non-growing phases
 <cit> , like the non-specific dna binding protein , also appear as highly regulated in this niche.

it has been also pointed before, that the uptake and metabolisms of cofactors and amino acids are particularly variable in marine environments, essential to adapt to typical oceanic oligotrophic conditions
 <cit> . in agreement with this, cofactor metabolism related functions are also enriched  ≤  <dig> ). in particular, we found enrichment for enzymes involved in the metabolism of molybdenum cofactors, pterin and folate . these findings were further confirmed by the overrepresentation of tyrr and argr binding sites in this niche, both known to be tfs involved in the control of amino acid transport for the synthesis of proteins .

acid mine
the acid mine is characterized by extreme physico-chemical conditions, showing low ph records and fluctuating temperature, conductivity and rainfall 
 <cit> . among the functions with high regulatory potential that appear enriched in this niche are those known to play a role in the adaptation to changes in external osmolarity, typical of environments with variable distribution of rainfall across the year
 <cit>  . it is worth mentioning the high regulatory potential of some genes related to the tonb transport system , which are also involved in avoiding toxicity by keeping metal homeostasis inside the cell
 <cit> , in particular of iron. the high regulatory potential of the tonb-dependent receptor and the iron chelator utilization protein  might provide homeostasis  to acid mine bacteria living under variable ferric concentrations, which is further confirmed by the fact that a significant fraction of homeostasis-related promoters could be assigned to leptospirillum  . in addition, we found overrepresentation of binding sites for lexa transcription factor in this niche , and, specifically in ton and tol transport systems related promoters . lexa transcription factor is known to be involved in the response to dna damage and external ph fluctuations
 <cit> . in fact, when we evaluated the fraction of binding sites shared between two members of the ton and tol system , we found a high number of coincidences for other sites besides lexa  .figure  <dig> 
example of the relationship between environmental factors and organization of regulatory potential in acid mine. a) seasonal variation in ph, conductivity and iron concentration across the year. the left panel represents samples from “uba” and right panel represents the samples collected from “5way” . b) tfbss found in the promoters which regulate ton and tol transport system genes. the left panel shows a graphic illustrating the regulatory potential related to ton and tol transport system in acid mine . the promoters are grouped by function and species . each bar in the graphic represents a promoter and, the red color in the bars indicates that the number of sites per promoter is equal or more than fifteen. below are represented the most abundant palindromic sites found in those promoters, some of them corresponding to known tf, such as, lexa, modr, agar, etc. the right panel represents a network of tfbss shared between promoters of tonb dependent receptor and iron chelator utilization protein; both proteins are represented by white circles. the tfbss are represented by colored circles with size proportional to the number of sites found.



taken together, the fact that highly regulated functions are not the same between the different environments agrees with previous metatranscriptome studies
 <cit>  and indicates that the organization of the regulatory potential between the functional space of each niche is different and influenced by the environmental physico-chemical conditions. this could reflect organism-environment interaction points where gene regulation should be able to provide enough plasticity to the functional network for the adaptation to variable external parameters.

CONCLUSIONS
we have here studied how variable physico-chemical conditions of the environment can shape the regulome of microbial communities living there to provide adaptation. we have combined existing and novel methodologies and applied it to three environments  to identify and characterize, for the first time, their regulatory space, i.e. proximal promoters and their corresponding tfbss. taking the density of tfbss as a measure of the level of regulatory potential, we first observed that, despite the differences of the living conditions of each of the environments studied here, their distribution of the regulatory potential, at quantitative level, appears to be nearly identical. however, when we went beyond simple counts we observed that the associated cellular functions in different groups related to the regulatory potential tend to be environment specific. this supports our hypothesis and expectation that point to a role of gene regulation in the adaptation of organisms to particular and variable external factors. also in this direction, we have found specific functional enrichments among highly regulated functions in each of the metagenomas, suggesting potentials interaction points between gene regulation and dynamic environmental conditions. in particular, we have identified points of interaction between signatures of significant functional enrichment and specific characteristics of the marine and terrestrial environments. these results highlight the impact of gene regulation in the adaptation of microbes to their habitat. beyond contributing to the general understanding of how wild bacterial communities interact with the environment, our methodology can also be used to identify potential external factors to which bacteria are particularly sensitive in order to design efficient communities for therapeutic, or ecological needs.

