BACKGROUND
in this study we investigated the hypothesis that the control of spatial attention is influenced by hemispheric utilization bias, a characteristic bias of individuals to utilize one hemisphere more than the other for information processing  <cit> . spatial selective attention is commonly thought to be mediated by a network in which attentional control systems based in prefrontal and posterior parietal areas modulate processing in perceptual areas  <cit> . each of the cerebral hemispheres contains a set of mechanisms for attentional control and perceptual representation  <cit> , which may be capable of operating independently in the intact brain  <cit> . these hemispheric attention systems appear to have mutually inhibitory biases that compete to direct attention to contralateral space, with the left hemisphere  having a stronger and/or more focused intrinsic bias than the right hemisphere   <cit> .

evidence for interhemispheric attentional competition comes from studies showing asymmetrical gradients in spatial attention in healthy individuals  <cit> , split-brain patients  <cit> , and neglect patients  <cit> . also in neglect patients, disruption of the contralesional hemisphere by a subsequent stroke  <cit>  or transcranial magnetic stimulation   <cit>  can cause recovery from neglect symptoms, consistent with the lesioned hemisphere being released from inhibition by the contralesional hemisphere. furthermore, in healthy individuals, reduction of the excitability of the parietal cortex in one hemisphere by tms can lead to an increase in subjects' ability to attend to ipsilateral stimuli  <cit> . together, these lines of evidence point to the focus of spatial attention being influenced by mutually competitive hemispheric attention systems.

hemispheric utilization bias appears to represent another, largely unexplored type of interhemispheric competition. individuals appear to have a characteristic and consistent bias to utilize one hemisphere more than the other for processing information. a reliable finding from many studies addressing the issue of between-subject variance on laterality tasks has been that the major source of this variability is not random measurement error nor variability in hemispheric specialization. rather, a significant source of variation comes from characteristic biases that individuals possess for consistently utilizing one hemisphere more than the other for processing information  <cit> .

for example, levine and colleagues  <cit>  tested individuals in three perceptual recognition tasks with bilateral stimulus presentations using words, faces, and pictures of chairs. as a group, the participants demonstrated a right visual field /lh advantage on the word task, a left visual field /rh advantage on the face task, and no visual field advantage on the chair task, as was expected. yet individuals differed with respect to the size and direction of these advantages. levine et al. found that individuals' asymmetry scores on the tasks were correlated, such that participants with a rvf/lh advantage on the chair task had a larger-than-average rvf/lh advantage on the word task, and a smaller-than-average lvf/rh advantage on the face task. hence, across all tasks these individuals were biased to utilize their lh more than average across all tasks. the reverse pattern was found for participants with a lvf/rh advantage on the chair task. the common factor affecting a given individual's performance on the three tasks is what we call here hemispheric utilization bias . when the inter-subject variability due to hemispheric utilization bias is taken into account, the pattern of hemispheric specialization across a population of individuals is consistent with that predicted by studies of neurological patients  <cit> . thus, hemispheric utilization bias is stable within an individual but variable across individuals.

levy and colleagues  <cit>  proposed that hemispheric utilization bias induces a characteristic bias to direct attention to the side of space contralateral to the more activated hemisphere, which leads to enhanced processing of information in the contralateral field regardless of the nature of the stimulus. thus, it seems plausible that individuals' hemispheric utilization biases could interact with the intrinsic attentional biases of the hemispheres.

in the present study we investigated this hypothesis, predicting that the intrinsic attentional bias of a hemisphere to the contralateral side of space would be enhanced when an individual is also biased to utilize that same hemisphere. competition between the hemispheres in attentional control was assessed using a bilateral version of the eriksen flankers task  <cit> , in which participants responded to target stimuli in the attended hemifield while ignoring a simultaneous flanking distractor in the opposite hemifield . flanker items could be compatible  or incompatible . the attended hemifield was varied across blocks.

we expected that the effect of the flanker would be larger when presented to the hemisphere for which an individual has a utilization bias, compared to when the it was presented to the opposite hemisphere. furthermore, this effect would be modulated by the greater strength of the lh's intrinsic bias compared to the rh. in particular, we predicted that lh-biased individuals would show the largest flanker effects when they attended to target items in the left visual field  and tried to ignore flankers in the right visual field , for which they would have a strong attentional bias. hemispheric utilization bias was measured using the chimeric faces test  .

studies of neglect and extinction patients have found evidence that stimuli presented to each hemisphere are processed to a post-identification level without reaching awareness, suggesting that interhemispheric attentional competition occurs at a late stage of processing  <cit> . therefore, we focused the present investigation on the n2c component of the erp, rather than on early sensory components such as the p <dig> and n <dig> that reflect the spatial distribution of early selective attention processes  <cit> . the n2c is elicited by stimuli that are associated with response conflict, such as a "no-go" stimulus in a "go/no-go" task  <cit> , or by stimulus displays containing response-incompatible distractors, as in flanker  <cit>  or stroop tasks  <cit> . n2c amplitude is related to the degree of response conflict on correct-response trials  <cit> , even when no overt signs of response conflict are present, suggesting that this component may reflect both the detection and suppression of incorrect response information  <cit> . the n2c is maximal at midline fronto-central sites with a peak around 200– <dig> ms post-stimulus in tasks with simple stimuli. source localization studies suggest that the n2c may be generated in the anterior cingulate cortex, similar to the error related negativity  <cit> .

RESULTS
the behavioral data are presented in fig.  <dig>  and the erp data in figs.  <dig> and  <dig>  as is typical in an oddball paradigm, rare stimuli compared to frequents were associated with higher error rates, slower reaction times , and elicited larger n <dig> and p <dig> components , so these effects will not be discussed further. we focused our analyses on the responses elicited by compatible and incompatible rares, which are matched for stimulus probability.

as shown in fig.  <dig>  incompatible rares elicited more errors than compatible rares . this difference was larger in the attend-lvf condition than in attend-rvf , and the attention × flanker interaction was statistically significant for the lh-bias group but not the rh-bias group . planned comparisons confirmed these effects. thus, lh-biased individuals were more likely to make an error on rare trials when a response-incompatible flanker was presented to their biased hemisphere. in the rt data, the overall attention × flanker interaction approached significance , but the group × attention × flanker interaction was not significant .

as predicted, incompatible rare stimuli elicited a larger n2c component  than compatible rares only in the attend-lvf condition for the lh-bias group . direct comparison of the responses for the lh-bias group confirmed that incompatible rares elicited larger n2s than compatible rares in attend-lvf , but there was no difference in attend-rvf . for the rh-bias group there was no interaction between attention and flanker compatibility .

inspection of the waveforms in fig.  <dig> suggests that the p <dig> component , which peaks before the n2c, shows a complementary pattern of differences between compatible and incompatible rares across the two attention conditions: the p <dig> is increased rather than decreased in amplitude for compatible rares compared to incompatible rares. for the p <dig>  the group × attention × flanker interaction approached significance , and the attention × flanker interaction was significant for the lh-bias group  but not the rh-bias group . for the lh-bias group, there was a trend for p <dig> amplitude to be larger for compatible relative to incompatible rares in attend-lvf , and p2s elicited by incompatible rares were significantly larger than compatible rares in attend-rvf . the marginal p <dig> effect in the attend-lvf condition may reflect overlap with the n2c, especially given the similar topography of the effects , but the p <dig> effect in attend-rvf is harder to interpret. the p <dig> is seldom reported to be modulated by spatial attention, and to our knowledge, has not been reported to be modulated by response compatibility. at this point, we can only speculate that the attend-rvf p <dig> effect could be due to a registration of the incompatible flanker at a perceptual, rather than response-related level.

since we found relationships between hemispheric utilization bias and some of the dependent variables, we investigated whether individual differences in these measures might be related. non-parametric spearman's correlation coefficients  were computed between cft score, the attend-lvf error rate effect , and the attend-lvf n2c effect  separately for each group. for the lh-bias group, cft score and the error rate effect were significantly correlated , indicating that the greater the degree of lh bias, the more the individuals were influenced by conflicting items presented to their lh. for the rh-bias group, a negative correlation between cft score and error rate approached significance . no other correlations with cft score were found.

discussion
when attending to the lvf, the lh-bias group made more errors when the flanker presented to their biased hemisphere conflicted with the target item in the opposite visual field. the size of this effect was correlated with the degree of lh utilization bias as measured by the cft. furthermore, on correct trials, incompatible rare arrays elicited larger n2c components than compatible rare arrays, indicating that the conflict between the flanker and target reached a late, response-related stage of processing. taken together, these data suggest that when lh-biased individuals focus attention in the lvf, they still attend at some level to items in the task-irrelevant rvf because of their hemispheric utilization bias.

flanker compatibility had a much stronger effect on error rate than rt for the rare arrays. the most likely explanation for this discrepancy is that the slowing of rt due to the low probability of the rares overrode the effects of flanker compatibility. in unpublished data, we have obtained flanker effects on rt using the same displays but with equal stimulus probabilities  <cit> . another possibility is that the manner in which individuals allocated attention between the visual fields varied across trials. on the majority of incompatible rare trials, the potency of the rvf flankers influenced processing  but ultimately not overt response production . however, on a sizable proportion of incompatible rare trials, the influence of the conflicting rvf flankers did reach the level of response production, leading to errors.

these data demonstrate that interhemispheric competition for the control of spatial attention can indeed be influenced by individual differences in hemispheric utilization. we predicted that when individuals have a lh utilization bias, it would augment the lh's already strong intrinsic attentional bias to the contralateral visual field. this enhancement of the lh's attentional bias would allow task-irrelevant information presented in the rvf to interfere with task-relevant lvf items. for the rh-bias group, however, no effects of interhemispheric attentional competition were detected for the corresponding set of conditions . this outcome may be due to the weaker intrinsic attentional bias of the rh to the contralateral side of space. further research is necessary to examine whether hemispheric utilization bias can influence attentional control by the rh.

the n2c data are consistent with the existence of a late locus of interhemispheric attentional competition, as demonstrated by behavioral studies  <cit> . the n2c results could also be interpreted in terms of the lh attempting to control response output, rather than as a failure to control spatial attention. such a proposal would be consistent with the evidence from split-brain patients for an interhemispheric "bottleneck" in response control  <cit> .

an important question to be examined in future studies is whether hemispheric utilization bias influences the early stages of spatial selective attention that are manifested by the p <dig> and posterior n <dig> components  <cit> . the present task was not well-suited to examine these early attention effects due to the bilateral stimulus displays, relatively small number of stimuli, and long stimulus onset asynchrony . the p <dig> and n <dig> attention effects are typically obtained in tasks involving unilateral displays  and hundreds of trials with rapid stimulus presentation . soa may be a particularly important factor, as we have found in unpublished data that as soa decreases, flanker compatibility effects also decrease. nevertheless, the examination of early spatial attention effects will be necessary to fully determine the mechanisms by which hemispheric attentional biases operate.

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides evidence that hemispheric utilization bias influences visuospatial attention at a late, response-related stage of processing, by enhancing a hemisphere's intrinsic contralateral attentional bias. these data are consistent with the hypothesis of kinsbourne  <cit>  that the cerebral hemispheres have mutually inhibitory and asymmetric biases to direct attention to contralateral space. the results of this study suggest that hemispheric utilization bias may play an important and largely unrecognized role in visuospatial attention.

