BACKGROUND
since their introduction in  <dig>  <cit> , dna-based microarrays  have driven an explosion in functional genomic analyses. all varieties of microarrays have in common the ability to perform binary comparisons of gene expression for a large number of genes simultaneously in a microchip format  <cit> .

in theory, biological changes should define the limitations of microarray technology, but unfortunately, technological issues have frequently limited the usefulness of microarray data. non-biological factors including printing artifacts, dye-gene interactions, background emissions, and slide-to-slide variations significantly reduce the ability to accurately monitor changes in gene expression in microarray experiments  <cit> . these experimental factors are common and often laboratory dependant due to the complicated multi-step procedures used in the production, hybridization, and analysis of microarrays. in attempts to minimize the effect of variability due to non-biological sources, a variety of statistical analyses  <cit> , normalization techniques  <cit> , and metrics for image quality  <cit>  have been proposed. however, all these analysis techniques have two assumptions: 1) that the only contributors to the signal within a printed spot are the labeled dna and a uniform background due to emission of the glass substrate and 2) that background fluorescence surrounding the spot is the same as background fluorescence under the spot, despite evidence that this assumption may not be valid  <cit> .

neither of these assumptions can be validated with current commercial microarray scanners. commercial scanners are univariate instruments; that is they use filters to pass all photons emitted in a specific wavelength range to a single point detector. this mode of operation can be fast, but it does not allow discrimination of photons by emission source. thus, it is not possible to distinguish two photons of the similar wavelength that arise from different emitting species if they are passed through the filter for that channel. many problems that plague microarrays  cannot be accurately assessed in data from filter-based microarray scanners due to this limitation and this can lead to erroneous data  <cit> .

to address these issues, we have developed a hyperspectral-imaging microarray scanner  <cit>  that allows the simultaneous quantification of all fluorescent species, including the spot-localized background leading to a significant improvement in the accuracy of microarray data. the hyperspectral scanner  coupled with multivariate data analysis provides in-depth understanding of the signal detected by traditional microarray scanners and can promote improvement in microarray technology and actually improve the quality of microarray data. the benefits of an additional dimension of spectral information for material science, cytogenetic, and histological applications  <cit>  and live-cell microscopy  <cit>  have been reviewed. however, until our report, hyperspectral imagers have not demonstrated the sensitivity or speed of commercial microarray scanners or the multivariate data analysis capabilities necessary to extract sufficient information from the complex data  <cit> . this paper presents the use of the hss and multivariate data analysis to understand three anomalies commonly seen in microarray data: skew toward the green channel, dye separation, and high, variable background signal. the unique capability of hss technology to identify and correct for the presence of these phenomena improves the reliability and accuracy of gene expression data.

RESULTS
hyperspectral imaging and multivariate data analysis
the hss we have developed is optimized for imaging printed dna microarrays and excites a sample with a single laser, typically at  <dig> nm, while recording the emission over a wavelength range from 550– <dig> nm in approximately  <dig>  nm increments to create a hyperspectral data cube . details of the optical design and characterization of this line-imaging system have been published elsewhere  <cit> . additional lasers are available and the wavelength range and spatial and spectral resolution are adjustable. the sensitivity and dynamic range of this hss is the same as or better than the commercial microarray scanners we have tested for dyes emitting in the green channel of commercial systems such as cy <dig>  <cit> . typically, red emitting dyes like cy <dig> are not optimally excited by our  <dig> nm laser, but based on its excitation spectrum, we are achieving ~5–8% excitation of cy <dig>  in comparison studies between an axon 4000b microarray scanner exciting cy <dig> with  <dig> nm light and the hss exciting cy <dig> with  <dig> nm light  the hss was found to be a factor of  <dig> less sensitive for cy <dig> than commercial microarray scanner. however, the signal acquired from cy <dig> is sufficient for quantitation by the multivariate algorithms. in addition, for the studies reported in this publication the focus is predominantly on the green channel emissions. in its current configuration the hss scanner operates at a slightly slower speed of data acquisition  but this disadvantage is compensated for by the more accurate quantification and increased specificity of the fluorescent signal, especially in the presence of contaminants. the ccd readout rate is the limiting factor in the current hss and newly available charge-coupled device  detector electronics could allow the hss to scan at speeds up to twice the speed of commercial scanners.

a typical hyperspectral data cube contains tens of thousands to millions of spectra and spectral and spatial relationships cannot be readily visualized . to reduce the data to a simpler representation of the important features, hss data are analyzed using multivariate curve resolution , a powerful factor analysis technique based on a constrained alternating least squares procedure  <cit> . mcr algorithms, when applied to fluorescence emission images, use correlations between variables to extract 1) representative pure-component spectra of the all the emitting species  and 2) independent concentration maps depicting the spatial location of these species and their relative concentrations from the highly overlapped spectral data . the mcr analysis assumes that the number of non-noise components is known or can be estimated and requires initial estimates to either the spectra or concentrations.

principal component analysis, a closely related and popular multivariate analysis technique for biological data  <cit> , typically provides an accurate determination of the number of non-noise components, but often cannot provide easily interpretable pure component spectra underlying complex spectral image data due to rotational ambiguity. for these studies involving microarray data, principal component analysis was used to determine the number of non-noise components and to provide initial estimates of the spectral shapes for the mcr algorithm to iterate upon. the application of non-negativity and equality spectral constraints within the mcr algorithms facilitates physically meaningful solution of spectral components. the benefits of mcr over more traditional univariate  and other multivariate  analysis methods include the ability to separate overlapping spectral emissions, discover the pure-component spectra with little or no information given a priori, and model unknown spectral contributions such as interferrents, backgrounds, and instrument artifacts. applications of mcr for vibrational spectroscopic data have been outlined in a recent review  <cit> . recently, members of our group have developed efficient, automated multivariate statistical analysis algorithms to analyze large x-ray hyperspectral image data using desktop computers  <cit> . we have optimized these algorithms for fluorescence image data from the hss  <cit> .

throughout this paper, emissions from within the area of the printed dna spots are referred to as spot-specific emissions and emissions that are not spot-specific are referred to as background emissions. also, ratio images generated by commercial microarray scanners are referred to as r/g  images and images generated by hss are referred to as cy5/cy <dig> images, because the commercial scanner image is constructed from the intensities in the red and green channels regardless of source, whereas the hss and data analysis produces true images of the cy <dig> and cy3-labeled cdna that are uncontaminated by emission from other species.

spot-localized emissions: skew to toward the green channel
earlier work has shown the presence of contaminant fluorescence in the green channel of many common types of microarray slides  <cit> . the hss was used to confirm the presence of the green contaminant in slides from a variety of laboratories  after hybridization. this contaminant is introduced to the slide during printing and can be recognized in the raw images as a variable, weak green channel signal that may be observed in all spots. in our investigations we examined slides from at least three laboratories printed using dmso printing methods and did not identify a green contaminant in any of the spots on these slides.

gtotal = gcy <dig> + gglass + gcont    eq. 1

commercial filter-based microarray scanners will confound signal from a spot-localized green contaminant with signal from the labeled cdna and glass substrate in the green channel. this is because the green signal intensity recorded for a pixel with a spot-localized green contaminant is the sum of all the green fluorescence intensities, including the glass emission , the contaminant , and the labeled hybridized cdna. this extra green intensity has no affect in the red channel and little effect on spots with high green channel signal, but contributes significantly to the signal from spots with weak and medium green-channel intensities. as illustrated in equation  <dig> data obtained from slides with spot-localized contaminating fluorescence will report green channel intensities that are falsely high  unfortunately the effect of spot-localized contaminant emission cannot be corrected in commercial scanner microarray data using standard background correction procedures that estimate background signal for a spot from the signal around the spot and thus it leads to errors in the calculated expression ratios . the detrimental effect of the contaminant decreases with increasing green-channel intensities but can easily account for skews toward the green channel, dye-gene effects, unsuccessful dye-flip experiments, and highly variable low intensity data observed in many microarray experiments.

spot-localized emissions: dye separation
"dye separation" is a phenomenon referred to in the microarray literature as a ring of one color surrounding the other, typically red around green  <cit> . although this phenomenon is seen in published images, there is no satisfactory explanation for what causes the labeled cdna to hybridize with a dye-specific spatial pattern. other spatial patterns of hybridization, e.g., doughnuts and coffee rings are well documented, but spatial anomalies theoretically should affect both dyes within a spot to the same extent.

apparent dye separation was visible in some spots on the microarray slides we examined with the green contaminant. figure 4a shows a r/g ratio image from a typical spot exhibiting dye separation scanned on an axon 4000b scanner. from this image, the cy5-labeled cdna appears to have hybridized in a circle around the area where the cy3-labeled cdna hybridized. hss analysis revealed that the spot-specific signal was from three sources: cy5-labeled cdna, cy3-labeled cdna, and green contaminant. the individual concentration maps generated from the multivariate analysis of the hss image data demonstrate that, for this spot, the diameters of cy <dig> and cy <dig> hybridization are equal, although little cy <dig> is present . the contaminant emission, which is brighter than the cy <dig>  is present in a smaller diameter circle  and the result of this localization difference is a spot with a bright green center and a red ring on commercial scanners. this size difference most likely occurs because of differences in surface tension of the printed cdna and contaminant when drying or differences in charge of the cdna and contaminant. figure 4b shows an accurate cy5/cy <dig> image of this spot created from the hss concentration maps. the original axon data produced a ratio of cy5/cy <dig> medians of  <dig>  and ratio of cy5/cy <dig> means of  <dig>  while the more accurate hss data gives rise to ratios of medians and means of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, for this particular spot.

background emissions
in microarray experiments, mean or median intensities are calculated per spot to determine expression ratios. these spot intensity values are typically corrected for background emission using methods that subtract local or global estimates of background contributions. various background correction methods exist in data analysis software, but all of these methods make one critical assumption about the data – that the background emissions are the same outside the spot as they are under the spot. this assumption is valid in an ideal situation where a perfectly homogeneous glass slide is the sole source of background emissions and the printed dna spot is sufficiently thin and non-scattering so as not to interfere with the excitation of the glass beneath it. unfortunately this assumption is rarely valid. researchers have shown the results of microarray experiments are very dependant on background subtraction methods used and have theorized that local background values are not representative of the true background emission in a spot, leading to erroneous values and negative spot intensities  <cit> . options such as not correcting for background, using a global background value for every spot, or using negative control values as a background can be successful in some cases, but are not robust.

using the hss, we have explored background emissions on many printed microarrays spanning a variety of preparation protocols. the unique ability to identify and isolate all emission sources and model the background for each pixel directly from the spectra allows us to generate pure-concentration maps of the dyes of interest without contributions from background sources. in every microarray we have scanned  the background was different under the spot than around the spot. this difference can vary from a subtle decrease in intensity under the printed spot to a much more predominant intensity variation that seriously affects the accuracy of the data. understanding the background emissions is essential to ensuring that appropriate background correction techniques are used when scans are to be performed with commercial scanners. this increased understanding of background emissions also provides the feedback necessary to alter the preparation process to minimize the background emissions present on microarray slides.

two additional points should be noted about figure  <dig>  first, in the hss cy <dig> concentration map, cy <dig> is present both in and outside of the printed cdna spots. this is in contrast to the cy5-hss image, in which cy <dig> is absent from many spots. we have observed a slight spectral shift in the cy <dig> emission maximum under these conditions compared to other slides with successful cy <dig> hybridization, suggesting that the cy <dig> outside the spots may contain significant amounts of residual, unincorporated dye. cy <dig> and cy <dig> both exhibit a spectral shift in emission maxima upon incorporation into cdna. this effect is illustrated in additional file  <dig> 

additional file  <dig> compares the mcr extracted spectra from a spotted array containing only cy5-dctp in the spots and a second spotted array containing only cy5-cdna in the spots showing the effect the molecule cy <dig> is attached to can have on the emission maxima of cy <dig>  second, the hss image of the glass concentration shows another phenomenon: the glass intensity is lower under very bright spots  than outside of the spots. this difference is slight but consistent. we believe this is due to scattering or absorption of the laser light by the printed spot, decreasing the irradiance of the glass beneath the dna spot.

we also observed several microarrays with high background in smears across the slide.  in those cases, the spectra from the smears did not resemble cy <dig> or cy <dig>  but, instead, were from a green contaminant. the smears persist across the surface of the spot and contribute to additional signal intensity in the cy <dig> channel. no background correction method can adequately correct for this emission and unless the contribution from this contaminant is modelled and removed from the data, the analyzed microarray data will not be reliable.

CONCLUSIONS
the microarrays utilized in this study consisted of commercial preprinted slides or slides printed in-house using widely accepted techniques, and thus are representative of a wide cross-section of the microarrays currently employed in genomic research. the results presented in this paper demonstrate that three common anomalies cited in the microarray literature can be explained by extraneous emission sources, reinforcing the urgent need for careful attention to detail to recognize the presence of extraneous emissions that reduce accuracy of existing microarray data.

our work illustrates the impact hyperspectral scanning can have on the accuracy and reliability of genomic data. hyperspectral imaging, together with multivariate data analysis, is a critical tool for understanding and characterizing the sources of microarray emissions after hybridization. our state-of-the-art hss and multivariate algorithms permit the simultaneous identification and quantification of contaminant and background emissions in microarrays, thus markedly improving the reliability and accuracy of these data. using these tools, we can obtain accurate concentration maps that are corrected for the effect of contaminant emissions. perhaps more importantly, this approach provides the capability to quantify the extent and contribution of extraneous emission sources to the signal, the consequences of failing to account for them, and the insight necessary to adjust preparation protocols to prevent such problems from occurring. the utility of the hss technology coupled with multivariate data analysis is not limited to microarrays, but could improve the understanding of data from a variety of applications based of fluorescence imaging and microscopy. in addition to providing more accurate measurements, the hss also has potential to increase the throughput and improve analysis of microarray experiments by providing quantitation of multiple overlapping dyes. future work will demonstrate this capability with microarrays and multiple fluorescence imaging applications.

