BACKGROUND
the term “pheromones” was first introduced by karlson and lüscher  to describe the substances involved in chemical communication among conspecifics  <cit> . pheromones can be classified as releasers, primers, or more recently, signalers and modulators  <cit> . these functions are not mutually exclusive. primer pheromones are exemplified by their effects on the onset of puberty, the length of estrous cycles in females, the success or failure of pregnancy, and shifts in hormone levels in mice  <cit> . male pheromones have a direct impact on female sexual desire, menstrual cycles and ovulation in humans  <cit> . about 20% of women who have smelled male underarm secretions have an advanced onset of next luteinizing hormone  pulse  <cit> . these primer pheromones are all putative pheromones since their chemical structures have yet to be determined.

sex pheromones exert priming effects via the hpg axis that links environmental inputs to reproductive outputs  <cit> . pheromone extracts or pheromone components have been shown to affect gonadotropin  or lh surge in many species  <cit> . however, no known pheromone component has been shown to directly induce gnrh release  <cit> . in fish, most studies of gnrh or gth release have focused on seasonal changes and very few studies pay attention to the daily cycle or pulsatility of gnrh or gth.

sea lamprey provides an advantageous vertebrate model to examine the mechanisms by which a pheromone component primes the hpg axis since lamprey gnrh peptides are well characterized  <cit> , and several pheromone molecules have been identified in this species  <cit> . sea lamprey occupy a key position close to the root of the vertebrate phylogenetic tree  <cit> . they develop through three distinct life stages  <cit> . larval sea lamprey spends several years in burrows as benthic filter feeders in the stream. after going through metamorphosis  <cit> , the resulting parasitic juveniles enter large lakes or the ocean to feed on host fish. after  <dig>  to 2 years, the adults cease feeding in the early spring and migrate into rivers to spawn and then die  <cit> . for parasitic sea lamprey, sexual maturation is halted until they cease feeding and begin an upstream spawning migration  <cit> . it is not clear how lgnrh-i and -iii regulate the final maturation and whether there is a differential expression of hormones or prehormones during this stage. males arrive at the spawning ground first, build a nest, and complete the final sexual maturation. mature males release sex pheromones containing 3kpzs through the gills at the onset of spermiation  <cit> . it is known that 3kpzs stimulates olfactory receptor neurons in the olfactory epithelium  <cit> , and induces upstream movement and searching behavior toward the nest in ovulatory females  <cit> . downstream from the nests, immature animals are also exposed to 3kpzs, the possible effects of which have not been examined.

we hypothesized that 3kpzs exerts priming effects by altering the hpg output in immature sea lamprey. to test this hypothesis, we first examined the effect of natural pheromone mixtures on sexual maturation of immature lamprey. we then examined the dose response and the time course of synthesized 3kpzs on plasma 15α-p concentrations, brain gene expressions of neuronal activation markers  and lgnrh-i and -iii, and lgnrh peptide concentrations in the forebrain, hindbrain, and plasma. the results confirmed that waterborne 3kpzs modulated the synthesis and release of lgnrh-i and -iii in immature sea lamprey.

RESULTS
natural male pheromone mixtures facilitate sexual maturation
exposure to spermiating male washings  facilitated reproductive maturation in immature males and females . on average, immature females exposed to smw began to ovulate in 21 days, whereas immature females exposed to prespermiating male washings  did not start to ovulate until day  <dig>  for immature males, the average time to spermiate when exposed to smw was 17 days; in contrast, when exposed to psmw, none of the immature males produced milt by day  <dig>  immature male lamprey appeared to mature faster  than immature females  after smw exposure.

exposure to water conditioned by mature male sea lampreys  facilitated reproductive maturation in immature males and females. on average, immature females  exposed to smw began to ovulate in 21 days, whereas pof exposed to immature male washings  did not ovulate until day  <dig>  for immature males , the average time to spermiate after exposure to smw was 17 days; in contrast, when exposed to psmw, none of the psms had spermiated by day  <dig>  χ <dig> =  <dig> , df =  <dig>  p <  <dig>  . nd: not determined.

sex difference in steroid responses to natural male pheromone mixtures
smw exposure for 24 h altered plasma 15α-p concent-rations in immature sea lamprey . there were seasonal effects and sex differences in plasma 15α-p concentrations after exposure to smw. plasma 15α-p concentrations increased in immature males but decreased or showed no effect in immature females . immature males showed an increase in 15α-p concentrations in response to smw exposure early in the spawning season  while immature females did not show the decrease in response to smw until mid-season  and the response dropped abruptly after july .

exposure to 3kpzs increased plasma 15α-p in males
immature males showed elevated plasma 15α-p concent-rations after continuous exposure to a wide range of 3kpzs for 4 h up to 8 h . exposure to 10-10 m 3kpzs for 4 h was the most effective treatment to increase plasma 15α-p concentration . 3kpzs had no effect on plasma 15α-p concentrations in immature females . there was no apparent dose effect of 3kpzs within the range examined. in fact, higher concentration  of 3kpzs appeared to show longer latency in elevating plasma 15α-p compared to lower concentration .

induction of forebrain gene expression after 3kpzs exposure in males
3kpzs was most effective at 10-11 m with 24 h exposure time, inducing 7- to 21-fold increase in forebrain gene expressions. as the concentration of 3kpzs increased, the peak of gene expressions shifted to earlier time points  but the magnitude decreased.

exposure to 10-11 m 3kpzs increased all mrna transcripts examined in the forebrain of immature males . all three known splice variants of lgnrh-i mrna were altered by 3kpzs exposure. gap <dig> transcripts increased after exposure for 8 h , 24 h , and 48 h . increases in gap <dig> transcripts occurred earlier and lasted longer after exposure for 4 h , 8 h , 24 h , and 48 h . gap <dig> transcripts only increased after 24 h exposure . lgnrh-iii transcripts increased after exposure for 24 h  and 48 h . jun transcripts increased after exposure for 8 h , 24 h , and 48 h . jnk transcripts increased after exposure for 8 h  and 24 h .

exposure to 10-10 m 3kpzs also increased all mrna transcripts examined in the forebrain of immature males . gap <dig> transcripts increased after exposure for 4 h , 8 h , and 24 h . gap <dig> transcripts increased after exposure for 8 h  and 24 h . gap <dig> transcripts only increased after exposure for 8 h . lgnrh-iii transcripts increased after exposure for 8 h , 24 h , and 48 h . jun transcripts increased the earliest, after exposure for 2 h , 8 h , and 24 h . jnk transcripts increased after exposure for 8 h  and 24 h .

exposure to 10-9 m 3kpzs only increased lgnrh-i transcript variants, lgnrh-iii and jun mrna concentrations in the forebrain of immature males . gap <dig> transcripts increased after exposure for 4 h , 8 h , and 24 h . gap <dig> transcripts increased later after exposure for 8 h  and 24 h . gap <dig> transcripts only increased after 8 h exposure . lgnrh-iii transcripts increased after exposure for 8 h , 24 h , and 48 h . jun transcripts rose the earliest, after exposure for 2 h , 8 h , and 24 h .

sex difference in forebrain gene expression after 3kpzs exposure
immature females showed increases in jun  and jnk  expression rapidly  after 10-11 m 3kpzs exposure , whereas immature males had more delayed responses . exposure to 10-10 m or 10-9 m 3kpzs had no effect on forebrain gene expression in immature females .

differential effect of 3kpzs on hindbrain gene expression
in the brain stem of immature males, 3kpzs seemed to be most effective at 10-10 m in increasing gene expressions, and the response appeared to be phasic with an earlier peak  and a delayed peak  at the time points examined. on the other hand, in the brain stem of immature females, only 10-10 m 3kpzs decreased gap <dig> expression after 2 h , 8 h  and 48 h  exposure . 3kpzs at other concentrations examined showed no effect on hindbrain gene expression in immature females .

the brain stem of immature males showed more pronounced gene expression changes than the forebrain after exposure to 10-11 m 3kpzs. lgnrh-iii transcripts increased after 2 h  and 48 h  exposure . jun transcripts increased after 48 h exposure . jnk transcripts increased after 2 h , 8 h , 24 h , and 48 h  exposure .

at 10-10 m 3kpzs increased gap <dig> transcripts after 8 h exposure . jun transcripts increased after 2 h  and 48 h  exposure. prolonged exposure to 10-10 m 3kpzs  increased gap <dig> , lgnrh-iii , and jnk  transcripts in the brain stem of immature males .

at 10-9 m 3kpzs increased lgnrh-iii transcripts after 8 h  and 48 h  exposure . jun transcripts increased after exposure for 2 h  and 48 h . jnk transcripts increased after exposure for 2 h , 4 h , 8 h , and 48 h . prolonged exposure to 10-9 m 3kpzs  decreased gap <dig>  but increased gap <dig>  expressions in the brain stem of immature males .

differential effect of 3kpzs on forebrain and plasma lgnrh peptide concentrations
exposure to 10-10 m 3kpzs increased lgnrh-i and -iii peptide concentrations in the forebrain  but had no effect in the brain stem of immature males . plasma lgnrh-i and -iii peptide concentrations pulsed at the short time course after 3kpzs exposure. 3kpzs increased plasma lgnrh-i and -iii peptide concentrations when the control level was low, but this effect was inhibited when the control level was high .

no effect of 3kpzs on the number of lgnrh neurons in the hypothalamus
the distribution of lgnrh mrna, observed in the in situ hybridization experiments, was similar to that observed by reed et al.  <cit> , and was found mainly in the preoptic-hypothalamic area . immunocytochemistry using antibodies specific for lgnrh-i and -iii demonstrated that the distributions of lgnrh-i or lgnrh-iii immunoreactivities in lamprey brain  were consistent with data described by nozaki et al.  <cit> . exposure to 3kpzs had no effect on the number of lgnrh-i or -iii immunoreactive cells in the preoptic-hypothalamic area.

discussion
to our knowledge, this is the first study of the dose response and time course of the priming effects of a single pheromone component on gnrh synthesis and release. the synthesized male pheromone molecule affects both sexes but induces more dramatic responses in males. an interesting possibility is that immature males develop the ability to respond to 3kpzs as a result of chemical spying  <cit>  since odors from conspecifics of the same sex tend to diminish reproductive activities in most species and there is no benefit to the mature males in broadcasting a signal to immature males  <cit> . as migratory adults arrive at the spawning ground with various sexual maturity at different times throughout the spawning season , spying on sex pheromones to synchronize gonadal development and other aspects of spawning readiness would be beneficial because sea lamprey are semelparous, i.e., spawning only once in their life time. this is especially important for immature males since they have to build nests and accelerate final sexual maturation so that they can release sex pheromones to attract mature females. the sex difference in the response to 3kpzs also revealed that different genders are likely tuned in to different chemical signals.

waterborne 3kpzs increased forebrain lgnrh peptide concentrations and gene expressions, and altered plasma lgnrh peptide and sex steroid concentrations. these results indicate that 3kpzs modulates gnrh release, which is important for steroidogenesis and final sexual maturation. mammalian neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus display pulsatile activities  <cit> , and ovulation is induced by a lh  surge which is preceded by a surge of gnrh  secretion into the brain portal system  <cit> . parallel to this preovulatory increase in gnrh secretion is an increase in gnrh gene expression, as indicated by expression of the immediate-early genes   <cit>  and elevated gnrh mrna  <cit> , and increased levels of newly synthesized gnrh  <cit> . lampreys and teleost fishes, however, lack the portal system in the brain, and gnrh neurons either terminate directly in the pituitary gland or release gnrh directly into the third ventricle  <cit> . teleost fishes have well-characterized gth with similar function and regulatory mechanisms as its mammalian counterpart . a cdna encoding lamprey gth subunit β has been cloned, but its function has not been validated  <cit> .

we found differential expression of lgnrh-i and -iii transcripts in sea lamprey brain exposed to 3kpzs. lampreys are the most primitive vertebrates for which multiple gnrh neurohormones are involved in pituitary-reproductive activity  <cit> . both lgnrh-i and -iii have been shown to induce gonadal maturation, steroidogenesis, and spermiation or ovulation in adult sea lamprey  <cit> . in immunocytochemical studies, both immunoreactive-lgnrh-i and -iii can be found in the cell bodies of the rostral hypothalamus and preoptic area in larval and adult sea lamprey  <cit> . lgnrh-iii was considered the more active form during development and gonadal maturation  <cit> . our results indicated that lgnrh-iii concentrations were more responsive to pheromone exposure. however, lgnrh-i may be more important in inducing behavioral responses in mature females, given that the transcripts of its three splice variants fluctuated in the brainstem after pheromone exposure while lgnrh-iii transcripts stayed constant.

it is interesting that three lgnrh-i splice variants also showed differential expressions after pheromone exposure. lamprey gnrh-i precursor was the first identified agnathan gnrh to contain the same tripartite structure with the signal peptide, gnrh decapeptide, and gnrh-associated peptide  as gnathostome gnrh precursors  <cit> . unlike other known vertebrate gnrh precursors, which typically have one or two splice variants, three distinct splice variants were isolated and sequenced in lampreys  <cit> . the lgnrh-i splice variants, gap <dig>  gap <dig> and gap <dig>  differed in the length of the gap coding sequence  <cit> . the relative abundance of these splice variants in our results followed a magnitude decrease in the order of gap <dig>  gap <dig>  and gap <dig>  according to the changes after pheromone exposure, gap <dig> seemed to be important for forebrain function whereas gap <dig> and  <dig> may be associated with brainstem function in both sexes. however, forebrain gap <dig> and brainstem gap <dig> may serve additional functions in immature females  <cit> .

corresponding to its gene expression level in male sea lamprey, lgnrh-iii is the most prominent lgnrh peptides in the brain and plasma. its concentration is around  <dig> times more than lgnrh-i. we also found that 3kpzs altered the pulsatile pattern of gnrh concentrations in plasma. pulsatile release of gnrh is a common neurobiological feature in vertebrates. it is autonomous within the gnrh neuronal network without spontaneous pacemaker cells  <cit> . it is interesting that menstrual synchrony in humans is mediated by pheromones through two opposing effects of the same compounds  <cit> . axillary compounds  from donor women in the follicular phase shortened both the time to ovulation and the length of the menstrual cycle in recipients and those in the ovulatory phase delayed ovulation and lengthened the total cycle  <cit> . we found that when gnrh level is low in the control group, 3kpzs increased gnrh peptide concentrations in the plasma whereas when gnrh level is high in the control group, 3kpzs showed opposite effects. there may be some similarity in the control mechanism involved in this process.

pulsatile gnrh regulates the gonadotropin subunit genes in a differential manner, with faster frequencies  favoring mammalian lh β subunit gene expression and slower frequencies  favoring the expression of fsh β subunit  <cit> . the mechanism is through the activation of gnrh receptor and its signaling cascades including jnk and its substrate jun  <cit> . we found that 3kpzs induced gnrh release within 15 min, and jun and jnk gene expression after 2 h exposure, suggesting that 3kpzs can modulate gnrh release and its signaling cascades.

the detection of lgnrh peptides in the plasma was a surprise since many previous attempts using hplc and radioimmunoassays had failed to detect lgnrh peptides in sea lamprey plasma  <cit> . however, high-affinity binding sites for lgnrh peptides were detected in lamprey gonads, and gnrh appears to stimulate steroidogenesis independent of the pituitary  <cit> . previous reports also noticed that the concentrations of brain gnrh peptides in lamprey occur at higher concentrations than seen in other vertebrates  <cit> , suggesting that there may be a higher production or metabolism  of each of the lgnrh peptides compared to gnathostomes  <cit> . taken together, lgnrh peptides likely serve as hormones that are released into the third ventricle and then into the blood stream, and act on target organ such as gonads. therefore, our results provide an additional explanation for gnrh binding affinity in peripheral organs  <cit> . furthermore, our results support a possible peripheral endocrine function of lgnrh peptides, which may bypass the pituitary gland in the hpg axis.

the acquisition of a hpg axis was a seminal event in vertebrate evolution leading to the neuroendocrine control of many biological functions  <cit> . gnrh is a critical neuropeptide that acts through the hpg axis to regulate vertebrate reproduction. however, invertebrate gnrh peptides seem to exert a wide range of central and peripheral functions not limited to reproduction  <cit> . in addition, gnrh may even function as spawning pheromone in invertebrates  <cit> . the presence of lgnrh peptides in sea lamprey plasma indicates that the function of lgnrh peptides may not be fully centralized. it is likely that sea lamprey gnrh peptides function in an evolutionary transitional state where they not only act on the hpg axis, but also exert hormonal functions through systemic circulation. furthermore, environmental factors such as a single pheromone component  can modulate the hpg axis through olfaction. the considerable specialization of gnrh in the hpg axis as a reproductive activator may be a phenomenon specific to jawed vertebrates  .

CONCLUSIONS
3kzps is a primer pheromone in sea lamprey that exerts its functions through the hpg axis via gnrh release.

