BACKGROUND
in c <dig> plants, pyruvate, orthophosphate dikinase  catalyses the conversion of pyruvate to phosphoenolpyruvate  in what is generally recognized as the rate-limiting step in c <dig> photosynthesis  <cit>  according to reaction  <dig> 

reaction  <dig> ...   pyruvate + atp + pi ↔ pep + amp + ppi

in turn, ppdk activity is regulated by light via a rather unique phosphorylation/dephosphorylation mechanism. the regulatory mechanism involved differs from other phosphorylation/dephosphorylation mechanisms in a number of ways. firstly, the regulatory mechanism uses adp rather than atp as the donor of a phosphate group. secondly, the substrate  for inactivation is a catalytically-phosphorylated form of the enzyme substrate. thirdly, the activation reaction involves a phosphate-dependent phosphorolytic removal of the regulatory phosphate group rather than a simple phosphatase-catalysed dephosphorylation reaction. and fourthly, both the inactivation and activation activities are catalyzed by a single enzyme . the pdrp from maize  <cit>  and arabidopsis  <cit>  have recently been cloned and expressed and their homology to the duf <dig> gene family recognised.

a phylogenetic analysis of the duf <dig> amino acid sequences available in genbank segregated the duf <dig> proteins into two major clades representing those bacterial species that possess ppdk and those that possess phosphoenolpyruvate synthetase  . peps is an enzyme found in many bacteria and catalyzes the phosphorylation of pyruvate to pep according to reaction  <dig> 

reaction  <dig> .....   pyr + atp ↔ pep + amp + pi

although there are varying degrees of homology between ppdks and pepss the two types of enzyme can be discriminated by signature sequences identified by tjaden et al  <cit> . an examination of the location of the duf <dig> gene in the genome of a large number of bacteria revealed that the gene is often, but not always, located close to either the peps or the ppdk gene. it is also interesting to note that although many members of the archaea possess either the ppdk or peps gene they do not contain the duf <dig> gene.

pep synthetase is present in many bacteria and has an important role in gluconeogenesis when bacteria are grown on small carbon substrates  <cit> . e. coli mutant studies demonstrated that peps-deficient mutants were unable to grow on pyruvate, lactate or alanine  <cit> . cooper and kornberg  <cit>  also suggested that the reaction catalysed by peps involved the transfer of a phosphoryl-group from atp to the enzyme and a phosphorylated form of the enzyme was isolated  <cit> . the formation of an ep form of the enzyme either in the presence of atp or pep was subsequently reported  <cit>  and a histidine residue identified as the site of phosphorylation  <cit> .

the successful expression of the maize pdrp  and the close similarity of the amino acid sequence of bacterial duf <dig> prompted an investigation of the role of the duf <dig> from e. coli. this paper reports experiments performed with e. coli peps and duf <dig> that clearly demonstrate that e. coli peps is controlled by a phosphorylation/dephosphorylation mechanism similar to that found in plants. and finally, given its function, it is proposed that this protein be given the common name of the pep synthetase regulatory protein and the abbreviation psrp be used to discriminate it from pdrp, duf <dig> proteins that may catalyse the regulation of ppdk.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis of duf <dig> amino acid sequences
a phylogenetic analysis of duf <dig> amino acid sequences from a range of plant and bacterial species revealed divergence in amino acid sequences that segregated into two major clades . further examination of the genomes of the species revealed that the duf299-containing species segregated according to whether they possessed either ppdk  or peps ; the identity of ppdk and peps was based on previously identified signature sequences  <cit> .

cloning and expression of peps and psrp
the dna sequences of the peps and psrp inserts in proexa were confirmed by dna sequencing. modifications to standard expression and extraction protocols were required to maximize the production of soluble, stable forms of both enzymes. peps expression was optimised by initially growing cells at 37°c for  <dig> h and pre-cooling cultures to 25°c prior to isopropyl thiogalactoside  induction of protein synthesis. in addition, dithiothreitol , to a final concentration of  <dig> mm, and glycerol, to a final concentration of 20% , was required to be added to the purified protein to retain active, soluble protein. the purified protein was stable for several days at room temperature or for more than  <dig> months at -80°c. cold stored enzyme needed to be reactivated by incubation at room temperature for at least  <dig> min.

for psrp, cultures had to be cooled to 18°c prior to induction of protein synthesis at 18°c, and glycerol had to be included in all solutions used during the purification of the protein, to maintain the enzyme in a soluble form. the purified protein was stable for at least a week when stored on ice.

the mw of the psrp subunits were about  <dig> kda as determined by sds-page. the native size of the e. coli psrp as determined by sephacryl s <dig> gel filtration indicated the native form of the protein is a tetramer eluting from the column between lactate dehydrogenase  and malate dehydrogenase . it is not known whether the quaternary structure of the e. coli psrp changes with ph; the maize pdrp is a dimer at ph  <dig>  and a tetramer at ph  <dig>   <cit> . there was no evidence to suggest that the n-terminal his6-tag of proex, which included the amino acid sequence msyyhhhhhhdydipttenlyfqga, affected psrp activity in any way.

inactivation and activation activities of the expressed e. coli psrp
the purified psrp catalysed both the adp/atp-dependent inactivation  and the pi-dependent activation of purified e. coli peps . in addition, the expressed psrp catalysed in-assay activation. in-assay activation occurs when inactivated peps in aliquots taken from a separate inactivation reaction activates in the assay used to measure peps activity. addition of pi to reaction mixtures used to measure peps activity in aliquots taken from inactivation reactions resulted in an increasing rate of peps activity; in the absence of added pi peps activity remained linear. therefore it was significantly easier to measure peps inactivation compared to measuring maize ppdk regulation due to the fact that there was no in-assay activation if pi was omitted from reactions measuring peps activity. therefore, in contrast to measuring maize pdrp activity, there was no need to add blue dextran or cibacron blue to inhibit in-assay activation when inactivation activities of e. coli peps were measured.

peps inactivation was measured as described in materials and methods. the experiment was repeated five times and results presented in the table are from one experiment that was representative of all five experiments.

the experiment was repeated five times; the results of one experiment, representative of all five experiments, are presented in the table.

addition of pyruvate to inactivation reactions inhibited adp/atp-dependent inactivation of e. coli peps . this result is similar to the pyruvate-dependent inhibition of pdrp-catalysed regulation of maize leaf ppdk  <cit>  and indicated that

e. coli peps had to be catalytically-phosphorylated prior to being inactivated. this was confirmed by pre-incubating peps with pep, removing the pep by sephadex g <dig> column chromatography and subjecting the catalytically-phosphorylated peps to adp-dependent inactivation in the presence of hexokinase and glucose; glucose and hexokinase were added to remove any atp that may have been formed from adp in the presence of contaminating adenylate kinase . only about 40% of the peps was inactivated which suggested that less than 50% of the peps was catalytically phosphorylated during pre-incubation with pep. this result was investigated further and it was shown that a small amount of pi and amp present in the assay  was responsible for the dephosphorylation of the catalytic histidine residue of peps.

compared to the regulation of maize leaf ppdk by pdrp, the inactivation of e. coli peps by e. coli psrp was considerably more sensitive to inhibition by pyruvate , being almost five times more sensitive than maize pdrp .

inclusion of adp  in activation assays demonstrated that adp inhibited pi-dependent activation . this result is consistent with the adp-dependent inhibition of pi-dependent activation observed with maize pdrp  <cit> .

in comparing the e. coli psrp to other duf299-family members, e. coli psrp resembles maize pdrp in that it catalyses both the adp-dependent inactivation and the pi-dependent activation of its substrate enzyme. this is in contrast to one of the two arabidopsis pdrp isozymes that have been reported  <cit> , one of which catalyses both the inactivation and activation reactions while the second isozyme catalyzes only the inactivation reaction.

substrate specificity of e. coli psrp and maize leaf pdrp
experiments were conducted in which e. coli psrp was replaced with bacterially-expressed maize pdrp  <cit> ; no adp/atp-dependent inactivation of e. coli peps was detected . furthermore, no adp/atp-dependent inactivation was detected in reciprocal experiments in which e. coli peps was replaced with maize ppdk.

the fact that e. coli peps activity is regulated by psrp may be important in light of experiments in which potato plants were transformed with an active e. coli peps in an attempt to increase the photosynthetic co <dig> assimilation rates  <cit> ; no increases in photosynthetic co <dig> assimilation rates were detected. e. coli peps was introduced into potato  in attempts to introduce an operating c <dig> photosynthetic pathway under the belief that the bacterial enzyme was not regulated  <cit> .

the regulation of e. coli peps by amp, adp, oxaloacetate, α-ketoglutarate, malate, adp-glucose and 3-phosphoglyceraldehyde has been reported  <cit> . the results presented in this paper provide evidence for the existence of another level of regulation of peps activity. the psrp-dependent regulatory mechanism may be critical in controlling the metabolic direction of pyruvate in the cell, either towards the oxidative catabolism of pyruvate via the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex to produce more atp, or the anabolic conversion of pyruvate to pep and glucose via an active peps. the results in this paper indicate that the psrp-dependent regulation of peps in e. coli is affected by the concentration of three major compounds ; adp, atp and pyruvate. this regulation is similar to the pdrp-dependent regulation of ppdk in maize. in maize, adp is both a substrate for the inactivation of ppdk and an inhibitor of the pi- dependent activation of inactivated ppdk. in contrast, atp is not only a substrate for ppdk but, together with pyruvate, controls the rates of adp-dependent inactivation of peps by controlling the phosphorylation status of the catalytic histidine residue; adp-dependent inactivation of peps requires the catalytic histidine residue to be phosphorylated. the pyruvate-dependent inhibition of adp-dependent inactivation of peps is consistent with e. coli peps needing to be catalytically phosphorylated prior to inactivation. therefore when e. coli is grown on pyruvate or lactate as a sole carbon source, the metabolic fate of pyruvate will be controlled by the relative activities of pyruvate dehydrogenase and peps. under elevated intracellular adp concentrations adp would not only inhibit peps activity but also inactivate peps while the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex would be active. in contrast, at low adp concentrations, which would also indicate high atp concentrations, peps would be activated and the e <dig> component of the pdh complex inhibited which would favour the anabolic conversion of pyruvate to pep; pep would be available for the shikimic acid pathway in addition to conversion to glucose.

at present, the phosphorylation status of the catalytic histidine residue of inactivated peps as a substrate for pi-dependent activation is not clear and is currently being investigated. in maize, the form of inactivated ppdk that is not phosphorylated on the catalytic histidine residue is the preferred substrate for pi-dependent activation  <cit> .

the synthesis of pep via peps is important in the biosynthesis of many commercially important chemicals; pep is a precursor for shikimic acid synthesis that, in turn, is the starting material for the production of a wide range of products including tamiflu, an orally effective anti-influenza agent . e. coli, over-expressing peps, are widely used in the biosynthesis of shikimic acid as is over-expression of 3-deoxy-d-arabino-heptulosonic acid 7-phosphate  synthase whose use can be limited by feedback inhibition. over-expression of feedback insensitive dahp synthase isozymes have been used in microbial syntheses of commercially important products such as aromatic amino acids, phenylalanine and tryptophan  <cit> . the discovery of the existence of a phosphorylation/dephosphorylation mechanism that regulates peps activity may have to be taken into account if peps and psrp are expressed in cells used for the synthesis of compounds dependent on the shikimic acid pathway. and in much the same way that feedback inhibition insensitive dahp synthase isozymes are used in microbial based syntheses, peps may need to be altered to render the enzyme insensitive to psrp-dependent regulation and maintain it in its active form. the effect of altering the regulatory threonine residue close to the catalytic histidine residue in peps is currently under study.

the wide distribution of duf <dig> in bacteria, the proximity of the duf <dig> gene to ppdk and pps genes in bacterial genomes, the expression of e. coli peps and duf <dig> and the demonstration that e. coli peps is subject to both adp-dependent inactivation and pi-dependent activation, indicate that the function of the gene family identified as duf <dig> is to control either peps or ppdk activities. the duf <dig> from streptococcus agalactiae, a bacterial species possessing both ppdk and duf <dig>  is currently being investigated.

CONCLUSIONS
a phylogenetic analysis of the duf <dig> gene, present in most bacterial species, segregates bacterial species into two major clades; those possessing ppdk and those possessing peps. expression of the duf <dig> gene from e. coli resulted in the synthesis of an enzyme that catalysed both adp-dependent inactivation of e. coli peps and pi-dependent activation of inactive e. coli peps. experiments revealed that the psrp from e. coli was very similar to the pdrp from maize in that the enzyme substrate of the regulatory protein had to be catalytically-phosphorylated before it could act as a substrate for adp-dependent phosphorylation. in addition, adp inhibited the pi-dependent activation activity of duf <dig>  the e. coli psrp was shown to be active as a tetramer but was not capable of catalysing either the adp-dependent inactivation or the pi-dependent activation of maize leaf ppdk.

since psrp and pdrp are expressed in a large number of bacteria many of which are pathogenic, and since the enzymes are rather unique in the types of reactions they catalyse, it may be possible to identify compounds that may selectively inhibit the enzymes inhibiting the synthesis of important biochemical intermediates and ultimately inhibiting the growth of the bacteria.

