BACKGROUND
understanding how local adaptation maintains phenotypic and genetic differentiation in spite of high rates of gene flow is an important question in evolutionary biology  <cit> . latitudinal clines have been of particular interest because many organisms and traits show patterns of geographic variation consistent with locally varying selective forces correlated with latitude  <cit> . in the model species drosophila melanogaster, numerous phenotypic traits , including some related to circadian behaviors  <cit>  are correlated with latitude suggesting they are shaped by spatially varying selection.

however, despite their connection to circadian and locomotor activity rhythms, the population processes maintaining genetic variation for sleep have never been investigated. sleep in drosophila has been defined as  <dig> or more consecutive minutes of inactivity  <cit> . this definition has been subsequently validated electrophysiologically  <cit> . drosophila sleep resembles mammalian sleep in many aspects. for example, both are characterized by an increased arousal threshold, the adoption of a particular posture, and for both, sleep bout duration varies with age and sex  <cit> . drosophila sleep is, in addition, sensitive to the same pharmacological agents as mammalian sleep, and is constituted of different sleep phases that are determined by circadian and homeostatic mechanisms  <cit> . finally, sleep deprivation impairs fly cognitive abilities  <cit>  and, in cases of long-term deprivation, can lead to death  <cit> . for all these reasons, d. melanogaster has become an important model species for identifying the mechanisms underlying the regulation of sleep  <cit> , with the ultimate goal of improving our understanding of human sleep disorders  <cit> .

the work presented here reports the first analysis of natural geographic variation in sleep in d. melanogaster. we found that flies from higher latitudes sleep substantially less than those from lower latitudes. high latitude flies also show a phase shift consistent with greater sunrise anticipation than that of lower latitude flies. our analysis of the head transcriptome for the two populations showing the greatest sleep differences revealed that most gene expression differences between populations are circadian-time dependent and provided potentially valuable molecular insights into the observed behavioral phenotypes.

RESULTS
d. melanogaster males sampled from populations collected along a latitudinal gradient ranging from maine  to panama city  were entrained under semi-natural conditions  prior to measurement of their locomotor activity. nighttime locomotor activity profiles from higher and the lower latitudes differ substantially . the regressions over latitude of the average locomotor activity during the photophase and the scotophase  show that nighttime locomotor activity is more strongly correlated with latitude  than daytime locomotor activity  suggesting a contrast between nighttime vs. daytime patterns. to further investigate population differences, locomotor activity was parsed into two main components: sleep  and walking speed . the former showed a very strong relationship with latitude, which explained 80% of the observed phenotypic variation ; the difference in average sleep bout duration between temperate and equatorial populations was about two-fold. both sleep duration and sleep bout number contribute to the observed pattern . the observation that nighttime walking speed shows no evidence of latitudinal variation  supports the idea that sleep , rather than walking speed , constitutes the key behavioral difference in nighttime activity levels in higher vs. lower latitude populations. to our knowledge this is the first demonstration of genetically determined geographic differentiation for sleep behavior in drosophila. importantly, the different patterns of geographic variation of sleep do not result from sharp differences occurring over short time periods , but rather, from a general night versus day pattern. these observations support the idea that nighttime and daytime sleep are mechanistically distinct  <cit>  and may evolve independently.figure  <dig> 
geographic variation in locomotor activity among five american
d. melanogaster
populations. the graph was obtained from the eduction analysis of faasx software. the white bar underneath the graph represents the photophase, the black bar the scotophase. the populations are maine , rhode island , virginia , florida  and panama city . the raw locomotor activity profiles are shown on additional file 1: figure s <dig> 
latitudinal cline in nighttime sleep bout duration. daytime and nighttime population mean phenotypic values  are shown respectively for locomotor activity a) and b), sleep bout duration c) and d), and walking speed e) and f). only sleep bout duration follows a latitudinal cline at nighttime  but not at daytime . the red line represents the regression of population phenotypic means  over latitude . me: maine, ri: rhode island, va: virginia, fl: florida, and pc: panama city.
correlations with latitude for sleep phenotype measured at different circadian times. the histogram bars correspond to the r-square values obtained when the hour-by-hour average sleep bout duration was regressed over population latitude. the fact that none of the  <dig> regressions was significant after correction for multiple testing but nighttime regressions showing elevated r-square is consistent with the presence of a global daytime vs. nighttime sleep pattern rather than sharp differences occurring over short time periods. the white bar underneath the graph represents the photophase, the black bar the scotophase.



population average locomotor activity patterns  suggest that the few hours preceding the morning light transition also exhibit geographic variation. in particular, the phase of the morning peak  of the rhode island  population occurs before light transition whereas it occurs after light transition for panama city , , virginia  and florida  being intermediate), which would be consistent with genetic variation in the anticipation of sunrise. to investigate this hypothesis, we quantified ramping in activity relative to the nighttime maximum locomotor activity . this analysis revealed substantial geographic variation for ramping activity. for example, at zt <dig> the pc population had reached only 50% of maximal activity, whereas flies from northern latitudes were already at 75% of their maximum activity; latitude explains 83% of the variation in late night activity level at this timepoint .figure  <dig> 
geographic variation in sunrise anticipation. percentage of maximal activity across time  was a normalization of each line’s activity profile between  <dig> and  <dig>  the data were then averaged over lines for each population. r-squares were obtained at each circadian timepoint from the regression of population mean activity levels over latitude.



to investigate this further, we carried out an experiment in which a set of pc and me flies were entrained in ld  with fluctuating light and temperature using the same incubator program as in the aforementioned experiment. after 3 days of entrainment the flies were shifted to constant dark  conditions with constant temperature . examination of the activity profiles under dd conditions revealed the persistence of the morning activity peak. moreover, the phase of this peak in me flies was about 1 hour earlier than the pc peak  but the free running periods were unchanged . this is consistent with a genetically determined difference in sunrise anticipation between high and low latitude flies. this result contrasts with previous work studying alternative clock mutants under naturalistic conditions  <cit> . however, the two studies differ in important ways, including entrainment regimes and experimental genotypes. moreover, we cannot rule out an alternative hypothesis that differential anticipation is driven by population differences in thermal sensitivity rather than pure circadian variation per se. we found no evidence of evening peak phase differences between pc and me . this phenomenon is reminiscent of splicing efficiency of dmpi <dig> intron of period  <cit> , where evening peaks are shifted by temperature without changes in period length. however, we found no evidence of variation in dmpi <dig> splicing efficiency across latitude .

to investigate potential molecular underpinnings of behavioral differences between high and low latitude populations, we carried out a transcriptomic analysis of male heads sampled at different circadian times from panama city  and rhode island  populations . we chose these two populations because they exhibited the greatest difference in sleep . of the  <dig> genes expressed in our data,  <dig>  showed expression differences  between populations for at least one timepoint . however, only 7% of the  <dig> genes were differentially expressed at all four timepoints. in other words, 93% of the geographic differences in gene expression were timepoint dependent, which strongly suggests that a comprehensive description of geographic differentiation in d. melanogaster transcript abundance may require sampling that accounts for circadian time.

genes that in previously published experiments exhibited cycling polya mrna abundance in heads  <cit> , brain cycling expression  <cit> , entrainment by light or temperature  <cit> , or direct regulation by the key circadian transcription activator clock  <cit>  showed significant enrichments among the genes exhibiting geographic differentiation in expression in our data . this suggests that a significant component of the geographic variation in mrna abundance in the fly head is influenced by circadian regulation. we found no support for the idea that polymorphic chromosome inversions play an important role in geographic variation in gene expression .

the timepoint at which the greatest number of genes were differentially expressed was zt <dig> , at which 76%  of the genes showed geographic variation in expression, as compared to zt <dig>  zt <dig> and zt <dig>  where respectively 23% , 23% , and 29%  of the expressed genes showed geographic differences. in addition, 66% of the genes differentially expressed at zt <dig> were not differentially expressed at other timepoints. the zt <dig> timepoint is unique in several respects:  it is our only daytime timepoint,  it is a peak activity time, and  it corresponds to a transition time between night and day. moreover, the fact our experimental lights turned on suddenly in the morning rather than ramping smoothly could have contributed to the strong expression differences observed at zt <dig> figure  <dig> 
a large fraction of the geographic variation in gene expression is circadian time specific. a) venn diagram showing the distribution across timepoints of the genes differentially expressed between pc and ri. b) venn diagram showing the distribution across timepoints of the genes differentially expressed and located into the 5% outlier fst windows. actual number of genes is indicated in parenthesis.



at zt <dig> there is no obvious pattern of greater transcript abundance being more common in one population or the other , though the magnitude of expression difference between populations is greater for genes expressed at a higher level in ri compared to genes expressed at a higher level in pc . the remaining timepoints, all of which are nighttime, show a different pattern , with a greater proportion of differentially expressed genes showing higher mrna abundance in ri than in pc. thus, it appears that population differences in transcriptional activity show some degree of correlation with population differences in nighttime activity. this is consistent with previous gene expression analyses showing that transcription levels in drosophila heads are higher in awake vs. sleeping individuals  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
variation in the direction of the expression difference. the figure shows the number of genes significantly overexpressed in pc vs. ri  and ri vs. pc  for each timepoint.



to investigate the possible role of natural selection in generating the observed population differences in gene expression we characterized the association between differentially expressed genes and population genetic differentiation as summarized by fst. if cis-acting regulatory variants  <cit>  influenced by differential selection in high vs. low latitude populations play an important role in gene expression differences, then gene regions near differentially expressed genes may be associated with unusually high levels of genetic differentiation relative to genome wide averages  <cit> . we used our gene expression data and published population genomic data from maine and florida d. melanogaster populations  <cit>  to test this hypothesis. we identified the differentially expressed genes that overlapped the 1-kb windows associated with the 5% most extreme average fst in reinhardt et al.  <cit>  which are likely enriched with targets of spatially varying selection. out of the  <dig> expressed genes that fell within an outlier fst window,  <dig>  showed expression differences for at least one time-point . thus, outlier fst windows are significantly enriched in differentially expressed genes compared to the genome average . expressed genes that are located within the outlier fst windows are 30% more likely to show expression difference between populations than genes not located in such windows. zt <dig> contributed substantially to this enrichment, as  <dig> %  of zt <dig> differentially expressed genes were located in the outlier fst windows  and only  <dig> %  were differentially expressed . for the three other timepoints, the outlier fst windows contain an excess of  <dig> to 16% of differentially expressed genes as compared to the genome average, but the enrichments are not statistically significant, perhaps due to reduced statistical power. overall, these findings support the idea that the observed expression differences between populations are significantly influenced by cis-regulatory variants associated with high levels of geographic differentiation.

to carry out a more directed analysis of differentially expressed genes that might be causally linked to the geographic variation in locomotor activity, we first identified the genes annotated with go terms plausibly linked to activity rhythms ; there were  <dig> such genes, of which  <dig> were expressed in our data. seventy-six  of these genes showed expression differences between populations , compared to the genome average of 16% . of these  <dig> genes,  <dig> overlapped a 5% outlier fst window, supporting the hypothesis that spatially varying selection plays an important role in shaping geographic differences in transcript abundance for genes related to locomotion/circadian rhythms.

in principle, the observed gene expression differences between pc and ri could arise due to genotypic differences or as plastic downstream consequences of behavioral differences . while population genomic data support the idea that the observed transcriptomic differences have a genetic basis tightly linked to the corresponding genes, we sought additional evidence bearing on this question. cirelli et al.  <cit>  identified  <dig> genes that showed expression differences for a single d. melanogaster genotype across the behavioral states, awake vs. sleeping. of those,  <dig> were expressed in our data set . 55%  of bse genes were differentially expressed between pc and ri , suggesting that some of the expression differences between pc and ri result from behavioral state differences. however, the bse genes showing geographic variation in expression were significantly underrepresented in the 5% outlier fst windows , and underrepresented in our list of  <dig> differentially expressed circadian rhythms candidates as well . in other words, most of the genes exhibiting geographic differences that are also associated with circadian annotations are likely not influenced by behavioral state. instead, they likely are causally related to behavioral state. another possible explanation for population differences in expression is that in our experimental condition of relatively high temperature, one population, perhaps rhode island, is more thermally stressed. while we cannot rule out that such a phenomenon contributes to the observed differences, we observed no sign of enrichment for go terms associated with heat, thermal response or stress in our gene expression analysis. this suggests that population differences in head gene expression as well as the locomotor activity/sleep patterns are unlikely to be explained in terms of differential stress responses.

the list of  <dig> differentially expressed genes  contains  <dig> genes that are either part of the core circadian clock or directly interact with the corresponding genes . in addition, atx- <dig> and tyf, both of which were differentially expressed at zt <dig>  form a protein complex that regulates period translation  <cit> , suggesting that transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation may contribute to geographic differences in locomotor activity. two genes, unc- <dig> and na, previously shown to be related to ramping in activity  <cit>  were also differentially expressed between pc and ri. with the exception of gl, all the aforementioned genes are differentially expressed at zt <dig>  however, given that differences in zt <dig> transcript abundance may not be manifest as downstream behavioral phenotypes for several hours, such differences may be less likely to play a primary role in nighttime sleep or sunrise anticipation.

of the  <dig> candidate genes, only  <dig> are differentially expressed at nighttime  and, among those,  <dig> that are differentially expressed at zt <dig> and zt <dig> seem more plausible candidates as contributors to variation in nighttime sleep or sunrise anticipation . ddc and dat, which were differentially expressed at zt <dig>  are part of the dopamine/serotonin pathway. ddc is located in an outlier fst window from reinhardt et al.  <cit> . the ddc protein catalyzes the last step in the production of dopamine and serotonin  <cit> , both of which are important neurotransmitters for the regulation of the sleep/wake cycle  <cit> . another important gene for sleep homeostasis  <cit> , hsp <dig>  showed circadian cycling behavior in rodriguez et al.  <cit> , was overexpressed in pc at both zt <dig> and zt <dig>  and was spanned by an outlier fst window. finally, two other genes in this candidate list, acer and takeout, both of which were differentially expressed at all timepoints, are worth mentioning. an acer null allele affects nighttime sleep  <cit>  and is one of the few sleep-annotated genes showing geographic variation in expression at nighttime. takeout  shows interesting patterns at several levels. it is significantly overexpressed in ri at all  <dig> timepoints with one of the greatest expression fold change differences between populations . both nascent transcripts and polya mrna transcripts of takeout cycle throughout the day  <cit> . additionally, takeout is entrained by light and temperature  <cit> . it appears to be located immediately downstream from the core clock pathway, as its expression is regulated by clock  <cit>  and pdp <dig>  <cit>  - the latter also showing evidence of geographic variation in expression at zt <dig> in our study. finally, the takeout locus is located in a genomic region showing strong latitudinal differentiation  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
while the genetics of sleep have been studied in several model systems, the population processes maintaining genetic variation for sleep have received little attention. here we suggest that there is a selectively maintained latitudinal cline in nighttime sleep, as well as evidence of geographic variation for sunrise anticipation. these data, along with our gene expression and existing population genomic data, support the idea that a significant component of this locomotor and gene expression variation results from selection in heterogeneous environments, though the mechanistic connection between variation in sleep and fitness variation remains a mystery. our data suggest that various biological processes may influence sleep variation, including dopamine/serotonin metabolism and post-transcriptional regulation of core clock components.

in addition to detailed functional analysis of the genes and traits identified here , several important basic questions remain. first, extending our analysis to additional population samples may solidify the evidence for clinality and provide better estimates of cline parameters. second, given the evidence for sex-specific locomotor activity rhythms  <cit>  and gene expression  <cit> , further experiments to assess whether female sleep and head/brain gene expression patterns also show geographic variation may be interesting. third, our investigation used a single set of temperature and light conditions. while our results provide very strong evidence of genetic differences in nighttime sleep between high and low latitude populations in this laboratory environment, we have no information regarding the expression of these genotypic differences in other light  or temperature environments, or the role of genotype × environment interaction in the maintenance of genetic variation for sleep in this species  <cit> . finally, functional investigation of natural variation affecting sleep in the d. melanogaster model  <cit>  may provide important insights into the mechanistic and population genetic explanation for genetic variation for sleep in other animals, including humans.

