BACKGROUND
inhibition plays an important role in visual cortical processing for receptive field formation and stimulus specificity at the local  <cit>  and global network level  <cit> . in vivo pharmacological manipulation of inhibitory neurons alters visual cortical receptive field properties  <cit> . understanding the kinetics of synaptic currents that give rise to inhibitory responses will be necessary to describe cortical network function and dynamics  <cit> .

within the neocortex γ-aminobutyric acid  is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter  <cit> . gabaa kinetics are known to be faster than gabab by roughly 10-fold  <cit> . there is variability in gabaa subunit composition across different interneuron subtypes but the functional consequences of this subunit variability are not well known  <cit> . different combinations of gabaa receptor subunits have been shown to contribute to unique inhibitory phasic and tonic response kinetics  <cit> .

the present study of inhibition in neocortex was motivated by reports of two forms of gabaa-mediated inhibition in the hippocampus  <cit> . gabaa receptor mediated ipscs in the hippocampus have fast  and slow  kinetic forms  <cit> . in the hippocampus, it has been shown that slow ttx insensitive spontaneous ipscs exist, albeit infrequently, and that they can be evoked by focal electrical stimulation in the ca <dig> apical and basal dendritic zones, but not in the cell body layer. in contrast, fast ipscs occur spontaneously at a high rate, but can only be evoked by micro-stimulation in the cell body layer  <cit> . fast ipscs are depressed by the subtype-specific gabaa antagonist, furosemide  <cit> , while slow ipscs are insensitive to furosemide  <cit> . the anatomical and pharmacological specificity argues for functionally distinct forms of gabaa receptor subunit combinations mediating fast and slow ipscs.

we demonstrate here, for the first time, that gabaa slow currents occur both spontaneously and as evoked responses in the neocortex. cortical gabaa slow responses are both quantitatively and pharmacologically distinct from gabaa fast responses and are evoked from anatomically distinct regions in the cortical columns.

RESULTS
in order to study a homogeneous population of neurons, our study focused primarily on excitatory layer  <dig> pyramidal neurons of visual cortex. slow gabaa spontaneous synaptic currents were observed in most pyramidal neurons  as well as a subset of histologically identified inteneurons . fast ipscs were observed in all pyramidal neurons and inhibitory interneurons.

spontaneous ipscs were recorded in rat visual cortical neurons perfused with room temperature acsf containing  <dig> mm ca2+ and mg2+  to limit the occurrence of ipsc bursts, allowing the distinction of isolated events . ipscs were isolated from epscs through bath application of cnqx/apv  to block glutamate-mediated events. the chloride channel blocker, picrotoxin  completely abolished both slow and fast gabaa ipscs. across the entire population and within any single recording, sipscs were observed with a wide range of kinetics and amplitudes .

spontaneous ipsc parametric analysis
in order to quantify the amplitude and temporal characteristics of the spontaneously occurring ipscs in our population of cells, single isolated ipscs were sorted from our recordings . all sorted ipscs  were then individually analyzed to determine their amplitude from baseline and rise time . the decaying slope of each ipsc was fitted with a double exponential equation to determine the temporal properties of the decay to baseline .

across the population of sorted isolated ipscs , a parametric comparison of kinetic properties revealed two distinct populations. rise time  and decay time  limits were used to segment the population into fast  and slow  events . ipscs with slow kinetics occurred far less frequently than fast events . for events that displayed an observable second component to their decaying slope , there was also clustering into two groups . ipsc kinetics were not correlated with amplitude for either rise time or decay time .

for a representative neuron, all ipsc events  were sorted and analyzed to determine the quantitative kinetics and amplitudes of all events for a given cell . the mean  amplitude  rise time  and decay time constant  for the representative neuron was not statistically different  from the estimates for our randomly sampled fast population .

†decay time constants from double exponential fit

‡standard deviation of the mean

*student's t-test

decay time constants τ <dig> and τ <dig> are shown for double exponential fits to the data. τ <dig> is shown for all ipscs in the sample population  and τ <dig> for responses with a significant second exponential .

in order to test for possible space clamp artifacts, spontaneous ipscs were recorded using a cscl-based internal electrode solution , to block potassium leak currents. on average, both rise times and decay times forslow spontaneous ipscs recorded using a cscl-based internal solution remained within the ranges of recordings made using a kcl-based internal solution:  <dig>  ±  <dig> ms for average slow event  rise times and  <dig> ±  <dig> ms for slow event  decay time constants. a random sample  of spontaneous events recorded using cscl-based internal solution also revealed kinetics that were similar to those recorded with kcl-based internal solution for fast spontaneous ipscs:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ms rise time and  <dig>  ±  <dig> ms decay time constant.

to compare spontaneous ipsc events statistically, slow and fast events were quantitatively analyzed as separate populations . fast and slow ipsc events  were separated based on rise time and decay time constant clustering as in figure  <dig>  decay time constants  for both fast and slow ipscs were skewed on a linear scale and were well fitted by a gaussian distribution on a logarithmic scale . there was significant separation of the population mean  for the decay time constants of fast and slow events, τ <dig> . rise time estimates for fast and slow events also showed significant separation between the two populations . similar separation was observed for ipsc duration  . however, amplitude estimates for fast and slow events were not significantly different across the population .

for events with an observable second component to the decaying slope of the ipsc , the second time constants  were log gaussian distributed for fast  and slow  events . there was significant separation between the mean population τ <dig> for fast and slow events .

anatomical specificity of evoked gabaa ipscs
extracellularly evoked ipscs were characterized based on the anatomical locus of stimulation in a sample of pyramidal cells . bipolar stimulating electrodes were positioned close to the dendrites of the recorded pyramidal neurons near  the distal apical , proximal apical  and basal  regions. distal apical stimulating electrodes were placed in layer i/ii directly above the dendritic axis of the cell. basal stimulating electrodes were placed below  the cell body . proximal apical dendrite stimulating electrodes were placed roughly half-way between the soma and the pia off axis .

evoked ipscs were recorded in the presence of cnqx/apv  and the holding potential was set at rest . averaged ipscs  were characterized for rise time, decay time and duration . evoked responses were recorded from two locations per cell  in 60% of the cells and a single anatomical per cell in the remaining 40%. slow evoked ispcs  were found predominantly in responses evoked from stimulation near the basal  and distal apical dendrites . evoked ipscs resulting from stimulation near the proximal apical dendrites  were all fast ipscs .

†each parameter compared across  <dig> groups 

‡ tukey-kramer post hoc test

evoked ipsc were collected for stimulating electrodes placed in either the distal apical , proximal apical  or basal  dendritic regions of excitatory pyramidal cells.

ipsc rise times  estimates were smallest for evoked responses elicited from stimulation near the proximal dendrites . responses evoked through stimulation in the region near the distal apical dendrites displayed rise times  that were significantly greater than those near the proximal dendritic region . evoked responses from stimulation near the basal dendrites displayed a range of rise times  that overlapped those from stimulation near the proximal dendritic region.

the decay time constant  was also characterized according to the anatomical origins of evoked stimulation . stimulation sites near the distal apical dendritic region and the basal region evoked ipscs with decay time constants  that were significantly slower than those evoked in the proximal apical dendritic region . variability was greatest for stimulation near the distal apical and basal dendritic regions  and lowest in the proximal dendritic region .

estimates of the ipsc total duration  were dominated by the decay time constant  and followed similar trends . both the distal apical and basal dendritic region stimulation estimates of duration  were significantly longer than estimates from proximal apical dendritic region stimulation . the distal apical and basal dendritic region stimulation estimates displayed greater range and variability . proximal apical dendritic stimulation sites produced ipscs with the least variability .

slow evoked ipscs were observed concurrently with fast and slow sipscs . during periods of evoked stimulation with pulses delivered near the distal dendrites, fast and slow sipscs were observed . evoked ipscs and sipscs did not appear to interact during distal dendritic region stimulation. fast and slow sipscs were observed within the period immediately preceding and following evoked stimulation, as well as overlapping evoked ipscs . neocortical evoked slow ipscs do not appear to suppress sipscs with either slow or fast kinetics.

furosemide action on gabaa-mediated ipscs
furosemide, the subunit selective gabaa receptor blocker, selectively depresses gabaa fast ipscs in the hippocampus, while leaving gabaa slow responses unaffected  <cit> . the effects of furosemide were tested on spontaneous currents from layer  <dig> cortical pyramidal neurons . furosemide  had no significant effect on the amplitude of slow ipscs compared to control  observed in our sample population . in contrast, the amplitude of fast ipscs was significantly reduced  in the presence of furosemide  compared to control . ipsc frequency was not significantly reduced in the presence of furosemide for either fast  or slow events .

evoked responses were recorded from extracellular stimulation of the distal and proximal apical as well as the basal dendritic region of pyramidal cells in control and furosemide  treated conditions . furosemide significantly depressed  evoked fast ipsc responses from stimulation sites originating in the proximal apical dendritic region . responses evoked from stimulation near the basal dendritic region showed a trend toward depression from application of furosemide . furosemide did not significantly alter evoked response amplitudes  originating in the distal apical dendrites .

median values for control and furosemide groups are shown with the first and third quartiles indicated in parentheses. stimulation sites were grouped according to their proximity to the basal , proximal apical , or the distal apical  dendritic region of each pyramidal neuron. the decay time constants were estimated from the double exponential fits to the ipsc decaying response phase.

treatment with furosemide resulted in prolonged rise times for evoked ipscs for responses evoked from stimulation of the basal  and proximal apical  dendritic regions . the rise times were not significantly  altered for responses evoked through stimulation of the distal apical dendritic regions .

evoked ipscs displayed increased decay time constants in the presence of furosemide for stimulation sites originating near the basal and proximal apical dendritic regions . decay time constants were significantly longer  in the presence furosemide  versus control  for stimulation sites located near the basal dendrites . evoked ipsc responses showed a trend toward increased decay time constant duration in the presence of furosemide  compared to control  for stimulation sites near the proximal apical dendrites . stimulation sites located near the distal apical dendrites produced ipscs with no significant difference  in the median decay time constants in control or furosemide treated condtions .

one-way multivariate analysis of variance  table for the effects of furosemide on evoked synaptic responses resulting from stimulation at sites near the basal, proximal apical, and distal apical dendritic regions. degrees of freedom are shown for each stimulation category for within-group sum of squares and cross-products , between-group sum of squares and cross-products  and the total sum of squares and cross-products . wilk's Λ test statistics are shown for each stimulation category along with the resulting p-value .

furosemide only partially depressed many of the evoked responses and the residual components often displayed slower kinetics than the control condition. in other cases furosemide completely suppressed the evoked response. increasing the stimulus intensity in the presence of furosemide revealed an evoked ipsc with slow kinetics even in cases  where the responses were completely suppressed . picrotoxin  completely suppressed all evoked responses. furosemide appeared to selectively depress the fast component of responses, revealing a slow ipsc that contributed to most evoked responses. this occurred for responses evoked through distal and proximal apical dendritic and basal dendritic region stimulation.

discussion
our study shows that both evoked and spontaneous gabaa-mediated slow ipscs occur in neocortex. slow gabaa-mediated ipscs display quantitatively similar kinetics properties for rise time and decay time  as those observed in the hippocampus  <cit> . spontaneous gabaa slow ipscs in the neocortex occurred infrequently compared to gabaa fast events. the low frequency of occurrence of spontaneous slow gabaa-mediated ipscs could explain the lack of previous reports of this slow synaptic inhibition in neocortex.

inhibitory interneurons within the neocortex form a highly interconnected and heterogeneous population of cells that appear to segregate into unique groups both morphologically and functionally  <cit> . two well described neocortical interneuron subtypes, fast-spiking  and low-threshold-spiking  cells, can be distinguished by their unique synaptic kinetics  <cit> . the ipscs from fs and lts cells have fast synaptic current rise times, but lts cells have slower decay time constants. the slow gabaa-mediated currents presented here display even slower rise times and decay time constants than the ipscs reported for fs and lts cells. perhaps gabaa slow ipscs also arise from of a unique subtype of interneuron.

it is unlikely that slow gabaa ipscs are merely a result of filtering from the cable properties of dendrites. we have shown here that pure fast as well as slow gabaa-mediated ipscs were preferentially evoked through electrical stimulation of the distal apical dendritic zones  of layer  <dig> pyramidal neurons. previous reports have shown that, unlike epscs, ipscs evoked in distal apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons show little effects of kinetic slowing from dendritic cable properties  <cit> . also we have observed similar time constants of ipscs recorded with either cscl or kcl internal solutions. cscl is known to block k+ channels and increase the signal to noise ratio for distal ipscs. in addition, furosemide failed to block distally evoked evens, suggesting a distinct pharmacological action based on the anatomical origin of stimulation.

slow gabaa-mediated ipscs observed in the neocortex are pharmacologically distinct from fast gabaa ipscs. a gabaa subtype-specific antagonist, furosemide  <cit> , did not alter gabaa slow ipscs, while it markedly attenuated spontaneous gabaa fast responses amplitudes . gabaa-mediated ipscs observed within the hippocampus show similar furosemide selectivity  <cit> . the differential sensitivity of fast and slow components to furosemide suggests that slow and fast responses in neocortex have unique gabaa receptor subunit compositions. gaba receptors containing either α <dig> or α <dig> subunits display the fastest decay time constants  <cit> . gaba receptors containing either α <dig>  <cit> , α <dig>  <cit> , or α <dig>  <cit>  have slower decay kinetics than either α <dig> or α <dig>  furthermore, furosemide has a 50-fold greater selectivity at α4βγ <dig> gabaa receptors, which have fast kinetics, compared to other isoforms  <cit> . blocking these fast-decaying receptors would yield a pool of slower  or similarly slow decaying  receptors.

it has been shown previously that furosemide nonspecifically blocks the k+/cl- cotransporters nkcc <dig> and kcc <dig>  <cit> . blocking cl- cotransporters would increase internal cl- concentrations and likely decrease the time constants of ipscs by increasing membrane resistance. however, we observed a time constant increase in the presence of furosemide. nonspecific effects on cl- cotransporters are also unlikely to affect synaptic responses in our preparation, because the chloride gradient was already reversed with a kcl-based internal solution .

some evoked and spontaneous responses were composed of a combination of slow and fast components. similar combined fast and slow components of gabaa-mediated ipscs have also been observed in piriform cortex  <cit> . the slower second components of evoked ipscs were proposed to result from activation of gabaa slow receptors. however, spontaneously occurring slow ipscs have not been shown in piriform cortex.

at least one-third of spontaneous events in our study contained a significant slow second component decay time constant as revealed with double-exponential fits. application of furosemide revealed a residual response component with slow kinetics in evoked ipscs for many cells. the decay time constants  of the residual currents were consistent with gabaa slow currents.

anatomical comparison revealed that ipsc responses with purely slow components were evoked in layer  <dig> pyramidal neurons through microstimulation of either the distal apical  or basal  dendrites but not the proximal apical dendrites. in contrast, fast ipsc responses were evoked with near-threshold stimulation throughout the dendritic arbor. in the presence of furosemide, slow ipscs were revealed in otherwise fast ipsc evoked responses at all locations of dendritic stimulation . ipscs evoked through stimulation of distal apical dendrites were also not depressed by furosemide. the presence of slow ipsc components in the evoked responses at proximal apical dendrites with application of furosemide suggests that gabaa slow responses occur throughout the dendritic length but are masked by stronger fast responses. this might result from a higher density of gabaa receptor subtypes responsible for fast responses at these locations. the exact location of synapses evoked through our stimulation might not correspond to our stimulation sites. because the synapses of any particular stimulation site might terminate some distance from the origin of stimulation, our anatomical classification cannot distinguish between the location of cell bodies versus synaptic inputs.

slow spontaneous ipscs might result from a unique population of inhibitory synapses containing gabaa receptors composed of subunits with only slow kinetics  <cit> . another possibility is that perisynaptic tonic receptors are activated by spillover of gaba from nearby fast phasic synapses without activating gabaa receptors that contribute to fast responses  <cit> . the low frequency of occurrence of these slow spontaneous events might result from the unique anatomical arrangement required for such an event to occur. both mechanisms have been suggested previously to explain gabaa slow responses observed in the hippocampus  <cit> . at this time, it is not possible to distinguish between activation of synapses with purely slow gabaa receptors versus spillover. selective agonists and antagonists for both types of receptors or specific knockout/knockin genetic models will be needed for future studies  <cit> .

the results presented here focused primarily on inhibitory synaptic inputs to excitatory pyramidal neurons. however, we observed spontaneous slow gabaa ipscs in neocortical interneurons as well. because of the diversity of subtypes of inhibitory neurons, a systematic analysis of each subtype will be required to make meaningful statistical arguments for each subtype and is beyond the scope of this study  <cit> . gabaa slow ipsc responses evoked in inhibitory neurons may provide a fruitful direction for future investigations.

CONCLUSIONS
inhibitory synaptic inputs of neocortical neurons are an important component of feedforward and feedback processing  <cit> . it has been shown that visual evoked field potentials display differential sensitivity to gabaa and gabab blockade for afferent feedforward components versus long-range feedback interactions  <cit> . it will be important to determine what role slow gaba responses have in specific aspects of visual feedforward or feedback processing. new genetic and molecular tools will be necessary to study these mechanisms in vivo.

intrinsic network oscillations also appear to be controlled by inhibitory inputs  <cit> . gabaa slow ipscs displayed durations ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> ms; therefore, slow gabaa-mediated ipscs might play a role in controlling alpha or beta rhythm  activity  <cit> . incorporating gabaa slow ipscs into computational models of cortical function will help improve our understanding of cortical information processing.

