BACKGROUND
next-generation sequencing  technology is a powerful tool for extracting and interpreting genetic information from a broad range of biological systems, e.g., mirna regulatory networks  <cit> , genome-wide association between single nucleotide polymorphisms  and phenotypes  <cit> , dna-protein interactions  <cit> , and differentially expressed genes between treated and control samples  <cit> . ngs is preferable over first-generation sanger sequencing because of its high sequencing throughput and low cost per base pair. with ngs, sequencing an entire human genome becomes feasible, which enables a larger cohort of samples in genome-scale comparative studies. rna-seq is a major branch of ngs technology that is useful for studying transcriptomes  <cit> . one aspect of transcriptome research is quantification of expression levels for various genomic elements, e.g., genes, transcripts, and non-coding rnas  <cit> . acquiring transcriptome expression profiles requires that genomic elements be defined in the context of the genome. multiple human genome annotations exist, including the aceview database  <cit>  and the refseq database  <cit> . thus, it is necessary to study the impact of genome annotation choice on transcriptome quantification.

genome annotation is a dynamic process that defines coordinates for each genomic element with respect to the genome sequence. such a process bridges the gap between dna or rna sequences and biological functions  <cit> . integration of a genome annotation with mapping information from rna-seq short sequence reads enables quantification of genomic elements such as genes and transcripts. each genome annotation project uses different annotation strategies and information sources. thus, high variation exists among multiple available annotations in terms of the comprehensiveness of annotated genomic elements. some annotation strategies rely on computer-based prediction, resulting in more complex gene models that contain more predictive or exploratory genomic elements. other annotation strategies rely on evidence-based methods, i.e., methods that require more manual curation, leading to simpler gene models with fewer genes and isoforms .

we compare six human genome annotations from various databases, including the aceview database  <cit> , the ensembl database  <cit> , the h-invdb database  <cit> , the refseq database  <cit> , the ucsc known genes database  <cit> , and the vega database  <cit> . the key characteristics of each genome annotation are summarized in table  <dig>  in which annotations are ordered by decreasing complexity from left to right. the term "complexity" describes the primary differentiating characteristic among the genome annotations. we define the complexity of a human genome annotation to be proportional to the number of genes, isoforms, and exons. this definition enables us to investigate the relationship between downstream rna-seq analyses  and the observed genome annotation complexity. we hypothesize that a more complex genome annotation is more difficult for rna-seq mapping and quantification because of the difficulties of determining a best possible mapping from multiple candidate mappings and assigning unresolved ambiguous mappings to their correct genomic elements.

aceview genes
h-invdb genes
ensembl genes
vegagenes
ucscknown genes
refseqgenes
maximum # of isoforms per gene
the annotated percentage is the total length of all genomic elements  over the entire length of the human genome

any relationship between genome annotation complexity and gene expression quantification could be helpful in guiding the selection of a genome annotation for various expression studies using rna-seq data. currently no guidelines for selecting a genome annotation for rna-seq are available, and the effect of genome annotation choice on downstream data analysis is still unclear. the focus of this study is to acquire some insights into the impact of human genome annotation choice on rna-seq expression estimates.

RESULTS
complexity of human genome annotations
effect of human genome annotation complexity on mapping
we propose two metrics to assess the effect of genome annotation complexity on sequence mapping. we first examine read mapping information and classify them into three categories for single-end sequencing samples or into five categories for paired-end sequencing samples. we use osa alignment outputs as an example to demonstrate the impact of genome annotation choice on read mapping. for both the shorter read length single-end sequencing sample  and the longer read length paired-end sequencing sample , we observe similar results . the refseq annotation consistently has the highest percentage of uniquely mapped reads and uniquely paired reads in the single-end case and paired-end case, respectively. note that the percentage of unmapped reads is similar for all annotations. the percentage of non-uniquely mapped reads or read pairs increases as genome annotation becomes more complex. outlying cases exist , but the observed trend still follows the complexity measure. from table  <dig>  more complex annotations generally annotate more genes and isoforms and thus, increase the possibility of ambiguous mappings. these ambiguous mappings are more difficult to resolve for identifying the best mapping, which directly translates to the increase in percentage of non-uniquely mapped reads when using more complex annotations.

we then examine the percentage of reads that map to the annotated and un-annotated genomic sequences. more reads mapping to the annotated genomic sequences implies that more sequence information will be available for the quantification step. reads mapping to the un-annotated regions are not useful for quantifying predefined genomic elements. from figure  <dig>  we observe that the aceview annotation results in the highest percentage of reads that map to annotated sequences. in contrast, the ucsc and refseq annotations have lower percentages of reads that map to annotated sequences, with ucsc being the lowest. other than this outlying case, this evaluation metric follows the annotation complexity measure.

effect of human genome annotation complexity on quantification
we propose two metrics to assess the impact of genome annotation complexity on rna-seq quantification. the first metric is to evaluate the stability of gene and isoform expression estimates. figure  <dig> demonstrates the variation of average coefficient of variation  due to the choice of annotation and the selection of gene or isoform subgroups. we focus on four subgroups: all genes of each annotation, common genes  that are defined in all annotations, genes not common to all annotations , and all isoforms. the smaller variance between replicate expression estimates leads to the lower average cv. trends for all genes and uncommon genes are similar. the aceview annotation has the highest average cv, followed by the vega annotation, the ensembl annotation, the h-invdb annotation, the ucsc annotation, and the refseq annotation. in the case of all isoforms, sometimes the h-invdb annotation results in the highest average cv. for common genes, the difference in average cv between various annotations is not large. the refseq annotation always results in the lowest average cv, whereas the h-invdb or aceview annotations have the highest average cv. the variation between annotations becomes larger for the cases of all genes, uncommon genes, and all isoforms since more annotation-specific elements are being considered. more complex annotations are more challenging for quantification because a larger number of ambiguous mappings occur. note that ensembl and vega deviate from the trend of the annotation complexity measure. a possible rationale for this observation is that the ensembl and vega annotations tend to include more small rnas compared to the other annotations. since the sequencing data we are analyzing follows the poly-a enrichment library preparation protocol, ideally, only mrna is retained in the final sequencing samples. thus, the majority of small rnas should have zero or very low expression. we define these zero expressing elements as absent genomic elements. the inclusion of additional low expressing genomic elements in the ensembl or vega annotation results in larger average cv.

effect of annotation complexity on differential expression calling
for thrombin study samples , we use osa alignment with htseq-count quantification to prepare input read count data for the edger package. most of the top  <dig> differentially expressed genes are detected in at least two of the six annotations, while several others are unique and annotation-specific  <cit> . even though the functions of these annotation-specific genes are unclear, more complex annotations are still preferable since they provide an opportunity to identify novel genomic elements that may be functionally important.

three genes were validated by rt-qpcr technology for the thrombin study samples . we examine the difference between rna-seq-based fold-changes and rt-qpcr-based fold-changes and summarize the results in table  <dig>  from table  <dig>  we observe that the ucsc annotation always outperforms refseq annotation in terms of the lowest average absolute deviation from the rt-qpcr fold-change estimates. however, the difference between them is not large. in contrast, aceview and h-invdb annotations have relatively higher average absolute deviations. we can infer from this observation that more complex annotations increase the difficulty of estimating gene expression accurately. higher variations in gene expression estimates propagate to fold-change estimates and other differential expression test-statistics.

the rt-qpcr data for maqc samples is publicly available in the geo database. we use three statistics to assess variations due to genome annotation choice. as shown in figure  <dig>  less complex genome annotations, e.g., the refseq annotation, results in lower average absolute deviation, lower root mean squared error , and higher correlation coefficient when comparing rna-seq fold-change estimates to rt-qpcr fold-change estimates. the variation between annotations is larger when using fpkm expression estimates from the tophat/cufflinks pipeline. some outlying cases exist , but the general trend of this evaluation metric still follows the annotation complexity measure.

CONCLUSIONS
the genome annotation is a necessary component of rna-seq expression analysis. multiple genome annotations are publicly available; however, it is not clear how different choices of genome annotation will affect downstream rna-seq expression estimates. we defined the complexity of human genome annotation, and assessed the relationship between genome annotation complexity and several rna-seq performance metrics. based on our complexity measure, we ordered existing human genome annotations from most to least complex as follows: aceview, h-invdb, ensembl, vega, ucsc, and refseq. in more complex annotations, a higher percentage of the entire genome is annotated. for rna-seq sequence mapping, less complex annotations result in a higher percentage of uniquely mapped reads and uniquely mapped pairs for both single-end and paired-end sequencing samples. however, at the same time, the number of rna-seq reads that map to annotated genomic sequences is smaller for less complex annotations. genome annotation complexity also affects rna-seq expression estimates. more complex annotations result in more ambiguous mappings, which increase the difficulty of rna-seq quantification and thus, cause higher expression variation between rna-seq technical replicates. furthermore, more complex annotations lead to a lower percentage of present  genes or isoforms, which suggests that the predictive or hypothetical genomic elements in these annotations tend to belong to non-expressors or low expressors. for rna-seq differentially expressed gene detection, the concordance is high among the six annotations. more complex annotations are capable of identifying annotation-specific genes that may be functionally important. deviations in rna-seq expression estimates due to differences in genome annotation complexity can propagate to fold-change statistics and, subsequently, differential expression detection. thus, when comparing rna-seq fold-change statistics to ground truth rt-qpcr fold-change statistics, more complex annotations tend to have larger deviation and smaller correlation. in summary, the impact of genome annotation choice on rna-seq expression estimates is significant, and the choice of annotation should depend on the study. less complex genome annotations are preferable for studies that require more stable rna-seq expression estimates. however, to discover and explain unknown biological mechanisms, more comprehensive and complex genome annotations are necessary.

