BACKGROUND
comparative genomics is based on the conservation of the molecular function of genes in different organisms throughout evolution. orthologous genes can be studied in simple, genetically tractable model systems, as a first step to address their function in higher organisms, including humans and evaluate their possible roles in diseases. the completion of dictyostelium genome now offers the opportunity to study the function of conserved genes present in the social amoeba and other organisms in a systematic way  <cit> .

dictyostelium is a primitive eukaryote, living as a single cell organism while bacteria, its source of nutrients, are present in the soil. when bacteria are consumed, starvation triggers a complex response allowing the cells to aggregate by chemotaxis and form a multicellular structure. many different aspects of its biology including motility, chemotaxis, cytokinesis, cell-differentiation and morphogenesis among others, are more closely related to those in higher organisms than to unicellular models, such as yeasts  <cit> . we have performed a systematic knock-out approach to begin to address the function of genes of unknown function present in dictyostelium and human but absent from s. cerevisiae and s. pombe  <cit> .

the classical approach of gene inactivation in dictyostelium is performed by the insertion of a resistant cassette in the target gene by homologous recombination. obtaining the disruption construct is time consuming since large flanking sequences are necessary to assure a high efficiency of the process. a pcr-based method and an in vitro transposition strategy have been developed facilitating the technique  <cit> . in the last method, the cloned gene is subjected to random insertion of a transposon containing a blasticidine-resistance cassette. the construct in which the transposon has interrupted the cloned gene is identified, expanded, digested and used for transformation of dictyostelium cells. since transposon insertion is random, it is sometimes necessary to screen a large number of clones, mainly when the gene is small. besides, after transformation, the variable efficiency of homologous recombination in dictyostelium makes the isolation of the disruptant strain tedious, since many different transformants must be screened to distinguish between random insertion and homologous recombination. although all these difficulties are not a threat when few knock-outs are being performed, they can be overwhelming when we try to scale up the number of genes to study. we have therefore optimized all the steps from cloning of the gene, construction of the disruption vector, preparation of dna for transformation and the screening of dictyostelium transformants. we describe in detail the methods and illustrate its usefulness to disrupt a subset of genes of unknown function highly conserved between dictyostelium and human.

RESULTS
optimizing the construction of disruption vectors in dictyostelium
we have essentially followed the protocol described by  <cit>  designed to insert a transposable cassette , containing blasticidin- and tetracycline-resistance cassettes, into a cloned gene. the gene loci were previously amplified by pcr and cloned into pgem-t vector as described in the methods section. ideally, insertion events of the transposon must be in the middle of the clone, leaving large flanking regions to allow for an efficient homologous recombination. besides, it might be important to interrupt the gene as much 5' as possible to disrupt the coded protein near the n-terminus. since in vitro transposition is random, many different clones must be analyzed to find a correct location of the cassette. consequently, the selection of the right insertion might be time-consuming, mainly when the targeted gene is small in comparison with the cloned insert. we have therefore designed a simple pcr strategy for a rapid assessment of the insertion point of the cassette after an in vitro transposition reaction. a single pcr reaction will provide information about the point of insertion and the same reaction can be sequenced directly to obtain the precise location of the insertion.

oligonucleotides a, b and eztn-r  were used in a pcr reaction with dna isolated from the bacterial colonies obtained after in vitro transposition as described in detail in the methods section. in those plasmids where the transposon was inserted in the vector, as illustrated in fig 1a, a band corresponding to the size of the insert is expected . however, if the insertion took place in the insert , eztn-r oligo would be located in the right position for amplification with oligo a or b . in this case, a band smaller than the size of the insert is expected, and its own size will provide an estimate of the position of the transposon . in the case shown in figure 1c, lanes  <dig> and  <dig> suggested good candidates. the specific insertion point can then be obtained by direct sequencing of the pcr product with oligo eztn-r. the use of dna extracted directly from the bacterial colonies and the procedure to obtained quality dna for sequencing are optimized steps carefully described in the methods section.

analysis of gene disruption by pcr
the region containing the flanking sequences and the inserted transposon was amplified by pcr using the universal oligonucleotides a and b . transformation of the pcr product is a faster alternative to the isolation of dna by maxi-prep and subsequent digestion. moreover, we have observed a higher transformation efficiency with pcr-derived dna than that obtained with maxi-preps.

after selection, transformants were plated in association with klebsiella aerogenes for clonal isolation. as soon as the lysis plaques are visible, cells from the growing zone were picked up and dna extracted for pcr analysis. as depicted in fig 2a,b, two close oligonucleotides surrounding the transposon insertion were previously synthethized for each targeted gene  to allow efficient amplification of the genomic region. a typical example of the analysis of dictyostelium colonies by pcr is shown in figure 2c. lanes  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> show the absence of the lower band corresponding to the amplification of the unaffected gene with oligos g <dig> and g <dig>  concomitantly, an upper band indicates the insertion of the transposon in the locus. an internal control corresponding to the amplification of an unrelated locus is included. the selected strains were grown and saved frozen for future analysis.

targeting genes of unknown function
in order to prove the value of the method, we have constructed  <dig> disruption constructs as described above for genes of unknown function present in dictyostelium and human but absent from the genome of the yeasts s. cerevisiae and s. pombe. the level of homology of the putative proteins between dictyostelium and human, as determined by e-value, was equal or lower than e- <dig>  the disruption constructs were amplified by pcr and transformed in dictyostelium by electroporation.  <dig> genes were successfully disrupted and for the remaining  <dig> we did not detect any homologous recombination events even after checking more than  <dig> independent transformants. either the efficiency of homologous recombination in those loci was very low or alternatively, disruption of the gene leads to lethality. the data has been compiled in table  <dig> including those genes previously described   <cit> . curated models of these predicted genes can be found at dictybase  <cit> . the possible phenotype of the disruptants is now under investigation and will open the possibility to use dictyostelium as a suitable model to address the function of these genes as previously described for mida, a new mitochondrial protein involved in bioenergetics  <cit> . as expected, most of the genes are also represented in other model systems such as drosophila, caenorhabditis and arabidopsis. however, a group of them are absent in some of the models. remarkably,  <dig> of them  are present in human and dictyostelium and no homologues can be recognized in the genomes of the mentioned model systems. in these particular cases, dictyostelium is probably the only non-vertebrate model to study their function. the absence of these genes in the yeast models suggests that their function might be related with those aspects that are closer in dictyostelium and higher eukaryotes than to unicellular protists. according to this, our preliminary phenotype analysis of the ko strains has revealed the involvement of some of these proteins in processes such as chemotaxis, motility, cytokinesis, phagocytosis and development .

CONCLUSIONS
a complete protocol from gene cloning to isolation of disruptant strains in dictyostelium is presented in this methodological report. every step was optimized from gene cloning to selection of homologous recombination, with the aim to allow large-scale gene disruption strategies, such as the one described for the analysis of genes of unknown function. once optimized, we have been able to complete the described protocol for a group of  <dig> genes in approximately  <dig> weeks of one person's work. it is conceivable for a well-trained technician to process  <dig> genes in a year. extrapolating our results, we might expect to fail obtaining knock-out strains in around 30% of any group of genes, in part due to lethality. other simple approaches must be designed to cope with these difficulties. meanwhile, the existing methods, such as the one described here, will help to the rapid development of functional genomics in dictyostelium.

