BACKGROUND
while it is said that the human and chimpanzee genomes share anywhere from  <dig> to  <dig> % similarity in their dna sequences, base exchanges and small indels alone are unlikely to completely explain the differences among diverging primates and between other mammals. comparative genomics identifies functional elements by searching for conserved dna across species and is an excellent method for identifying highly conserved biological functions  <cit> . however, sequence conservation is not sufficient to identify newly evolved functions. although point mutations in combination with selection can explain changes in transcriptomes and proteomes, the high number of retroposition events along the primate lineage must also be considered to understand the phenotypic difference between primates and other mammals. our aim is to understand how one class of these, retroposed mrna  influenced gene evolution in primates.

primates experienced a large increase in retroposed insertions, and at least forty-five percent of the human genome is composed of retroposed elements  <cit> . the majority of random sequences in the human genome are also retroposition-derived, but are too old to be recognized as such  <cit> . the subclass of retroposed copies of spliced mrnas are referred to as retrocopies, irrespective of their potential functionality  <cit> . retrogenes are then those retrocopies that do not decay in the genome but have been exapted into a variant or novel function. discernible retrocopies contribute only about 1% of the human genome, yet they have a much more varied protein coding space than other more numerous types of retroposed elements, including the long interspersed elements  and short interspersed elements . the latter lack protein coding regions altogether. yet, part of alu and mir sines contributed to newly evolved exons  <cit> .

authors differ widely in their assessment of the number of functional retrogenes  <cit> . following the first reports of functional retrogenes in the late eighties  <cit> , it was thought that these were isolated cases, as mrna retrocopies lack their own promoter elements. despite this apparent handicap, research in the last  <dig> years has shown that gene duplication via retroposition – as opposed to segmental duplication of entire genes including their regulatory elements- is able to equip retrogenes with regulatory elements that are different from those in the parent gene and often leads to different expression patterns  <cit> . formation of new genes via retroposition followed by positive selection and/or adaptive evolution during modification of genes via exon acquisition has been increasingly reported  <cit> . in addition to simple duplication events, gene fusions involving retrocopies that contribute protein domains with sequence similarities to existing genes were also reported both in animals  <cit>  and in plants  <cit> . transcribed retrogenes or retrocopies also have the potential to become functional as non-protein coding rnas .

the number of new genes that have arisen since mouse and human split from their common ancestor is small compared with the total number of human genes  <cit>  and apparently, most proteins arose by duplication and divergence of existing ones  <cit> . yet, it would be surprising if evolution would not have grasped opportunities of genes  "out of the blue", i.e., from loci that previously were intergenic or intronic. early studies suggested "overprinting" of a protein coding region in a different reading frame as a means of generating new protein sequence space  <cit> . this concept has been revisited one and a half decades later in alternatively spliced genes  <cit> . the idea of recruiting novel protein sequence space out of random intronic sequences dates back to wally gilbert's suggestion three decades ago  <cit>  with experimental evidence initially accumulating slowly  <cit> . interestingly, it has been shown experimentally that an arbitrary sequence can evolve towards acquiring a biological function  <cit> . young genes or young parts of more ancient genes are a unique set to examine because we can see both the putative successes and apparent failures of natural selection, before the latter are erased by mutations. although our study focuses on these more recent events, we also find evidence for more ancient events. this, along with the fact that 12–15% of mammalian genes are intronless  <cit> , one of the hallmarks of retrocopy retroposition, suggests that the process of retroposition and the idiosyncratic variations of potential novel protein sequence acquisition have been important for billions of years in generating novel protein-sequence space  <cit> . our results document that there are many mechanisms beyond segmental duplication and point mutations by which genomes generate new genes or variants of existing ones. retrocopies provide the means for modifying splice patterns of genes  <cit> , potentially adding entirely new protein coding sequences, and contributing non-protein coding rna or regulatory sequences, thereby expanding the possibilities to shape gene evolution. from here on, when we mention retrocopy-derived protein sequences, orfs, and/or exons, we assert that they are potential, hypothetical or theoretical only. the main rationale of this publication is to delineate the multitude of possible ways in that mrna retrocopies, once exapted, can contribute to novel protein sequences over evolutionary time.

RESULTS
retrocopies with strong evidence of expression
to determine how many retrocopies are potentially functional, we used blastz to align all human mrnas to the human genome, which resulted in several hundred thousand alignments. these matches were then scored for a set of features, including the number of processed introns; the absence of conserved splice sites; breaks in orthology with mouse, dog, and rhesus monkey; the presence, position, and length of the poly tail; and sequence similarity and fraction of the parent mrna that is represented in the retrogene , indicating evidence of the likelihood of recent retroposition. from this we obtained a set of  <dig>  candidates that are likely retroposed copies of intron-containing parent genes. in order to set our score threshold, we compared our set to the manually curated vega of processed pseudogenes . when we found disagreements between the sets, we either improved our feature set or discovered problems with the vega annotation. this resulted in improvements of both. in order to determine if the retrocopies are expressed, we looked for overlap with mrna or est evidence. following filtering to eliminate  <dig> cases without mrna or est evidence, we found that  <dig>  retrocopies showed evidence of expression by at least one est or one mrna . for our analysis we used more stringent requirements for expression  than previous work. we chose not to use ka/ks analysis to look for evidence of natural selection, mostly due to the short length of retrogene sequences. many of those could be functional parts of genes; however, for more recent events, final proof might be difficult.

major categories of retrocopy contributions
to evaluate the types of events that led to new functional gene candidates or modifications of existing genes, and to reduce the possibility that a given transcript resulted from genomic priming, we increased the stringency factor for evidence of expression and examined in more detail a reduced set of  <dig> cases that overlapped at least five ests and one mrna or annotated as a gene in refseq or ucsc knowngenes .

we examined, in detail, all cases that were not purely duplication events, specifically those events that exhibited evidence of exon acquisition : 1) cases with multiple coding exons, and 2) cases that showed evidence of contributions from retrocopy orfs in the antisense direction. in general, we found that the retroposition events can be described predominantly by the following three categories: type i: exon acquisition, in which part of the retrocopy was included into an existing gene transcript, in particular, in which a portion of the retrocopy could potentially serve as a protein coding exon. type ii: retropositional gene duplication, in which apparently no pre-existing host gene at the site of insertion was altered. type ii events, in order be functional, would require recruitment of resident regulatory elements at the site of insertion, such as promoters and/or enhancers, and the process may have been accompanied by intron generation, for example, to reduce the size of 5' utrs  <cit> . finally, type iii retrocopy events occur, in contrast to type i and ii events, when the retrocopy contributed a sequence that is largely out-of-frame, derived from a utr, or in the opposite orientation with respect to the retrocopy's parent. other flanking dna sequences, including those derived from other transposed elements , may also be co-opted into the structure of these ab initio gene candidates. hence, the type iii genes, if functional, have a protein sequence that is mostly novel.

comparison with other datasets
we found good agreement between our candidate set of transcribed retrocopies and the major transcribed retrocopy datasets produced by other groups  <cit> . of the  <dig> transcribed retrocopies reported by harrison  <cit>  we agreed with  <dig> cases. randomly selected cases that were missing from our set were cases that relied soley on scarce est data and fell below our threshold. of the ten randomly selected cases in our set that were missing from the harrison set, 30% were present in the kaessmann set  <cit> . of the remaining cases not present in our set or kaessman's, 20% have weak expression evidence but were nevertheless classified as retrocopies by harrison . in contrast, we found many examples in the hoppsigen dataset  <cit>  that were not present in our dataset or kaessman's set. a random sample of ten were all found to be either segmental duplications or inactive line elements that we assume were false positives in their data. kaessmann reported  <dig>  expressed retrocopies with at least one est  <cit> . we agreed with  <dig> of these. most of the cases missing from our set had mitochondrial, immunoglobin or zinc finger genes as parent genes. these were systematically excluded from our dataset because they are frequently generated by a different mechanism, i.e., segmental duplication. we reported  <dig> cases that were not present in kaessman's set. most were due to the smaller starting gene set that his pipeline used and exclusion of parental utrs from the analysis.

although the functional potential of type ii retrogenes was discussed early on  <cit>  and overwhelmingly substantiated over the past  <dig> years  <cit> , only a few type i exon-acquisition events have been reported  <cit>  as well as de-novo gene evolution  <cit> . the significant number of type i and type iii events that we report demonstrates the extent of the contribution of retrocopies to the evolutionary processes that test, reject, and retain novel amino acid encoding sequence space. all the retrogene candidates fall along a continuum from a large degree of similarity  to little similarity  to the original sequences in their respective parent genes. many of the putative, novel retrogenes, potentially encoding proteins with no similarities to other existing proteins, may have been missed by methods relying on protein alignments, as protein-based screening methods cannot find antisense insertions and also are not able to align utr regions of retrogenes. protein alignment methods miss type iii retrogenes entirely. the retrocopies involved in generation of type iii gene candidates made relatively small, but potentially 'seeding', contributions to the formation of novel genes. of course, it must be emphasized that most of the type ii and type iii mrna retrocopy-derived "retrogenes" described in this study are putative genes for which no proteins have as yet been documented. while some of these new transcripts may code for proteins, others may serve as non-protein coding rnas, possibly involved in cellular regulation  <cit>  or in chromatin remodeling  <cit> .

overview of types of events whose expression was strongly supported
of the  <dig> candidate retrocopies whose expression was supported by many transcripts,  <dig> were composed of single protein coding exons and  <dig> contained multiple protein coding exons. the  <dig> cases came from a set of manually examined cases that overlapped known genes with more than one exon , single exon cases transcribed in the reverse orientation based on est and mrna evidence , and a random sample of the other single exon cases that slipped through our initial screen due to alternative splicing . we compared: 1) the phylogenetic conservation of the orf in the various species listed in methods, 2) the relative contribution of the retrocopy to the new gene, 3) the relative contribution of the host gene , 4) contribution from other types of transposed elements, 5) whether the retrocopy inserted in the sense or antisense orientation, and 6) we compared the parent orf to the retrocopy orf looking for frameshifts and mutations. conclusions based on phylogenetic analysis are to be treated with caution as the non-human primate sequences contain a sufficient percentage of mistakes, erroneously indicating lack or presence of phylogenetic conservation in predicted orfs.

type i: retrocopy inserted into or near an existing gene. a portion of the retrocopy contributes, mostly by alternative splicing, a new sequence to a pre-existing mrna. type i events can be divided into cases that add new n- or c-terminal encoding exons or internal exons. type ii: duplicated gene inserted at a locus where no prior gene existed. type ii events often acquired 5' or 3' utr portions from the locus of integration after the insertion. type iii: novel gene sequence, whose encoded protein has little or no amino acid sequence similarity to that of the retrocopy's parent. frequently, type iii events include sines, lines, ltrs etc., as well as unannotated sequences as additional contributors to gene candidates.

type i – genes modified by exon acquisition
of all cases with strong evidence of expression that we inspected, we identified 5% as being potential gene fusions, or exon-acquisition events. it is generally assumed that inserted retrocopies decay without affecting the structure of the host gene. however, we found several examples in which part of a retrocopy orf integrated into the host gene , and often led to alternative mrna splicing . we cannot be sure of the duration of time between the retrotranposition event and the start of alternative splicing. the new splice sites were either fortuitously present in the orf of the retrocopy, or they arose subsequent to the integration by base changes over time. we did not observe splice sites in retrogenes that coincided with the splice sites in the parent gene. this is not surprising, as important intronic parts of splice sites are removed on the processed mrna templates prior to retroposition. therefore, figure  <dig> shows generic splice sites as dotted white vertical lines that do not coincide with splice sites used in the novel gene context. the six categories in figure 1a are defined as follows: 1) part of protein coding sequence from parent is used as alternatively spliced exon of the host gene. 2) retrocopy contributes new 3' exon to host gene . 3) in-frame contribution  combined with out-of-frame contribution  form a new n-terminal encoding region. a short 5' utr  has been generated from the orf of the retrocopy.

examples of specific categories of retrocopy insertion events shown in figure  <dig> with designation of parent gene. genomic locations of the examples are cross-referenced in . y; indicates presence of the retrogene in this species, n; indicates its absence, aa; amino acids in potential encoded entire protein, f/s; frame shift, wrt; with respect.

we also found several examples in which a putative novel exon had been exapted from an orf, but the reading frame is now different from that of the parent gene  which results in a shorter transcript. also, putative novel exons were exapted entirely from sequences that correspond to utrs of the parent gene, here alternatively sliced . in other instances insertion of a retrocopy and exaptation of an exon from that sequence triggered recruitment of an additional exon entirely from intronic space. for example, in figure 1a, category  <dig>  the retrocopy contributes in-frame protein coding region  combined with unannotated intergenic sequence  to form a new n-terminal encoding exon for the host gene. in turn, portions of the intronless retrocopy's protein coding region became an intronic sequence in the host gene . an interesting example of retrocopy mediated domain shuffling is the ctglf <dig> gene , which started as a cyclin gene, and then had three domains  contributed by insertion of a centg2-derived retrocopy. the mouse version of this gene, ak <dig>  has only a cyclin domain and represents the ancestral form before the retrocopy insertion. these observations underscore the fact that natural selection exapts novel sequence space in addition to slowly modifying existing sequence space.

type i exon acquisition in reverse orientation
while at least one group has reported on the existence of sense retrocopy integrations into existing genes, with coding contributions  <cit> , this is the first report of mrna retrocopy integrations in the antisense orientation. the existence of this category of retrocopy events, if functional, supports the idea that natural selection has no preference with respect to the origin of novel sequences. in this category, novel exons were recruited from retrocopies that inserted into or adjacent to host genes in the opposite orientation to the retrocopy's parent gene. as in the case of type ia 'sense' retrocopies, the splice sites in the 'antisense' retrocopies, of course, do not correspond to those present in the parent genes. of the type ib examples that we manually inspected, polypyrimidine tracts inserted by the retrocopy – used for recognition of splice sites – were frequently derived from antisense oligopurine tracts in the parent gene. these sequences are often rich in codons for lysine, glutamic acid, and glycine, as well as certain codons of arginine in the parent gene. a few type ib examples are described in detail below.

1) internal exon  added to host gene in the opposite orientation relative to the parent of the retrocopy for example, the brca <dig> gene has an alternatively spliced internal cassette exon  contributed by rpl <dig> in the antisense direction . the insertion occurred after the new world monkey split and the reading frame is open in chimpanzee, orangutan, and rhesus monkey.

2) internal exon added to host gene triggered recruitment of an additional protein coding exon from formerly intronic sequence . for example, rora acquired an internal cassette  from an antisense retrocopy of cycs. interestingly, a second exon  appeared in conjunction with the retrocopy-derived exon, apparently derived from an intronic sequence, that maintains the frame of the gene . the open reading frame is maintained in orangutan, rhesus monkey, and marmoset, but there is an early in-frame stop in chimpanzee  – an example in which one lineage did not retain such an innovation .

3) recruitment of a 3' exon including novel orf and 3' utr generated from orf of the retrocopy; it extends the orf of the host gene . examples are scp <dig>  hla-f, and kiaa <dig> with potentially functional variants that have alternatively spliced 3' ends that are derived from antisense retrocopy insertions of rras <dig>  rpl <dig>  and flj <dig>  respectively. the scp <dig> variant that includes the retrocopy-derived exon has a shorter transcript  and is only present in chimpanzee and human. in hla-f the insertion generated a longer orf . importantly, the retro-derived variants of scp <dig> and hla-f are reviewed ncbi refseq genes.

4) portion of the retrocopy contributes a potentially alternatively spliced protein coding exon in conjunction with a novel protein coding exon generated from intergenic sequence . for c6orf <dig>  we detected two mrna variants; the first, depicted in figure 1b , presumably also represents the ancestral status prior to the retrocopy insertion. the second putative variant has an alternative, upstream promoter, a new first exon from an unknown source, and a second protein coding exon  derived from the eif3s <dig> retrocopy in reverse orientation. surprisingly, the third putative coding exon in the second variant is also longer than the corresponding n-terminal coding region in the original variant. part of the eif3s <dig> utr was potentially exapted as a protein coding sequence . both splice forms and open reading frames coexist in chimpanzee and rhesus monkey.

5) alternative splicing or alternative translation after retrocopy insertion. the first putative protein coding exon becomes one of the 5' utr exons ; a second 5' utr exon is recruited from unknown sequences. the first putative protein coding exon  is recruited from the retrocopy . as in the aforementioned examples, denn1b and hk <dig> also exhibit mrna variants with and without their respective retrocopies. their promoters are shared by both variants and both have putative alternative translation starts. interestingly, in both cases the version with retrocopy contribution does not start transcription in the first exon, but instead, includes a second utr exon before splicing to the retrocopy-derived putative antisense coding exon. the next protein coding exon is shared by both variants. the orf for hk <dig> is open in chimpanzee, orangutan, and rhesus monkey. denn1b has valid orfs only in human and chimpanzee, but the retrocopy-derived portion is present with disruptions in orangutan and rhesus monkey.

6) two 5' utr exons, intron, and n-terminal encoding exon are recruited from the protein coding region of the retrocopy. for example, one variant of csmd <dig> is expressed in the brain and contains a sequence encoding a potential n-terminal  <dig> aa exon . the other putative variant of csmd <dig> is expressed in testes , and instead of the  <dig> aa exon uses part of an antisense rpl18-derived retrocopy; the event might also have led to use of a new promoter for the gene . in addition, a 5' utr exon and a small intron were derived from the protein coding region of the retrocopy. only the human version of the retrocopy-containing putative variant has an intact orf.

type ii duplication events
of the type ii events,  <dig> of them contained one or more 5' and/or 3' untranslated exons acquired along with regulatory elements derived from the flanking region of the insertion site  as predicted previously  <cit> . a few examples in which introns also arose in flanking utrs were reported recently  <cit> . in our numerous examples, we found no indication that the utr introns came from the parent gene. occasionally, a 5' or 3' exon recruited from the locus provided not only a utr, but also the first or last protein coding exon . we also observed shorter and longer n- or c-terminal encoding parts of genes in separate lineages , representing one of the mechanisms that might explain the frayed ends of many protein homologs, even orthologs  <cit> . in addition, we found cases where an intron arose within the coding region after retroposition . these and the aforementioned examples  underscore the notion that even intron-containing genes, especially those with large exons and relatively intron-impoverished with respect to their parent genes, can be derived from retroposition. similarly, one or several introns of a gene can be lost by recombination with the corresponding retrocopies  <cit> .

type iii novel gene candidates
in a small fraction of the cases  we examined, a putative new gene with no known homologs included a retrocopy  that inserted into the genome and possibly provided protein coding sequence either 1) out-of-frame  or 2) antisense with respect to the parent gene .

details of candidate genes showing parent gene, expression evidence and phylogeny shown in figure  <dig>  y; indicates presence of the retrogene in this species, n; indicates its absence, aa; amino acids in potential encoded protein, f/s; frame shift, wrt; with respect to.

examples are briefly described as follows: a) the novel candidate gene flj <dig> was generated from mark2-derived retrogene featuring protein coding sequence completely out-of-frame with respect to the parent. there is a potential ltr contribution of promoter and the remaining utr sequences of flj <dig> gene were derived from flanking sequence shown as blue bars. b) the novel candidate gene flj <dig> was generated from a krt18-derived retrocopy out-of-frame with respect to the parent, the remainder of the protein coding sequence was derived from flanking region. c) the first protein coding exon of candidate gene mgc <dig> was derived from a mir element ; the second exon from intergenic region  and the final protein coding exon from the 5' utr and orf of l13a-derived retrocopy out-of-frame . d) the novel gene candidate c15orf <dig> is processed into three alternatively spliced transcripts, two of which use retroposed sequences as first protein coding exon . the second protein coding exon, in part from unknown sequences, was fused to an hmg14-derived retrocopy completely out-of-frame. e) the rpl7a-derived retrocopy contributes half of the orf in-frame  and half out-of-frame  yielding novel gene candidate q9br <dig>  upstream exons were contributed by repeats . f) ct <dig> gene was generated, in part, from a napl1-derived retrocopy, which contributed the c-terminal encoding region out-of-frame. most of the orf  arose from intergenic sequence. g) two alternatively spliced mrnas originated from an rcn1-derived retrocopy  in reverse orientation. h) ltrs contributed utr and first protein coding exons ; other exons were derived from intergenic sequence ; candidate gene c20orf <dig> contains part of a loc16236-derived retrocopy in opposite orientation. i) two events, retroposition of snx <dig> followed by a second retroposition of snag <dig> or segmental duplication formed the intron containing candidate gene flj <dig> in reverse orientation to snag <dig>  presumably with generation of two introns out of ancestral orf sequences. j) a novel gene candidate flj <dig>  was formed from a c18orf24-derived retrocopy . the second, larger exon including a large part of orf was contributed by the internal promoter and 5' utr region of a line element . k) an iqck-derived retrocopy contributed the protein coding exon in reverse orientation  yielding novel gene candidate flj <dig>  downstream utr exons were derived from alu elements and intergenic sequences.

one can summarize the following: although there is no evidence that a protein is produced, the size of the putative new orfs ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> aa in human, and seven maintained open reading frames in human, chimpanzee and orangutan. only four cases also had open reading frames in rhesus monkey and only two also in marmoset . suprisingly, all but three had multiple putative exons, lending further weight to the notion that we were not observing random transcription. while fusions between existing genes and mobile elements have been described  <cit> , we also observed exons that were generated, in conjunction with the retrocopy, by other types of transposed elements and/or unannotated sequences. for example, most of the ct <dig> gene  <cit>  which has evidence of protein coding sequence  arose initially from unannotated sequence , amplified by segmental duplication and has a valid orf in human, chimpanzee, orangutan, rhesus macaque, and marmoset. other cases in which a gene arose from unannotated sequences have been described in flies  <cit> . out of the  <dig> primate cases, seven had putative protein coding regions that included repetitive elements . one was composed of a chimeric fusion of two retrocopies .

functional categories of source genes
we looked at go annotations of the parent genes that spawned retrocopies. for both the expressed on non-expressed sets of retrocopies we found no statistically significant enrichment from a normally distributed set.

discussion
the more than  <dig> instances of evidently transcribed retrocopies in the human genome indicate that this process has contributed significantly to our transcriptome, and may have contributed novel protein coding segments more often than previously appreciated. how these changes altered the content and regulation of the repertoire of protein coding genes remains to be experimentally investigated. however, it is evident that the retrocopy mechanism provides an extremely versatile means to tinker with gene structure, and many of the topologically possible kinds of novel exon recruitment events seem to have been explored.

we observed retroposition events that happened prior to vertebrate diversification, those that date from after the homo sapiens lineage diverged from that of the chimpanzees, and those that occurred at times between these events. each of these events was/is initially a chance event – probably neutral at best. the combination of neutral forces and natural selection are responsible of the future trajectories, whether such a gene with retrocopy contribution persists or is abandoned in all or some of the subsequent lineages after a "trial period", which can be very short or last for tens of millions of years. this does not differ from genes that arose entirely by segmental duplication. in either case, a certain proportion is eventually discarded in all or some lineages, after being active for some time, while others persist.

does segmental duplication or retroposition lead to more functional duplicated genes? the fact that some retrocopies lack their own promoters might be construed as a disadvantage. however, the high percentage  of the genome being transcribed  <cit>  should help neutralize this apparent disadvantage. moreover, recruitment of a novel promoter might be an advantage over that of an amplified gene that was generated via segmental duplication. in fact, many retrogenes exhibit expression patterns that are drastically different from those of the parent genes  <cit> . perhaps the increase in retroposition in primates has allowed greater regulatory flexibility to evolve in a relatively short time.

the uncertainty of a long life after the birth of a gene is not much different from the exonizations of novel sequence domains in "established" host genes. krull  <cit>  examined the history of five alu element exonizations by phylogenetic analyses and found that many of these events did not persist in all lineages in which they were exonized. in contrast, of five mir element exonizations analyzed, four are present and expressed as mrna in all mammals examined  <cit> , and there are likely many more – thus far unproven – mir exonizations. when comparing the older mir exonizations with the younger alu exonizations, it is apparent that over the past billion years, most exonization were transient and, due to low levels or lack of evolutionary pressure, did not persist. as an aside, it appears that exonizations can occur at any time following the sine insertion. there is one apparently old and previously neutrally evolving mir that only "recently" was exapted as a protein coding exon in the alpha <dig> nicotinic cholinergic receptor gene in great apes  <cit> . likewise, it is conceivable that a retrocopy or part thereof can be exapted at any stage of decay . at the same time, it is clear that some of the aforementioned alu exonizations have persisted in some lineages and not in others. the inability to predict whether an event will persist is equally impossible for younger type ii retrocopy insertion events.

novel exon recruitment often occurs at the ends of genes. eleven of the  <dig> type i  mrna retrocopy events added exons at the 3' or 5' ends of the transcripts, while only four transcripts contained coding exons inserted internally, the remaining cases have new utr exons added to existing genes. this makes sense if one considers that only one splice site needs to be added to extend the orf at the end of the gene. we also observed that type ii retrogenes, presumably during phases of no or little purifying selection and/or during periods of positive selection, frequently changed in different lineages, mostly with respect to the n- and c-terminal encoding parts of the orfs . for example, in one lineage the c-terminal encoding part of the orf is truncated compared to the orthologous region in another lineage. it might be reasoned that changes at protein extremities are better tolerated than elsewhere in the protein. this is supported by large-scale sequence comparisons of orthologous proteins, in which the terminals vary more than do the rest of the proteins  <cit> .

apart from the acquisition of existing protein domains , the acquisition of novel protein sequence space via retroposition  plays a role in ab initio formation of genes. apart from hitherto neutrally evolving sequences , these putatitvely novel genes can include i) orf exons from what corresponds to 5' and 3' utrs of the parent genes; ii) orf exons out-of-frame with respect to the parent gene; iii) orf exons from any retrocopy part, inserted in the antisense orientation; and iv) orf exons from intronic sequences or intergenic regions adjacent and in addition to the co-opted retrocopy parts. extreme cases are those examples in figure  <dig>  in which the retrocopy did not contribute much novel or pre-existing sequence space, but contributed to the formation of potential genes out of unannotated intergenic regions or retroposons.

CONCLUSIONS
examining the births of these, as yet, putative retrogenes provides us with important ideas concerning the evolution of older, known genes – or parts therof. of course, for young events the "gene" status is hard to prove short of experimental verification of a functional protein product, and for older events the history of the gene modules is more difficult to discern. these points notwithstanding, whether or not the examples presented will stand the test of time – either on an evolutionary scale or in the lab , this is clearly another way that novel genes or gene variants can arise. we see evidence of the diversity of tinkering that occurs with genes beyond simple point mutations. the generation of new transcripts with protein coding potential derived from anti-sense retrocopies would be an unexpected contribution to protein evolution, if function can be shown. thus, retroposition is certainly a mechanism that can help explain the differences that we see in phenotypes between species.

