BACKGROUND
the myxozoa comprise microscopic, oligocellular, obligate endoparasites, with approximately  <dig> species spread among over  <dig> genera  <cit> . myxozoans mainly parasitize poikilothermic vertebrates such as fish and amphibians, as well as vermiform invertebrates such as polychaetes and oligochaetes. myxozoans possess complex life stages with infective spores that alternate between vertebrate and invertebrate hosts. though most myxozoans are harmless to their hosts, some are known to cause disease in commercially important wild and farmed fishes, including whirling disease in rainbow trout that can lead to nearly 90 % population loss, proliferative kidney disease in various salmonids, and intestinal giant-cystic disease in carp . despite global ubiquity and commercial importance, the evolutionary affinity of myxozoa would not be settled for over a century and a half after their discovery  <cit> . this is owed in part to their extreme morphological degeneracy, leaving few characters to be examined comparatively , as well as resistance to culturing, marginalizing the extent to which these parasites could be studied. as a result, little was historically understood about myxozoan biology beyond localized host-parasite dynamics.

the advent of molecular systematics clarified the phylogenetic position of myxozoa. the first inclusion of myxozoa within a study utilizing small subunit ribosomal rna sequence data demonstrated the metazoan origin of these parasites  <cit> . soon after, additional taxon sampling and ontogenetic evidence demonstrated that myxozoans are highly derived cnidarians  <cit> . the evolutionary placement of myxozoa for some time was understood only through single ribosomal gene phylogenies. the sister relationship of myxozoa and medosozoa, the subphylum of medusa-forming cnidarians, was revealed by the first genome-level study:  <dig> cloned protein-coding orthologs of the malacosporean buddenbrockia plumaetellae  <cit> . another study implemented phylogenetic inference of  <dig> protein-coding orthologs of the myxosporean myxobolus cerebralis alongside b. plumatellae within a broad, metazoan dataset, firmly corroborating the cnidarian origin of the myxozoa  <cit> . these works marked the onset of next-generation genomic study of myxozoa in context of their nature as derived parasitic cnidarians.

at this intersection of availability of high throughput sequencing and context of cnidarian evolution, several studies in recent years have employed rna-seq to generate transcriptomic data . transcriptomes are powerful tools for comparing genetic underpinnings among closely related organisms, including the exonic bases of development that are poorly understood for the myxozoa. these initial studies have corroborated cnidarian origins by demonstrating cellular expression of taxonomically restricted genes, such as nematocyst structural minicollagens  and nematogalectins  <cit> , a potential developmental regulatory gene  <cit> , and proto-mesodermal genes  <cit> .

one concern with rna-seq approaches of non-model endoparasites is the possibility of host contamination . rna extraction is a sensitive process and total separation of parasite from host cannot be guaranteed. this concern is exacerbated by the movement away from probe-based amplification and careful cloning to generalized shotgun fragmentation sequencing techniques. putative transcripts derived from cdna libraries of rna extractions of endoparasites of salmonids, a typical fish host of many myxozoan species, have been demonstrated not to have been derived from the parasite, and their misinterpretation led to incorrect inferences of biological function and evolutionary history . this is of particular concern for myxozoan research due to the histozoic nature of many species, which pervade by diffuse infiltration and thus are not easily isolated from surrounding host tissue. this includes many commercially impactful pathogens such as myxobolus cerebralis and tetracapsuloides bryosalmonae, the causative agents of whirling disease and proliferative kidney disease respectively in salmonids  <cit> . though some species proliferate through the formation of a macroscopic trophozoite in their vertebrate host that can easily be isolated, the cystic wall surrounding the trophozoite is comprised of epitheloid cells generated by the immunoresponse of the host  <cit> , rendering inevitable the sequencing of host tissue.

studies have implemented methods to prevent sequencing of host contamination. careful centrifugation, pelleting, and rinsing of infective spores during rna extraction, as well as pcr amplification using host-specific primers, has been used to ensure purity of isolation  <cit> . another study meticulously isolated infective stages released from oligochaetes via micropipetting  <cit> . however, even with such precautionary measures, studies have reported spurious findings, such as the identification of four putative myxozoan hox homologs  <cit>  that were later shown to be of northern pike and bryozoan origin  <cit> . one solution is to generate a library in parallel of uninfected host tissue that can be used to subtract matching sequences in the infected library  <cit> . however, this is time-consuming, costly, and may not be a realistic option for many studies. in light of the unreliability of separation of host and parasite, initial transcriptomic studies have focused only on characterization of cnidarian-specific genes, such that host contaminants were not a concern  <cit> . in order to facilitate wider study of myxozoan evolution with transcriptomic data cleared of contaminant transcripts, this study describes in silico hybridization, an iterative similarity searching and filtration pipeline. this pipeline was tested on previous datasets to explore the extent to which host transcripts pervaded. as a case study, this pipeline was then implemented on myxobolus pendula, a cyst-forming parasite of gill arch of the common creek chub semotilus atromaculatus. with the set of transcripts identified with reasonable certainty as exclusively myxozoan, functional genetic study can be implemented. as a framework for future transcriptomic investigation of the evolution of these highly derived parasites, this study used the filtered set of transcripts to mine for taxonomically restricted genes as well as genes with non-cnidarian homologs, describe for the first time putative venom homologs, and characterize proteins related to extracellular communication.

RESULTS
rna isolated from encysted plasmodia of myxobolus pendula infecting gill filaments of common creek chub semotilus atromaculatus  was used in a high-throughput illumina hiseq  <dig> sequencing reaction. three libraries of purified rna were prepared: two from early and late stage cystic development collected summer  <dig> , and a third from late stage development collected summer  <dig> . these libraries occupied 1/5th, 1/7th, and 1/7th of a lane of a flow cell, producing a total of  <dig> , <dig> paired 125 bp reads. following removal of low quality reads , de novo assembly of each library individually using the software trinity  <cit> , concatenation of the three sets of assembled contigs, and filtering for transcript redundancy using cd-hit-est  <cit> , a final set of  <dig>  transcripts was produced. sequence and assembly statistics are summarized in table  <dig> fig.  <dig> encysted plasmodia of myxobolus pendula from gill arch of semotilus atromaculatus. a cysts encapsulating the sporogenic stages of m. pendula are seen among the gill filaments. b close-up of cyst revealing vascularization and attachment to gill arch by host-derived connective tissue


too close to calla
for in silico pipeline statistics, percentages in parentheses reflect proportion of contigs assigned to that category out of the redundancy-filtered set of contigs


amatched both myxozoan and host query sets with e-values within two orders of magnitude of one another



to test its efficacy, the in silico hybridization pipeline  was implemented on four previously existing myxozoan datasets, including expressed sequence tags  of the malacosporeans buddenbrockia plumatellae  <cit>  and tetracapsuloides bryosamlonae , predicted protein-coding peptide sequences from the genome of thelohanellus kitaeui  <cit> , and shotgun genome sequences of myxobolus cerebralis, generously provided by paulyn cartwright at university of kansas. of these  <dig>  myxozoan transcripts,  <dig>  %  were assigned as myxozoan-derived, either by matching only or better to the myxozoa query set;  <dig>  %  were assigned as host-derived, either by matching only or better to fish/annelid host query sets;  <dig>  %  were not assigned to either, either by matching both sets within two orders of magnitude to one another or by matching neither set. the proportional breakdown of assignment for each dataset, as well as the distribution of e-value comparisons for transcripts that matched both query sets, are visualized in fig.  <dig>  categorization of each transcript within each dataset is provided in additional file  <dig> fig.  <dig> 
in silico hybridization pipeline. diagram of the workflow used to decouple myxozoan transcripts from contaminant transcripts. through iterative searching and comparison of e-values, contigs generated through transcriptomic assembly are respectively categorized

fig.  <dig> results of in silico hybridization pipeline on previous data sets and on m. pendula. proportional categorization of sequences from each of four previously existing myxozoan datasets, as well as a cumulative chart of all four combined, in gray box. sequence categorization for newly generated myxobolus pendula transcriptome outside of box. for each dataset, a pie chart showing breakdown of all six possible results of the in silico hybridization pipeline, and an associated histogram showing the resolution of “disputed” sequences that returned significant similarity against both query sets. for each histogram, the x-axis represents e-value ratios, in which values at either extreme are more favored for that query set, and the y-axis represents frequency of transcripts at that e-value ratio



of the  <dig>  myxobolus pendula contigs,  <dig>   were definitively categorized through the in silico hybridization pipeline, using the aforementioned  <dig>  derived sequences as the myxozoan query set. this workflow resulted in the identification of  <dig>  contigs  as transcripts putatively derived from m. pendula,  <dig>  contigs  as creek chub contaminant, and  <dig> contigs  as other contaminants such as gill bacteria and diplomonad parasites. by returning significant similarity to both query sets,  <dig>  contigs  had to be separated by comparing e-values. within this subset of “disputed” contigs,  <dig>  contigs  returned stronger similarity to myxozoa,  <dig>  contigs  returned stronger similarity to the host, and  <dig>  contigs  returned significant similarity to within two orders of magnitude to one another, thereby rendering them too close to categorize as one or the other.

the remaining  <dig>  contigs  were not categorized. this included the aforementioned  <dig>  “too close” contigs, as well as  <dig>  contigs  were found to be significantly similar to neither myxozoan nor host. as with previous datasets, proportional breakdown and distribution of e-value comparisons is visualized in fig.  <dig>  the derived set of  <dig>  m. pendula transcripts were translated into predicted open reading frames  using orfpredictor  <cit> , which generated a total of  <dig>  unique peptide sequences representing  <dig>  % of the derived transcript library. to test for expressional completeness with respect to the thelohanellus kitauei genome  <cit> , the predicted t. kitaeui proteome was searched against the set of m. pendula orfs using blastp at an e-value of 1e− <dig>  returning matches for  <dig> of  <dig>   predicted proteins. within the subset of predicted orfs,  <dig>  sequences  matched in similarity only to myxozoan data and not to any other metazoan . functional annotational analysis, conducted using blast2go  <cit> , revealed  <dig> matches  against the nr database, whose level  <dig> gene ontology annotational frequencies were plotted .fig.  <dig> functional annotation of transcripts matched only to myxozoa and no other metazoan taxon. using level  <dig> of gene ontology, functional annotation of the  <dig> transcripts which were uniquely matched against myxozoan sequences and no other taxa

fig.  <dig> maximum likelihood phylogenetic reconstruction of minicollagen genes across cnidaria. blue-shaded boxes indicate myxozoan and polypodium hydriforme clades. newly sequenced myxobolus pendula minicollagens are bolded and their structures are represented by adjactent boxes, with colored boxes representing domain structure: green = signal peptide; yellow = cysteine-rich; blue = polyproline; red = polytripeptide. values at nodes represent bootstrap supports ≥  <dig>  nodes without values indicate bootstrap support below  <dig>  aa = amino acids

fig.  <dig> putative myxobolus pendula toxins. matches of toxin transcripts found in the m. pendula transcriptome to well-annotated toxins of other cnidarians and public databases are shown divided by gene ontological categories. a total of  <dig> sequences were identified as candidate toxins. blue = matched to the uniprot animal toxin database; red = matched to the proteome of hydra magnipapillata  <cit> ; light green = matched to anemonia viridis  <cit> ; dark green = matched to aurelia aurita  <cit> 



taxonomically restricted genes
well-characterized components of the cnidarian nematocyst, such as nematogalectins, minicollagens, nowa, and spinalin were mined for in the finalized, filtered myxobolus pendula database via homologous copies from cnidarian taxa through tblastn with an e-value threshold of 1e− <dig>  though no putative transcripts of nowa or spinalin were found, copies of genes within the nematogalectin and minicollagen families were discovered.

orthologs of nematogalectin-a, nematogalectin-c, and nematogalectin-related were identified for myxobolus pendula. multiple sequence alignment of each of these putative homologs with known sequences revealed the expected domain structure for this family of genes, including a conserved signal peptide, a polytripeptide gly-x-y domain, and a carboxyl-terminal sugar-binding galectin domain. the gene tree phylogeny  demonstrated monophyly of myxozoan orthologs of each nematogalectin gene, including a sister relationship between m. pendula and sphaeromyxa zaharoni in each clade. no copy of nematogalectin-b was found.

orthologs of each of the three myxozoan minicollagens identified by shpirer et al.  <cit>  were identified, including minicollagen i , minicollagen ii , and minicollagen iii . all m. pendula minicollagen sequences contain the expected minicollagen domain structure, including a signal peptide, terminal cysteine-rich domains , and a central polytripeptide gly-x-y domain flanked by a polyproline stretch. the central gly-x-y domain of m. pendula ncol- <dig> is divided into two 14 +  <dig> sections of repeats by a lone alanine, rendering it a group  <dig> minicollagen  <cit> . this domain contains only one polytripeptide stretch containing  <dig> tripeptides in ncol- <dig> and ncol- <dig>  while the remaining domains are structurally identical, rendering each a group  <dig> minicollagen  <cit> . alignments of taxonomically restricted genes can be found in additional file  <dig> 

phylogenetic analysis of all available minicollagen genes demonstrated with high bootstrap support  a distinct clade for each of the three myxozoan copies , with each clade spread throughout the phylogeny. within each clade of myxozoan minicollagens, the myxosporeans are monophyletic, with a sister relationship between myxobolus pendula and sphaeromyxa zaharoni, as was observed in the nematogalectin family gene tree. each clade also contains copies of polypodium hydriforme minicollagens, found either between myxosporean and malacosporean minicollagens , sister to a malacosporean minicollagen , or one copy sister to a malacosporean minicollagen and another copy sister to the whole clade . bayesian inference phylogenetic analyses of taxonomically restricted genes returned similar topologies to those found by maximum likelihood analysis.

an additional transcript was discovered that represents a fourth myxozoan minicollagen. this myxozoan minicollagen iv contains canonical minicollagen features, including a signal peptide, a pro-peptide region, cysteine-rich domains, and a central polytripeptide gly-x-y domain. like other group  <dig> minicollagens, this transcript has a conserved n-terminal crd  and a unique c-terminal crd. the minicollagen phylogeny reveals a sister relationship of this transcript with the polypodium hydriforme minicollagens ncol- <dig>  ncol- <dig>  and ncol- <dig>  the c-terminal crd of these four genes immediately follows the polytripeptide domain, with no polyproline stretch in between, a feature observed in no other minicollagen genes. the c-terminal crd is interrupted by a polyproline stretch, a feature only present in p. hydriforme ncol- <dig> through ncol- <dig> and myxozoan ncol- <dig>  this putative minicollagen also contains features unique among the minicollagens. within its polytripeptide domain, the fifth glycine residue is replaced by alanine, a similarly neutral non-polar amino acid. the polytripeptide domain contains only seven repeats, below the 12– <dig> range seen in other minicollagens. three additional gly-x-y repeats interrupt the c-terminal crd.

nematocyst proteome
the  <dig> unique protein sequences identified by orbitrap ms analysis of isolated nematocysts  <cit>  were queried against the database of myxobolus pendula transcripts via tblastn with an e-value threshold of 1e− <dig>  this search returned matches for  <dig> proteins. the most significantly similar m. pendula transcript for each matched hydra magnipapillata protein was queried against the nr database in a reciprocal blast approach. transcripts whose top matches were either the hydra protein’s annotation or an “uncharacterized/predicted” protein within cnidaria were retained, resulting in 82 m. pendula proteins that match the proteome of the hydra nematocyst .

of the  <dig> proteins identified,  <dig> matched hydra extracellular matrix  glycoproteins. three prominent ecm domains were repeatedly identified, including thrombospondin type- <dig>  von willebrand factor-a, and laminin-g . other prevalent ecm domains encoded by the contigs were found to have homology to members of the sea, chitin-binding, and discoidin superfamilies.

as a follow-up to the  <dig> venom proteins matched between hydra and m. pendula, a more detailed analysis of toxin proteins was conducted with a wider set of query sequences . a total of  <dig> sequences were identified as candidate toxins . these transcripts spanned several toxin classes included metallopeptidases, other peptidases, peptidase inhibitors, and cysteine-rich secreted proteins, as well as toxin-associated classes such as molecular binding proteins . despite the significantly larger number of non-cnidarian query sequences from the animal toxin database  compared to cnidarian sequences from recent ms/ms studies and within the uniprot database , the number of matches was nearly even, with  <dig> identifications deriving from the uniprot database and  <dig> from cnidarian queries. of the  <dig> toxin candidates,  <dig> were predicted to code for signal peptides using signalp  <dig>   <cit> . of the  <dig> sequences without a signal peptide,  <dig> were found to be incomplete at their n-terminus, indicating that upward of  <dig> of 49 m. pendula toxin candidates code for signal peptides.

discussion
in an effort to decouple parasite transcripts from host contaminants, an in silico hybridization pipeline was developed . through six possible outcomes, transcripts were categorized as: derived from the myxozoan, either by  only returning significant similarity to the myxozoan query set or  having a myxozoan similarity score more than two orders of magnitude greater than the host similarity score; derived from the host, either by  only returning significant similarity to the host query set or  having a host similarity score more than two orders of magnitude greater than the myxozoan similarity score; no categorization, either because  similarity was detected in both and the respective similarity scores were too close to distinguish or  no significant similarity was detected in either blast search. the utility of this method was tested on previously existing myxozoan transcriptomic data as well as the newly generated transcriptome of myxobolus pendula . the proportional distribution of these six assignment outcomes, represented as pie charts, was variable among datasets . for m. cerebralis, the majority of transcripts were matched to either only one or neither query set; for tetracapsuloides, all transcripts were matched to both query sets. although both buddenbrockia and thelohanellus also had a majority of transcripts match both query sets, the former returned a greater resolution of sequences as myxozoan, whereas the latter returned many more sequences that were too close in similarity to distinguish. m. pendula showed a similar distribution to its congener m. cerebralis, in which the majority of transcripts matched one or neither query set, and the majority of disputed contigs were assigned to the host.

the histograms associated with each pie chart, representing the resolution of “disputed” contigs matched by both datasets, show the extent to which e-values were favored by either query. for each taxon, the spread of preferences roughly resembles a normal distribution, with few cases at either extreme, more towards the center, and the most  frequent in that central “too close to call” range. in particular, the proportion of ambiguity in the thelohanellus data  underscores one limitation of the method, which can be assuaged by improved query sets  or by secondary analyses such as domain structure. the largest of these datasets, m. pendula had many more contigs resolved as host at higher e-value differentials, much more so than did its close relative m. cerebralis. this indicates that as datasets grow, the level of obvious host contamination will grow too. perhaps most tellingly, the cumulative distribution for previous datasets was roughly 1/3rd of reads matching myxozoa, 1/3rd matching danio rerio for myxosporean data or capitella teleta for malacosporean data, and 1/3rd unannotated. under the most generous interpretation of these results, in which all transcripts that were “too close” and all transcripts that didn’t match either query set are assumed to be myxozoan-derived, a third of the data still putatively derived from the host. this demonstrates a significant degree of contamination and the need for examination thereof within this system.

using the filtered datasets as the myxozoan query set, this pipeline was implemented on rna sequenced from encysted plasmodia of myxobolus pendula . approximately half of the assembled contigs were identified with reasonable confidence as myxobolus pendula transcripts . as the database of myxozoan genetic data grows, more of these sequences can be incorporated into the myxozoan query set within the pipeline, and this increased set of sequences will likely enable more contigs to be identified as myxozoan with greater confidence. nearly 1/5th of the transcripts were identified as deriving from the creek chub host, and a few hundred more as other contamination, such as gill bacteria or flagellates. it will be similarly important to have genomic data available for hosts and potential microbial contaminants in order to filter non-myxozoan transcripts. fortunately, because so many intermediate vertebrate hosts of myxozoans are closely related to model organisms , the availability of such data is of little concern. of the remaining sequences, over 1/3rd could not be annotated as deriving either from m. pendula or from creek chub; as a corollary to the foregoing, this number will be reduced as query sets are augmented.

within the final set of m. pendula transcripts,  <dig>  were matched only to myxozoan query sequences and not to any other metazoan. this set of transcripts seemingly restricted to the myxozoa represents an interesting baseline for future study of specialization of these animals towards morphologically degenerate parasitism. these sequences are available as a fasta file in additional file  <dig>  when subjected to functional annotation using blast2go  <cit>  at an e-value cutoff of 1e− <dig>  only  <dig> transcripts  within this subset returned annotational matches. the overwhelming lack of similarity may be reflective of the highly divergent genetic nature of myxozoa, as has observed in known myxozoan ribosomal markers  and in the mitochondrial genome  <cit> . the scarcity of matches also may be compounded by the lack of currently available myxozoan genetic data in the nr database. the gene ontology terms for those with a match were visualized categorically at level  <dig> of gene ontology . in all three classifications, clusters relating to cellular activity  were much more highly represented than clusters relating to development and reproduction . this result was expected given that the collected plasmodia were not believed to be in stages of development. in addition to a general increase in publicly available genetic data, sequences generated from different stages of development will facilitate a more complete understanding of lineage-specific myxozoan gene families.

one consideration with this approach is that identifiable contigs will be limited to protein-coding genes. despite their apparent non-protein-coding nature, a significant number of expressed transcripts within invertebrates are known to have regulatory and yet unknown functions. such transcripts cannot be identified by a comparative pipeline that is built on similarity searching with known protein-coding mrna sequences. in order to study transcripts such as long non-coding rnas , future genomic studies will have to incorporate additional measures to identify and characterize them. this will further reduce the number of unannotated sequences, as these transcripts may in part be comprised of genes such as lncrnas as well as protein-coding genes yet unidentifiable with current query sets.

in light of the difficulty of total expulsion of host tissue during nucleic acid extraction, this method offers  an a posteriori bioinformatic solution to ensure proper identification and filtration of contaminant sequences. to the extent that is possible when working with non-model microscopic endoparasites and currently available public data, this approach eliminates spurious identification of contaminant transcripts as being parasite-derived, such as the identification of bryozoan hox genes as myxozoan  <cit> , and thereby enables functional genetic searching beyond taxonomically restricted genes. because this method compares search results among query sets, it is a more thorough and precise approach than a one step depletion of contaminants from a transcriptomic library by similarity searching against a set of host sequences at some similarity threshold. this single step removal of contigs that match non-parasite at some e-value may exclude ancient, highly conserved genes that return high similarity against both parasite and non-parasite. obversely, this may incorrectly retain genes that are dissimilar to non-parasite but are even more dissimilar to the parasite.

the conversion of the transcriptomic library of interest into a database against which known sequences are queried is critical in order to ensure comparability of similarity scores. e-values, the calculation of which is dependent upon the size of the database, can only be compared across searches against a common database. use of unannotated transcripts as queries against variably sized databases of known sequences would violate this requisite for comparison of similarity score. sorting similarity search output by subject and e-value returns the most significantly similar and therefore most likely identification of each contig within each search, and these identifications can be compared across searches.

functional genetics
as demonstrated for several myxozoan species in a recent study of polar capsule structural proteins  <cit> , myxobolus pendula possesses three copies of the nematogalectin family, including nematogalectin a, nemgalectin c, and nemgalectin-related. the lack of nematogalectin b, the exons of which exist within the same gene as nematogalectin a and are expressed by alternative splicing, is unsurprising due to its ontogenetic relation to the development of barbs and spines of the proximal tubule of hydra  <cit> , features which are not present in myxozoan polar filaments. secondary loss of nematogalectin b could in part have shaped the relative simplicity of the myxozoan polar filament repertoire. similarly, the absence of spinalin and nowa, the other two well-characterized nematocyst proteins, is unsurprising given their lack of homologs outside of hydra  <cit> . phylogenetic reconstruction of the nemgal family, in which m. pendula is monophyletic with other myxozoans , reveals a basal relationship of myxozoans with other cnidarians in all three nematogalectin genes that myxozoans possess. this is reflective of an ancient divergence of this critical component of the nematocyst tubule.

neither minicollagen group type nor copy number exhibited strong signal in the phylogenetic reconstruction of this family. this, in combination with poor bootstrap support for most internal nodes, reflects the rapid evolution of these short proteins. despite this, minicollagens of m. pendula and other myxosporean species were monophyletic for all gene copies, reinforcing the phylogenetic utility of this gene family. in each minicollagen gene clade, myxozoan taxa exhibited sister relationships with polypodium hydriforme, a parasite of acipenseriform oocytes. like myxozoans, p. hydriforme is an obligate endoparasite, develops via “cell-within-a-cell” ontogeny, possesses atrichous isorhizan nematocysts, and is believed to be a highly modified, morphologically degenerate cnidarian. a sister relationship between myxozoans and p. hydriforme has been demonstrated in numerous studies , and the clade comprised of these two taxa has been labeled “endocnidozoa”   <cit> . the phylogenetic findings within this study contribute to the growing body of evidence evolutionarily uniting these parasites.

beyond the three previously described myxozoan minicollagen genes  <cit> , a fourth copy was discovered in the m. pendula transcriptome. though the diversity of myxozoan minicollagens  is still much lower than the putative sister taxon polypodium hydriforme  or free-living cnidarians such as hydra magnipaillata , this finding marks the fourth time that the described diversity of polar filament minicollagens has been augmented  <cit> , suggesting greater polar filament complexity than previously imagined. the adjoined polytripeptide and cysteine-rich domains of myxozoan minicollagen iv and p. hydriforme ncol7- <dig>  found in no other minicollagen copies, is strong evidence of the homology of these genes. this relationship is corroborated by monophyly of these genes in the phylogenetic reconstruction of the minicollagen family . the fifth glycine residue within the polytripeptide domain of myxozoan minicollagen iv is replaced by alanine, a feature observed in no other minicollagen. the substitution of glycine with alanine in the central core of helical domains, such as the triple helix-forming polytripeptide within minicollagens, has been shown to stabilize the protein  <cit> . this primary structure of minicollagens is therefore more malleable than previously thought, a notable observation given that these proteins that are known for their considerable tensile stability as major components of one of the most osmotically pressurized cellular products known  <cit> .

in addition to structural collagen and proteoglycan proteins, several glycoprotein extracellular matrix molecules were identified in the m. pendula transcriptome. for their role in determining shape and physical properties of tissues as well as regulating all cellular activities, ecm molecules have played an indispensable role in the development and evolution of multicellular organisms with species-specific innovations. this renders ecm molecules important for comparative study of the biology of the highly degenerate myxozoa among free-living cnidarian relatives. three glycoprotein domains were found prominently in m. pendula, including laminin-g, thrombospondin type- <dig>  and von willebrand factor-a . the lam-g domain repeats of the c-terminal α-subunit laminin trimers bind to integrins, heparin sulfate proteoglycans and α-dystroglycan  <cit> , promoting the polarization of epithelial cells. thrombospondin tsp- <dig> domains, which are found in many ecm glycoproteins, induce signal transduction by binding to several cytokines and growth factors  <cit> . vwa domains are involved in regulating a wide variety of cellular functions are found within integrin subunits, collagens and several other ecm glycoproteins  <cit> . however, it remains to be determined if putatively homologous domains expressed by m. pendula have equivalent functions. identification or assignment of biological functions to ecm molecules is challenging for many reasons. the functions of ecm glycoproteins are modulated by posttranslational modifications, such as glycosylation, phosphorylation and sulfation. alternative splicing can also generate multiple isoforms. the genomes of m. pendula and other cnidarians code for a variety of matrix remodeling metalloproteinases and other peptidases that could cleave and alter the activity of specific ecm proteins at different stages of sporogenesis. moreover, ecm glycoproteins cannot be identified by the presence of a specific domain, since domains are shared by multiple ecm glycoproteins; rather it is the specific combination and the order of domains that serve as a more reliable diagnostic tool. hence, further bioinformatic analysis of the contigs generated from this study is required to gain a better overview of the complexity of the m. pendula secretome and the phylogenetic relationship of individual glycoproteins to known and uncharacterized ecm glycoproteins.

on the basis of amino acid sequence and domain similarity to toxins described from cnidarians  and the uniprot animal toxin database, a set of  <dig> transcripts was identified as putative myxozoan toxins. these candidate sequences represent a similar diversity of envenomation-related proteins as found in other cnidarians, including peptidases, cytolysins, and molecular binders. this is the first recorded evidence of toxin proteins expressed within myxozoans. the expression of toxin proteins within polar capsules contravenes previous assumptions about myxozoan biology. polar filaments have been described as injecting neither venoms nor digestive enzymes, but rather acting as anchors to the next host in the myxozoan life cycle  <cit> . more specifically, polar capsules have been shown ontogenetically to be homologous to the atrichous isorhiza  <cit> , a type of nematocyst known within cnidaria as exclusively producing sticky secretions that assist in either capture or adhesion to integument of prey  <cit> . the everted tubule of a polar capsule is holotrichous and spineless, and has been shown to enable attachment to host by infective myxozoan spores loose in the water column  <cit> . these findings suggest that polar filaments are more functionally complex than previously imagined, and may possibly utilize envenomation during host infiltration. a recent study of the venom proteome of the box jelly chironex fleckeri  <cit>  has concomitantly raised doubt as to the nature of this nematocyst type shared by myxozoans, demonstrating little difference in the toxin contents of isorhizas and mastigophores, which are known to contain the lethal components of cubozoan venoms  <cit> .

nevertheless, sequence similarity and even domain conservation cannot confirm the expression of toxins within the myxozoan polar capsule. despite apparent homology, venom proteins have been shown to adapt to roles unrelated to envenomation, such as metallopeptidases in hydractinia echinata participating in cellular development  <cit> . a recent study producing the genome of thelohanellus kitauei has described peptidases and peptidase inhibitors similar to those found presently in myxobolus pendula as functioning in nutrient absorption  <cit> . that nearly half of the identified homologs matched proteins identified through tandem mass spectrometry of isolated nematocysts lends credence to the polar capsular origin of these putative toxins. a mass spectrometry analysis of sequences derived from isolated myxozoan polar capsule proteins cross-referenced with the candidates identified from the m. pendula transcriptome is necessary to define the nature of these transcripts.

CONCLUSIONS
the advent of next generation sequencing of myxozoans in combination with strong evidence for their cnidarian origins has set the stage for genome-level myxozoan research. the pipeline described herein enables confident decoupling of myxozoan transcripts from contaminant transcripts generated during a sequencing reaction. the implementation of this in silico hybridization pipeline on previously existing myxozoan datasets reveals varying proportions of putative contamination and demonstrates the need for careful, rigorous examination of data generated from these microscopic parasites.

implementation of this workflow on the creek chub parasite myxobolus pendula serves as a model for exploring the genetic underpinnings of myxozoan biology and evolution, including taxonomically restricted structural genes, proteomic profile comparisons to other cnidarians, extracellular matrix motif proteins, and potentially pathogenically important toxin genes. expressional studies can be used to explore numerous other biological avenues, such as the evolution of germ layers, cellular communication, or host recognition pathways. in any such targeted study, proper identification of myxozoan transcripts is paramount, and can be achieved using this in silico hybridization method.

