BACKGROUND
sexual reproduction in angiosperms involves the formation of complex reproductive organs  containing diploid tissues and the haploid germline. the germline gives rise to the male  and female gametophyte  through successive meiotic and mitotic cell divisions from their respective microspore and megaspore mother cells. the genetic and molecular regulation of these events has been extensively studied in the model species arabidopsis thaliana <cit> . pollen development and maturation occurs within the anther locule, surrounded by a specialized layer of helper cells named the tapetum. tapetal cells greatly contribute to pollen viability and function through the segregation and deposition of the outer cell wall layer  and the pollen coat  on the pollen surface. the exine is an extremely durable and biochemically resistant structure consisting of sporopollenin, a series of complex polymers derived from fatty acids and phenolic compounds; whereas tryphine contains a sticky mixture of fatty acids, flavonoids, carotenoids and proteins deposited on the exine surface and cavities when the tapetum degenerates through programmed cell death 
 <cit> .

recently, several biochemical steps of sporopollenin biosynthesis and transcriptional regulatory circuits controlling pollen development have been elucidated in arabidopsis by the analysis of male-sterile and exine-defective mutants 
 <cit> . in brief, medium- to long-chain fatty acids such as lauric acid are monohydroxylated by the cytochrome p <dig> cyp703a <dig> 
 <cit> , and modified to form fatty acyl-coa esters by acyl-coa synthetase <dig>  in tapetal cells 
 <cit> . coa-esterified fatty acids are alternatively reduced to form fatty alcohol derivatives or condensed with malonyl-coa by less adhesive pollen5/polyketide synthase b  and lap6/pksa, leading to alkyl pyrones 
 <cit> . these latter compounds are hydroxylated by tetraketide α-pyrone reductase <dig>  and tkpr <dig> 
 <cit> , and combined with phenylpropanoids to produce the sporopollenin precursors. then sporopollenin is successively secreted to the apoplast by specific transporters 
 <cit>  and translocated to the microspores bound to proteins such as lipid transfer proteins  and glycine rich proteins  
 <cit> . a network of transcription factors containing basic helix-loop-helix , plant homeodomain  finger, and myb domains among others are likely regulating the expression of genes involved in these processes in the tapetum 
 <cit> .

the knowledge regarding tapetum and pollen development in species other than the model organisms such as arabidopsis and rice is scarce and fragmentary; in spite of the relevant influence that these processes exert on pollen viability, fruit set and productivity. within the genus prunus, including stone-fruit species as peach, plum, apricot, almond and cherry, several agronomical reports describe male-sterile varieties at the morphological and histological level 
 <cit> . however a consistent genetic and genomic analysis of processes affecting pollen viability is currently non-existent. the pollen development in prunus species and other woody perennial plants from temperate climates such as apple and poplar is affected by the seasonal cessation of meristem growth termed endodormancy. endodormancy contributes to elude the detrimental effects of the low temperatures in winter by preventing the resumption of growth under non-optimal conditions for survival. the growth inhibition of endodormant buds is due to internal signals within the buds, in contrast to growth inhibition by other distal organs , or by environmental factors . for the purpose of this work we have employed the term dormancy to refer to the endodormant state. in these species, the flower buds start to differentiate in summer and continue their reproductive development until growth is arrested in autumn. after a period of chilling accumulation required for dormancy release, pollen mother cells within the anthers initiate meiosis and further microspore development, resulting in fully mature pollen grains 
 <cit> .

in order to identify putative genes involved in tapetum function, pollen development and pollen wall formation in peach , we analyzed the results of two transcriptomic experiments comparing gene expression between dormant and dormancy-released flower buds, and in peach cultivars with different dormancy behaviour 
 <cit> . this work led us to postulate a role for several genes in sporopollenin synthesis and deposition, and transcriptional regulation of pollen development processes, based on expression analysis and previous works in model species.

RESULTS
identification of genes up-regulated in late stages of reproductive bud development 
meristems of woody perennials from temperate climates go through the cold season in a dormant stage, protected into specialized structures named buds. in peach, reproductive  buds are typically arranged in pairs, flanking a single vegetative bud . in successive steps, flower buds are induced and differentiate in summer, and enter a dormancy period in autumn-winter. the dormancy is released after a required chilling period, whose length is genotype-specific. finally their reproductive organs resume growth and development leading to blooming when temperature conditions become favourable . in anthers, the release of dormancy initiates microsporogenesis, pollen development and maturation 
 <cit> .

we previously studied the genome-wide modification of gene expression in flower buds of peach through two complementary transcriptomic approaches. in the first work we isolated differentially enriched transcripts in dormant buds and dormancy-released buds by the suppression subtractive hybridization  procedure 
 <cit> . ssh procedure relies on the selective amplification and enrichment of abundant cdnas in a sample  when incubated and hybridized with an excess of a reference sample . in the latter work cdnas isolated by ssh were printed in a glass-microarray and used as probes in a microarray hybridization experiment against mrna samples extracted from flower buds of ten peach cultivars with different chilling requirements for dormancy release 
 <cit> . genes found to be up-regulated in flower buds during the dormancy transition, after the respective statistical analyses of ssh and microarray hybridization approaches are operationally termed in this work flower-bud late genes . most of these flower-bud late genes are described by transcript models predicted by the international peach genome initiative , but nine lack a transcript profile, and consequently are designated by the unigene or est name described in previous articles 
 <cit> . three genes coding for putative peroxidases and ltp proteins were described by more than  <dig> ests each, which suggests a pronounced up-regulation of them under our experimental conditions.

* arabidopsis genes related to sporopollenin and tapetum development that are putative orthologs of peach genes listed in this table  are highlighted with their names and references.

flower-bud late genes are expected to play a role in dormancy release, growth resumption or late flowering events. whereas dormancy associated mads-box  and other genes found repressed in dormancy-released buds have been unequivocally related to dormancy processes 
 <cit> , no experimental evidences have been obtained pointing to a role of flower-bud late genes described in this work in dormancy processes. in order to identify putative orthologs of these genes in arabidopsis we made a reciprocal blast analysis  as described in methods. interestingly,  <dig> genes were putative orthologs of arabidopsis genes involved in sporopollenin synthesis and transcriptional regulation of tapetum and pollen development . in addition, ppa009789m was very similar to ruptured pollen grain <dig> , a component of the mtn3/saliva gene family coding for a plasma membrane protein essential for microspore viability and exine pattern formation in arabidopsis <cit> , even though they could not be considered as putative orthologs by rba . these data strongly suggest that flower-bud late genes identified by two transcriptomic approaches in peach 
 <cit>  are to a large extent involved in sporopollenin synthesis and deposition, indicating the activation of this metabolic pathway during or shortly after dormancy release. such predominance of pollen cell wall related genes over other bud processes, as dormancy release, abiotic stress resistance and female gametophyte development, could be due to the major contribution of anthers to the total weight of the bud, or alternatively could be caused by an experimental bias of the ssh procedure towards transcripts with higher expression differences.

flower-bud late genes show cultivar-dependent expression
the expression of ests from the  <dig> flower-bud late genes listed in table 
 <dig> was extracted from microarray hybridization data stored in arrayexpress database  with accession number e-mexp- <dig>  these expression data corresponded to flower buds from ten different peach cultivars collected the same day, after the accumulation of  <dig> chilling hours , a time approximately intermediate between the chilling requirements of earlier and later cultivars 
 <cit> . a clustering of these expression data is shown in figure 
 <dig>  with cultivars arranged according to their chilling requirements. in a previous work under our experimental conditions, early cultivars ‘red candem’, ‘flor red’, ‘may glo’, ‘86-6’, ‘precocinho’ and ‘sunraycer’ required less than  <dig> chilling hours for dormancy release; intermediate cultivars ‘carolina’ and ‘crimson baby’ needed 412– <dig> chilling hours; whereas ‘rose diamond’ and ‘big top’ showed requirements longer than  <dig> chilling hours 
 <cit> . as expected in genes up-regulated after dormancy release, the overall gene expression was higher in early cultivars with low chilling requirements  than in late cultivars with higher requirements . interestingly, the peach putative orthologs of arabidopsis genes involved in pollen development programs were mostly grouped in two clusters , which argues for the existence of evolutionary conserved regulatory circuits orchestrating the coordinated expression of these genes.

quantitative real-time rt-pcr  confirmation of microarray hybridization results allowed a more accurate determination of groups of similar expression . eight genes from the cluster i of figure 
 <dig> were analyzed by qrt-pcr. all of them showed a common pattern, with higher and similar expression values in the cultivars ‘red candem’, ‘86-6’ and ‘sunraycer’, almost undetectable expression in ‘rose diamond’ and ‘big top’, and intermediate values in the remaining five cultivars . on the other hand, ten genes analyzed from the cluster ii showed a similar expression profile by qrt-pcr, due to their higher transcriptional activity in ‘red candem’ and ‘sunraycer’ . the gene ppa011974m  from cluster i and other five genes not included in clusters i and ii in figure 
 <dig> had a more gradual decline in expression from early to late cultivars , without drastic differences between cultivars with similar chilling requirements. we employed these qrt-pcr data, based on their improved accuracy over microarray signals, to redefine two clusters of coordinated expression in flower-bud late genes: cluster a including ib <dig>  ppb <dig> , ppa020886m , ppa008548m , ppa018509m , ppa009789m , ppa021109m  and ppa008777m  , and cluster b containing ppa003797m , ppa006852m , ppa006506m , ppb <dig> , ppa022178m , ppa019432m , ppa016810m , ppa011965m , ppb <dig>  and ppa021373m  . the predominant expression in cultivars ‘red candem’, ‘sunraycer’ and to a lesser extent ‘86-6’, indicates an earlier activation of genes involved in microsporogenesis and tapetum development in these cultivars.
 <dig>  expression levels are relative to actin. the mean value of expression in ‘red candem’ was set to one, and the rest of the values were shown relative to ‘red candem’. data are means from two biological replicates, with error bars representing ± sd.

flower-bud late genes are transiently expressed in anthers
the tissue specificity of genes belonging to clusters a and b was studied in the cultivar ‘big top’ by qrt-pcr. the transcript accumulation of these genes in vegetative buds was negligible when compared with their expression in flower buds , which precludes a general function of them in dormancy or growth-resumption processes common to both vegetative and reproductive buds. instead of that, flower-bud late genes from clusters a and b are related to the formation and function of the male gametophyte based on their preferential expression in anthers with respect to other flower-bud tissues . three transcript models not belonging to clusters a or b, coding for a bhlh transcription factor potentially orthologous to atbhlh <dig> from arabidopsis , a peroxidase similar to at1g <dig> product from arabidopsis , and an ltp family protein  were similarly expressed in anthers, which indicates that other flower-bud late genes different from those grouped in clusters a and b are also playing a role in anther development processes.

the temporal expression of these genes was analyzed in flower buds of ‘big top’ collected at different points from the middle of january to the middle of march. transcriptional expression was induced transiently in genes from clusters a and b, and also in the non-categorized genes ppa008351m , ppa020321m  and ppa025857m  ; but rise and drop of transcript accumulation followed slightly different profiles in the different clusters. expression of cluster a genes were highly induced in sample  <dig> , peaked in sample  <dig> , and started to drop in sample  <dig>  to finally reach a low basal level in sample  <dig>  in the middle of march . on the other hand, the induction of cluster b genes in sample  <dig> was low or absent, and reached a maximum value in sample  <dig>  and in some cases in sample  <dig>  contrarily to clusters a and b, transcripts belonging to other clusters , such as ppa008351m , ppa020321m  and ppa025857m  had already a significant expression level in sample  <dig> .

based on qrt-pcr results shown in figures 
 <dig> and 
 <dig>  we have determined that flower-bud late genes are transiently expressed in anthers with slight differences in the timing of induction. these results reasonably suggest that cluster-specific differences observed in figures 
 <dig> and 
 <dig> are due to differences in the induction time instead of the presence of distinct signals and transduction pathways. under this hypothesis, cultivar-specific features of clusters a and b and non-clustered genes  could merely describe snapshots of a single transcriptional program taken at different times. most of cluster b genes are expressed later, leading to cultivar-specific differences at the fixed collection point of  <dig> chilling hours observed in figure 
3b. on the contrary, earlier non-clustered genes could have acquired a similar maximum expression level at this fixed time in different cultivars , and a genes could represent an intermediate situation between b and non-clustered genes . a highly simplified interpretation of these data would suggest the induction of a genes by one or several non-clustered regulatory genes, and the successive expression of b genes induced by a hypothetical transcriptional factor activated or expressed concomitantly with a genes. however a better knowledge on the transcriptional networks affecting tapetum and pollen processes is required to ascertain the plausibility of this hypothesis.

flower-bud late genes are expressed during microsporogenesis and pollen maturation processes
a histological analysis of anthers on the five samples utilized for qrt-pcr  was performed in order to identify developmental changes associated to the expression of flower-bud late genes. we observed the anthers of three independent buds per sample. in sample  <dig>  fully dormant anthers contained only pollen mother cells and the tapetum layer in a quiescent state . in sample  <dig>  after  <dig> chilling hours, flower buds were proximate to dormancy release. at this point, some anthers had already entered microsporogenesis by initiating meiosis of pollen mother cells and tapetum vacuolation , whereas most of anthers remained inactive. in sample  <dig>  a wide range of developmental stages were observed, from dividing pollen mother cells to isolated microspores, with a high number of anthers showing postmeiotic tetrads surrounded by a callose wall and highly vacuolated tapetal cells . in sample  <dig>  most of anthers contained vacuolated microspores and a degenerating tapetum , but one of the buds had also some tetrads. finally, in sample  <dig>  the tapetum had already disappeared and pollen grains were apparently fully mature .
 <dig>  scale bars,  <dig> μm. pmc, pollen mother cell; tp, tapetum; t, tetrad; vm, vacuolated microspore; ex, exine; p, pollen grain.

flower-bud late genes were not significantly expressed in samples  <dig>  and  <dig> , thus they are expected to be involved in one or several processes occurring in samples  <dig> to  <dig>  as meiotic and mitotic cell division, pollen maturation, synthesis and segregation of substances, and tapetum degeneration. tapetal cells actively participate in the supply of essential compounds for pollen cells during most of the period covered by these samples and particularly are involved in the synthesis and deposition of sporopollenin; a major component of the pollen cell wall exine. the exine may be identified as a blue light layer surrounding the vacuolated microspores and pollen grains stained in figures 
6d-e, but sporopollenin starts to accumulate earlier, in the tetrad stage 
 <cit>  . the temporal expression pattern of flower-bud late genes, peaking in samples  <dig> and  <dig> in anthers, in addition to their protein sequence similarity to sporopollenin-related genes of arabidopsis, strongly suggest a role of some of these genes in sporopollenin synthesis and deposition, as detailed below.

candidate genes for sporopollenin synthesis and deposition in peach
those genes having a putative ortholog in the sporopollenin pathway of arabidopsis and others showing ltp or grp domains  have been placed on a schematic picture depicting the hypothetical elements of this pathway in peach . the gene ppa016810m could have a similar role to cyp703a <dig> in the hydroxylation of fatty acids 
 <cit> . the gene ppa003797m codes for an acyl-coa synthetase similar to acos <dig>  an early and essential function for the synthesis of sporopollenin in arabidopsis <cit> . subsequently, the genes ppa006852m, ppa019432m, ppa008548m and ppa008777m could perform additional steps in the synthesis of sporopollenin monomers similar to the functions exerted by the polyketide synthases lap5/ <dig> and the tetraketide α-pyrone reductases tkpr1/ <dig> in arabidopsis <cit> . the resulting sporopollenin monomers are extruded to the locule and deposited on the pollen cell wall with the assistance of ltps and grps 
 <cit> . we isolated two grp-like  and five ltp-like genes  that could be considered as candidates to perform this role in peach. in addition, ppa009789m gene codes for a protein similar to rpg <dig> of arabidopsis, a plasma membrane protein involved in exine pattern formation 
 <cit> . two additional flower-bud late genes  are respectively putative orthologs of the arabidopsis tapetum <dig> gene , coding for a putative short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase expressed in the tapetum 
 <cit>  and lap <dig> gene, essential for proper exine formation 
 <cit> .
 <cit> .

the following flower-bud late genes coding for putative dna-binding and regulatory proteins could be involved in the transcriptional regulation of pollen maturation pathways: ppa008351m, ppa022178m and ppb <dig> . the arabidopsis potential ortholog of ppa008351m  codes for a bhlh-type transcription factor that interacts at the protein level with aborted microspores  and dysfunctional tapetum  <dig> , two other bhlh-type factors involved in tapetum development and pollen wall formation 
 <cit> .

on the other side, ppa022178m is the potential peach counterpart of the arabidopsis male sterility <dig>  gene, which encodes a well-known phd-domain transcription factor relevant for late tapetum development and pollen wall biosynthesis 
 <cit> . interestingly, at2g <dig> gene, coding for an at-hook dna-binding protein highly similar to peach ppb <dig>  was found specifically expressed in the wild-type tapetum after meiosis, and unexpectedly up-regulated in the ms <dig> mutant 
 <cit> . this prompted to the authors to hypothesize that ms <dig> was involved in the stage-specific repression of at2g <dig> to ensure its expression in a narrow time interval soon after the degeneration of the callose walls surrounding the tetrads. the functional relevance of at2g <dig> in pollen cell wall formation was assessed by the generation of rnai transgenic lines, showing pollen grains with a thinner cell wall, some of which had collapsed 
 <cit> .

the fact that genes expected to function downstream in the biochemical pathway  are expressed earlier than the upstream genes seems to be rather inconsistent . however their particular expression profiles do overlap over a certain period of time, suggesting that it could act as a mechanism ensuring the activation of this pathway at the precise time. the complex network of transcriptional and protein interactions between the transcriptional factors involved in early and late anther development in arabidopsis <cit>  points to an intricate gene regulation pathway. as inferred from the expression studies shown in this work, ppa008351m  is expressed earlier than ppa022178m  and ppb <dig>  within the regulatory circuits operating in the anther developmental events in peach .

the data presented here constitute an initial genomic approach to unravel anther developmental processes in peach, focusing on sporopollenin synthesis and deposition. in addition, the identification of genes induced during microsporogenesis and pollen maturation processes could assist in the finding of expression biomarkers associated to dormancy release in peach 
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study utilized transcriptomic data from flower buds of peach at different stages of dormancy and several cultivars with different chilling requirements to obtain a list of flower-bud late genes expressed shortly after dormancy release. some of these genes clustered into two major expression patterns. their close similarity to genes described in the sporopollenin synthesis pathway in arabidopsis and their transitory expression in anthers coinciding with microsporogenesis events strongly suggests their participation in the biochemical processes required for the formation of the cell wall exine of pollen grains. in addition, three peach regulatory factors with bhlh, phd and at-hook domains have been postulated to take part in transcriptional circuits regulating late anther development in peach.

