BACKGROUND
perennial ryegrass  is the predominant grass for temperate pastoral production globally, with its popularity largely attributed to its ability to grow large amounts of high quality feed for livestock. nevertheless, there are some limitations to perennial ryegrass, including distinct seasonal growth and quality trends  <cit> . while the environmental conditions implicated as variables affecting growth are out of farmers' control, other factors have a substantial influence on perennial ryegrass growth, for example defoliation management.

the effect of different defoliation regimes on growth have been evaluated  <cit> , but the complex biological processes affected within the plant are largely unknown. monitoring alterations in gene expression patterns facilitates our understanding of these biological processes. traditionally, the factors that influence plant gene expression have been determined under controlled conditions, while varying one or more factors at a time  <cit> . although critical to understanding gene function, these results must be validated in the field, where interactions between weather, farm management, pest challenge, and other confounding factors are likely to affect the pattern and/or degree of response  <cit> .

quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction  is among the best methods available for determining changes in gene expression, because of its ability to quantify target genes rapidly and accurately, even those with very weak expression levels . before analysis of target gene expression, it is essential to select an appropriate normalisation strategy to control for non-specific variation between samples. introduction of inter-sample variation can occur at a number of stages throughout the experimental protocol, and can affect efficiencies of the reverse transcription  and polymerase chain reaction  reactions  <cit> . the most commonly applied approach for normalisation for qrt-pcr is the use of one or more endogenous reference genes  <cit> . while an ideal reference gene would be universally valid, with a constant expression profile across all possible tissues and experimental conditions  <cit> , no such universal reference gene has yet been reported  <cit> , and is unlikely to exist  <cit> . however, most experimental designs are restricted to a few different tissue types or treatments, and it is likely, therefore, that one or more genes will be stably expressed across a limited experimental design.

in the past, genes that had putative housekeeping roles in basic cellular processes were frequently used as reference genes  <cit> , but often without proper validation of their expression stability. such an oversight can be misleading, as their expression has been reported to fluctuate in some instances  <cit> . studies that fail to use appropriate reference genes may bias gene expression profiles and result in low precision or misleading results  <cit> .

the aim of the current study was to identify moderately expressed genes that had relatively stable gene expression throughout the year using existing serial analysis of gene expression  data  <cit> . the stability in expression of these candidate reference genes was then validated in  <dig> diverse perennial ryegrass samples, grown under both field and laboratory conditions, and comprising replicated samples from different tissues/cultivars/growth stages and treatments. expression stability was evaluated using the statistical algorithms, genorm  <cit>  and normfinder  <cit> .

RESULTS
identification of reference gene candidates
from existing sage™ data , sage™ tags that were mapped correctly, annotated, and had moderate expression profiles across seasons  were identified. from the list of the sage™ tags that met the above criteria, six genes involved at the pre-transcription stage , transcription , translation , and in protein biosynthesis , modification  and degradation  were selected as candidate reference genes.

as eef1a is often identified as a stable reference gene  <cit> , a more highly expressed eef1a gene, eef1a , was also selected from the sage™ data for testing, along with a strategy proposed by martin et al.  <cit>  in which transcripts from multigene eef1a, eef1a , would be identified. the seasonal expression profile and accession numbers of the candidate reference genes from the sage™ data are presented in table  <dig> 

1national centre for biotechnology information genbank dbest accession number/s for the perennial ryegrass sequence/s to which the tags are mapped.

2national centre for biotechnology information genbank tsa accession number for the perennial ryegrass sequence to which the tags are mapped.

3tags are presented as a  <dig> base pair sequence, excluding the nlaiii site .

4not applicable.

expression levels of the reference gene candidates
all of the candidate reference genes were moderately abundant , with the exception of h <dig>  expression of h <dig> was generally very low in the tested samples  or was not detected at all ; therefore it was excluded from further analyses. the least variation in gene expression across all  <dig> tested samples was displayed by e <dig> , while eef1a  was the most variable . mean ± standard deviation of cp values of the candidate reference genes from different tissue/cultivar/growth stage/treatment combinations are presented in additional file  <dig> 

expression stability of the reference gene candidates
data were segregated into  <dig> different datasets for evaluation of gene expression stability using genorm and normfinder . in genorm, when all  <dig> perennial ryegrass samples were included , the average expression stability  of the moderately expressed eef1a  and multigene eef1a  was least, and that of the more highly expressed eef1a , was greatest. this suggests that expression of eef1a  and eef1a  was most stable and eef1a  was least stable . this was also the case in the dataset containing the  <dig> field-grown leaf and stubble samples collected at different growth stages following a range of defoliation treatments . average expression stability and ranking of the candidate reference genes in the remaining datasets are presented in figures 2c-j.

1datasets consist of  all  <dig> perennial ryegrass tissue samples,   <dig> field-grown samples harvested following different defoliation management,   <dig> laboratory-grown samples,   <dig> perennial ryegrass stubble samples,   <dig> perennial ryegrass leaf samples,  four perennial ryegrass callus, inflorescence and root samples,  five perennial ryegrass etiolated seedlings of different cultivars,  four field-grown samples harvested at the peak of each season,  three laboratory-grown samples to evaluate water stress and  four laboratory-grown samples to evaluate cold stress.

2there were  <dig> leaf samples in total, but in  <dig> of the samples taken immediately after defoliation there was insufficient leaf for rna extraction.

3the four seasonal samples  each consisted of two original tissue samples  that were bulked together after cdna synthesis.

4each of the  <dig> samples was tested in triplicate using qrt-pcr.

the genorm algorithm also calculated the pairwise variation vn/vn+ <dig>  which measured the effect of adding further reference genes on the normalisation factor, thus determining the optimal number of reference genes. evaluation of all plant samples revealed a large decrease in the pairwise variation with the inclusion of a third, and then fourth reference gene . when a fifth reference gene was added, the v values dropped below the proposed guideline of  <dig>  . thus, according to genorm, five reference genes , eef1a , tbp- <dig>  e <dig> and yt521-b) are required for accurate normalisation. pairwise variation within the field-grown samples collected at different growth stages following a range of defoliation treatments indicate that the four most stably expressed reference genes , eef1a , tbp- <dig>  and yt521-b) should be used for normalisation, while in the laboratory-grown samples use of the three most stable genes , tbp- <dig>  and eif4a) is sufficient .

the results of the normfinder analysis are summarised in table  <dig>  when all  <dig> samples were included , eef1a  was identified as the most stable gene with an expression stability of  <dig> , followed by yt521-b ; eef1a  was least stable . out of the ten datasets, eef1a  was most often identified as the most stable reference gene, while yt521-b was most often identified as the least stable reference gene.

1datasets consist of  all  <dig> perennial ryegrass tissue samples,   <dig> field-grown samples harvested following different defoliation management,   <dig> laboratory-grown samples,   <dig> perennial ryegrass stubble samples,   <dig> perennial ryegrass leaf samples,  four perennial ryegrass callus, inflorescence and root samples,  five perennial ryegrass etiolated seedlings of different cultivars,  four field-grown samples harvested at the peak of each season,  three laboratory-grown samples to evaluate water stress and  four laboratory-grown samples to evaluate cold stress.

2normfinder analysis carried out using the group property to identify the six different defoliation treatments contained within this dataset. as well as identifying the best reference gene; this analysis gives the combination of the two best reference genes with their combined stability value.

normfinder has the added ability of being able to estimate the variation between sample groups or treatments . this function determines the best combination of two reference genes for normalisation. it also establishes whether normalisation using the two reference genes in combination will be more accurate than just using the most stable gene .

the dataset containing the  <dig> field-grown leaf and stubble samples collected at different growth stages following a range of defoliation treatments was the only dataset that contained sufficient replication to allow this full analysis . analysing this dataset with or without the treatment groups identified did not affect the ranking of the genes, although the stability values were reduced with the inclusion of treatment groups . with the treatment groups identified in this dataset, normfinder selected eef1a  as the most stably expressed single gene, with a stability value of  <dig> . the best combination of two genes, eef1a  and yt521-b, further reduced the normfinder stability value to  <dig> .

comparison of reference genes for normalisation of a target gene
the expression levels of a target gene, chloroplast translational elongation factor tu , were used as an example to show the effect of using different reference genes for normalisation. the ef-tu expression was normalised using three different strategies: 1) geometric average of the four most stably expressed reference genes selected by genorm, 2) geometric average of the two most stably expressed reference genes selected by normfinder, and 3) the least stably expressed gene according to both genorm and normfinder used alone.

in perennial ryegrass leaf tissue, there was no effect  of defoliation frequency or severity, or any interaction between the defoliation treatments. there was, however, a significant  interaction between leaf regrowth stage and the normalisation strategy used. normalisation using the least stable reference gene ) led to over-estimation of the target gene following defoliation  and at the 1-leaf stage of regrowth compared with the genorm strategy, and at the 1-leaf stage of regrowth compared with normfinder . although the genorm and normfinder strategies did differ in their estimation of the target gene at the 1- and 3-leaf stages of regrowth, the trend in transcript abundance throughout regrowth remained the same, in contrast with that displayed following normalisation using eef1a .

discussion
quantitative rt-pcr has become a powerful tool for analysis of gene expression because of its high throughput, sensitivity, and accuracy  <cit> . however, the use of one or more stably expressed reference genes to normalise the variation introduced by rna sample quality, rna input quantity, and rt enzymatic efficiency is essential to achieving reliable results  <cit> . to obtain a solid basis for normalisation of gene expression data, it is advisable to validate the expression stability of candidate reference genes under the conditions studied, rather than using reference genes published elsewhere  <cit> . validation of reference genes has been simplified with the design of statistical algorithms, such as genorm and normfinder, which not only test the expression stability of reference genes, but can also determine the number of reference genes required to provide accurate normalisation  <cit> .

this study describes the validation of candidate reference genes for normalisation of gene expression in perennial ryegrass. the most comprehensive dataset contains  <dig> field-grown leaf and stubble samples collected at different growth stages following a range of defoliation treatments and representing spatial and temporal replicates. using genorm, eef1a  and eef1a  were identified as the two most stable genes across the wide range of samples tested, followed by tbp- <dig> and yt521-b. use of all four of these genes is recommended for normalisation, based on a suggested pairwise variation threshold of  <dig>   <cit> . however, this is not an absolute rule and depends on the data. in the current study, based on v ≤  <dig> , two reference genes are sufficient for normalisation of qrt-pcr data from the callus, inflorescence and root samples, the etiolated seedlings of different cultivars, the laboratory-grown samples to evaluate water stress, and the field-grown samples harvested at the peak of each season.

one of the factors that may have made it more difficult to achieve v ≤  <dig>  in the current study is the large number of samples and treatments tested. datasets containing smaller numbers of samples and treatments tended to require fewer reference genes for accurate normalisation  <cit>  than larger datasets . as far as we are aware, the maximum number of qrt-pcr samples analysed hitherto using genorm was  <dig> samples  <cit> . moreover, even other studies that analysed smaller sample numbers  were not able to obtain v values smaller than  <dig>  when they tested eight or ten candidate reference genes in human breast cancer and osteoarthritic cartilage samples  <cit> . perennial ryegrass, like the human species, is an outcrossing, heterogenous species; hence within a sample of the ryegrass population there can be considerable genetic diversity between plants  <cit> . thus, more reference genes may be required to stabilise the variability in gene expression. the larger threshold for variability in reference gene expression may have also been a result of the fact that the plants were field-grown, and thus exposed to constantly changing environmental conditions.

in slight contrast to genorm, the alternative algorithm, normfinder, ranked eef1a , yt521-b, eef1a , and tbp- <dig> as the four most stably expressed genes in this dataset, with eef1a  and yt521-b providing the best combination of two genes for normalisation of gene expression data. although the reduction in the stability value when using the single, most stably expressed gene  compared with the two most stably expressed  is not large, if small differences in gene expression are to be detected then this increase in the accuracy of normalisation is still desirable.

some studies that have utilised both genorm and normfinder have reported minor changes in gene stability ranking  <cit> , while others have observed relatively substantial changes [i.e. up to  <dig> places between the two methods;  <cit> . genorm and normfinder rely on different mathematical approaches to calculate stability. genorm selects two genes with a low intra-group variation and approximately the same non-vanishing inter-group variation. in comparison, normfinder selects the two best genes with minimal combined inter- and intra-group expression variation  <cit> , which can have a notable effect on the subsequent gene stability ranking  <cit> . therefore, the fact that the ranking of candidate reference genes by normfinder is not always identical to that defined by genorm is not surprising. some studies have chosen to base their reference gene selection on genorm results because of its ability to identify the appropriate number of reference genes for accurate normalisation  <cit> . others have chosen normfinder, because it examines the stability of each single reference gene independently, and not in relation to the other genes as genorm does; which is important considering our limited knowledge regarding gene co-regulation  <cit> .

when the target gene ef-tu was quantified using the four reference genes recommended by genorm, the two suggested by normfinder or the least stable gene there were some differences in the calculated transcript abundance. the genorm and normfinder strategies differed in their estimation of ef-tu at the 1- and 3-leaf stages of regrowth. in an ideal situation, normalisation using the genes defined by genorm or normfinder would have produced exactly the same result, indicating that there was no additional benefit in using four reference genes as opposed to two. while this wasn't the case, it is difficult to say whether the mathematical approach used by genorm or normfinder is superior. therefore, the fact that the trend in transcript abundance throughout regrowth remained the same for both strategies suggests that either approach could be used for normalisation. both approaches demonstrate the same up- or downregulation of the target gene, it is just the magnitude of the effect that differs, which could be taken into consideration when interpreting results. the trend in transcript abundance produced from normalisation using the least stable gene differed to the other two strategies. this highlights the importance of validating reference gene stability to ensure that low precision or misleading results do not occur  <cit> .

some of the reference genes used in the current study have been used previously as reference genes in other species. in plant studies, eef1a is probably the most commonly used reference gene  <cit> , although its expression profile has not always been validated before use. using genorm and/or normfinder, eef1a has been ranked as one of the top two reference genes in rice, perennial ryegrass, potato, and lolium temulentum  <cit> , and third best in arabidopsis , brachypodium distachyon, and ectocarpus siliculosus  <cit> . however, while eef1a was proven to be a good reference gene in the current, and other published studies, there is also evidence that its expression profile is not as consistent as that of other reference genes that have been tested  <cit> . one possible reason for this is that eef1a is encoded by several genes in a multigene family, members of which have been shown to exhibit differential expression  <cit> . in the current study the gene expression of two individual eef1a genes in perennial ryegrass was analysed. the moderately expressed eef1a  had a more stable expression profile than the more highly expressed eef1a . this difference in the expression stability may explain why contrasting results exist for many tested reference genes  <cit> , and highlights the importance of validating expression stability of candidate reference genes before use for normalisation.

brunner et al.  <cit>  suggested that simultaneous amplification of two or more members of a reference gene family by a single primer pair designed in the conserved coding region could result in more stable gene expression than a single gene amplification. this assumes that genes within the same family will have balanced expression, which is not always the case, as demonstrated with eef1a here and by reid et al.  <cit> , with ubiquitin by jain et al.  <cit> , and with actin by jian et al.  <cit> .

the reference gene yt521-b, although identified as the most unstable gene in half of the datasets, was selected by normfinder, along with eef1a , as providing the best two-gene combination for normalisation of gene expression data in the most comprehensive dataset. to our knowledge yt521-b has not been tested before for use as a reference gene. in arabidopsis, bläsing et al.  <cit>  illuminated five-week old seedlings for  <dig> hours in the presence of ambient or <  <dig> ppm carbon dioxide . they identified an yt521-b-like family protein  as a carbon fixation-responsive gene, which perhaps makes it slightly surprising that it was considered to be a stably expressed gene in the field-grown samples collected following a range of defoliation treatments. however, in eukaryotic cells, yt521-b are said to be ubiquitously expressed nucleolar proteins  <cit>  playing vital roles in the assembly of genes into transcription centres and allowing efficient gene expression regulation  <cit> . yt521-b appears to be a good reference gene candidate; however it is vital that it is validated due to its instability under some experimental conditions.

to the best of our knowledge, no other study has attempted to analyse gene expression in field-grown perennial monocotyledons, let alone perennial ryegrass. to successfully commercialise perennial plants specific for pastoral/turf/biofuel use, an understanding of gene expression in these plants during their regrowth cycle is necessary before we can harness the power of biotechnology for various industries. the prelude to this would be to validate a set of reference genes in order to harmonise the data from various experiments that are expected to follow suit. we believe that we have achieved this by the validation of several suitable reference genes for normalisation of target genes involving not only perennial ryegrass plants raised in controlled conditions, but also in the field.

CONCLUSIONS
this study is unique in the magnitude of samples tested with the inclusion of numerous field-grown samples, helping pave the way to conduct gene expression studies in perennial biomass crops under field-conditions. our results indicate that eef1a  and yt521-b are suitable reference genes for normalisation of target genes in perennial ryegrass following different defoliation management in the field. several other stably expressed genes have also been validated providing useful guidelines for reference gene selection in perennial ryegrass under conditions other than those tested here.

