BACKGROUND
the eyes and skin are obvious retinoid target organs. vitamin a deficiency causes night blindness and retinoids are widely used to treat acne and psoriasis. however, more than 90% of total body retinol  is stored in liver stellate cells  <cit> . in addition, hepatocytes produce the largest amount of retinol binding protein and cellular retinoic acid binding protein to mobilize retinol from the hepatic storage pool and deliver retinol to its receptors, respectively  <cit> . furthermore, hepatocytes express the highest amount of retinoid x receptor alpha  among all the cell types. surprisingly, the function of endogenous retinoids in the liver has received very little attention. thus, the current study aims to identify the bona fide rxrα and rarα targets in the liver.

the broad and complicated roles of retinoids can be explained by the presence of multiple receptors for retinoic acid , the biological active form of retinol. the receptors for ra are retinoic acid receptor  as well as retinoid x receptor   <cit> . in addition, rxr is essential for many other receptors to function. these receptors for ra belong to a nuclear receptor family whose members are transcriptional factors. thus, ra exerts its biological effects by regulating gene expression. rxr is unique in that it not only forms homodimers, but also dimerizes with other nuclear receptors, which include receptors for fatty acids , bile acids , oxysterols , xenobiotics , vitamin d , and ra . hence, most rxr partners participate in regulating lipid homeostasis. within these heterodimers, rxr can be either a permissive or a silent partner. when rxr serves as a silent partner, the heterodimer does not respond to ra. when it is a permissive  partner, ra and the ligand for the heterodimeric partner can both activate the heterodimer. for example, rxr is a permissive partner for ppar  <cit> . similarly, heterodimeric complexes of rxr with lxr  <cit>  or fxr  <cit>  also retain ra responsiveness. furthermore, retinoids also activate pxr, vdr, and car thus are able to thus regulate xenobiotic metabolism and potentially their own oxidation  <cit> . since most of these receptors are abundantly expressed in the liver, the endogenous ra may regulate many hepatic nuclear receptor-mediated pathways. therefore, the role of ra in the liver is unpredictable. in order to understand the endogenous function of ra and its receptors, it is crucial to identify ra receptor targets  genome-wide.

rxrα is highly expressed in the liver  <cit> . liver specific rxrα-deficient mice have increased serum triglyceride and cholesterol levels  <cit> . in addition, lack of hepatic rxrα increases sensitivity to alcohol- and non-alcohol-induced steatosis and steatohepatitis  <cit> . besides regulating lipid metabolism, hepatocyte rxrα also controls xenobiotic  <cit> , carbohydrate  <cit> , and amino acid metabolism  <cit> . these findings indicate that rxrα-mediated signaling has a huge impact on maintaining liver health and in regulating many disease processes.

to understand the global roles of rxrα and rarα at the genomic level, chromatin immunoprecipitation using anti-rxrα and -rarα antibodies followed by sequencing  was performed. since rxrα is an essential partner for other nuclear receptors, we compared chip-seq data to rxrα binding locations with locations from previous studies for pxr  <cit> , lxr  <cit> , fxr  <cit> , and pparα  <cit> . meanwhile, the expression levels of the genes responsible for lipid homeostasis were studied in wild type and hepatic rxrα-deficient mouse livers. both genome-wide dna-binding and hepatic gene expression data were used to define the role of ra in the liver. our data uncovered the unknown function of retinoic acid and rxr vs. rar in the liver. using different approaches, we showed for the first time that retinoic acid-activated rxrα and rarα have distinct effects. moreover, the action of retinoic acid in the liver is to regulate lipid homeostasis specifically by reducing serum cholesterol, triglyceride and bile acid levels. the data provided may lead to future development of synthetic retinoid that can target metabolic syndrome or other types of lipid-associated health issues.

RESULTS
genome-wide binding of rxrα, rarα, pxr, lxr, fxr, and pparα in mouse livers
to understand the global roles of rxrα and rarα at the hepatic genome level, chip-seq was performed using anti-rxrα and -rarα antibodies. single read sequencing yielded  <dig> and  <dig> million uniquely mapped reads for rxrα and rarα, respectively. after filtering by including peak scores that were greater than  <dig> and distance within 10 kb from the transcriptional start site,  <dig>  peaks were detected for rxrα and  <dig>  peaks for rarα. since rxrα is an essential partner for other nuclear receptors, we compared chip-seq data of rxrα with those of pxr  <cit> , lxr  <cit> , fxr  <cit> , and pparα  <cit> . our data showed that the numbers of peaks, which were commonly bound by rxrα and other nuclear receptors, were  <dig>  for rarα, followed by  <dig>  for pparα,  <dig>  for fxr,  <dig>  for lxr, and  <dig> for pxr in the mouse liver genome. rarα had less than 50% overlapping bindings with rxrα while pparα, fxr, lxr, and pxr had over 85% overlapping bindings with rxrα . these findings suggest that rxrα is indispensable for the function of pparα, fxr, lxr and pxr in the mouse liver. in contrast, rarα may work in the absence of rxrα. more than  <dig> of rarα binding genes were bound by rxrα, and occupied 56% of total rxrα bindings, followed by pparα , fxr , lxr , and pxr . the well-known lipid regulators including pparα, fxr, lxr, and pxr bound to almost 50% of rxrα-bound regions suggesting the extensive role of rxrα in regulating lipids.

cluster and principal component analysis  were performed using the binding data. overlapping bindings between rxrα and rarα, pparα, fxr, lxr, and pxr were analyzed. according to the length of the vertical branches , lxr and pxr were clustered into one basic group. fxr was clustered into a subgroup with lxr and pxr. pparα, pxr, lxr, and fxr were classified into another group. however, rarα was distant from the others. the same datasets were subjected to pca analysis. after dimension deduction, two components were picked to describe the global properties of the samples. the two-dimension score plot showed that lxr and pxr had the shortest distance, implying their properties on the genome-wide binding level were most similar . the distance between fxr and lxr/pxr was shorter than the distances between other receptors and lxr/pxr. rarα was far from all other nuclear receptors. thus, the information generated from the pca and cluster analysis was consistent. the difference among the binding profiles of pxr, lxr, fxr, and pparα were described by component  <dig> while the difference between the binding profile of rarα and those four nuclear receptors were described by component  <dig> in the pca.

function analysis of the genes that have overlapping binding sites between rxrα and each of rarα, pxr, lxr, fxr, and pparα
to understand the potential biological role of genes likely to be targeted by rxrα-heterodimers, david functional annotation was performed. the top ten processes for each of the heterodimers formed by rxrα and other nuclear receptors were investigated in this study . although common pathways among these heterodimers, such as carboxylic acid catabolic process, organic acid catabolic process, and oxidation reduction, appeared in the top  <dig> pathways, the heterodimers still have their unique biological functions. rxrα-rarα uniquely regulated protein transport, localization, and rna processing. the heterodimers of rxrα and pxr, lxr, fxr, and pparα have a great impact on various lipid processing pathways. for example, rxrα-pparα and rxrα-lxr tend to bind to the genes involved in acylglycerol, glycerol ether, and neutral lipid metabolic processes, which are fatty acid derived. in addition, rxrα-pparα distinctly binds to the genes that are involved in fatty acid metabolic processes, and rxrα-lxr is more prone to bind to the genes that participate in steroid metabolic process. in addition to steroid metabolic process, rxrα-fxr also tends to bind to genes that dictate lipid transport and regulate steroid and monosaccharide homeostasis. rxrα-pxr targets specific biological processes like regulating pyruvate and carbohydrate biotransformation, but it also has a role in acute-phase response, acute inflammatory response, and response to wounding. taken together, rxrα-rarα targeted protein and rna processes while rxrα-pxr/lxr/fxr/pparα targeted homeostasis regulation of small molecules, which include monosaccharide and lipids.

numbers in the table represent the p value given by david.

global profiling of the expression of lipid homeostasis genes in wild type and rxrα ko mice treated with and without ra
hepatic rxrα ko mice have elevated serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels  <cit> , and the majority of pxr, lxr, fxr, pparα-bound genes were also bound by rxrα. we next tested a hypothesis that ra and hepatic rxrα could regulate lipid homeostasis in the mouse liver via rxrα and its heterodimeric partners. the expression levels of the lipid homeostasis genes  in the kegg pathway database were studied in wild type and hepatic rxrα ko mice treated with and without ra. the pca score plot showed that ra treatment of wild type mice caused a downward shift in c <dig> from the untreated control group . in contrast, an upward shift was found due to hepatic rxrα deficiency in comparison to the untreated wild type mice. thus, ra treatment and rxrα deficiency had opposite effects. in addition, no significant change was noted when ra was used to treat hepatic rxrα ko mice. these findings unequivocally prove that the effects of ra on regulating those lipid homeostasis genes were rxrα dependent. score plot  indicates component  <dig> made a contribution to distinguish groups of control, ra-treated, and rxrα-deficient mice. thus,  <dig> out of  <dig> genes with high loading values  in component  <dig> were selected for further analysis . among them,  <dig> genes were induced by ra and had decreased expression levels due to rxrα deficiency. the other  <dig> genes, whose expression levels were suppressed by ra, had increased expression levels due to a lack of rxrα. thus, the expression levels of those  <dig> lipid-related genes are ligand -responsive and receptor -dependent. based on the known function of those genes described in kegg and pubmed, the role of those  <dig> genes was assigned and summarized in table  <dig>  remarkably, ra regulated many genes involved in certain pathways. for example, ra decreased the expression of  <dig> genes in the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, but did not increase the expression of any other genes in the same pathway. thus, it is very likely that ra inhibited the biosynthesis of cholesterol in an rxrα-dependent manner. ra also induced the expression of  <dig> genes in the ra elimination process and yet did not reduce the expression of any gene in the same process. thus, ra can self-regulate its own level. furthermore, ra also induced the expression of  <dig> genes in the biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids responsible for anti-inflammation. since there was no inhibition of gene expression in the same pathway, it is very likely that ra up-regulates the synthesis of unsaturated fatty acids and has an anti-inflammatory role. chip-seq data indicated that most of the genes  had rxrα binding implying direct gene regulation.

taken together, ligand  treatment and hepatic rxrα deficiency resulted in opposite effects. figure  <dig> summarizes the effect of ra and hepatic rxrα deficiency on lipid homeostasis. rxrα deficiency tends to favor saturated fatty acids, triglyceride, cholesterol, and bile acids synthesis. in contrast, ra treatment leads to unsaturated fatty acids and phospholipid synthesis and lipolysis as well as triglyceride breakdown.

binding of ra/rxrα responsive genes by other nuclear receptors
additional analysis was done to understand which other nuclear receptors may be involved in regulating the expression of these  <dig> ra/rxrα target genes, which have a role in lipid homeostasis. the binding data generated in the current study  were compared with the binding data of pxr, lxr, fxr, and pparα. figure  <dig> shows overlapping genes with rxrα-heterodimers, as assessed by overlapping binding of rxrα and other nuclear receptors. the data were organized by the number of different nuclear receptors binding the genes. for example, motifs located in the abca <dig>  abhd <dig>  acsl, and aldh3a <dig> genes could be bound by rxrα and all five nuclear receptors. peaks located in the apoa <dig>  cyp <dig>  cyp7b <dig>  and elovl <dig> could be bound by rxrα and any  <dig> out of the  <dig> studied nuclear receptors . some of the commonly regulated genes have nuclear receptor binding site at the same location. the data indicated extensive crosstalk among nuclear receptors in regulating the expression of those genes.

quantification of serum cholesterol, triglyceride, and bile acid levels
chip-seq and rna expression profiling indicate the role of ra in controlling lipid homeostasis in the liver. serum cholesterol, triglyceride, and bile acid levels were quantified to test the genetic findings. the data showed that ra reduced serum cholesterol, triglyceride as well as bile acid levels in wild type mice . however, such effects were not found in hepatic rxrα ko mice. in addition, serum cholesterol and triglyceride, but not bile acid, levels were elevated due to rxrα deficiency. these biochemical findings confirm the role of ra in regulating lipid homeostasis in the liver.

discussion
this study establishes the role of nuclear receptors and ra in regulating lipid homeostasis in the liver. in addition, the mechanisms by which nuclear receptors and ra regulate lipid homeostasis were illustrated at the gene, pathway, and systemic levels. furthermore, relationships between rxrα and pxr, lxr, fxr, as well as pparα in regulating lipid homeostasis were analyzed. these nuclear receptors depend on rxrα to execute their functions and more than 85% of their bound genes overlap with those bound by rxrα. the nuclear receptor binding data were strengthened by profiling the expression patterns of  <dig> lipid genes, which showed that ra treatment and rxrα-deficiency had an opposite effect in regulating lipid homeostasis. nuclear receptor binding data also illustrated extensive cross talk among the studied nuclear receptors. thus, our novel in vivo data provided extensive evidence showing the role of ra in dictating lipid homeostasis in the liver.

it is intriguing that more than 85% of the pxr, lxr, fxr, and pparα binding sites overlapped with those of rxrα. in contrast, only 43% of rarα binding sites overlapped with those of rxrα. it has been shown that rarα can form homodimers  <cit> . it is also possible that rarα may dimerize with rxrβ and rxrγ to exert its function. although the percentage of overlapping bindings between rarα and rxrα is not as high as others, the number of genes that could be bound by rxrα/rarα  is the highest, followed by rxrα/pparα , rxrα/fxr , rxrα/lxr , and rxrα/pxr , implying the relatively extensive role of these nuclear receptors in regulating hepatic gene expression. it is important to further study the role of rarα and other rars in the liver. by forming partners with other nuclear receptors, rxrα is a master regulator. our data showed that more than  <dig> hepatic genes were bound by rxrα, and 72% of them overlapped with the genes bound by rarα, pxr, lxr, fxr, or pparα. the remaining 28% of rxrα binding sites might be bound by rxrα homodimer or the heterodimer of rxrα and vdr or car. thus, the five nuclear receptors  analyzed in the current study account for almost three quarters of rxrα binding genes in the liver. furthermore, nearly 50% of rxrα bindings overlapped with the bindings of pxr, lxr, fxr, and pparα . hence, lipid regulation should be one of the major functions of rxrα.

clustering and pca showed that the genome-wide binding pattern of rarα is not similar to that of pparα, lxr, pxr, and fxr. biological function annotation also showed that rarα has some unique features including protein processing, protein localization, and rna processing. however, the five studied nuclear receptors also demonstrated functional redundancy. for example, there are four pathways, including oxidation reduction, carboxylic acid catabolic process, organic acid catabolic process, and cofactor metabolic process, that can be regulated by more than four nuclear receptors. this finding suggests the importance of these four pathways in the liver, and the role of rarα in them.

although pparα, lxr, fxr, and pxr have extensive roles in regulating lipids, they also have specific roles in regulating different types of lipids. rxrα/pparα prefers to bind to genes that participate in neutral lipids, glycerol ether, and organic ether as well as fatty acid metabolism processes. all of which are either fatty acid-derived products or precursors for the biosynthesis of fatty acids. another pathway bound by rxrα/pparα is the acylglycerol metabolic process, which is involved in triglyceride homeostasis. rxrα/lxr tends to regulate genes involved in sterol metabolism, which is consistent with its known role  <cit> . rxrα/fxr not only binds to the genes participating in steroid metabolism process, but also those involved in lipid transport and carbohydrate metabolism processes. rxrα/pxr binds to the genes involved in regulating the pyruvate metabolic process at the dna binding level. pyruvate is a key intersection for fatty acid, carbohydrate, and protein metabolisms. in addition, rxrα/pxr also regulates response to acute phase, inflammatory, and wounding, implying that pxr can be an excellent target for metabolism and inflammation-related health issues. lastly, fxr binds to the genes involved in monosaccharide metabolism, which shows the intimate relationship between bile acid and glucose homeostasis  <cit> .

all of the  <dig> genes that showed differential effects of ra treatment and rxrα deficiency are bounded by rxrα and rarα, pxr, lxr, fxr, and pparα heterodimers. these findings indicate that those studied nuclear receptors retain ra response in vivo and the effect of ra is dependent upon those nuclear receptors. ra has a broad spectrum of effects including biosynthesis of retinoids, phospholipids, and unsaturated fatty acids. it also has a role in eliminating retinoids, oxidizing saturated fatty acids, and breaking down triglycerides. it seems that ra has extensive beneficial effects in maintaining the health of the liver. specifically, ra induced the expression of cyp2c37/38/50/54/ <dig> and cyp2j <dig>  these genes encode enzymes involved in the generation of epoxyeicosatrienoic acids  <cit> , which have anti-inflammatory effects  <cit> . in contrast, rxrα deficiency induces the gene expression of cyp4f that is responsible for the generation of 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid, a pro-inflammation molecule  <cit> . in addition, ra increases mrna levels of cbr <dig>  which is responsible for transforming prostaglandin e <dig> to prostaglandin f2α. prostaglandin e <dig> and f2α have different effects in regulating lipid breakdown. prostaglandin e <dig> is a lipolysis inhibitor  <cit> ; whereas, prostaglandin f2α has not been shown to have the same effect. thus, the induction of cbr <dig> gene expression could be a mechanism by which ra induces lipolysis. ra also induces expression levels of gene encoding proteins for phospholipid biosynthesis, but rxrα deficiency increases the expression of the genes that have a role in the degradation of phospholipids. this finding suggests the potential role of ra in maintaining the normal structure of the cell membrane. formation of the monolayer of lipoprotein or lipid droplet is one of the major ways that phospholipids regulate lipid metabolism  <cit> . phosphatidylethanolamine  and phosphatidylcholine  are two important phospholipids that show different effects on lipid metabolism in humans and rodents. lower pc/pe ratio induces steatosis or even steatohepatitis in humans  <cit> , however, pe has a greater effect than pc in reducing the cholesterol level in rodents  <cit> . our data showed that ra induced the gene expression of ptdss <dig> , which converts pc to pe. consistently, the ptdss <dig> gene expression is reduced due to hepatic rxrα deficiency. these gene expression levels and dna binding data not only showed the underlying mechanism for ra in regulating liver gene expression, but also suggested the biochemical outcome.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, the differentiation and morphogenetic effect of ra is well known. however, the current study provides a comprehensive analysis of the role of ra in lipid homeostasis. all-trans ra is the most abundant retinoid that can be easily detected in the liver. thus, ra is likely to act as a regulator to control hepatic lipid metabolism. since the effect of ra is broad, it is important to develop specific retinoids in order to target specific pathways. such efforts may allow us to identify compounds that can be used to treat or prevent metabolic syndromes and other lipid-related health issues.

