BACKGROUND
site-directed and saturation mutagenesis are widely used to prepare mutant genes for studying a protein function in basic research and for preparation of engineered proteins for industrial and pharmaceutical applications. for example, protein function is studied by comparing the wild-type protein with the corresponding mutant proteins produced from genes with single or multiple mutations. site-directed saturation mutagenesis combined with directed evolution strategies were also used to modify protein properties  <cit> , such as altering substrate specificity  <cit> , enhancing activity  <cit> , or improving thermal stability  <cit> . to facilitate the preparation of mutant genes, various methods of multiple site-directed and saturation mutagenesis have been developed.

the most commonly used method for site-directed mutagenesis is the quikchange® method , which employs mutagenic plasmid amplification to introduce single site-directed mutations. using a more complicated protocol, this method was extended to introduce up to five site-directed mutations, although the complete mutagenesis efficiency decreased to 32%  <cit> . to improve this efficiency, omnichange was developed and was used to successfully introduce five site-directed saturation mutations  <cit> . although this method demonstrated high efficiency for complete multiple mutagenesis, synthesis of phosphorothioate nucleotides is necessary to generate 3′-overhanging dna fragments.

since  <dig>  several homologous dna assembly methods  <cit>  have been developed; one method in particular, one-step isothermal in vitro recombination   <cit> , was used to introduce multiple site-directed mutations  <cit> . in this method, termed as multichange isothermal in vitro recombination , multiple dna fragments were first prepared using polymerase chain reaction  followed by gel purification. the dna fragments possess 40-base pair  sequences homologous to the adjacent dna fragments on either side. because the iso reaction employs t <dig> exonuclease, dna fragments are degraded in a 5′–3′ direction, exposing a 3′ overhanging sequence complementary to the adjacent dna fragment. the dna fragments are annealed, and the gaps are filled using phusion dna polymerase, and the resulting nicks are sealed by taq dna ligase. this method permits highly efficient assembly of up to six dna fragments and is used to successfully introduce eight point mutations in a gene. however, because the iso method was originally generated to assemble dna fragments several hundred kilobases in length, the reaction condition was not necessary suitable for multiple site-directed mutagenesis.

in this study, we developed an optimized dna assembly method, termed multiple patch cloning , which could assemble up to  <dig> dna fragments to introduce nine site-directed mutations . the mupac reaction mixture is easily prepared from commercially available common enzymes, including t <dig> exonuclease, klenow fragment , and t <dig> dna ligase. we also utilized mupac to introduce site-directed saturation mutations at multiple sites in gfpuv gene. because mupac is a cost effective and efficient method for the dna manipulation, this method would be a useful tool to prepare various mutant genes to study and improve protein’s functions.

RESULTS
multiple patch cloning method
mupac is an optimized mutagenesis/cloning method that allows the assembly of multiple dsdna using short 16-bp assembly sequences . mupac employs t <dig> exonuclease, klenow fragment , and t <dig> dna ligase. in the reaction mixture, t <dig> exonuclease degraded the dna in a 5′–3′ direction and exposed 3′ overhang in the assembly regions at the ends of each fragment. when the dna fragments annealed at the exposed complementary single-strand region, klenow fragment  filled the gaps and t <dig> dna ligase joined the nick to assemble dsdna. the difference between mupac and the iso method was the enzymes that were used in the reaction mixture. because the iso method employed thermostable dna polymerase  and dna ligase  instead of the klenow fragment  and t <dig> dna ligase, the optimum temperature for the iso reaction was 50°c  <cit> , which favored a long assembly sequence, typically 40 bp. when the method was applied to a multiple site-directed mutagenesis in miso, this feature became drawback because the preparation of relatively long oligo-dnas was required to introduce each point mutation. in contrast, mupac required an assembly sequence of only 16 bp because the optimal reaction temperature for the enzymes used was 37°c. this difference also made it easy to prepare a saturation mutant gene pool using short oligonucleotides as mentioned in the section below.

gfpuv single site-directed mutagenesis
to evaluate the performance of new enzyme mixture in a point mutagenesis, we first tested its ability to mutate tyr  <dig> in the mutant gfpuv to asp. because the tyr  <dig> residue is key to the formation of the gfpuv chromophore , the mutation from tyr to asp abolished fluorescence. two pcr fragments were prepared using wild-type gfpuv gene template and two sets of pcr primers , one of which had a sequence that corresponded to the mutation from the tyr  codon to the asp  codon. the two fragments were assembled with the nhei–ecori-digested pbad plasmid using mupac, and the colonies of the e. coli jm <dig> transformed by the assembled plasmid were exposed to a uv light to observe fluorescence. as expected, none of the colonies exhibited fluorescence, indicating that no detectable wild-type gfpuv gene persisted through mupac . we then introduced a back mutation to the mutant gene to recover gfpuv fluorescence. two pcr fragments were prepared using mutant gfpuv y66d template and two sets of pcr primers , and were assembled with the pbad plasmid using mupac. as a result, 91% of the colonies of the e. coli jm <dig> transformed by the assembled plasmid exhibited fluorescence . this result shows that a single mutation could be introduced efficiently by mupac.

gfpuv multiple site-directed mutagenesis
next, we evaluated the performance of mupac in multiple mutagenesis. for this experiment, we employed the same back mutation strategy as for gfpuv single site directed mutagenesis to confirm the complete back mutation of mutant gfpuv genes. in addition to the y66d mutation, four other mutations  were chosen because the side chains of these residues were oriented to the inside of the β-barrel structure of gfpuv, and therefore only the one of the mutations could disturb the fluorescent property of the protein . for three-point mutagenesis, four pcr fragments were prepared using the v29d-y66d-a110d mutant  gene template and four sets of pcr primers . alternatively, for five-point mutagenesis, six pcr fragments were prepared using the v29d-y66d-a110d-f165d-l201d mutant  gene template and six sets of pcr primers . these dsdna fragments were assembled in the nhei–ecori-digested pbad plasmid using mupac, and fluorescent and non-fluorescent colonies were counted to calculate the efficiency of complete multiple mutagenesis. contrary to our expectations, the ratios of the fluorescent and non-fluorescent colonies in three- or five- point mutagenesis  were similar to that in one point mutagenesis . conversely, when miso method was used for five-point mutagenesis by assembling the same plasmid and pcr fragments, only 49% of colonies exhibited fluorescence . moreover, the numbers of colonies were similar between the one- , three- , and five-  point mutagenesis by mupac. these results clearly demonstrate the high fidelity and efficiency of mupac for multiple site-directed mutagenesis.

multiple site-directed mutagenesis of m-mlv rt gene
to evaluate the suitability of mupac for multiple site-directed mutagenesis, we also attempted to introduce six-point mutations  in m-mlv rt gene in the pet16b plasmid. seven pcr fragments were prepared using the m-mlv rt gene template and seven sets of pcr primers , assembled with ndei–xhoi-digested pet16b plasmid using mupac, and transformed into e. coli jm <dig>  gel electrophoresis of ndei–xhoi-digested plasmids extracted from the resulting colonies showed that  <dig> of  <dig> plasmids possessed full-length m-mlv rt gene . the dna sequence analysis of the full-length plasmid also showed that the all the genes sequenced had all six mutations without undesired mutations.

next, we increased the number of mutation sites from six to nine . ten pcr fragments were prepared using the m-mlv rt gene template and ten sets of pcr primers  were assembled with the ndei–xhoi-digested pet16b plasmid using mupac, and transformed into e. coli jm <dig>  gel electrophoresis of the ndei–xhoi-digested plasmids showed that  <dig> of  <dig> plasmids possessed full-length m-mlv rt gene . dna sequence analysis of the plasmids also showed that all full-length genes had all nine mutations without undesired mutation.

although the proportion of plasmids possessing the full-length mutant gene decreased as the number of mutation sites increased, mupac still produced the desired gene with nine-point mutations in approximately 40% of plasmids . these results clearly demonstrate the suitability of mupac for multiple site-directed mutagenesis.

multiple site-directed saturation mutagenesis on gfpuv gene
a number of studies have shown that the site-directed saturation mutagenesis is useful for altering or improving a protein function  <cit> . therefore, we tested the performance of mupac in five-point site-directed saturation mutagenesis  of gfpuv gene. six pcr fragments, each of them bearing nnk codon at the desired site, were prepared using gfpuv gene and six sets of pcr primers . the resulting dsdna fragments were assembled in an nhei–ecori-digested pbad plasmid using mupac, and transformed into e. coli dh10b by electroporation. sequence analysis of the plasmid mixture extracted from > <dig> of the resulting colonies showed that the extracted genes contained random nnk codons at the desired sites . we also independently sequenced  <dig> plasmids extracted from  <dig> randomly chosen colonies with gfpuv gene as an insert . the sequence data showed that all plasmids had mutations only at the desired sites. at each mutation site, the codons exhibited a, t, g, or c as the first and second bases, and t or g as the third base , and an average of  <dig> amino acid variations  was found at each site of the nnk codon . these results demonstrate the suitability of mupac for the preparation of a gene pool with multiple site-directed saturated mutations.

discussion
we developed a dna assembly method, termed mupac, capable of assembling multiple dsdnas with short homologous sequences . unlike the iso method, mupac uses dna modification enzymes with an optimum reaction temperature of 37°c. this feature allows the use of short  homologous assembly sequences, and confers high assembly efficiency.

we first used mupac for the back mutation of fluorescence-deficient mutant gfpuv with one-, three-, or five-site mutations . in all cases, approximately 90% of the resulting colonies exhibited gfpuv fluorescence, which demonstrates a high fidelity of mupac for multiple site-directed mutagenesis . this result also demonstrated the high efficiency of mupac because the similar numbers of colonies were obtained for one-, three-, or five-point site-directed mutagenesis of gfpuv.

to explain why 10% of colonies were non-fluorescent, we extracted plasmids from the four non-fluorescent colonies formed in the five-point site-directed mutagenesis experiment, and we analyzed them using electrophoresis and dna sequencing . one contained a single nucleotide deletion in the primer region, indicating that impurity of the synthesized primer caused the production of an undesired product. the other three plasmids showed higher mobility than the pbad-nxe plasmid on electrophoresis analysis, suggesting that the over-degradation of the plasmid with t <dig> exonuclease caused the production of the undesired small plasmid.

we also found that the concentration of t <dig> exonuclease, klenow fragment exo - and t <dig> dna ligase influenced the efficiency of dna assembly . for efficient dna assembly, at least  <dig>  u/μl of t <dig> exonuclease was required. assembly efficiency was influenced to a lesser degree by the concentration of klenow fragment exo–, although the excess of the klenow fragment exo– caused a significant reduction in the number of colonies carrying the desired plasmid. higher  concentration of t <dig> dna ligase did not alter the assembly efficiency , but slight reduction in the number of colonies was observed when the concentration was reduced to half the concentration .

to demonstrate the suitability of mupac for multiple site-directed mutagenesis, we performed six- and nine-point site-directed mutagenesis of m-mlv rt gene. analysis by electrophoresis showed that the  <dig> of  <dig>  and  <dig> of  <dig>  plasmids possessed full-length m-mlv rt gene as an insert . sequence analysis of the plasmids containing the full-length gene showed that all the plasmids analyzed had all, six or nine, desired mutations.

in contrast with gfpuv mutagenesis, pet16b plasmid was found in  <dig> of  <dig> colonies  and  <dig> of  <dig> colonies  in m-mlv rt mutagenesis. similar results were obtained between experiments using different lots of restriction enzyme-digested pet16b . we sequenced plasmids with truncated m-mlv rt gene; all possessed a deleted sequence in the same position . this deletion was generated by an undesired assembly with a 7-bp homologous region. because m-mlv rt gene has  <dig> of 7-bp,  <dig> of 8-bp,  <dig> of 9-bp, and  <dig> of 10-bp homologous regions , it is surprising that only one deleted sequence resulted from an undesired assembly.

the increased proportion of undesired plasmids with nine-point mutagenesis compared with six-point mutagenesis suggests that the number of dna fragments requiring assembly is a limitation of mupac. similarly, when mupac was used to assemble eight dna fragments of m-mlv rt gene, one of which was 49-bp in length, the proportion of the plasmids carrying the desired sequence significantly decreased . because t <dig> exonuclease degrades the dna in the 5′–3′ direction at the each end, short dna fragments could simply be decomposed before assembly. the shortest dna fragment we used in this experiment was  <dig> bp; therefore, the lower limit of the dna length could be 50– <dig> bp. thus, when the distance between two mutation sites is under  <dig> bp, we recommend using a pair of overlapping forward and reverse primers, both of which carry each mutation . this is also applicable to mutations whose interval is as short as  <dig> bp; when the distance between two mutation sites is less than  <dig> bp, a longer primer with two mutations should be used .

we also applied mupac in multiple site-directed saturation mutagenesis. five sites of gfpuv gene were chosen to introduce an nnk codon, and the plasmids extracted from the mutant gene pool were sequenced. all genes contained mutations at the desired sites, and no undesired mutations existed elsewhere . n  at the first and second bases and k  at the third base of the nnk codons were evident in all codons at the five desired sites, although the g appeared more frequently . this bias toward g could be simply caused by the quality of the random oligonucleotides purchased from operon biotechnologies because a similar bias was observed in different oligonucleotides purchased from the same company .

CONCLUSIONS
we developed the mupac system that could efficiently assemble multiple dnas with a short homologous sequence. mupac successfully achieved one- to five-point site-directed mutagenesis of the gfpuv, and six- or nine-point site-directed mutagenesis of the m-mlv rt gene. furthermore, we demonstrated the suitability of mupac for five-point site-directed saturation mutagenesis of the gfpuv gene. we have also used this method for the simple cloning of a gene, and for construction of a plasmid with tandemly arranged genes . because mupac can flexibly manipulate dna in a simple and efficient manner, this method could greatly contribute toward research in many fields including molecular and synthetic biology.

