BACKGROUND
m. ulcerans is the causative agent of the chronic necrotising human skin disease buruli ulcer. after tuberculosis and leprosy, buruli ulcer is the third most common mycobacterial disease, and western africa is the world region most affected. the disease usually begins as a painless nodule and, if left untreated, leads to massive tissue destruction. more than 50% of those affected by buruli ulcer are children under  <dig> years of age. the disease often occurs in focalised areas close to stagnant or slow-moving waters. the mode of transmission is thought to be from environment to human but is still very poorly understood, partly because standard molecular typing methods lack the resolution required for detailed micro-epidemiological analyses.

whole genome sequence comparisons of an m. ulcerans isolate from ghana  with the m. marinum m strain have shown that the former has evolved from the latter by a process of lateral gene transfer and reductive evolution  <cit> . characteristic for m. ulcerans and probably a key driver of its speciation is the acquisition of the virulence plasmid, pmum <dig>  required for production of the tissue damaging polyketide, mycolactone  <cit> . another striking feature of the m. ulcerans agy <dig> genome was the many examples of dna deletions when compared with the m. marinum m strain which were referred to as murds  and account for the loss of  <dig> kb of dna between m. marinum and m. ulcerans.

for other mycobacterial pathogens such as mycobacterium tuberculosis, m. leprae, and m. avium, inter- and intra-species comparative genomics has contributed considerably to our understanding of their evolution, virulence and phylogeographical dispersal  <cit> . especially, specific deletions in regions of difference  proved to be excellent epidemiological and evolutionary markers since they did not occur independently in different strains but rather result from events in a common progenitor  <cit> . thus, to gain further insight into m. ulcerans and explore the dna deletion diversity among m. ulcerans strains we recently developed a plasmid-based dna microarray that facilitated the detection of large sequence polymorphisms among m. ulcerans isolates of world-wide origin  <cit> . these initial microarray studies revealed twelve deletions  between  <dig> and  <dig> kb in size among the  <dig> m. ulcerans isolates tested, representing hitherto unknown large sequence polymorphisms and uncovering a major source of strain diversity in m. ulcerans, a species where nucleotide diversity is less than  <dig> % even between the most distantly related strains  <cit> . this insertional-deletional  genomic variation showed that genome reduction is ongoing within m. ulcerans which provides evidence for an adaptive change from an environmental to a possibly new host-adapted organism.

in this current study, we have undertaken a detailed characterization of these twelve rds comprising over  <dig> kb based on indel events that allowed for a phylogenetic resolution, of a representative collection of  <dig> m. ulcerans patient isolates of world-wide origin for which genotyping was very limited. most importantly, we show the existence of two distinct phylogenetic lineages with diverse evolutionary history in m. ulcerans which has implications for both the understanding of mycobacterial adaptation and further research on this emerging human pathogen.

RESULTS
identification and localisation of genomic regions of difference  in m. ulcerans
in a previous study we identified twelve rds among  <dig> m. ulcerans strains of diverse geographic origin using a dna microarray based on the ghanaian reference strain agy <dig>  <cit> . for the current investigation, we mapped each rd on the recently completed agy <dig> genome . five of the rds were located on the genome between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mbp. the other seven identified rds were distributed elsewhere on the chromosome. as found upon in depth analysis , the twelve rds altogether spanned some  <dig> kb, representing more than 7% of the m. ulcerans agy <dig> genome . size analysis of the deletions clustered the  <dig> analysed m. ulcerans strains of diverse geographic origin into five haplotypes . the geography of the haplotypes and the origins of the m. ulcerans strains under investigation are shown in a distribution map .

complete analysis of large sequence polymorphisms in m. ulcerans rds confirms five haplotypes
to further resolve the above microarray based phylogenetic differentiation we analysed each of the twelve rds in greater detail by focussing on two independent patient isolates for each of the five haplotypes. since the method used for detection of deletional diversity  <cit>  would bias the results towards phylogenetically informative events leading away from the reference strain agy <dig>  we monitored the genome composition of the rds irrespective of the information gained by the microarray approach and referred to the m. marinum m strain sequence. using pcr, cloning and primer walking we determined deletion sizes and their breakpoints, and identified sequence insertions, substitutions, dislocations, inversions and rearrangements. for crucial loci, confirmatory tests were made for the whole and extended collection of  <dig> m. ulcerans strains. consistently throughout our analysis, members of a given subgroup yielded identical results  in all rds analysed and confirmed the occurrence of five haplotypes. thus, strain japan  <dig> was identical to china  <dig> as was surinam  <dig> to french guyana  <dig> and the two mexican isolates  <dig> and  <dig> to each other, defining haplotypes referred to as the asian, the south american and the mexican, respectively. the asian haplotype excludes strains of south east asian origin. comparative analysis of the largest subgroup of strains, comprising the isolates originating from africa, australia, papua new guinea and malaysia, revealed no large sequence polymorphisms within the subgroup and represented the african/australian haplotype. two of the australian strains,  <dig> and  <dig>  are almost identical to the african/australian haplotype but have an additional deletion and thus represent a separate haplotype, australia 5142/ <dig>  since identical results were obtained for all independent isolates per haplotype we conclude that the large sequence polymorphisms identified were neither experimental artefacts nor events that had occurred during in vitro culturing over time. in contrast, these concordant indels reflect real geographically associated features with the genome rearrangements resulting from irreversible genetic events that had occurred in the common progenitor strains of each haplotype. thus, we consider the description of indels as useful phylogenetic markers since m. ulcerans strains appeared to be largely clonal  <cit>  and recombination is unlikely to occur extensively in this species  <cit> .

detailed rd sequence comparison reveals the existence of two major m. ulcerans lineages
genome sequence polymorphism data were compared with the available reference complete genome sequences of m. ulcerans agy <dig>  and the m. marinum strain m. properties of the five m. ulcerans haplotypes are presented in table  <dig> in comparison to the m. marinum m sequence. in the genomes of the south american, mexican and asian haplotypes deletions in the absences of substituting dna such as an insertion sequence element  are more frequent and the deletions are larger than in the african/australian cluster . in contrast, insertions of ises  were frequently found in the african/australian haplotypes, but not in the south american, mexican and asian haplotypes. moreover, in the african/australian cluster a multitude of genomic rearrangements was observed, including i) large dna fragment dislocation from remote sequence positions in the m. marinum genome into the investigated rds ; ii) dna fragment inversions ; and iii) dna fragment rearrangements involving sequences derived from unlinked m. marinum loci that are rearranged and then linked to each other by is <dig> elements . such a rearrangement was not found in any of the twelve rds for the south american, mexican and asian haplotypes. these m. ulcerans haplotypes thus shared a genetic backbone corresponding to the m. marinum strain m sequence at loci where the african/australian haplotype  showed extensive genome rearrangements. dna sequences present in the south american, mexican and asian haplotypes and missing in the african/australian haplotypes showed an overall sequence identity of 98% with the corresponding sequences in the m. marinum strain m.

a: these two deletions are common for all investigated m. ulcerans strains

b: inserts consist of complete is elements plus some additional flanking nucleotides

c: this insertion consists of one functional is <dig> element and an additional truncated is <dig> fragment

d: the inserted dna stretches are not represented in the m. marinum strain m genome sequence; gene bank blast and fasta searches identified sequences of i) bacteria other than mycobacteria with about 60% nucleotide identity over up to  <dig> bp for the indel in rd7; ii) mammalia with about 68% identity over  <dig> bp for the indel in rd2; and iii) mycobacteria and other environmental or pathogenic bacteria with identities between  <dig> and 83% over 600– <dig> bp, most of them grouping into insertion sequences and phages, for the indel in rd <dig> 

the twelve rds thus distinguish two major m. ulcerans lineages: one branch, comprising the isolates from africa, australia, malaysia and papua new guinea, we have called the classical lineage, since it includes the sequenced african strain, agy <dig>  and most of the existing m. ulcerans clinical isolates. the second lineage comprises the strains of asian, south american and mexican origin. we designated it the ancestral lineage, since its members are genetically closer to the progenitor m. marinum in sequence composition, order and orientation. this is illustrated for selected rds in fig.  <dig> where the sequence of m. marinum is aligned to each one representative haplotype of the m. ulcerans ancestral lineage and to m. ulcerans agy <dig>  representing the classical lineage. the alignments demonstrate the high conformity between m. marinum and members of the ancestral m. ulcerans lineage with only minor changes including single nucleotide polymorphisms, small deletions or sequence variations over short stretches. in contrast, major genome rearrangements mark significant genomic differences between the ancestral and the classical lineage .

irreversible sequence polymorphisms disclose phylogenetic relationships and an evolutionary scenario for m. ulcerans
the two deletions rd12a  and rd3a  were shared by all m. ulcerans strains analysed. these shared features define the hypothetical m. ulcerans most recent common ancestor  from which the two major lineages descended. acquisition of the virulence plasmid, pmum <dig>  is also a characteristic of the mrca. in fig.  <dig>  haplotype specific configurations of insertional-deletional polymorphisms are shown for five selected rds. the deletional patterns within a given rd differ across the haplotypes and the deletions within one rd were given letter extensions . sequence position details of these deletions are summarized in table  <dig>  the configurations within several loci provide a non-ambiguous picture of the phylogenetic relationship between the five m. ulcerans haplotypes. in fig.  <dig>  comparative analysis of rd <dig> shows that the asian, south american and african haplotypes share the  <dig>  kb deletion, a feature of the m. ulcerans mrca. apart from this, none of the three subgroups can have descended from each other, since each of them has either maintained dna stretches of the m. marinum genetic backbone that are deleted in the other genotypes  or has accumulated insertions that are missing in the others . sequence comparison in rd <dig> illustrates that neither the asian nor the south american strains can have derived from the african strain agy <dig> due to the absence of both the african-australian specific deletion rd11a and is <dig> insertion . in contrast, alignments in rd <dig> show that agy <dig> cannot have one of the ancestral haplotypes as an ancestor since it has maintained stretches that were deleted in either of them. similar conclusions can be drawn from sequence comparison in rd <dig> which also shows the derivation of the two strains australia  <dig> and  <dig> from the african/australian cluster . interestingly, in rd <dig> both the south american and the australian haplotype of strains  <dig> and  <dig> carry a deletion at the same position, but with different sizes  and different breakpoints at each of their flanking sequences. furthermore, an is <dig> element has been inserted in the south american haplotype, while no substituting insertion is found in the australian strains indicating that the two deletions have evolved by different mechanisms . partly overlapping deletions that also appear to have arisen independently have also been found in a number of other rds  suggesting that some loci are hot spots for genomic changes.

positions refer to the m. marinum m genome sequence  <cit>  following stinear et al.,  <dig>  <cit> . discrepancies between position numbers and deletion sizes are due to nucleotide variations between the m. marinum and m. ulcerans genomes in these regions

other typing methods applied earlier to m. ulcerans isolates  resulted in dendrograms that equally position strains from mexico, south america and  also from asia, members of the ancestral lineage, genetically closer to m. marinum than to the cluster of african, australian and south east asian isolates, members of our classical lineage  <cit> . two recent studies based on mlst also placed the branching point of a surinam, mexican and a chinese isolate at the junction between a cluster of each one african, australian and south east asian m. ulcerans strain and various m. marinum types  <cit> . here, albeit with yet low geographical resolution, an unequivocal evolutionary scenario can be proposed for m. ulcerans haplotypes, in which all branching points are well defined by irreversible and non-ambiguous genetic markers . the m. ulcerans mrca  is distinguished from m. marinum strain m by the common deletions rd3a and rd12a. the classical lineage is separated from members of the ancestral lineage by numerous large sequence polymorphisms  including at least seven genomic rearrangements in five rds , blank insertions of ises in ten rds  and deletions in seven rds . within the classical lineage, the australian strains  <dig> and  <dig> separate by rd3c  from all other members of this lineage. the three haplotypes belonging to the ancestral lineage are separated from each other by deletions of considerable size such as the partially overlapping but independent deletions in rd <dig>  and in rd <dig>  in the asian and south american haplotypes, respectively . interestingly, a shared indel event in rd <dig>  suggests a closer relationship between the mexican and asian than between the mexican and south american haplotypes.

discussion
large genome sequence polymorphisms have been used to unravel inter-species relatedness and evolutionary order within the m. tuberculosis complex as well as for other mycobacterial species  <cit> . our microarray based comparative genomic hybridization analysis of m. ulcerans isolates demonstrates that indel diversity is also common in this mycobacterial species  <cit> . a detailed analysis of the twelve identified rds presented here defined properties of a hypothetical m. ulcerans mrca, and identified two major distinct lineages among m. ulcerans strains, which could all be assigned to either a classical or an ancestral lineage. members of the ancestral lineage have a genomic backbone highly homologous to m. marinum and are therefore positioned closer to the m. ulcerans mrca. within the asian, south american and mexican haplotypes, a set of large, discrete and independent deletions could be identified upon comparison with the m. marinum strain m genome, while in members of the ancestral lineage no major genome rearrangements were found within the  <dig> kb of the investigated rds . in contrast, such changes were frequent in the isolates belonging to the classical lineage, where rearrangements of dna fragments, at least partly caused by the activity of insertion sequence elements, led to complex genome reorganizations and interspersing of regions with other dna fragments.

in our earlier microarray based analysis we hybridized genomic dna from a set of m. ulcerans isolates belonging to the classical lineage to a panel of genomic fragments prepared from the sequenced reference strain agy <dig>  <cit> . although this approach favoured detection of indel diversity within the classical lineage, only two subgroups could be distinguished within this lineage. while a single deletion of  <dig>  kb in rd3c distinguished two australian isolates from all other isolates belonging to the classical lineage, no additional differences were obtained with the  <dig> african, seven australian, one malaysian and two papua new guinean lineage members analysed. the prototype microarray used covered only 10% of the genome of strain agy <dig>  <cit>  and a whole genome array would be likely to identify more indel diversity within the classical lineage.

the presence of irreversible genomic changes enabled us to unambiguously resolve an intra-species evolutionary scenario for m. ulcerans. the approach of indel based phylogenetic analysis is independent of implied probabilities and has the advantage of giving a precise understanding of the direction of evolution of m. ulcerans strains. this evolutionary scheme advances the present descent information and is compatible with phylogenetic trees that have been proposed based on data obtained with other typing methods  <cit> . a recent report described several novel mycolactone-producing mycobacteria that were not associated with causing buruli ulcer in humans  <cit> , and subsequent mlsa suggested that they show very high affinity to m. ulcerans strains from south america  <cit> . we envision that application of the deletion analysis described here has the power to confirm and refine the phylogenetic relationship of these strains, where one would predict they belong to the m. ulcerans ancestral lineage.

all typing methods applied so far to m. ulcerans isolates from africa and australia revealed surprisingly few differences  <cit> . m. tuberculosis may have adapted to its human host far back in the beginning of human evolution  <cit> , and m. leprae, the paradigm microbe for genome reduction, is so adapted to an intracellular lifestyle in human hosts that it is unable to grow in culture  <cit> . in comparison, m. ulcerans is suspected to have evolved more recently from an environmental bacillus to a mammalian pathogen  <cit> . environmental changes, perhaps due to human activity, are suspected as a driving force for its emergence  <cit> . the diffuse picture of transmission possibilities of buruli ulcer may reflect infection pathways that are more random than specifically evolved and human-adapted. the observed genome shrinkage of roughly  <dig> mb from m. marinum to the classical lineage of m. ulcerans  <cit>  probably reflects adaptation to a more stable environment  <cit> . preliminary inspection of the rds showed that, apart from ises and phages, proteins involved in intermediary metabolism and respiration were prominent among the lost coding sequences  in all five m. ulcerans subgroups. only in the mexican haplotype a trend towards overproportional loss of proteins classified for virulence, detoxification, and adaptation was observed. in particular, in the classical lineage members of the pe/ppe gene families were highly represented in the repertoire of disrupted cdss. interestingly, four particular members of these protein families are eliminated in three of the five haplotypes by independent disruption processes. the fact that most cases of buruli ulcer are caused by strains belonging to the classical lineage may either be indicative of a higher virulence in comparison to the ancestral lineage or of a higher prevalence in habitats relevant for transmission. it has to be further investigated whether severe buruli ulcer lesions in the countries affected by m. ulcerans ancestral lineage strains are only occasional, as apparent from the clinical reports, or if additional cases presently remain either misdiagnosed or underreported. however, preliminary observations based on is <dig> identification in the amazon region of peru revealed low prevalence of buruli ulcer disease although detection of is <dig> in the environment was similar to what was found in benin . thus, it seems more likely that, after formation of the m. ulcerans mrca from a m. marinum progenitor, the distinct genomic changes forged the classical lineage and rendered this emerging lineage more virulent. it is tempting to speculate that members of the ancestral lineage remained largely environmental mycobacteria that only occasionally affect humans in the endemic regions. the classical lineage haplotypes instead became widely dispersed, resulting in a clonal population within africa and australia. the ability to chronically infect mammalians, leading to shedding into the environment, may represent a property that is gaining importance for the survival of the species in highly endemic areas. a comprehensive comparison of the proteomes of the two m. ulcerans lineages may give insight into the differences of their adaptive biology.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we present a detailed analysis of deletions, insertions, indels, and genomic rearrangements by comparative genomics that distinguishes between five haplotypes of m. ulcerans, for which high-resolution genomic fingerprinting is still lacking. from this analysis, we have reconstructed the phylogenetic evolution of m. ulcerans in two distinct lineages, with the ancestral lineage being genetically closer to the environmental mycobacterium marinum, and the classical lineage having undergone extensive genome reorganization and reduction. these findings contribute to the understanding of differences in pathogenicity across m. ulcerans isolates and sheds new light on the phylogeography of this emerging human pathogen. distinction of subgroups within these m. ulcerans lineages leads us to conclude that indels serve as evolutionary landmarks for differentiation within the species and help in the development of a genotyping strategy for both m. ulcerans and other environmental and pathogenic mycobacteria.

