BACKGROUND
specific protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interaction are in the focus of many biochemical studies. the exact nature of these interactions is not known. some scientists argue that the macromolecular interactions are determined by long sequence domains that are involving many residues , while others found that there is some degree of specificity already on a single residue level, i. e. some residue pairs are preferentially co-located on interacting interfaces. the existence of preferred residue pairs within, as well as between, macro-molecular structures are supported by numerous statistical analyses of protein-rna  <cit>  regulatory protein-dna  <cit> , restrictions enzyme-dna cut site  <cit> , protein-protein  <cit>  structures and interfaces. although many studies are performed for statistical analyses of residue co-location, it was not possible for us to find a publicly available tool for this purpose. we found only a reference for the existence of a commercially available tool, the quanta modeling software  <cit> .

implementation
any structure files  may be selected for analyses from the main window. . the tool automatically provide the title of the selected pdb file, a list of sequences present in the file and a list of every common atom in the residues of the respective sequences. these possible backbone atoms are n, ca: calpha, c and o in proteins; and p, o1p: o1p, o2p: o2p, o5*: o5', c5*: c5', c4*: c4', o4*: o4'. c3*: c3', o3*: o3', c2*: c2', c1*: c1', c5: c <dig>  c6: c <dig>  n1: n <dig>  c2: c <dig> , n3: n <dig> and c4: c <dig> in nucleic acids. it is possible to exclude one or more sequence from analyses by selecting the "no-one" option in the common atoms list. the user is asked to define a spherical space around the selected core atoms by choosing a minimum and maximum detection radius around these atoms . it is usually not interesting to detect residue co-locations related to neighbor residues in the same sequences. therefore it is possible to exclude up- and downstream neighbors in the same sequence. . the program ignores terminal residues if they are annotated as hetatm i.e. non-standard residues. the seqx program makes a list of atoms  which are located within the defined radius around the pre-selected common atoms and are not excluded as neighbor residues. this list is accessible as a residue table that contains the residue contact map elements. the atomic distances are calculated by the pythagoras theses. the results of these analyses are visualized in a residue contact map and summarized in a statistical table. the residue contact map is a dot-plot like graph where every residue in every sequence in the pdb structure is compared to each other, and residue co-locations are indicated by a square. the color of the squares indicate the type of molecular contacts .

the main features of the protein secondary structure are indicated by background colors , if they are annotated  in the pdb source files.

it is possible to zoom in the center of the map and move it into optional directions . primary structure  is available along the coordinates. if the sequence is too long, it is necessary to zoom in the map to make the sequence readable.. protein sequence is indicated with the  <dig> one-letter codes , while the nucleic acid sequence with the a, t/u, g, c letters. clicking on any co-locations highlights the corresponding  <dig> letters in the sequences .

a simple statistical analysis is performed and the number of every possible residue combinations is listed in a residue contact table. it is possible to save the results of the analysis in jpg and xls  files. it is also possible to save even the residue contact map in binary form and xls format for future statistical processing .

RESULTS
the residue contact map provides a 2d dot-plot like graph of residue co-locations in protein, nucleic acid or nucleoprotein complexes. . this plot is simple and as easy to understand as any other dot-plot. the main right diagonal line corresponds to residue co-locations in the same polymeric chain  and it is possible to eliminate by neighbor exclusion. .

the residue contact table contains all possible residue combinations  and lists the frequency of theses co-locations in the observed structure. some of the listed co-locations are specific  while other is aspecific  co-locations.

it is possible to estimate the specificity of the results only in the case of nucleic acids where the watson-crick base pairs are known to be specific co-locations. the residue contact table provides data for the  <dig>  different type of nucleic acid base co-locations, however it is known that only adenine-thymine  and guanine-cytosine  co-locations indicate true  and specific base-pairs, while the  <dig> other pairs are false .

the estimated specificity of the seqx tool on dsdna is up to 60% , . the specificity is greatly improved by proper distance selection and exclusion of residue neighbors. . it is easy to explain the reason for these observations. .

it is more difficult to find optimal seqx parameters for studying residue co-locations in- and between proteins. in contrast to the dna it is not known which  amino acid pairs represent specific residue co-locations. furthermore some protein structures are very compact and, for example, in the case of alpha helical proteins many amino acid neighbors might interfere with the specificity of the detection  and the exclusion of more than one neighbor is necessary to improve the specificity of the detection.

we found that detection radius between 5– <dig> Å and exclusion of +/- <dig> neighbors gives the best results for analyzing alpha helical protein structures.

a real specificity estimation is not possible to do on protein sequences , because the amino acids are not known to be complementary to each other. therefore the frequency of amino acid co-locations found by seqx  is compared to the frequency of residue co-locations data from literature  <cit> . our results showed highly significant correlation to data from the literature . .

some cautious and preliminary estimation is still possible even for the specificity of detected residue co-locations in protein structures. namely, it is known from physico-chemical studies, that some amino acids are attractive while others are repulsive to each other. the known physico-chemical laws suggest that pair-formation  is probably preferred between amino acids having similar hydrophobicity or different charge, while pair-building between amino acids with different hydrophobicity or similar charge are strongly prohibited.

to test this assumption we generated a pool of artificial random protein sequences by translating randomized nucleic acid sequences. the nucleic acids contained equal amount of each nucleotide bases  and, by that way, the average frequency of amino acids in the translated artificial proteins became very similar to the amino acid frequency of the entire human proteome.

the residue co-locations within and between these sequences are determined by statistical lows if we assume that the spatial mobility of the residues in these proteins is free and independent of each other. the calculated probability of any residue co-locations  will be pab = nanb/t <dig>  t = na+nb...+n <dig> wher n is the number of a given amino acid. the calculated relative frequency of a given co-locating pair  is proportional to pab and might be calculated by the cab = pab/   <dig> formula, where x and y indicate any of the  <dig> possible amino acids and the number of xy pairs is  <dig> 

the relative frequency of physico-chemically favored co-locations is significantly higher  in real protein structures  than it is calculated for random interactions . 

this example indicates that the number of false positive  co-locations is about 20% and the specificity of seqx methods for proteins might be as much as ~80% however this is a very crude estimate, because the number of true co-locations is not surely known.

discussion
to understand the nature of specificity of macromolecular interactions is a major challenge in bioinformatics. we were successful in providing evidence to support the view that some degree of specificity already exists on residue level  <cit> . therefore we decided to continue our studies of frequency analyses of residue co-locations in nucleoprotein structures. the seqx tool is specifically designed for this purpose. the 2d residue contact map is a simple and easy to understand display of nucleic acid and protein structures. there are some very sophisticated analytical tools which also even incorporate this feature, like moltalk  <cit> , sting millennium  <cit> , stride  <cit>  molsurfer  <cit>  molprobity  <cit> . the major advantage of this approach is its simplicity. the effective usage of 3d tools and learning the "3d thinking" usually requires lengthy training which often is not affordable for general bioinformaticians. we have further developed the concept of residue contact map and added many new features that are not present in existing tools. such features are

 <dig> , the option to choose different backbone atoms  for statistical analyzes and visualization of entire-residue co-locations and it does not pay particular attention to side chains and the pattern of the side chain interactions. it does not limit the usefulness of this tool for its original purpose: any significant residue co-locations  are necessarily caused by the side chains  because they are the variable elements of the structures. however a future implementation might focus on analyzes of side chain to side chain co-locations and examine whether that will improve the specificity of this tool.

CONCLUSIONS
the seqx is a simple, easy to use specialized tool for visualization and statistical analyses of protein and nucleic acid residue co-locations. it is mainly and specifically developed to study known and novel specific residue interactions.

authors' contributions
jcb designed and tested the tool, and wrote this article. gf implemented the software. gf is the winner of the first prize of the first hungarian george gamow competition and fellowship in  <dig> with his contribution.

supplementary material
additional file 1
seqx_ <dig> _ <dig> jar. see this article

click here for file

 acknowledgements
the general support of z. benyo and b. benyo is greatly appreciated. grants were provided by the homulus foundation .
