BACKGROUND
the tree of life is significantly less balanced than expected under a stochastic process of lineage divergence and extinction  <cit>  - some lineages are diverse whereas others are species-poor. deterministic explanations for the asymmetry include clade age  <cit> , and among-lineage diversification rate variation  <cit>  caused by mass extinction  <cit> , lineage attributes  <cit> , environmental attributes  <cit> , and ecosystem attributes  <cit>  . lineage attributes affecting diversification rates can be divided into two classes:  phenotypic traits that are attributes of individuals, for example reproductive rate, dispersal ability, and the degree of ecological specialization; and  traits that are attributes of species, for example geographic range, population size, and local abundance. a key factor in the theory of diversification rate variation is resource availability and breadth, i.e. adaptive zone dimensions. under an adaptive radiation model  <cit>  it is argued that diversification is limited to the amount of free space in an adaptive zone, and that elevated rates of diversification are driven by ecological opportunities in geographic space  or the evolution of an adaptive trait . well-studied examples of adaptive radiation include the hawaiian silverswords  <cit> , phytophagous beetles  <cit> , and columbines  <cit> . ecological specialization is thought to be an important process following expansion of a lineage's adaptive zone, and a major driving force generating species richness and diversity  <cit> .

not all adaptive traits are expected to result in an increased rate of net diversification; on the contrary, some adaptive traits may result in a dramatic depression of the diversification rate e.g. in-bred sociality in theridiid spiders  <cit> . reduced radiation rate as a result of failure to speciate is commonly interpreted to result in "evolutionary dead-ends" - lineages that have low adaptation potential and are thought likely to become extinct before they can diversify  <cit> . thus, the expected effect of ecological specialization on diversification rate has been an area of debate  <cit> . on the one hand, diversification rate is likely to increase if specialists have smaller geographic ranges and population sizes  <cit> . on the other hand, tightly constrained niches are likely to be unstable over time, and it has been predicted that specialization should be associated with increased extinction rates due to a specialist's inability to adapt  <cit> , a notion supported by some empirical analyses  <cit> .

the evolution of gall-induction on plants is a major trophic shift that has occurred multiple times among insects, with over  <dig>  described species with this habit  <cit> . galls are believed to provide the inducer with enhanced nutrition, a favorable microclimate and, in some cases, protection from natural enemies  <cit> . among nematine sawflies, gall-inducing species are targeted by fewer species of parasitoid and experience lower rates of mortality than external-feeding species  <cit> , but in general natural enemies can inflict high mortalities on gallers, and top-down selection pressure is thought to be a critical force driving interspecific variation in gall form  <cit> . insect galls are thus an extended phenotype of their inducers - with the gall exposed to selection pressures related to predation and host resistance  <cit> .

gall-inducing taxa appear to be exceptionally host- and tissue-specific. for example, less than 1% of the described species of gall wasps  have been recorded from more than one host genus  <cit> , and gall wasps on quercus are the single most diverse lineage of herbivores associated with a single host genus . all of the  <dig> described species of agaonid fig wasps induce galls within the flowers of species of ficus  <cit> . within-host-plant diversification has occurred in many groups of gall midges  <cit>  with, for example, a monophyletic group of  <dig> species of asphondylia  inducing galls on the leaves, stems, buds and flowers of a single plant species   <cit> . only three of the fourteen described species of the gall-inducing psyllid genus calophya  associated with schinus  are known to develop on more than one host species - there are eight species of schinus  <cit> . gall-inducing species of aphids and scale insects also tend to be constrained to closely related hosts  <cit> .

these observations of host-specificity, and the intimate relationship between gall-inducer and host, have led to the idea that gall-inducers are specialized relative to their externally-feeding progenitors  <cit> . gall-inducing insects thus provide a good study system to examine the effects of ecological specialization on evolutionary diversification rates.

here, we examine phylogenies of gall-inducing insects and their non-galling relatives, including a total of approximately  <dig>  species . we first use thirteen sister-taxon comparisons to test the assumption that gallers are more host-specific than non-gallers. we then evaluate the significance of any diversification asymmetry against an equal rates markov  model. finally, we use maximum likelihood to compare the fit of fixed  and flexible  birth-death models to phylogenies, to test whether inferred origins of gall induction correlate with a shift in diversification rate  <cit> .

RESULTS
host-specificity
gall-inducing insects are significantly more host-specific than their non-galling sister groups . all five significant differences in host range favored gallers being more host specific than their non-galling sister group.

diversification rates
sister-taxon comparisons
the gall-inducing sister-clade was more diverse in seven of thirteen comparisons, and the non-galling sister was more diverse in the other six. we cannot reject the null model in which each sister has an equal chance of being more diverse with the binomial test  or the signed-rank test .

one gall-inducing taxon was more diverse than expected under an equal rates markov  null model: the scale insect genus apiomorpha . two gall-inducing taxa were more diverse with marginal non-significance: cerataphidini aphids , sawflies in the subtribe euurina . two gall-inducing taxa were markedly less diverse than expected: the armored scale insect genus maskellia  and the sawfly genus micronematus .

ml  modeling of shifts in radiation rate
only two data sets were sufficiently sampled to satisfy criteria for tests of rate shifts along lineages. for the acacia thrips, we were unable to reject the fixed-rate null model. in the laser analysis, under no extinction , the likelihood ratio test  p-value was  <dig> . under high rates of extinction  the lrt p-value was  <dig> . the medusa analysis selected a one-rate model with a net diversification rate of  <dig>  and a relative extinction rate of  <dig> . all more complicated models had higher akaike information criterion  scores.

for the nematine sawflies, the laser analysis strongly favored the flexible-rate model  with an increase in diversification rate along the stem branch of the salicaceae-galling euurina. the medusa analysis selected a model with  <dig> shift points. as in the laser analysis, the single shift point resulting in the largest increase in likelihood was at the stem node of the euurina. background rates of net diversification  and relative extinction  were estimated as  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. within euurina both the net diversification rate and relative extinction rate increased dramatically .

discussion
we confirm that, as expected and commonly stated, gall-inducing taxa are more host-specific than their non-galling relatives. the effect of ecological specialization in gall-inducing insects on diversification rates is complex, but host range appears to be a critical factor. when a gall-inducing lineage has a host range approximate to that of the non-galling sister, the gallers are more diverse. these include the salicaceae-galling euurina gall wasps that are sister to a group restricted to salicaceae and betulaceae, the styrax-galling aphids cerataphidini that are sister to a group restricted to quercus, and the eucalyptus-galling scale insect genus apiomorpha that is sister to a group that occurs on eucalyptus and casuarinaceae. conversely, when the non-galling clade has a much wider host range than the galler, the non-galler is much more diverse. in our analysis, the diversity bipartition that is most significantly weighted in favor of the non-galling taxon  is also the comparison with the greatest disparity in host range, as measured by the estimated age of the most recent common ancestor of the hosts. the importance of host breadth as a determinant of diversification rate is consistent with the assumed importance of host-switching in speciation of phytophagous and parasitic lineages  <cit> .

thus adaptive zone dimensions may be of more fundamental importance to diversification rate variation than is the degree of ecological specialization. when clade host breadth was roughly equivalent between gall-inducing and non-galling sister groups, the gall-inducing group was more diverse. this could result from uneven diversification rates stemming from differences in species-level ecological specificity, or because, for a given set of hosts, the adaptive space available to a gall-inducing lineage is larger than that presented to a non-galling species.

ecological traits of host lineages are also likely to affect diversification rates of gall-inducers. two of the diverse gall-inducing groups in this study, euurina and apiomorpha, occur on host taxa  that are persistent and locally abundant over vast geographic spaces, traits thought to reduce a lineage's probability of extinction. on the other hand, the most strikingly species-poor gall-inducing taxon included in this study, maskellia, also occurs on eucalyptus, and the gall-inducing thrips on acacia are not as diverse as might be expected given the diversity of the host , although it likely that much of the true species diversity of gall-inducing thrips is unrecognized  <cit> .

gall-inducer diversification rates could also be profoundly affected by top-down pressure from parasitoids and pathogens. gall-inducing euurina sawflies have been shown to have a depauperate fauna of natural enemies and suffer lower enemy-caused mortality than closely related external feeders. in contrast, species of apiomorpha experience extremely high mortality rates .

CONCLUSIONS
gall-inducing lineages tend to be more host-specific than their non-galling sister groups. a gall almost certainly represents an expansion of the ecological resource pool , but the gall-inducer's niche space may not be expanded. the effect of the evolution of gall-induction on net diversification rate appears to have been lineage-specific; no general trend was detected, but some gall-inducers were exceptionally diverse and others were exceptionally under-diverse. although this study was not designed explicitly to test the effect of a lineage's host-breadth on its net diversification, our results suggest that host-breadth may be a general factor influencing the net diversification of phytophagous insect groups.

