BACKGROUND
cassava is an important food crop and ranked in the fourth place after rice, sugarcane and maize  <cit> . it has been reported to feed more than  <dig> million people per day  <cit> . apart from the dietary aspect, cassava is also demanded by diverse industries, including medicine, cosmetics, biopolymers, and biofuels. these highlight the significance of cassava beyond its previous recognition as a staple food in many countries in the african and south american continents. compared to other starchy crops, the competitiveness of cassava lies in the capacity for starch accumulation, and the tolerance to drought and the deprivation of soil nutrients; cassava roots contain starch up to  <dig> to  <dig> percent of the root dry weight  <cit>  and cassava plants can grow under water scarcity and in low fertilized soil  <cit> . with the growing demand of starch along with a significant increase in world population, most of the research focuses on cassava still aim to produce cultivars with greater starch yield per unit cultivar area.

in contrast with the importance of cassava, a very limited amount of information on cassava is currently available in the literature. before  <dig>  only a small number of the percentage of the cassava genome was revealed, mostly acquired from the classical genetic and est expression studies  <cit> . not only is there a lack of genome information, but the knowledge on cassava biology and physiology is also lacking and unorganized  <cit> . at the early stage, the genetic variability of cassava was explored and that information was utilized to breed for a novel cassava line  <cit> . nowadays, various high-throughput technologies have been employed to disentangle the complex regulation underlying the biological processes in cassava plants, including cassava starch metabolism  <cit> . the availability of technologies to monitor the intracellular components, for example, the microarray and c- <dig> labeling experiment, has allowed researchers to investigate the regulation controlling the behavior of the cells. in  <dig>  with the release of the cassava genome sequence  <cit> , the margin of the cassava research has leaped forward. the current sequenced genome of cassava covers  <dig> percent of the predicted genome size and contains  <dig> percent of the whole genic region. the  <dig>  genes and  <dig>  alternative splicing forms were predicted and annotated. this genome information has been made available at the phytozome database  <cit> . the status of cassava genome information is much better after the sequencing, yet the real complete genome annotation is still on the way. in addition to the relatively little background knowledge on cassava in plant science research, an abundance of research questions about the cassava plant remain to be revealed, especially the regulation underlying the starch biosynthesis.

the current understanding of starch biosynthesis in cassava relies very much on the observations in the arabidopsis model plant, and other starchy crops such as the potato. it has been believed that plant species share the backbone pathway of starch biosynthesis starting from the carbon dioxide fixation, followed by transitory starch degradation, sucrose synthesis, and starch synthesis in the storage organs. sometimes, this conservation is also assumed at the level of biochemical reactions composed of the starch biosynthesis pathway. however, this presumption is questionable as to what would make the properties of plant starches diverse if the series of biochemical reactions comprised of the starch biosynthesis pathway in all plants are assumed identical. the discovery of the distinction between the starch biosynthesis pathways of cereal and non-cereal crops is the example evidence of the pathway diversity in plant species, highlighting the uniqueness of the specific pathway to the species. the major difference involves the conversion of glucose-6-phosphate  to adp-glucose , a common precursor for starch synthesis. in cereals, the conversion takes place in the cytosol and the adpg is then imported to the amyloplast through a membrane-bound transporter, whilst in non-cereal crops, g6p is directly imported to the amyloplast prior to the g6p-to-adpg conversion taking place  <cit> . thus, to pursue a better understanding of starch biosynthesis in cassava, the species-specific pathway describing the series of reactions orchestrated in the network of the cassava starch production process is required.

the plant-specific metabolic pathways have continuously been reconstructed not only for the broad purposes as found in the public databases , but also for a particular pathway investigation as demonstrated in various publications . besides the information-rich arabidopsis <cit> , the metabolic pathway reconstruction has been carried out in various valued crops, such as potato  <cit> , wheat  <cit> , barley  <cit>  and maize  <cit> . for cassava, however, only broad metabolic pathways have been reported  <cit> . though there are attempts to explore the starch biosynthesis in cassava using various techniques , the most likely first metabolic pathways of cassava were credited to  <cit> , whose pathways were inferred from the comparative genomic analysis of the full-length cdna library and established before the release of the cassava genome data. considering the starch biosynthesis pathway exemplified in their studies, it obviously showed an information deficiency containing several gaps in the resulting pathway. as a result, shortly after the availability of the cassava genome sequence in the phytozome database,  <cit>  revised such a pathway by using a more stringent comparative genomic protocol. the resulting pathway relatively contained more complete information, yet with further development, not only the quality of the reconstructed pathway would be improved, but the assurance for reliability and its further uses would also be confirmed.

accordingly, we have improved the pathway reconstruction of starch biosynthesis in cassava by exploiting the cassava genome data and comparative genomic approach with multiple plant templates. this work was organized into two parts: pathway reconstruction and omics data integration. for the first part, the starch-related genes of cassava were identified through the sequence similarity analysis using five selected plant templates. the reconstructed pathway was verified by the cassava gene sequences from the genbank database and the protein motif analysis, and then finally visualized in an informative and concise format. for the second part, the reconstructed pathway was transformed into the platform that facilitates the incorporation of high-throughput data into the network. here, the microarray gene expression data was integrated into the reconstructed pathway of starch biosynthesis to illustrate the advantage of our resulting pathway to increase the comprehension of the studied system.

RESULTS
given the importance of starch, biochemical processes underlying the starch biosynthesis pathway have been extensively studied in several plant species, but not in cassava. therefore, this work aimed to explore the starch biosynthesis pathway in cassava using the comparative genomic approach. the resulting pathway of the starch biosynthesis in cassava is not only an innovation contributed from this study, but the observations along the reconstruction process are also useful to expand our comprehension on the studied process. the pathway reconstruction and the main observations are described as follows.

the reconstructed metabolic pathway of cassava starch biosynthesis
the starch biosynthesis pathway, which covers three main processes including the calvin cycle, sucrose synthesis, and storage starch biosynthesis, was reconstructed in this work. the reconstruction protocol was developed based on the similar basic idea as  <cit>  in the exploitation of the multiple template plants for the pathway annotation, but it was re-designed to incorporate certain intensive analyses to ensure the high-level of quality of the resulting pathway. as outlined in figure  <dig>  multiple plant species were employed to identify the set of starch-related genes in cassava. after a manual pathway curation, the resulting pathway was further validated to certify the accuracy of the reconstruction. furthermore, the confidence scoring system and informative as well as interactive visualization maps were created to increase the value of the reconstructed pathway. the results from each analysis are discussed as follows.

the starch biosynthesis pathway of cassava here is comprised of  <dig> cassava protein sequences annotated by their orthologues in the five template plants, arabidopsis, maize, rice, castor bean and potato. among the annotated sequences,  <dig> proteins were found to be involved in the sucrose and starch synthesis sub-pathway and the remaining  <dig> proteins were related to the calvin cycle sub-pathway.

according to sequence similarity,  <dig> starch-related proteins in cassava  were identified from their orthologues collected from the five template plants, including arabidopsis, rice, maize, castor bean and potato. among these,  <dig> proteins were observed to play a role in the sucrose and starch metabolism, while the remaining  <dig> proteins have functions in the calvin cycle . according to the kegg and pmn reference pathway databases, our reconstructed pathway of starch biosynthesis comprised of the identified proteins was broken up into three aforementioned sub-pathways and then presented on both smartdraw  and vanted  platforms. due to the lack of a metabolic gap, we are claiming that the starch biosynthesis pathway of cassava was successfully reconstructed from the  <dig> cassava proteins identified by these five template plants. compared to the two previous pathways proposed by sakurai et al.  and rongsirikul et al. , our reconstructed pathway definitely provides more complete information on the process underlying the starch biosynthesis in cassava  <cit> .

the descriptive map drawn on the smartdraw platform was mainly used to explain the nature of the starch biosynthesis pathway in cassava  because it included the information from which the pathway was reconstructed. in addition to a set of biochemical reactions and a number of involving metabolites, our descriptive map also includes the protein lists that were identified to play roles in specific reactions according to a given ec number . for a protein in the list, there is a graphical notation indicating  the organisms from which the protein was annotated and  the confidence level of the function assignment. the descriptive maps that appeared on the smartdraw platform utilized  colored circles to represent the plant species: green – arabidopsis, red – maize, pink – rice, violet – castor bean, and orange – potato. they also utilized  colored boxes to represent the confidence level of the function assigned: yellow > blue > white. furthermore, the sophisticated confidence scores that numerically quantify the reliability of the protein annotation were also included in this map. all proteins presented in the map were given a 12-digit numeral id whereby the first  <dig> digits represent the gene id as available on the phytozome database and the rest is the transcript id of the corresponding genes. this system allows traceability between the reconstructed map and the reference genome database.

besides the completeness of the resulting pathway and the informative visualization maps, the quality of the reconstructed pathway was increased by introducing manual curation and literature-based validation into the reconstruction framework. after human curation, the accuracy of the pathway was proven through two tests. the first test intended to demonstrate the correspondence between the reconstructed pathway and the existing data of cassava published in literature. the hypothesis underlying this test is that the well-reconstructed pathway should be able to match the experimentally identified genes of cassava existing in the genbank database. the positive results were obtained as it showed that  <dig> starch-related genes of cassava  matched with the annotated genes in our starch biosynthesis pathway, marked as underlines in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  although the results of the first test suggest a good quality of the reconstructed pathway, it is important to note that this suggestion was inferred from the validation of only 13%  of all annotated genes. to provide further evidence supporting the correctness of our pathway, the second test was carried out to investigate the correspondence between the annotated function and the conserved motifs existing in the protein. for example, the protein that was annotated as amylase was analyzed to find whether it truly contains the catalytic motifs highly conserved for all amylases. the results of this test confirm the validity of the protein annotation as well as the pathway reconstruction herein. figure  <dig> exemplifies a part of the interactive map where the results of the analysis were demonstrated. the complete results are provided as the supplementary data  or can be downloaded from the website of the systems biology and bioinformatics research group at kmutt .

taking all results together, our study offers the newly reconstructed pathway of starch biosynthesis in cassava with greater quality over that presented in the literature. the quality of the pathway here is not only defined by the parsimonious reconstruction framework, but also the visualization styles enhancing the pathway utilization for further research. with respect to the most recently proposed pathway of cassava starch biosynthesis  <cit> , which contained less confident annotation with weak validation process, the contribution of this work provides a higher-quality pathway of starch biosynthesis in cassava.

inferring the confidence of the gene annotation through confidence scores
scoring is a strategic approach to project the abstract quantity onto the measurable standard, so the confidence scores, i.e., ms and cs, are meant to numerally measure the reliability of the protein annotation constituting the reconstructed starch biosynthesis pathway. the advantages of these quantitative scores can be described in three levels as they were employed in this work. the basic advantage lies on the straightforward use of the scores to represent the level of confidence of each protein annotation . at the higher level, the scores were exploited to make a clear comparison between the annotation qualities among the annotated proteins. it enabled us to rationally prioritize the proteins for further investigation. for the advanced advantage, the scores were utilized on the purpose of inference and prediction. in this context, we created the ms-cs plot where the ms scores of all annotated proteins were plotted against their corresponding cs scores to investigate the distribution of these scores in the overall range . each cross mark represents the ms-cs scores of a protein member in the starch biosynthesis pathway and the circles highlight the scores of proteins that were certified by the genbank database to exist in cassava with corresponding annotation to our reconstruction. figure  <dig> shows that the ms-cs plot can be divided into three regions according to confidence levels: a  – poorly matched with the template sequence in alignment analysis  and poorly conserved across plant templates , b  – well matched with the template sequence in alignment analysis  but poorly conserved across plant templates , and c  – well matched with the template sequence in alignment analysis  and highly conserved across plant templates . as demonstrated, almost all of the annotated proteins supported by the data in genbank  possess the confidence scores in regions b and c, so that it might be deduced that the proteins whose confidence scores fall into regions b and c were considered as the confident annotation and worthwhile of future analysis.

inferring the nature of the cassava starch biosynthesis pathway through comparative genomic study
in this study, the cassava starch biosynthesis pathway was reconstructed from information retrieved from multiple template plants. with this method, we have discovered interesting information regarding the nature of the starch biosynthesis pathway in the plants under study, including the conservation and the uniqueness of the process.

the conservation of the starch biosynthesis process among the six plant species, including cassava and the five template plants, were observed at both molecular sequence and pathway levels . in analogy to the orthologous or conserved gene identification from the similarity of sequences, the conservation at the pathway level may be inferred from the similarity of the constituents and the structure of the pathway. it was shown in our results that the molecular sequences comprised of the starch biosynthesis pathway were highly conserved in plant species, though their starch-storage organs are physiologically different. for example, the genes encoding for sucrose synthase  and adp-glucose pyrophosphorylase , the main components of the starch biosynthesis pathway  <cit> , were found in nearly all plant species; moreover, these orthologous sequences show a high degree of sequence likeliness, at least with the sequence of cassava. the observed conservation of the important enzymatic proteins in the starch biosynthesis pathway of cassava is not only limited to the class of dicotyledonous plants , but also found across the monocotyledonous plants . the conclusive view of this observation was demonstrated as the high confidence scores in the ms-cs plot  to which the resemblance of the aligned sequences and the frequency of finding such sequences in the list of studied species were referred, respectively . at the pathway level, we showed that the starch biosynthesis pathway of cassava is very similar to the pathway of the other plants established in the kegg and pmn reference databases  in terms of the number of biochemical reactions and enzymatic proteins. almost all of the enzymatic proteins of the starch biosynthesis existing in the reference pathway, which collects information from various plant species including rice and arabidopsis model plants, were also found to be encoded in the cassava genome and presumably formed a similar shape to the metabolic pathway as illustrated in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  the apparent conservation or the similarity of the starch biosynthesis pathway among plants indicates their common ability to synthesize starch in cells. however, at this level of detailed pathway reconstruction, it might be too early to infer the complete picture of the intracellular starch production process, covering the exact mechanism of starch granule formation. this downstream part of the synthesis pathway remains mysterious, yet the related presumptions and findings have been found in various reviews  <cit> . regarding the high similarity of the core biochemical pathway of the starch biosynthesis, it might suggest that the factors dictating the variation in plant starches, in terms of characteristics and accumulation capacity in the cells, might be hidden in the granule formation step where the enzymes  work together in a very precise order  <cit> . another explanation of the distinct starch production yielding of the conserved pathway might be the dissimilarity of enzyme kinetics and the dynamics of the process, which are supposed to be a species-specific property. the implication of this hypothesis lies on the findings of the distinct activity and specificity of the same enzyme in organisms as well as plant species  <cit> ; an example includes varied activities of starch branching enzyme isoforms between dicotyledon and monocotyledon plants .

despite the high conservation of the starch biosynthesis pathway, the results indicated the variation of genes responsible for the starch biosynthesis process in a particular plant, implying the species-dependent pathway uniqueness. as observed in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  some of the genes could be identified in only one or two template plant species. these include the genes that code for starch synthases  , the  <dig> -alpha glucan branching enzyme  , and the starch debranching enzyme  . this type of information was found more often in the sucrose and starch biosynthesis pathway, but not in the calvin cycle. our interpretation was reinforced, not an exaggerated conclusion from the low confident data, by the observation that the two  of three experimentally supported genes related to starch synthase enzyme were identified from only two template plants . overall, the identified genes falling into region b of the ms-cs plot, possessing low cs but high ms scores, reflect the uniqueness of the starch biosynthesis pathway in the cassava. to address the stronger hypothesis of which uniqueness results in the distinction of cassava starch biosynthesis from the others, more investigation is required.

another interesting observation is the long list of genes/proteins predicted to be involved in a single metabolic reaction in the starch biosynthesis pathway . on average, approximately five, four, and seven cassava genes were predicted to be participants in one metabolic reaction in the calvin cycle, sucrose synthesis and storage starch biosynthesis, respectively. these identified genes/proteins in the list, moreover, show high conservation across plant species, suggesting that the results are not false positives, but instead reflect the complexity of the starch production process in cassava. the complexity of the metabolic process due to the multiple proteins modulating a single reaction often refers to the functional redundancy and mutual participation scenarios. the circumstance supporting the existence of these scenarios in plants would be the presence of multiple isoforms of starch-related enzymes, e.g., starch synthase and starch branching enzymes, for converting one metabolite to another . also, it has been found in the range of plant species that these enzyme isoforms contain redundant functions to each other and sometimes mutually participate in glucosyl chain extensions in plants  <cit> .

at last, we presented results that could be additional evidence supporting the classification of cassava as a c3-c <dig> intermediate species. photosynthesis in cassava has been researched since the 1970s. with continuous research, the classification of cassava has changed dramatically from being a c <dig> plant  <cit>  to that with c <dig> photosynthesis characteristics based on physiological and biochemical studies  <cit> , and nowadays to a c3-c <dig> intermediate plant  <cit> . in this study, the findings of c4-phosynthesis-related genes in the cassava genome  and their transcriptional activities  reinforce the possession of c4-phosynthesis characteristics in cassava. the metabolic pathway reconstruction of co <dig> fixation  predicted that several genes were responsible for the c4-photosynthesis pathway , including the genes encoding phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase  which is a key enzyme of the c4-photosynthesis pathway. the activities of these cassava genes were obviously observed at the transcriptional level ; however, it has been well established that their activities at the metabolic level are low with respect to that of the typical c4-plants  <cit> .

insight into starch biosynthesis pathway/regulation through data integration
in this section, the reconstructed pathway was used as a platform for omics data integration to enhance our comprehension on the starch biosynthesis in cassava. this strategy enables us to gain more understanding into the process by observing the interrelation between the multilevel regulations. to illustrate the benefit of our approach and the innovated pathway, the microarray data of  <cit>  were integrated into the cassava starch biosynthesis pathway in the vanted platform . in brief, this microarray experiment measured changes in gene expression patterns in three different types of cassava roots, including fibrous, developing storage and mature storage roots which are believed to possess distinct predominant metabolism, especially those related to starch biosynthesis. figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> depict the results after incorporation of the microarray gene expression data. the height of bars represents the gene expression levels and the color of each bar represents the types of roots being studied: the fibrous root – is black, the developing storage root – is dark grey, and the mature storage root – is light grey. according to the integrative map , our findings based on the inter-relationship between the transcriptomic and metabolic level of regulation can be drawn as follows.

according to figure  <dig>  the expression of genes commonly known to play a role in the co <dig> fixation process was also observed in cassava roots. the observation of the activity of the photosynthesis-related genes in the roots of cassava is not entirely unusual because there are similar findings in other green plants like acmella, artemisia, rudbeckia, sfevia, tagetes and orchid roots  <cit> . the literature, moreover, suggested that the co <dig> fixation in roots or underground organs may take place via the pep case enzyme rather than ribulose- <dig> -bisphosphate carboxylase   <cit> . regarding the observed gene expression of the pep case in cassava roots, it is possible that the pep case enzyme retains its function as it does in green root plants, and thus co <dig> might be fixed into cassava roots via the same mechanism.

when comparing the expression of genes in the co <dig> fixation pathway between the three different root types, the results suggested that the calvin cycle is more active over the c <dig> pathway. this interpretation was drawn from the observation that the expression of genes in the calvin cycle evolves with the root types, while the c <dig> pathway is tentatively independent of the types of cassava roots. our results correspond to the finding that the activities of enzymes in the c <dig> pathway are less dominant in cassava co <dig> fixation with respect to the activities of key enzymes in the calvin cycle  <cit> . however, the demonstrated gene expression indicated the activity of the c <dig> photosynthesis pathway in cassava, at least at the transcriptional level.

in the calvin cycle, the genes required for the synthesis of triose sugars  are highly expressed in the mature storage roots over their expression in the developing storage and fibrous roots . the results might reflect the increasing demand of the precursors for starch biosynthesis and cellular activities in the mature root where starch is highly produced and accumulated compared to the other root types.

for sucrose and starch biosynthesis pathways , the integrated map suggested a sensible illustration of the progressive starch production along with the cassava root development. the expression of genes encoding the enzymes that catalyze the reactions toward starch production is highly expressed in the mature storage roots with respect to that in the fibrous and developing storage roots, indicting the dominance of this metabolic process in the storage root type. these results might be unsurprising and simply be forecasted from the existing knowledge of starch biosynthesis. however, it is worthwhile to investigate and confirm this circumstance to ensure the current understanding.

CONCLUSIONS
nowadays, the importance of cassava is unquestionable both in terms of being a significant food stock and a promising energy source. since the advantage of cassava over the other crops lies in the incredible amount of starch produced and accumulated in the underground roots, we paid our attention to the starch biosynthesis process in the cassava roots. employing the recently released cassava genome data, this study presented the high-quality pathway of cassava starch biosynthesis reconstructed using multiple plant templates. the quality of the pathway was claimed as including curation as well as validation steps into the reconstruction framework, i.e., the curated pathway was verified by the information from the genbank database and also by the protein motif analysis. moreover, we have increased the distinction of our reconstructed pathway by numerally indicating the level of confidence for each sequence annotated here and the manifold visualizations. the confidence scores are considered advantageous in two aspects:  to quantitatively indicate the confidence level of the comparative results and  to suggest the reliability level of the newly annotated genes from the computational prediction. this information could be a hint for a molecular biologist to select the genes of interest for further investigation. for the pathway visualization, in addition to the descriptive view of the pathway that is often deduced from all pathway reconstruction research, we have also provided the resulting pathway in the interactive form. this format of visualization facilitates omics data integration  to allow the researchers to easily outline a new hypothesis regarding the regulation of the starch biosynthesis process. at the end, we exemplified the usefulness of the reconstructed pathway by incorporating the gene expression data  <cit>  to understand the nature of starch biosynthesis in the cassava plant. the success of this work inspired us to extend the reconstruction to other starch-relevant pathways. in the near future, it might be possible to have a quantitative model to observe the dynamic of the regulation of starch biosynthesis in cassava. if the conservation of the regulation underlying behavior of the root crop species was proven, the understanding from cassava research would be of great benefit for other plant research. in this case, cassava, whose potential in terms of data availability is dominant over the starchy-root crops, could be considered as a model of root crop species. therefore, the current effort of cassava study would be a real contribution for the research on other starchy root plants in the future.

