BACKGROUND
anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing  bacteria convert ammonium and nitrite into nitrogen and are major players in the biogeochemical nitrogen cycle  <cit> . they comprise a monophyletic taxon within the planctomycetes phylum. like other planctomycetes, they possess an unusual cellular architecture with a diderm cell envelope and a compartmentalized cytoplasm  <cit> . more specifically, the cells of anammox bacteria contain a single organelle-like intracytoplasmic compartment bounded by a single bilayer membrane. this compartment is known as the anammoxosome, and was proposed to be the site at which the anammox reaction takes place  <cit> . this reaction is thought to be performed mainly by cytochrome c enzymes  <cit> . within anammox cells, such enzymes have been shown to be present exclusively inside the anammoxosome  <cit> .

if indeed the anammoxosome is a separate compartment in which a distinct and substantial part of the proteome is localized, this would present a situation unique to bacteria. in a thorough electron tomographical study it was reported that, unlike for example the magnetosomes of magnetotactic bacteria  <cit>  and the chlorosomes of green photosynthetic bacteria  <cit> , the anammoxosome has no detectable membrane links with the cell envelope during its biogenesis  <cit> . furthermore, anammoxosomes divide separately from the cell envelope during cell division  <cit> .

this leads to two questions regarding the cell biology of anammox bacteria: firstly, which proteins are targeted to the anammoxosome besides the cytochrome c enzymes? secondly, by what mechanism are these proteins specifically targeted to the anammoxosome?

one possible answer to the second question is that anammoxosomal proteins might contain specific sorting signals such as targeting motifs, domains or signal peptides  <cit> . for example, in salmonella, several effectors were reported to contain multifunctional motifs or domains that are responsible for translocation and localization of the effector traits  <cit> . moreover, some cases have recently been discovered in which modulation of sec-signal peptide sequences result in different protein localizations  <cit> . most strikingly, in cyanobacteria, signal peptides from proteins targeted to the thylakoid differ from signal peptides of proteins targeted to the cell envelope  <cit> .

progress in the experimental investigation of the cell biology of anammox bacteria is slow because these bacteria grow exceptionally slowly , and are not available in pure culture. however, the genome of the anammox bacterium candidatus "kuenenia stuttgartiensis" was recently assembled from a community genome  <cit> .

using these genome sequence data, it might be possible to answer the first question. interestingly, it has been shown experimentally that the anammoxosome may be more acidic than both the cytoplasm and the cell envelope  <cit> . we reasoned that such a physicochemical difference could be reflected in the amino acid composition of the anammoxosomal sub-proteome  <cit> , and that this difference could be used to predict this sub-proteome in silico. therefore, a random forest  classifier was trained on two sets of anammoxosomal  and cell-envelope  protein sequences, constructed based on existing experimental evidence and comparative genomics. the best rf classifier was successful at predicting the targeting of proteins to the anammoxosome. this approach was complemented by the analysis of the encoded protein translocation machinery. finally, the predicted signal peptides of the two sub-proteomes were analyzed and compared to unravel the molecular basis of protein sorting in anammox bacteria.

RESULTS
construction of training sets
we constructed two sets of amino acid sequences from soluble proteins with functions that were known to be specific to either the anammoxosome or the cell envelope . the anammoxosomal set  contained the sequences of  <dig> proteins, including the  <dig> most highly expressed cytochrome c proteins of k. stuttgartiensis  <cit>  and  <dig> orthologues of these proteins from another anammox bacterium, candidatus "scalindua marina" . the cell-envelope set  contained the sequences of  <dig> proteins that were homologous to proteins with an experimentally validated function specific for the periplasm, cell envelope, or extracellular environment. all proteins of both sets contained a predicted n-terminal signal peptide that can putatively be recognized by the sec translocon. tatfind  <cit>  and pilfind  <cit>  predicted no tat-system or type iv system-secreted proteins in these two sets.

training of the random forest classifier
to detect the overall compositional differences between the anammoxosomal and cell-envelope protein sets, we constructed random forest  classifiers based on amino acid composition, using set a and set p as the training sets. among commonly used analytical machine-learning techniques  <cit> , the rf algorithm has shown its power in classifying proteins based on noisy amino acid composition  <cit> . to balance class sizes of sets a and p, set p was first randomized into two sets  to arrive at three equally sized protein sets .

in total  <dig> three-set  rf classifiers were trained, based on different combinations of single or two adjacent amino acids frequencies  error  <dig> % with standard deviation of  <dig> %). the best-performing rf model for discriminating set a from set p was selected based on the highest accuracy  and the best anammoxosomal protein  recall . this rf model had been made using two-adjacent-amino-acids combination frequencies from full-length protein sequences as the input . the top  <dig> most important adjacent amino acid residue combinations associated with the recognition of set a were gp, ts, id, ys, tf, ld, yg, ig, gn and it. the highest accuracy of rfs trained on other types of input data  ranged from ~75% to 84%, and the recall of anammoxosomal protein sequences ranged from 60% to 83%, respectively . no tests on combinations of more than two amino acids were attempted because this required prohibitively long computation time. during the training process, the rf algorithm chose the most representative features of each class by random bagging with overlaps, which is similar to jack-knife cross validations. within the training process, rf accurately determines classification error-rate   <cit> . these oob errors were used as a non-biased indicator of the performance of the classifiers.

identification of translocated and membrane proteins
all translocated proteins and membrane proteins encoded in the genome of k. stuttgartiensis were classified based on the predicted presence of transmembrane helices and/or signal peptides. prediction of signal peptides was not straightforward because anammox bacteria are evolutionarily only distantly related to proteins of those organisms that were used to train the predictors . for this reason,  <dig> different available signal-peptide prediction algorithms were applied to the open-reading frames predicted for the k. stuttgartiensis genome . positive predictions were combined into a single majority vote decision for each protein. among  <dig> open-reading frames,  <dig> membrane proteins and  <dig> translocated soluble proteins with signal peptides were predicted . nine of the signal-peptide carrying proteins were predicted to be tat-translocated by tatfind, and ten proteins were predicted to be secreted by the type iv secretion system by pilfind.

experimental evidence was obtained to confirm the signal peptide cleavage sites of some exemplary proteins by protein mass-spectrometry. for seven k. stuttgartiensis mature proteins, including two from set a and one from set p, n-terminally non-tryptic peptides were identified that matched exactly to sequences after a putative sp1-cleavage site at the end of a canonical sec signal peptide , indicating that the signal peptides of both anammoxosomal and cell-envelope proteins were predicted correctly and are functional.

prediction of the anammoxosomal sub-proteome
we then used our rf classifier to predict the destination of the  <dig> translocated and membrane proteins. of these proteins, approximately 60%  was predicted to be anammoxosomal  after removal of four predicted type iv secretion system substrates.

a summary of the predicted anammoxosomal sub-proteome of k. stuttgartiensis. in this set,  <dig> proteins are hypothetical proteins of unknown function. some examples of proteins are listed, especially those with functions known to be related to anammox. details of the predicted sub-proteome are stored in additional file  <dig> 

importantly, the predicted anammoxosomal sub-proteome formed a functionally consistent and cohesive set. first, the cytochrome c maturation machinery  <cit>  was predicted to be anammoxosomal as  <dig> out of the  <dig> encoding genes were predicted to be targeted to the anammoxosome , consistent with the recent proteomics study of karlsson et al.  <cit> . secondly, the destination of proteins encoded in the same genetic neighbourhood  was generally consistent. this makes sense because such proteins are usually subunits of a protein complex or otherwise functionally associated . thirdly, we found that only  <dig> of the  <dig> predicted anammoxosomal proteins  had smart or pfam functional domains  <cit>   which are on functional grounds incompatible with an anammoxosomal location .

finally, the predicted anammoxosomal sub-proteome was consistent with the proposed biological role of the anammoxosome  <cit> . if the main catabolism of anammox bacteria takes place in the anammoxosome, the respiratory complexes should be associated with this compartment. indeed, all  <dig> major respiratory complexes encoded in the k. stuttgartiensis genome were predicted to reside in the anammoxosomal membrane . moreover, three out of four ammonium transporters, all nitrite transporters, and all nitrite/nitrate antiporters were predicted to be anammoxosomal . in contrast, importers of essential trace elements and amino acids, as well as multidrug-efflux proteins were predicted to be located on the outside of the cells, as expected. a single putative copper atp transporter was predicted to be anammoxosomal consistent with the anammoxosomal destination of some enzymes dependent on copper .

overall, the rf classifier predicts that in anammox bacteria the cytoplasmic membrane is mainly used for transport and that essentially all catabolic functions  are associated with the intracytoplasmic organelle.

mechanism of protein translocation
the next point we addressed is the molecular basis for protein sorting in anammox bacteria. we reasoned that comparison of predicted protein features to those of reference bacteria could provide the first clues to how such a sorting system could function.

homology searches showed that the typical bacterial protein translocation system components, including the sec-translocation system   <cit> , tat-translocation system   <cit>  and type i  <cit> , ii  <cit>  and iv  <cit>  signal peptidases were encoded by the genome of k. stuttgartiensis. all components were present in single gene copy only .

putative candidatus kuenenia stuttgartiensis orthologues of proteins that are known to be involved in protein sorting. orthology is based on reciprocal best blast hits and on the unique presence of pfam functional domains.

the identified components of the sec- and tat-systems appeared canonical, except for the presence of a c-terminal fecr domain  in tatc. this signal-transducing domain is absent in any other tatc protein identified so far. topology predictions of the tatc-fecr protein  unanimously showed that the fecr domain is non-cytoplasmic. because of the uniqueness of such a domain combination, it is tempting to speculate that the fecr-like domain may somehow have a role in the evolutionary solution that has been found by anammox bacteria for protein sorting to the anammoxosome.

interestingly, the rf classifier results for sec components were ambiguous , whereas the tat system was predicted to be completely anammoxosomal . consistently,  <dig> out of the  <dig> tat-substrates predicted in the k. stuttgartiensis genome were also predicted to be anammoxosomal. these include a multi-copper oxidase sufi , a putative superoxide dismutase , two rieske subunits of the bc <dig> complex , and a few hypothetical proteins. the narg nitrate reductase subunit is very probably a false positive, as has been noted earlier  <cit> .

in conclusion, the encoded protein translocation machinery shows that no duplication of the sec- or tat-systems has taken place to facilitate separate translocation routes, and that both systems may be involved in protein sorting towards the anammoxosome.

the role of signal peptides in protein sorting
regardless of the protein translocation machinery used, the targeting of proteins to specific subcellular locations is often accomplished by modulation of n- or c-terminal signal peptides, in eukaryotes  <cit>  and prokaryotes  <cit>  alike. therefore, we compared the n- and c-termini of the two training sets a and p to identify a possible distinctive property or amino acid motif that could be used to differentiate both sets of protein sequences.

direct alignment of the signal peptides resulted in alignments which only had high quality  in the h-regions . therefore, the n-, h-, and c-regions of the signal peptides from the amino acid sequences from both training sets were first extracted manually, and were used to create a series of ungapped alignments which were aligned at:  the n-terminus;  the h-region start;  the c-region start; and  the putative cleavage site. the resulting segmental alignments were then joined in the order corresponding to the original signal peptide architecture. the sequence logo  <cit>  of the ungapped alignments of the n-termini illustrates that in general the signal peptides of both sets were canonical type i signal peptides  and most of the proteins had spase i cleavage sites with a clear axa motif. these alignments were further investigated by comparing the search results of hidden markov models  <cit>  of both sets in a sliding window approach , but no discriminating motif was found in either set a or set p. meme motif searches  <cit>  and statistical analysis of amino acid frequencies also did not yield any significant differences. finally, we trained rf classifiers using only the n-terminus  of the two sets of proteins, with the frequencies of two adjacent amino acid combinations as also used for the full protein rf classifiers. the resulting rf classifiers showed much lower accuracy than the models built based on the complete protein sequences, suggesting that less distinctive features were encoded in the n-terminus of these  <dig> groups of proteins .

an interesting side observation was that the h-regions of the predicted signal peptides from k. stuttgartiensis proteins contained significantly more phenylalanine residues  than found in e. coli tmhs . we speculate that this difference may be related to the affinity of trans-membrane helices to the unique ladderane membranes of anammox bacteria that have an exceptionally high density to prevent diffusion  <cit> .

yet in conclusion, it is unlikely that the n- or c- terminus plays a role in protein targeting of anammox bacteria.

discussion
the anammoxosome of anammox bacteria is one of the best documented cases of organellar biogenesis in bacteria; electron tomography has shown that this bacterial organelle divides separately from the cytoplasmic membrane, and is not connected to this membrane during a complete cell cycle  <cit> . cytochrome c proteins were detected exclusively inside the anammoxosome  <cit>  and an intracytoplasmic ph gradient was shown to exist  <cit> . because experimental investigation of anammox bacteria appeared to be difficult and the genome of k. stuttgartiensis has been sequenced recently, an in silico analysis was therefore obviously the next step forwards in unravelling this interesting biological phenomenon.

in the present study a random forest classifier was trained with two sets of protein sequences. the best rf classifier predicted an organellar sub-proteome of  <dig> proteins that was internally consistent and made functional sense. the best classifier used two-adjacent-amino-acids combination frequency as the input. according to their grand average of hydropathy   <cit>  and aliphatic index  <cit> , the anammoxosomal proteins tend to be more hydropathic and more aliphatic . this could be a consequence of the different physico-chemical characteristics  inside the anammoxosome. as computing power is likely to increase, the accuracy of the rf classifier may be improved in follow-up studies, e.g. by using combinations of more than  <dig> amino acids.

the anammoxosomal training set consisted only of amino acid sequences of cytochrome c proteins. it is possible that the classification was biased by the uniqueness of the protein types in this set. however, the cytochrome c protein family is only defined by the presence of a conserved cxxch heme-binding motif  in an alpha-helical domain. yet the remainder of the amino acid sequences were vastly variable, some polypeptides even containing regions with different folds or domains  <cit> . in fact, motif searches showed that no conserved sequence patterns could be found in set a except for the heme-binding motif, and the pairwise sequence identities of proteins in this set were all below 80%, with only  <dig> of them above 50%.

for the prediction of translocated proteins, a combination of  <dig> existing signal peptide prediction algorithms was used. these  <dig> signal peptide predictors reported immensely different predictions  on the presence or absence of a signal peptide in k. stuttgartiensis proteins. considering the fact that the gram-negative predictors were mainly trained with sequences from proteobacteria, which are only very distantly related to anammox bacteria, it is highly unlikely that the reported accuracies of these predictors of 91-95%  <cit>  can be valid for kuenenia proteins. moreover, among all employed algorithms, the signalp-hmm algorithm trained on eukaryotes showed the highest true-positive rate by predicting signal peptides in  <dig> out of  <dig> of the proteins in set a. this indicates that anammox signal peptides are more similar to those of eukaryotes than to those of gram-negative or gram-positive model bacteria.

analysis of the encoded protein translocation machinery provided some clues as to how this bacterium targets translocated proteins to their proper destination. because this machinery is non-redundant, an additional layer of chaperoning would be required to achieve specificity. moreover, because no sorting signal was apparent at the n- or c-termini of the proteins, such chaperones could act on the physicochemical characteristics observed in the amino acid sequence. alternatively, the signal may act at the level of the messenger rna that could determine the fate of the protein even before translation starts.

in case of the sec translocase, some subunits  were predicted to be anammoxosomal, while some others  were not. according to the presence of the seemingly canonical sec-signal peptides on both cell-envelope-targeted proteins and anammoxosome-targeted proteins, it is likely that the sec translocase has a dual localization on both the anammoxosomal and the periplasmic membranes. however, recent studies have also shown that under certain conditions sec-system exported proteins could as well be translocated by the tat-system  <cit> , and therefore we cannot exclude the possibility that the tat system translocates more than just the predicted twin-arginine-motif-carrying substrates.

an alternative hypothesis for anammoxosomal targeting could be primary translocation to the periplasm through the sec pathway and secondary retro-translocation to the anammoxosome  through vesicles. however, it must be noted that the application of 3d electron microscopy  did not reveal any such vesicles in growing or dividing cells  <cit> .

in order to further elucidate the anammox protein targeting problem, more experiments, such as immunolocalization of the tat- and sec-translocase subunits and quantitative proteomics approaches  <cit> , comparing protein concentration levels in purified anammox cells and solutions enriched in anammoxosomes , are required. the present study provides a clear hypothesis to future experiments: in anammox bacteria, catabolism and respiration are strictly organellar, leaving only transport functions for the cytoplasmic membrane.

CONCLUSIONS
the anammoxosome of anammox bacteria is one of the best documented cases of organellar biogenesis in bacteria. experiments have shown that several key enzymes catalyzing the anammox reaction are present exclusively inside the anammoxosome. the present study makes use of physicochemical characteristics of predicted protein sequences to predict a 90% accurate sub-proteome that constitutes this bacterial organelle. meanwhile, the mechanism of protein sorting remained largely elusive.

the predicted sub-proteome has been deposited into a freely accessible microsoft-excel database .

