BACKGROUND
honeybees are social insects that divide labor and live in highly structured communities. as pollinators, the honeybees play an instrumental role in shaping natural ecosystems by facilitating gene flow between plants  <cit> . furthermore, managed honeybee colonies provide pollination services for many agricultural crops, and are therefore of considerable economic importance  <cit> . dramatic losses of honeybees in recent years have spurred research towards a better understanding of mutualistic and pathogenic microorganisms associated with the honeybee  <cit> . some beekeepers use antibiotics to control pathogens, which in turn has affected the commensal microbiota and resulted in the accumulation of antibiotic resistances with unknown long-term consequences for honeybee health  <cit> . an improved understanding of the evolution and function of the honeybee microbiota is therefore an important step towards devising long-term viable management strategies for improving honeybee health.

currently, little is known about the role of individual members of the commensal microbiota, and their interactions with each other and the honeybee host. however, similarly to the human gut microbiome  <cit> , the honeybee microbiota is thought to be involved in the defense against pathogens and in the food processes within the beehive  <cit> . several independent studies of samples from diverse geographic origins have shown that the healthy honeybee gut contains a specialized microbial community, dominated by eight distinct phylotypes  <cit> . quantitative studies have indicated that the community composition fluctuates between honeybees and sites, but that the eight phylotypes generally represent >99% of all bacterial sequences in the gut metagenome of the worker bees  <cit> .

two phylotypes of the honeybee microbiota belong to the genus lactobacillus of the phylum firmicutes , with abundances in individual bees ranging from less than 5% to more than 50%  <cit> . a third phylotype belongs to the genus bifidobacterium  of the phylum actinobacteria. similarly to the lactobacilli, bifidobacteria are consistently found in the honeybee gut microbiota, although at lower abundances  <cit> .

phylotypes, or species, are commonly inferred from a 97% cut-off in percentage identities for the 16s rrna genes, under the assumption that strains in such groups are ecologically similar, but the adequacy of this cut-off is debated  <cit> . notably, inconsistencies between the sequence similarity of the 16s rrna genes and protein coding genes was recently reported for a single-cell genome study of the honeybee gut phylotypes gilliamella apicola and snodgrasella alvi, where it was suggested that recombination has homogenized the 16s rrna genes within phylotypes, while other genomic regions have continued to diverge  <cit> . similarly to g. apicola and s. alvi, a high similarity in the 16s rrna genes for two strains of the “firm-5″ phylotype contrasted with an average nucleotide identity of 86% for their genomes  <cit> . this suggests that the honeybee gut bacteria may be functionally divergent despite having highly similar 16s rrna genes.

honeybees are generalist pollinators and their main food sources are nectar and pollen produced by flowers. the sugar concentration in nectar varies widely, from less than 10% to more than 70%  <cit> . nectar consists mainly of the disaccharide sucrose and its monosaccharides fructose and glucose, but the exact composition of sugars differs between continents, seasons and sources  <cit> . consistent with the adaptation to a carbohydrate-rich diet, a metagenomic study of the bee gut identified protein families involved in carbohydrate metabolism and transport among the significantly enriched functional categories  <cit> . these include phosphotransferase systems  and enzymes involved in the breakdown of polysaccharides in nectar, pollen walls or host glycans, such as glycoside hydrolases, polysaccharide lyases and pectin.

nectar collected from flowers is first stored in the crop, which is a highly osmotic and microaerophilic bacterial hostile environment that precede the mid- and hindgut. despite the harsh conditions in the crop, bacteria have been isolated from this compartment, including lactobacillus kunkeii  <cit>  and diverse members of the “firm-4″, “firm-5″ and “bifido” phylotypes described for the honeybee gut microbiota  <cit> . thus, similar strains of lactobacillus spp. and bifidobacterium spp. have been isolated from the entire alimentary tract. the identified strains are found in all honeybees that belong to apis mellifera and its subspecies regardless of the geographic location  <cit> . previous research has demonstrated that the isolated bacterial strains secrete substances such as bacteriocins and antimicrobial proteins  <cit> , and can inhibit the growth of the honeybee pathogens  and food spoilers in vitro, and in vivo in honeybee larvae  <cit> . however, at the genetic level, nothing is known about these strains beyond the 16s rrna genes, and as we know from previous studies of other phylotypes of the honeybee gut microbiota, comparisons of the 16s rrna genes may underestimate the divergence and diversity of the protein coding genes.

to study the correlation between the diversity of gene sequences and functions, we have sequenced and analyzed the genomes of  <dig> bacterial strains isolated from the crop of a. mellifera. the strains were selected to include representatives of the “firm-4″, “firm-5″ and “bifido” phylotypes, several of which have recently been described as novel species  <cit> . by comparative genome analyses, including  <dig> recently published genomes of bifidobacteria isolated from honeybees and bumblebees  <cit> , we have quantified sequence divergence levels, identified novel gene acquisitions and estimated recombination frequencies. we discuss the genome-wide level of diversity and the finding that each of the three phylotypes contains highly diverse communities of strains with distinct metabolic properties.

RESULTS
genome overview
we have sequenced the genomes of  <dig> strains of lactobacillus and bifidobacterium spp.  isolated from the crop of apis mellifera mellifera, as described previously  <cit> . for  <dig> of the  <dig> strains, most of the contigs could be organized into a single scaffold, and the number of contigs in the final assemblies ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> . overall, the genomes showed the expected gc-skew curves that followed the putative origin and terminus of replication . furthermore, read coverage generally displayed a smooth curve with a coverage peak around the origin and a valley at the terminus , suggesting that the genomes had been accurately assembled. contigs not contained within the scaffolds included sequences from the rrna regions. a highly increased coverage over these contigs indicated the presence of multiple rrna gene copies. most of the remaining contigs not included in the main scaffolds were putatively identified as plasmids.table  <dig> 
strains sequenced in the current study



strain
species
1
genus
bee gut phylotype
2
b. coryneforme/b. indicum
bifidobacterium
b. asteroides
bifidobacterium
b. asteroides
bididobacterium
b. asteroides
bifidobacterium
l. apis
lactobacillus
l. helsingborgensis
lactobacillus
l. melliventris
lactobacillus
l. kimbladii
lactobacillus
l. kullabergensis
lactobacillus
l. mellis
lactobacillus
l. mellifer
lactobacillus

1species descriptions were recently published for the lactobacillus strains in  <cit> . for the bifidobacterium strains, the closest relative  is indicated.


2the “bifido” group was further divided into subgroups, based on the core genome phylogeny .



the genomes were about 2 mb in size, ranging from  <dig>  mb  to  <dig>  mb , and containing from  <dig>  to  <dig>  genes, of which from  <dig> to  <dig> genes  showed no hits to genes in the public databases . plasmids were identified in  <dig> of the  <dig> strains, and some strains had more than one plasmid. for the bifidobacteria, two small plasmids were associated with strain hma <dig>  while none were found in the other strains, thus conforming to the general trend that only small plasmids are present in the bifidobacterium genus  <cit> . in contrast, large plasmids of more than 100 kb were found in  <dig> of the lactobacillus strains . prophage regions were putatively identified in most genomes. an increase in sequence coverage over the phage-regions was observed in the l. kullabergensis and l. melliventris genomes, indicating the presence of multiple phage gene copies or replication of the prophage. the latter is perhaps more likely since some read pairs supported circularization whereas other read pairs suggested that the region was located within the main chromosomal scaffold.table  <dig> 
descriptive statistics on genomes



strain/species
genome size
1

plasmids
total plasmid size 
phage regions
gc content
# of cds
2
mean gene size 
3
rrna 
trna
pseudo-genes
partial cds
4
# unique genes
5

l. apis

l. helsingborgensis

l. melliventris

l. kimbladii

l. kullabergensis

l. mellis

l. mellifer

1total size of contigs larger than 500 bp, excluding contigs annotated as plamids.


2cds, excluding pseudogenes and partial genes.


3cds  divided by total length.


4cds overlapping a contig border.


5genes larger than 300 bp with no significant blast-hits found during annotation.



core phylogenies of lactobacilli and bifidobacteria
to place the isolated strains in a phylogenetic context, we retrieved complete genome sequence data from all species of the families lactobacillaceae and leuconostocaceae  . we identified  <dig> protein family clusters with ortho-mcl for this set of genomes, of which  <dig> were single-copy genes present in all genomes. the sequences of the pan-orthologous proteins were aligned and concatenated, and used for a phylogenetic inference with the maximum likelihood method . this analysis showed that five of the lactobacillus strains  belonged to the so-called ncfm clade  <cit> , named after lactobacillus acidophilus. the two other lactobacillus species sequenced here, l. mellis and l. mellifer, formed a separate strongly supported clade that diverged prior to the ncfm clade. furthermore, the two species were not particularly closely related to each other , similarly to the diversity found in a recent study using the 16s rrna gene  <cit> .figure  <dig> core genome phylogeny of lactobacilli. phylogenetic tree inferred from a maximum likelihood analysis of a concatenated alignment of  <dig> pan-orthologous genes. strains sequenced in the current study are highlighted in red, with their group names indicated to the right . the main groupings of lactobacilli as identified by kant et al.  <cit>  are indicated with bold letters. accession numbers of all genomes are listed in additional file 3: table s <dig> .



likewise, we identified and aligned single-copy gene orthologs for each species of the genus bifidobacterium for which complete genome data was available , to which we added five recently published genomes of bifidobacteria isolated from honeybees and bumblebees  <cit>   and the four genomes sequenced in the current study. we also included gardnerella vaginalis, which is closely related to the genus bifidobacterium and for which the taxonomic placement is debated  <cit> . we inferred a maximum likelihood phylogeny of these species based on the concatenated alignment of  <dig> single-copy orthologs . strain hma <dig>  bin <dig> and bin <dig> formed a clade  with b. asteroides, isolated from the gut of apis mellifera  <cit> , while strain bma <dig> was part of a sister clade  to this group, clustering together with b. indicum and b. coryneforme. the two “bifido” groups and b. actinocoloniiforme  formed a strongly supported clade that diverged prior to the common ancestor of previously sequenced bifidobacterium species isolated from non-invertebrate habitats.figure  <dig> core genome phylogeny of bifidobacterial strains. phylogenetic tree inferred from a maximum likelihood analysis of a concatenated alignment of  <dig> pan-orthologous genes. strains sequenced in the current study are highlighted in red, with their group names indicated to the right . other strains isolated from the honeybee gut are shown in light blue, and strains isolated from the bumblebee gut are shown in dark blue. accession numbers of all genomes are listed in additional file 3: table s <dig> 



notably, although these two groups of bifidobacterium strains isolated from the honeybee are on average 98% identical in their 16s rrna gene sequences , the lengths of the branches separating the groups indicate a higher level of divergence between the groups compared to previously sequenced bifidobacterial species with similar 16s rrna divergences . the two other strains isolated from the bumblebee  formed a separate clade with g. vaginalis, which also diverged prior to the common ancestor of previously sequenced bifidobacteria from non-invertebrate habitats. g. vaginalis is currently classified as the sole species of the genus gardnerella, which in turn belongs to the bifidobacteriaceae family. thus, in the phylogeny presented here, the bifidobacterium genus is paraphyletic suggesting that gardnerella should be re-classified.

phylogenetic comparison to the honeybee gut microbiota
to examine the relationships of our strains to the phylotypes described for the digestive tract of a. mellifera  <cit> , we also inferred phylogenetic trees based on the 16s rrna and the uvrc genes. the 16s rrna gene phylogeny of the lactobacillus strains analyzed here and related sequences from the bee gut microbiota  <cit>  confirmed that l. mellifer and l. mellis belong to the “firm-4″ phylotype, and that l. apis, l. helsingborgensis, l. melliventris, l. kimbladii and l. kullabergensis belong to the “firm-5″ phylotype . furthermore, the phylogeny inferred from the uvrc gene showed that each of the four “firm-5″ phylotype uvrc sequences obtained from a metagenome sample of the honeybee gut  <cit>  were more closely related to the species sequenced in the current study than to each other, indicating that these species are representative of the “firm-5″ bacterial community in the honeybee .

likewise, the diversity of the bifidobacterial strains from the crop matched the diversity of bifidobacterial sequences in the bee gut microbiota . however, while the topologies of the 16s rrna and uvrc gene phylogenies were largely consistent with the core genome phylogeny, the 16s rrna gene phylogeny in particular was poorly supported, indicating that this genetic marker does not contain sufficient information for reliable phylogenetic inference within the genus bifidobacterium. based on the uvrc gene phylogeny, the two “bifido” phylotype uvrc sequences from the honeybee gut microbiota  <cit>  are most closely related to strain hma <dig> in the current study, while strains bin <dig> and bin <dig> clustered with b. asteroides  <cit> .

we conclude that the strains sequenced in the current study are representative of the lactobacillus and bifidobacterium phylotypes described for the honeybee gut microbiota. for reasons of consistency with the nomenclature used previously to describe the key members of the bee gut microbiota, we refer to the cultivated strains from the crop as the “firm-4″, “firm-5″ and “bifido” groups in the following analyses, with “bifido-1″ and “bifido-2″ referring to each of the subgroups within the “bifido” phylotype group .

inference of the core and accessory genomes
the repeated isolation of multiple members of the same phylotype from the same apiary  <cit>  suggests that the strains form stable communities, consistent with the simultaneous identification of most of the strains in an independent metagenomic dataset  <cit>  . as a first step towards understanding the maintenance of these communities, we inferred the core and accessory genomes for each phylotype group.

from the two separate ortho-mcl clusterings of the lactobacillaceae/leuconostocaceae and bifidobacterium proteome datasets, we identified  <dig> and  <dig> single-copy orthologs present in all strains of the “firm-5″ and “bifido″ groups, respectively. to identify the accessory gene pools for each group, we counted protein family clusters  that lacked one or more strains for each group. in total,  <dig> and  <dig> protein families were found to be variably present within the “firm-5″ and “bifido” groups respectively. for the “bifido” subgroups,  <dig> and  <dig> protein families were accessory in “bifido-1″ and “bifido-2″ respectively, out of which  <dig> were accessory in both. to visualize patterns of shared gene content within each of these groups, we plotted the accessory protein families, including singletons, in venn diagrams . these plots revealed an approximately even distribution of shared protein families, with protein families being shared between strains in all possible combinations, consistent with ongoing gene losses and/or horizontal gene transfers. for the “firm-4″ group, which was only represented by two strains in the current study, the core and accessory genomes were not estimated. however, we noted that  <dig> and  <dig> protein family clusters/singletons did not include both strains. thus the sequenced genomes suggest a very high level of gene content diversity within all three groups.figure  <dig> venn diagram of shared protein families within the “bifido-1” group. numbers correspond to protein families of orthologous sequences, inferred with ortho-mcl, plus singletons . similar plots for the “firm-5” and “bifido-2” groups can be found in additional file 6: figure s <dig> and additional file 7: figure s <dig> 



despite the presence of large accessory gene pools, the gene order of the genomes was highly conserved within the groups, with strain-specific genes scattered along backbones of conserved core genes .figure  <dig> genome synteny plot of the “firm-4″ strains. comparative analysis of the “firm-4” genomes. the genome and plasmid sequences are represented by horizontal grey lines. the similarity between genomes was inferred with blastn and is shown with connecting grey lines, where darker lines indicate higher similarity. blue bars show the positions of conserved group-specific core genes. yellow bars indicate the positions of genes, which are not shared between the two strains. red bars indicate the conserved group-specific operon encoding the putative cscab genes  <cit> , whereas green bars show the position of putative eps-clusters.



adaptation to the arthropod and mammalian gut
the honeybee and bumblebee digestive tract, including crop, mid- and hindgut, represents a unique environment compared to previously described habitats for lactobacillus and bifidobacterium species. therefore, core genes specific to strains isolated from bees are candidates for traits associated with adaptation to the arthropod gut. we identified about 20– <dig> protein families uniquely present in each of the “firm-4″, “firm-5″ and “bifido” groups, but not in the proteomes of their related species in lactobacillaceae/leuconostocaceae and bifidobacterium. although most of these proteins were of unknown function, several interesting group-specific gene functions were identified.

among the genes shared exclusively among the bifidobacterium strains isolated from bees were the cydabcd genes involved in aerobic respiration , suggesting that these genes are important for colonization of the arthropod gut for bifidobacteria. the cydabcd genes were also present in the “firm-4″ group, but not in the “firm-5″ group, possibly reflecting adaptation to distinct microhabitats within the gut. the cydabcd genes have previously been shown to be sporadically present among the lactobacilli, with several independent gene losses being the most parsimonious explanation for their scattered distribution pattern  <cit> . consistently, the gc content of the cydabcd genes of the “bifido” genomes was similar to the genomic gc content, suggesting that this gene cluster was ancestrally present and has been lost at the node separating the bee-associated bifidobacteria from the other bifidobacterial genomes.

the group-specific genes also included genes coding for compounds involved in carbohydrate storage. trehalose is used for carbohydrate storage in bacteria, yeast and insects  <cit> , whereas glycogen is the main carbohydrate storage compound in mammals. uniquely present in the bee-associated bifidobacteria were the otsab genes, which code for enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of trehalose. in contrast, the genes for glycogen biosynthesis  and degradation  were absent in the bee-associated bifidobacteria, although these were otherwise conserved in all other bifidobacterial genomes included in this study. likewise, homologs of the glycogen biosynthesis operon in lactobacillus acidophilus  <cit>  could not be detected in either of the “firm-4” and “firm-5” groups.

novel group-specific outer surface proteins of the honeybee gut microbiota
several of the core genes specific to the “firm-4″, “firm-5″ and “bifido″ groups were inferred to code for outer surface structures based on protein domain predictions. the “firm-5″ group contained a variable number of tandemly repeated genes coding for large proteins of  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids found in two distant genomic locations . some of the genes were located at assembly contig borders , suggesting that additional copies may be present in some strains. the proteins were all predicted to contain an ysirk signal motif in the n-terminal segment, up to five copies of a domain of unknown function  in the central part of the protein, and two slap domains at the c-terminal end. the ysirk motif serves as a signal peptide for protein secretion in staphylococcus and streptococcus  <cit> , and has been identified in various lactobacillus adhesins  <cit> . the slap domain is the common denominator for surface layer  proteins in the ncfm clade  <cit> , and mediates binding of the s-layer protein to the cell envelope  <cit> . however, while the previously identified lactobacillus s-layer proteins are in the size range of 40–200 kda and encode a single slap domain, these group-specific putatively surface-exposed proteins of the “firm-5″ clade are substantially larger, 350–500 kda, and encode two slap domains.figure  <dig> comparative analysis of regions containing group-specific putative outer-surface proteins. a) two genomic regions containing duplicated genes for novel putative surface exposed proteins in “firm-5” strains. genes are shown as boxes, where blue and grey boxes represent the putative outer surface proteins, and white boxes represent other genes in the regions. grey boxes correspond to genes identified at contig borders in the genome assemblies . the tree topology is as in figure  <dig>  b) comparative analysis of the main genomic region containing tandemly duplicated genes for rcc1-repeat domain proteins in “bifido” strains.” genes are shown as arrows, where genes corresponding to each of the two protein clusters indicated by orthomcl and phylogeny  are shown in light and dark blue respectively. genes containing rcc1-repeats that are members of other protein familes, as predicted by orthomcl, are shown in purple. genes not containing the rcc1-repeat domains are shown in white. the genomic position of the region is indicated in figure  <dig>  the tree topology is as in figure  <dig>  c) genomic regions containing the putative cscab genes in “firm-4″ strains. genes are shown as arrows, where light-blue arrows represent the putative csca genes, and dark-blue arrows represent the putative cscb genes. the gene with homologues in other lactobacilli strains used for the orthomcl search is shown with a red border. in all comparisons, the similarity between genomes was inferred with tblastx and is shown with connecting grey lines, where darker lines indicate higher similarity.



the “bifido” genomes contained 7– <dig> genes per genome coding for rcc <dig> repeat domain proteins, previously identified in  <dig> gene copies in the b. asteroides genome  <cit> . some additional rcc1-repeat domain proteins were found at assembly contig borders , likely due to the repetitive nature of the proteins. furthermore,  <dig> rcc1-repeat domain proteins were present in b. actinocoloniiforme, the most closely related outgroup strain to the “bifido” group , suggesting the genes were acquired in the common ancestor of the clade, and have since diversified. most of the rcc <dig> repeat domain proteins were co-located in clusters with tandemly repeated genes , the longest cluster of which is shown in figure 7b. all genes were found to encode a listeria-bacteroides repeat domain  upstream of each rcc1-domain, and the cell wall anchoring signal lpxtg sequence at the c-terminal end with a hydrophobic stretch of amino acids and a short positively charged tail  <cit> , indicating that the rcc1-domain proteins are covalently attached to the peptidoglycan.

on average, we identified  <dig> repeats per domain, with 2– <dig> domains per protein. interestingly, the two “bifido” subgroups differed in both the number and type of rcc1-repeat domain proteins encoded in the genomes. the rcc1-repeat domain proteins of the “bifido-1″ subgroup mainly contained  <dig> domains, with a single 3-domain protein present in all “bifido-1″ strains and no 4-domain proteins. in contrast, the “bifido-2″ subgroup strains had multiple rcc1-repeat domain proteins with  <dig> domains as well as a single 4-domain protein conserved in all strains. phylogenetic inference based on the rcc1-repeat domain proteins with two  and three domains respectively  also revealed a clear separation of the subgroups, with the b. actinocoloniiforme rcc <dig> repeat-domain proteins forming a separate clade from the two subgroups. in contrast, the clustering of proteins from the same subgroup was highly variable, and the proteins were generally not positional orthologs. we conclude that the rcc <dig> repeat domain proteins evolve by duplication and divergence under diversifying selection, with recombination and horizontal gene transfers mainly restricted to the subgroup level.

the “firm-4″ genomes contained  <dig> conserved group-specific protein families residing in a contiguous region of  <dig> genes . six of these genes code for proteins with two domains of unknown functions , and three for a protein containing the wxl domain. l. mellifer also contained one additional gene outside the cluster coding for a protein with the wxl domain. these domains have previously been identified in several plant-associated gram-positive bacteria, and were found to be particularly numerous in lactobacillus plantarum  <cit> . genes containing these domains are organized into nine clusters in l. plantarum, each of which contains one or more copies of the cscabcd genes, where csca code for proteins with the duf <dig> domain and cscbc for proteins that contain the wxl domain  <cit> . the functional role of wxl domain proteins has not been determined, but the domain has been demonstrated to bind to the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria  <cit> , and to mediate co-aggregation with other bacteria  <cit> . additionally, it has been proposed that the cscabcd genes in l. plantarum encode cell-surface protein complexes involved in the degradation and utilization of complex plant polysaccharides  <cit> . positional orthologs formed separate clusters with orthomcl, suggesting that the duplications arose before the separation of the l. mellifer and l. mellis species.

carbohydrate metabolism and transport functions dominate the accessory gene pool
the maintenance of a diverse bacterial community consisting of phylotypes with large accessory gene contents is suggestive of niche differentiation within the phylotypes. in order to gain clues about such potential differentiation, we functionally characterized the accessory genes. about 40-50% of the accessory protein families in the “firm-5″ and “bifido” groups could be assigned to a cog category. among these, the cog category “carbohydrate metabolism and transport” was highly over-represented. overall, 100– <dig> protein families per strain were assigned to carbohydrate transport and metabolism, of which about  <dig> were conserved among all strains of each phylotype. this represents 21–43% of the variably present families with a cog annotation, as compared to only 9-17% of the total proteome.

expansion of phosphotransferase systems in the “firm-5″ group
in the “firm-5″ group, the accessory gene pool was dominated by pts transporters, which represented 50-60% of the 40– <dig> accessory genes assigned to cog category “g” in each strain. we assigned the identified transporters to the  <dig> described pts transporter families with the aid of the transporter classification database  <cit>   and found that the large majority of genes coded for transporters of the mannose-fructose-sorbose  family  . l. kullabergensis and l. kimbladii contained as many as  <dig> and  <dig> genes per genome for the man transporter family, corresponding to at least  <dig> and  <dig> complete transporter operons with genes for all four subunits respectively.

although the pts transporters were not restricted to any specific part of the genomes, different pts transporters were often found in genomic islands with a general lack of sequence similarity between genomes . a more detailed plot of one such region with multiple different pts transporters is shown in figure  <dig>  this region contains several genomic islands with variable numbers and families of pts transporters. not even the most closely related species, l. kimbladii and l. kullabergensis, have a similar set of genes for pts transporters in the same order in this region.figure  <dig> genomic locations of pts transporters in the genomes of the “firm-5” strains. genome sequences, similarity and phylogeny are as for figure  <dig>  pts transporters are shown as red and yellow bars along the genomes, where red bars represent the man family pts transporters and yellow bars represent all other pts transporters. additionally, the man pts transporters have been numbered according to the order of their occurrence in the genomes. the green boxes show the position of the variable region analyzed in figure  <dig> 



to investigate the evolutionary relationships of the pts genes in more detail, we inferred phylogenies of the man pts transporters based on the man iic and man iid protein subunits . the topology provided statistical support for more than  <dig> different groups, only one of which contained positional orthologs in all strains. in the two most closely related species l. kimbladii and l. kullabergensis 18– <dig> pts transporter operons were identified, of which  <dig> sites were orthologous. additional man pts gene clusters in l. kullabergensis were most similar to man pts genes in l. melliventris, while one showed a more distant relationship to man pts genes in l. mellis of the “firm-4″ clade. overall, these results suggest that the pts transporters have undergone an extreme expansion, which preceded the diversification of the “firm-5″ strains, followed by loss, recombination, diversification and possibly also transfer between the “firm-4″ and “firm-5″ groups.

furthermore, we found that the pts genes were co-located with other genes also involved in carbohydrate metabolism, including enzymes involved in the degradation and modification of sugar residues, such as glucosidases, hydrolases, isomerases, racemases, epimerases, aldolases and phosphatases, and their regulatory genes. thus, the genomic islands in the “firm-5″ group code mainly for carbohydrate-related functions and are extremely dynamic in structure and gene content.

diversity of the eps clusters within the “firm-4″ and “bifido” groups
within the accessory gene content of the “bifido” group, we identified carbohydrate abc transporters as well as many enzymes involved in the degradation of complex carbohydrates, such as xylan and mannan , starch, and cellulose. we also identified a hyper-variable region coding for accessory proteins with a putative function in the biosynthesis of cell wall associated polysaccharides . this region contains a gene cluster for the biosynthesis of the rhamnose precursor “dtdp-rhamnose” in the “bifido-2″ group as well as in the “bifido-1″ strain bin <dig> . in the other “bifido-1″ strains, only the rfbb gene could be identified.figure  <dig> comparative analysis of putative eps-clusters. a) putative eps-clusters for the “bifido” strains. phylogenetic tree is as in figure  <dig>  b) putative eps-clusters for the “firm-4″ strains. similarity was estimated with tblastx, using a length filter of 100 bp. pink: dtdp-rhamnose biosynthesis genes, green: abc transporter genes, yellow: glycosyl-transferases or genes with orthology to known eps genes, orange: glycosyl-hydrolases, brown: c-terminal domain of priming glycosyl-transferase, grey: other genes with a putative function in polysaccharide biosynthesis. light blue: putative catalase, dark blue: putative manganese transporter and repressor. for a complete list of protein domain predictions, see additional file 12: table s <dig> 



in bifidobacteria, genes for the biosynthesis of dtdp-rhamnose are located within the eps gene cluster for the biosynthesis of exopolysaccharides   <cit> . likewise, it has been shown that dtdp-rhamnose is an important precursor of cell wall polysaccharides and rhamnose-containing eps in lactococcus lactis  <cit> . two abc- <dig> type transporter genes were also present in the hyper-variable region, which may be involved in the transfer of polysaccharides across the cytoplasmic membrane to the cell wall. multiple genes for diverse glycosyl-transferases were present in all strains, consistent with a function in eps biosynthesis  <cit> , as well as other proteins with domains suggesting a function in polysaccharide biosynthesis . finally, the gc-content of the genes in the region varied between 53-55%, compared to the genomic average of 60-61%, which is typical of eps clusters in bifidobacteria  <cit> .

since the segment containing the eps genes is located at the same genomic position in all genomes , we were able to identify the corresponding genes in the bumblebee-associated outgroup strain b. actinocoloniiforme . the order of genes was similar to the “bifido-1″ strain bin <dig>  but also included genes for a putative cell wall hydrolase present in all the “bifido-2″ strains and the “bifido-1″ strain hma <dig>  thus, similarly to the diversity of pts transporters in the genomic islands of the “firm-5″ group, all the “bifido” genomes contain unique combinations of genes within the eps-region  , suggesting that the strains produce distinct cell wall associated polysaccharides. furthermore, an eps cluster located in another genomic island was previously identified in b. asteroides  <cit> , but was found to be absent from the “bifido” strains sequenced in the current study .

no eps-clusters were identified within the “firm-5″ group, but l. mellifer and l. mellis contained the rfbabcd genes for the biosynthesis of dtdp-rhamnose . furthermore, a gene encoding the c-terminal domain of the “priming” glycosyl-transferase, which is predicted to carry out the transferase function of the gene, was identified in both species. similarly to the putative eps-cluster identified for the “bifido” group, the two strains contained a unique combination of genes in the region, including multiple glycosyl-transferases, as well as genes with homology to the plasmid-encoded eps-cluster of lactococcus lactis  <cit> .

carbohydrate fermentation patterns
in an effort to evaluate the metabolic capacity of the strains, we determined the carbohydrate utilization profiles of the bifidobacterium strains sequenced in the current study , and compared these to the profiles of the lactobacillus species  <cit> . all strains were able to grow on fructose and glucose, and these were the sole carbon sources that promoted growth of the “firm-4″ strains among the sugars tested. additionally, four of the “firm-5″ strains possessed the ability to ferment mannose. the “bifido” strains showed the broadest spectrum of metabolic capacities among the tested sugars; all strains utilized saccharose and arabinose, and an additional six sugars were fermented by one or more strains.

low levels of homologous recombination in the core genome
to place the dynamic changes of the genomic islands in the context of the core genome, we inferred individual gene phylogenies and compared their topologies to the topology of the concatenated phylogenetic trees . the “firm-5″ and “bifido” groups were in most cases monophyletic, suggesting that recombination events outside the groups that span across the gene boundaries are rare. furthermore, out of  <dig> single gene phylogenies, only two abc-transporter genes and the protein encoded by the rfbb gene in eps-cluster of the “bifido” group  were incongruent with the monophyly of the “bifido-1″ and “bifido-2” groups.

to estimate the extent of shorter recombination tracts within genes, we used the two larger core gene datasets consisting of  <dig> and  <dig> single-copy genes present in all members of the "firm-5″ and “bifido″ groups, respectively. we applied three recombination-scanning methods in phipack  on each alignment and found  <dig> genes with evidence of recombination in the “firm-5″ group , while only  <dig> genes were significant for recombination in the “bifido” group .

finally, we quantified the overall ratio at which recombination and mutation events  have generated substitutions in the strains sequenced here. to this end, clonalframe was run on genes previously used in multilocus sequence typing of lactobacillus casei  and bifidobacterium spp. . the r/m ratio was estimated for these gene sets to  <dig>  for the “firm-5″ group  and to  <dig>  for the “bifido” group .

phylotype-specific diversity in adaptive immunity against phages
phages and plasmids were inferred to be present in most of the genomes sequenced in the current study . defense crispr-cas systems  <cit>  were identified in members of “firm-5″ and the “bifido-1” groups, but not in the “firm-4″ or the “bifido-2″ groups . the “firm-5″ strains encoded a crispr-cas system of type ii-a, located at the exact same site in all genomes , while the “bifido-2″ subgroup encoded crispr-cas systems of type i-e and i-c, also located at the same site in all genomes .table  <dig> 
crispr-cas systems
1



group
species/strain
crispr classification
1
number of spacers per region

b. asteroides

b. coryneforme

b. indicum
l. apis



l. melliventris

l. kimbladii

l. kullagergensis
l. mellis

l. mellifer
na6
b. actinocoloniiforme

1classified according to  <cit> .


2frameshift in gene cas <dig> 



3
cas <dig> gene present on plasmid, fragment of cas <dig> gene on chromosome.


4no cas genes, repeats are identical to region  <dig>  but the spacers are different.


5frameshift in gene csn <dig> 



6
b. actinocoloniiforme is a bifidobacterium species closely related to the “bifido” phylotype strains, which was isolated from the bumblebee.



in the “firm-5″ group, a second region of crispr spacers was found for l. helsingborgensis in another location on the chromosome, but without any associated cas-genes. the earliest diverging species, l. apis, contained only the degenerate first part of the cas <dig> gene on the chromosome, but a complete cas <dig> gene was found on its plasmid together with a few crispr spacers , suggesting that plasmids can mediate exchange of crisprs between strains.

the outgroup species of “bifido-1″ and “bifido-2″, b. actinocoloniiforme, encoded a type i-e crispr-cas system. located upstream of these genes was a fatty acid biosynthesis operon, including the multifunctional type i fatty acid synthase gene  . surprisingly, the “bifido-2″ strains lacked both the crispr-cas genes and the fatty acid biosynthesis operon, which was otherwise present in all bifidobacteria analyzed in the current study. a blast using the type ii fatty acid biosynthesis gene fabf from arthrobacter phenanthrenivorans  did not yield any significant results in the “bifido-2″ group, nor could any fatty acid biosynthesis genes be predicted using kaas  <cit> , so it is currently unclear how these strains synthesize fatty acids.

next, we investigated whether the spacers of the identified crispr-cas systems  had similarity to any known sequences, or to sequences contained within the genomes analyzed in the current study. in total, hits were found for  <dig> out of  <dig> spacers . most of the hits were to genes with a putative phage function, or hypothetical genes close to phage-related genes, and many hits were targeting the same genomic regions. all the spacers from the “firm-5″ group for which a hit could be found were targeting other members of the “firm-5″ group. similarly, spacers originating from bifidobacteria isolated from honeybees or bumblebees had hits to other members of this group, with the exception of b. bohemicum, for which two spacers had hits to b. longum. furthermore, one spacer from the recently sequenced genome of gilliamella apicola had a hit to the identified plasmid from the “firm-5″ species l. apis, albeit with multiple mismatches. these results suggest that strains of different phylotypes are subject to distinct phage populations within their shared habitat.

discussion
in this study, we have sequenced and analyzed  <dig> genome sequences of lactobacillus and bifidobacterium spp. isolated from the crop of the honeybee. we have shown that the strains represent the diversity of rrs and uvrc genotypes of the ″firm-4″, “firm-5″ and “bifido” phylotypes, previously identified in the gut  <cit> , and therefore consider our dataset to be a good representation of these phylotypes in the honeybee. notably, the genomes revealed extensive diversity in gene content. in the following, we will discuss these results in light of adaptation and niche differentiation, both within and between the lactobacillus and bifidobacterium phylotypes associated with honeybees and bumblebees.

niche differentiation between phylotypes
as seen from the concatenated protein phylogenies, each of the three gram-positive phylotypes investigated in this study are more closely related to bacteria isolated from other habitats than to each other, and have therefore adapted to the honeybee independently, as already suggested for lactobacilli based on 16s rrna gene sequences  <cit> . consistently, we identified several protein families and functions specific to the bee-associated strains, but not shared between phylotypes. for example, genes for aerobic respiration were present in the “bifido” and “firm-4″ groups, but not in the “firm-5″ group. novel outer surface protein families, unique for each group were also identified, which are likely to be involved in interactions with both the host and the environment  <cit> . furthermore, transporters and enzymes involved in import and degradation of sugar compounds differed extensively between the phylotypes. taken together, this suggests that the three groups not only have different origins but also occupy distinct micro-habitats within the bee gut.

similarly to the human gut microbiome, it has been proposed that the bee gut microbiota form a nutritional symbiotic association where the gut bacteria metabolize nutrients that the host cannot process. indeed, a recent study showed that the honeybee gut microbiota is capable of metabolizing diverse compounds  <cit> . while nectar mainly consists of sucrose, glucose and fructose, trace amounts of other carbohydrates are also present, some of which are poisonous to the honeybees  <cit> . thus, it was previously suggested that the “firm-5″ strains could be responsible for processing mannose, based on the high diversity of pts-transporters of the mannose family in a metagenomic sample  <cit> . our genome analysis confirmed the presence of an exceptionally large number of pts-transporters for the “firm-5″ group and four of the five species within this group have been shown to be able to ferment mannose in vitro  <cit> . however, mannose was also fermented by two “bifido” strains in the current study, so the fermentation of mannose is not strictly phylotype-specific.

in terms of general patterns of adaptation to the gut environment, it has previously been suggested that the biosynthesis of glycogen, and its use for carbohydrate storage, represents a specific adaptation in lactobacilli to the mammalian gastrointestinal tract  <cit> . interestingly, we found that these biosynthetic genes were absent from the “bifido”, “firm-4″ and “firm-5″ strains isolated from bees, which provides indirect support for the hypothesis that glycogen biosynthesis is indeed a specific adaptation to the mammalian gut. instead, we identified genes for the biosynthesis of trehalose, which functions as an energy storage compound in insects. in bees, trehalose is produced in the fat body and maintained at high concentrations in the haemolymph  <cit> . although more data is needed, it is intriguing that the gut bacteria seem to utilize the same storage compounds as the hosts to which they are adapted.

however, several other functions for trehalose have also been described in bacteria, such as stabilization of proteins and membranes during various stress-conditions, and protection from damage by oxygen radicals  <cit> . considering the concomitant presence of the respiratory chain complex  in all the bee-associated bifidobacteria, it is possible that trehalose helps protect against oxidative stress. although a number of other candidate genes were previously proposed to serve this function  <cit> , none of these were conserved in all strains associated with honeybee and bumblebee associated strains in this study. however, an argument against such a general role is that no orthologs of the trehalose biosynthetic genes could be identified in the “firm-4″ group, which also encodes the cydabcd operon.

niche differentiation within phylotypes
our study has shown that about 40-50% of the identified genes in the genomes are variably present among strains of the same phylotype. interestingly, phylotype sequences of the “firm-5″ group from the same metagenomic study were more similar to the species sequenced in the current study than to each other, suggesting that these species are maintained in the honeybee colony. this result is particularly remarkable when considering that the protocol used for dna extraction in the metagenomic study was designed to enrich for gram-negative bacteria, and therefore represents a conservative estimate of the diversity of gram-positive bacteria  <cit> . although the basis of the co-existence of these species in the honeybee is not known, niche differentiation connected to the phylotype accessory gene content is an intriguing possibility.

within the “firm-5” group, an exceptionally large number of pts transporters were identified; for example, l. kullabergensis and l. kimbladii from the “firm-5″ group encode an estimated  <dig> and  <dig> complete pts transporters, a diversity that to our knowledge is unprecedented  <cit> . for comparison, l. plantarum contains  <dig> complete operons for pts transporters, and this has until now represented the largest number of pts transporters in lactobacilli genomes  <cit> . while other members of the ncfm clade, to which the “firm-5″ group belongs, also encode multiple pts transporters, none of them encode as many as the “firm-5″ strains  <cit> . thus, the evolution of the “firm-5″ group has likely been driven by selection for expansion and loss of the pts transporters. consistently, the pts genes were mostly located inside genomic islands containing strain-specific sets of pts genes, indicative of high rates of duplications, losses and gains. similarly, a previous evolutionary study of man family pts transporters also showed that the transporter phylogenies were generally incongruent with the species phylogeny  <cit> .

despite the name, pts transporters of the man family are also known to import other sugars than mannose, and individual transporters may import a range of sugars  <cit> . considering the extensive diversity of sequences within the man transporter genes in the current study, it seems likely that this is also true for the man family pts transporters in the “firm-5″ group. notably, it was previously shown that  <dig> out of  <dig> tested carbohydrates were fermented only by a subset of the “firm-5″ strains  <cit> , so the specificity of these transporters merits further studies.

phylotype-specific outer-surface protein families, which contain protein domains previously identified in secreted and cell surface proteins, also displayed extensive intra-phylotype diversity. strain-specific variations in the number of genes and domains in each gene indicate that they evolve by duplication and divergence under diversifying selection. the rcc1-repeat domain proteins associated with the “bifido” group showed particularly high levels of diversity.

finally, we identified gene clusters associated with the biosynthesis of cell wall associated polysaccharides in both the “firm-4″ and “bifido” groups, where each strain encoded a unique gene set . cell wall associated polysaccharides have been shown to influence gut colonization and interactions with the immune response, suggesting that these genes may be of great importance for host-symbiont interactions in the honeybee gut  <cit> . furthermore, exopolysaccharides are frequently involved in biofilm formation, which may provide resistance to the host immune response and exclude other bacteria from the habitat  <cit> . thus, a particularly interesting question in this context is whether biofilms in the honeybee gut consist of members of different phylotypes, strains of the same phylotype or perhaps individual strains  <cit> .

genetic exchange of mobile elements between members of the honeybee gut microbiota
niche differentiation could also be the result of barriers to sequence exchange within or between phylotypes. we identified several large plasmids within the “firm-5″ group, two of which were highly similar, indicative of a recent transfer. in contrast, a recent publication of two additional strains of the “firm-5″ group did not identify any large plasmids, consistent with their dynamic nature  <cit> . furthermore, the identification of prophages and crispr regions provides indirect evidence that bacteriophages are active in this environment. by including previously sequenced strains from honeybees and bumblebees, we found significant hits for  <dig> out of  <dig> spacer sequences. interestingly, hits were mostly restricted to members of the same phylotype, suggesting that lactobacilli and bifidobacteria of honeybees consist of genetically well-separated phylotypes with distinct phage populations.

within phylotypes, the emergence of resistance mechanisms to phage infections via the crispr-cas systems could prevent gene flow between certain strain combinations, and thereby further contribute to strain differentiation. indeed, the phylogenies clearly supported the formation of micro-clusters within phylotypes, and only 2-9% of the phylotype core genes were significant for recombination. furthermore, the ratio at which recombination versus mutation events contribute to sequence divergences in the core genes was in the range of  <dig>  to  <dig> , thus being low also for shorter recombination tracts. these values are similar to previous estimates for one of the lineages in lactobacillus sakeii  inferred to represent a clonal, specialized subpopulation  <cit> .

parallels to the human gut microbiota
several interesting parallels can be drawn between the honeybee microbiota and the human gut microbiome. neither microbiome is vertically inherited and must therefore be established by colonization at each generation. the crop is sterile at eclosion, and the lab microbiota starts to build up within minutes post-eclosion by trophallactic exchange with nestmates  <cit> . similarly, the colonization of the infant gut begins during birth, where the mother’s vaginal and fecal microbiomes provide an important source of inoculum  <cit> . interestingly, it has been shown that the human microbiome composition can change rapidly in response to a switch from a plant-based to an animal-based diet  <cit> . the ability to change the microbiota in response to herbivorous versus carnivorous diets is likely to have been a strongly selected trait in the evolution of humans, just like the ability to respond to changes in carbohydrate composition and concentrations in the nectar and pollen may have been of prime importance for the honeybee gut microbiota.

CONCLUSIONS
the honeybee gut microbiota has been shown to be remarkably consistent, with a small number of phylotypes being repeatedly found to dominate the community. however, the current study revealed that the lactobacillus and bifidobacterium phylotypes consist of multiple strains with highly diverse gene content, indicating that the community is more complex than previously thought. shared mobile elements and crispr spacer hits suggest that that members of the same phylotype exchange genetic material, which may provide possibilities for dynamic development of the phylotype accessory genomes. however, the low levels of homologous recombination suggest that such exchanges rarely affect the core gene contents of the strains, which will therefore continue to diverge.

we consider these results to be of specific interest for our understanding of the gut bacterial community of the honeybee and of general interest for our understanding of niche differentiation between bacteria adapted to the same habitat. the identification of unique outer surface structures, remarkably different repertoires of systems for the import of carbohydrate and resistance mechanisms to phage infections are some of the factors that may contribute to specialization, diversification and speciation. experimental studies to elucidate whether the strains three phylotypes are spatially, temporally and/or functionally differentiated is an interesting avenue for future research.

