BACKGROUND
evolutionary analyses of rna polymerases, and rna polymerase ii  in particular, have provided important phylogenetic inferences about ancient evolution. the rnap largest subunit has played a key role in resolving such widely accepted hypotheses as the three domains of life  <cit>  and putative affiliation of the "long-branch" microsporidia with fungi  <cit> ; however, one particular inference of eukaryotic relationships based upon the rnap ii largest subunit  has proven controversial. rpb <dig> sequences consistently recover a polyphyletic kingdom plantae, with independent origins of red algae and green plants  <cit> . this result is in conflict with a growing consensus on eukaryotic relationships from other molecular phylogenetic analyses .

the hypothesis that red algae are related closely to green algae and plants grew out of sequence-based phylogenetic analyses of plastid-based characters . a monophyletic association of most plastid-based molecular characters lent support to the hypothesis of a single plastid origin  <cit> . because both red algae and green plants have "primary" plastids  it is reasonable to assume that plastids originated in the common host cell ancestor of the two groups  <cit> . although these data also can be reconciled with polyphyletic plastid origins  <cit> , analyses of a number of nuclear genes likewise recover a monophyletic association of the red and green host cell lines  <cit>  . congruence among a number of molecular phylogenies, from both host cell and plastid-based characters, has led to general acceptance of the hypothesis that all photosynthetic eukaryotes with primary plastids share a common ancestor  <cit> . this consensus view of plant evolution even has been incorporated into the phylogenetic treatment of eukaryotes in major biology textbooks  <cit> . consequently, a polyphyletic plantae recovered in rpb <dig> analyses typically is interpreted as a phylogenetic artifact  <cit> .

as part of a general investigation of rnap ii evolution and function, we have examined this persistent phylogenetic conflict between rpb <dig> and other molecular analyses. a key taxon missing from previous rpb <dig> surveys was the glaucocystophyta, a small, enigmatic group of photosynthetic protists also believed to harbor primary plastids  <cit> . although relatively uncommon in nature  <cit> , glaucocystophytes have intrigued phycologists and evolutionary biologists for over a century because of their cyanelles, photosynthetic organelles with characteristics intermediate between those of derived plastids and cyanobacteria. historically, the pigments and vestigial peptidoglycan cell wall of cyanelles were taken as evidence of an intermediate relationship between the glaucocystophyte host cell and more recently acquired endosymbiont  <cit> . current views hold that cyanelles and plastids have descended from the same endosymbiotic cyanobacterial ancestor  <cit> , and phylogenetic analyses of large, multi-gene plastid and nuclear data sets both provide strong support for a monophyletic association of glaucocystophytes with red algae and green plants  <cit> . as the potential "missing link" in the evolution of primary eukaryotic photosynthesis, glaucocystophytes could provide ancestral data for clarifying the origins of red and green plants and overcoming phylogenetic artifacts that produce conflicts among molecular data.

we sequenced the complete rpb <dig> gene from glaucocystis nostochinearum itz., including the region encoding the c-terminal domain , as well as a partial sequence from cyanophora paradoxa korsh. here we report comparative analyses of inferred protein sequences from these two species and a broad sample of other eukaryotes in an effort to understand the overall topology of the rpb <dig> tree, and the specific branching positions of green plants, red algae and glaucocystophytes.

RESULTS
characterization of rpb <dig> from glaucocystophytes
most molecular analyses of the glaucocystophyta have focused on cyanophora; therefore, we made an effort to recover rpb <dig> from it and glaucocystis. we encountered several technical problems, however, in our attempts to sequence the complete gene from cyanophora. first, a persistent pcr artifact occurred with 3' race , preventing direct recovery of sequence distal to conserved region g  <cit> . in addition, we identified two distinct rpb <dig> sequences from cyanophora. although they differ only at synonymous positions, the presence of two sequences complicated efforts to isolate a single contiguous gene product through standard rt  and pcr methods. therefore, we concentrated on recovering the complete rpb <dig> gene from glaucocystis.

the most interesting overall feature of glaucocystis rpb <dig> is that it encodes a typical rnap ii c-terminal domain . in its canonical form, the ctd comprises tandemly repeated heptapeptides with the consensus sequence y1-s2-p3-t4-s5-p6-s <dig>  <cit> . these heptapeptides act as a platform for various proteins functionally associated with rnap ii transcription. ctd-protein interactions help regulate gene expression, couple transcription to pre-mrna processing and post-transcriptional silencing, and generally coordinate nuclear function  <cit> . the ctd is missing or degenerate in many eukaryotic groups, but is conserved across the broad diversity of animals and fungi, as well as their putative protistan ancestors  <cit> . this strong conservation is not surprising, given numerous and essential ctd functions in mrna synthesis.

although its biochemical interactions are not as well-characterized as in animals and yeast, the ctd also is present in all green algae and plants examined to date  <cit> ; based on comparative genomic analyses, core ctd-protein interactions also appear to be conserved across all of these groups  <cit> . given this strong conservation of ctd form and function, it is reasonable to conclude that the protistan ancestor of green plants and algae also used ctd-based rnap ii transcription. in this light, the presence of a ctd in glaucocystophytes is consistent with the hypothesis that they share a common ancestor with green plants, and lends support to a broader kingdom plantae including other eukaryotes with primary plastids. by the same token, the most straightforward explanation for the absence of a conserved ctd in most red algae  <cit>  is that rhodophytes do not share a common ancestor with green plants and glaucocystophtyes.

as discussed previously, phylogenetic analyses of rpb <dig> sequences likewise have indicated that red algae originated independently of a common ancestor of green plants, fungi, animals and related protists. it is precisely in these latter eukaryotic groups that the ctd is invariably conserved, suggesting that ctd-based rnap ii transcription was canalized in their common ancestor  <cit> . if the now widely accepted hypothesis of a monophyletic plantae is accurate, then both a "ctd-clade" and the independent origin of red algae inferred from rpb <dig> sequences must result from a tree-building artifact. a recent genome-level investigation of the ctd and its attendant proteins provides an explanation for just such an artifact: the ctd-clade recovered in rpb <dig> phylogenies reflects parallel functional constraints on rnap ii and related proteins, rather than historical signal retained in their sequences  <cit> . if true, then the polyphyly of green plants and red algae represents a phylogenetic artifact of sequence covariation  <cit>  resulting from selection for differing mechanics of rnap ii transcription among eukaryotic lineages. the inclusion of glaucocystophyte sequences in rpb <dig> analyses might provide ancestral information that could help overcome such an artifact.

phylogenetic analyses of rpb <dig> sequences
the addition of glaucocystophyte rpb <dig> sequences does not yield a monophyletic plantae. both maximum-likelihood  and bayesian inference still recover a "ctd-clade" ; it includes green plants and glaucocystophytes but not red algae. even more problematic is an unexpected but strongly supported clade grouping glaucocystophytes with acanthamoeba and dictyostelium, members of the amoebozoa  <cit> . to sample as broadly as possible, we included a number of partially sequenced genes  in our 47-taxon analysis; as a result, the alignment  incorporates large blocks of missing data. in an effort to ameliorate potential sources of phylogenetic artifact, we aligned  <dig> of the most complete rpb <dig> sequences retaining multiple representatives of major lineages. we also excluded giardia and the microsporidians. although these sequences are complete, giardia is the strongest source of "long-branch attraction" in rpb <dig> analyses  <cit> . likewise, the microsporidians are a potentially significant source of phylogenetic artifact  <cit> , particularly with respect to the a priori expectation that amoebozoans will associate with opisthokonts   <cit> .

eliminating partial sequences and "long-branch" taxa has little effect on the tree topology. glaucocystis still associates strongly with acanthamoeba and dictyostelium in bayesian inference, ml and distance bootstrap analyses . this grouping also is recovered in parsimony analyses, but with low bootstrap support . in addition, the "ctd-clade" is recovered using all four standard phylogenetic methods, although generally without strong support. this poses a number of problems with respect to leading hypotheses of eukaryotic relationships. entamoeba, which has no ctd, is excluded from the ctd-clade containing other amoebozoans. the diatom thalassiosira groups with ctd-containing taxa, not with ciliates and apicomplexans as predicted by the "chromalveolate hypothesis"  <cit> . finally, as noted above, red algae do not group with green plants and glaucocystophytes as predicted by the kingdom plantae hypothesis. in fact, with this data set a monophyletic plantae is rejected significantly in both kh and sh tests ; this appears to be due largely to the strong association of glaucocystophytes and amoebozoans, as support for a polyphyletic plantae is reduced when acanthamoeba and dictyostelium are removed from the data set . we therefore undertook a detailed investigation to determine why rpb <dig> sequences generate such an unorthodox tree topology, beginning with the positions of glaucocystis, dictyostelium and acanthamoeba.

why might some amoebozoans group with glaucocystophytes?
the strong association between the two amoebozoans and glaucocystophytes would appear to have one of three explanations: 1) they are, indeed, evolutionary sister groups; 2) their pairing reflects an ancient lateral gene transfer  of rpb <dig> from a glaucocystophyte to the common ancestor of acanthamoeba and dictyostelium; or 3) their association is a phylogenetic artifact. although the first explanation cannot be rejected outright, molecular analyses usually group amoebozoans with animals and fungi  <cit> , and we can find no consequential evidence  to support a relationship between amoebae and glaucocystophytes. thus, we presume that the rpb <dig> tree topology does not accurately reflect organismal relationships.

likewise, given the number of co-adapted proteins interacting to form the rnap ii holoenzyme  <cit> , not to mention associated general and specific transcription factors  <cit> , lgt of the largest subunit seems exceedingly unlikely. these complications are only exacerbated if rpb <dig> anchors additional co-adapted ctd-protein interactions  <cit> . moreover, a comparison of intron positions gives no indication of a glaucocystophyte ancestry for the acanthamoeba rpb <dig> gene , nor are there any diagnostic indels to suggest such a relationship . thus, with the exception of rpb1-based phylogenies, there is no evidence to suggest lgt between glaucocytophytes and amoebozoans. if conflicting gene phylogenies represent its only support, lgt is an unfalsifiable hypothesis. any phylogenetic conflict can be resolved by invoking lateral transfer among the misbehaving taxa. therefore, although neither of the first two hypotheses can be ruled out absolutely, we concentrated on the prospect that phylogenetic artifacts are responsible for the glaucocystophyte + amoebozoan grouping.

analyses of potential sources of phylogenetic artifacts
neither the glaucocystis sequence, nor those of dictyostelium and acanthamoeba, deviate significantly from ml estimated mean amino acid frequencies . in fact, in χ <dig> analysis for each of the three sequences, p was greater than  <dig> , indicating that they deviate very little from overall mean frequencies. the majority of sequences in the alignment do not deviate significantly from the average, many also at p >  <dig>  . thus, biases in estimated amino acid composition are insufficient to account for the glaucocystophyte + amoebozoan clade.

a disproportionate number of unique substitutions  can provide prima facie evidence of an increased evolutionary rate independent of any presumed tree topology  <cit> . by this measure, glaucocystis and the two amoebozoans are among the most slowly evolving sequences , although a number of others have accumulated comparably few substitutions at highly conserved sites. nonetheless glaucocystis displays the fewest unique substitutions of any monotypic representative of an ancient eukaryotic lineage . thus, in terms of both amino acid composition and the accumulation of autapomorphies, rpb <dig> genes from glaucocystis and the two amoebozoans have changed less from their ancestral sequences than have those of most other taxa.

to assess the empirical tendency of rpb <dig> sequences to attract "long branches," we examined the behavior of randomly generated sequences of average amino acid composition. with the alignment including all  <dig> taxa, none of  <dig> random sequences was attracted to glaucocystis, acanthamoeba or dictyostelium in any most parsimonious tree recovered . when significant points of long-branch attraction  were removed from the alignment, these three sequences still did not attract randomly generated "long branches." in fact, even when only the  <dig> rpb <dig> genes least prone to attract "long branches" were retained in the analysis, glaucocystis, acanthamoeba and dictyostelium still attracted the fewest randomly generated sequences. remarkably, given that it is the sole representative of an ancient lineage, glaucocystis attracted only one random sequence in all of the analyses performed, the fewest for any taxon in our investigation. furthermore, glaucocystis was the only monotypic representative to survive into the final round of random sequence addition .

the results of three separate analyses of "long-branch" indicators show that sequences of glaucocystis, acanthamoeba and dictyostelium are highly unlikely to be drawn together by "long-branch attraction." rather, they appear to be among the most slowly diverging rpb <dig> genes . what then accounts for their recovery as a strongly supported clade? the tendency to attract a randomly generated sequence correlates with how randomized a given sequence has become with respect to its phylogenetic relatives – in other words, how much it has diverged from its most recent shared ancestral sequence. in  <dig> tests using the complete rpb <dig> data set, as well as in previous investigations of other gene sequences  <cit> , two random sequences included in an alignment always attract each other. four-sequence simulated phylogenies yield comparable results for completely and partially randomized sequences  <cit> , although sequences with an intermediate level of randomization can actually repel long branches under the conditions modeled.

in large trees with complex hierarchical structure, random sequences virtually never attach to individual members of a clade of closely related taxa, even when its members display accelerated substitution rates. for example, although randomly generated sequences attach to the long internode leading to kinetoplastids in 32% of parsimony replicates , none are attracted to any of three sequences individually. this tendency mirrors the accumulation of unique substitutions at otherwise strongly conserved sites   <cit> , further supporting random sequence attraction as a measure of relative sequence divergence. therefore, if the glaucocystis + amoebozoans clade is indeed artifactual, it is probably because their genes are the least derived from their common ancestral sequence; that is, they cluster on the basis of shared, ancestral positions lost from other taxa. their overall similarity excludes randomized sequences from attaching to an individual branch within the group; this apparently extends to other more divergent rpb <dig> sequences as well.

although similar groupings have been uncovered with other molecular data sets  <cit> , phylogenetic artifacts typically are viewed as "long-branch" effects resulting from the sequences that have experienced rapid or otherwise unusual modes of divergence  <cit> . as a result, these sequences are considered suspect, whereas those with lower than average rates typically are assumed to perform well in phylogenetic reconstruction. by definition, however, if a lba artifact is present, then there also must be an artificial clustering of more slowly evolving taxa that should group with the respective long-branch sequences. we offer the phrase "short-branch exclusion"  to identify this associated artifact . the sbe phenomenon uncovered in our analyses is consistent with demonstrated artifacts caused by differences in the proportion of variable sites  across lineages  <cit> ; this kind of complexity in rate variation can dominate tree-building signal in ancient phylogenetic reconstruction, including among sequences with low proportions of variable sites   <cit> . the unexpected clustering of glaucocystis and two amoebozoans, along with consistent evidence that the three are among the least diverged sequences in the analysis, give all the indications of such a "short-branch" artifact .

phylogenetic artifacts and global tree topology
as noted above, the overall rpb <dig> tree topology and the specific positions of red algae, thalassiosira and entamoeba are consistent with recovery of a "ctd-clade," comprising all eukaryotic lineages in which the ctd has been strongly conserved while excluding those where it has been allowed to degenerate . originally this "ctd-clade" was hypothesized to be a natural group descended from a common ancestor in which ctd-based rnap ii transcription had coalesced  <cit> . more recent genome-level investigations of the ctd and its protein partners  <cit>  indicate that the ctd-clade can be explained alternatively by parallel functional constraints in organisms that use ctd-based transcription, which lead to correlated patterns of rpb <dig> sequence evolution. thus, the major discrepancies between the rpb <dig> tree and more widely accepted views of eukaryotic evolution  can be reconciled as artifacts of short-branch exclusion, and parallel or convergent evolution due to covariation in the mode of selection on the rpb <dig> molecule.

at first inspection it appears reassuring that analytical artifacts can explain apparent phylogenetic anomalies, specifically the recovery of a polyphyletic plantae. although red algal rpb <dig> genes are not particularly fast-evolving with respect to most eukaryotes, they exhibit greater "long-branch" tendencies than do sequences from other members of the hypothesized kingdom plantae. along with differing functional constraints on ctd-based rnap ii transcription, these subtle rate differences could explain the presumed artifact in rpb <dig> trees. our investigation of "long-branch" indicators, however, raises a more general issue with respect to the global rpb <dig> tree; virtually the entire topology of the rpb <dig> tree is disturbingly consistent with those same sources of artifact. for example, if suspect and inconsistent tree-rootings are discounted, the branching position of alveolates is generally consistent with phylogenomic treatments  <cit> . in rpb <dig> analyses, this position is associated with a clade comprising the four most identifiable "long-branches," entamoeba, trichomonas, mastigamoeba, and kinetoplastids. when the latter sequences are excluded, however, alveolates also display disproportionate long-branch tendencies . in effect, their branching position is consistent with a "long-branch attraction" artifact. even within the ctd-clade – composed of sequences with the lowest rates and otherwise average patterns of divergence  – relationships among well-established groups are consistent with apparent rate variation among sequences.

as a function of overall within-clade similarity, individual green plants and animals  do not attract random sequences, nor do they show an accumulation of unique substitutions . behavior of the internodes leading to these clades, however, suggests that their individual sequences may represent somewhat "longer branches" than those of glaucocystis, dictyostelium or acanthamoeba . therefore, we analyzed unique substitutions and random sequence behavior using the representative sequence with the fewest "long-branch" tendencies from each group: human from animals, oryza from plants, schizosaccarhomyces from fungi, and dicytostelium from amoebozoans. in this analysis, the relative short-branch tendencies of dictyostelium and glaucocystis become even more pronounced , and their clustering is consistent with an sbe artifact . moreover, the green plant oryza, recovered as sister to the glaucocystis/dictyostelium clade, has the next fewest "long-branch" indicators. the human + schizosaccharomyces clade, which corresponds to the widely accepted systematic hypothesis of the opisthokonta, then could be explained as a lba artifact localized within a group of generally more slowly-evolving sequences. in model-based ml analyses, the branches leading to these two sequences have nearly twice the substitution-per-site probability of those for glaucocystis and dictyostelium, and five to ten times the probability of the two internodes that define overall branching order .

direct evidence that such localized lba can occur in phylogenetic reconstruction is immediately apparent in parsimony analyses of the rpb <dig> data set. although it is a long-branch taxon compared to other green algae and plants, chlamydomonas is placed correctly using likelihood and bayesian algorithms . in parsimony it falls victim to long-branch attraction. rather than attaching to the strongest sources of lba , however, chlamydomonas is attracted to the diatom thalassiosira  and the two emerge as the deepest branch of the ctd-clade. lba pulls chlamydomonas away from other green plant sequences, but unknown evolutionary constraints  prevent it from being drawn completely out of the ctd-clade. thus, the two longest branches that are constrained to fall within the ctd-clade attach to each other.

generally it has been the case in sequence-based phylogenies that well-defined evolutionary lineages  exclude other sequences and form strongly supported clades. this occurs even if a lineage has a generally high divergence rate , so long as its members have not diverged too far from their common ancestral sequence. the challenge of deep molecular systematics has been to determine the relationships among these well-defined groups. when the potential for localized tree artifacts is considered, the overall relationships of these groups on the rpb <dig> tree are consistent with a combination of biases identified in the data. this is true even in those regions of the tree where sequences are undergoing relatively slow and comparable modes of evolution . in fact, the cumulative effects of artifacts can explain the entire backbone of relationships among major eukaryotic lineages , and no signal from an historical pattern of relationships appears to be required. given the number of putatively misplaced taxa , the implicit assumption that most regions of the tree reflect true evolutionary history is unwarranted.

broader implications for deep phylogenetics
the fact that a phylogeny is consistent with data biases does not exclude the possibility that the tree accurately reflects evolutionary history. it does say, however, that the null hypotheses cannot be rejected; that is, that random effects and/or data biases account for the pattern recovered . consequently, the alternative hypotheses that the tree is based on historical signal cannot be accepted.

it is possible that the rpb <dig> tree shown in figure  <dig> truly depicts the pattern of eukaryotic evolution. given conflicts with other data sets, and the fact that much of its topology can be explained by rate variation and parallel constraint, it is more reasonable to conclude that the rpb <dig> tree is rife with phylogenetic artifacts. this assessment can be made because of accumulated data in three areas, which are unavailable for most sequences used in phylogenetic analyses of ancient evolution. first, rpb <dig> structure, function and biochemical interactions are well characterized, providing the framework for recognizing different functional constraints among taxa  <cit> . second, extensive analyses of "long-branch" indicators have been performed, including for regions of the tree that do not appear to be subject to lba by highly divergent sequences. finally, topological incongruence exists between the rpb <dig> tree and more widely accepted hypotheses of eukaryotic relationships, providing an impetus to investigate specific discrepancies. of course, in arguing that artifacts dominate rpb <dig> phylogenies we have assumed those broadly held hypothetical relationships to be true. given the evidence of pervasive artifacts uncovered here, and in many other molecular phylogenetic studies of deep relationships as well  <cit> , that assumption must be considered provisional.

recent phylogenetic inferences of deep eukaryotic evolution have been made using large multi-gene data sets. the conclusions from these phylogenomic investigations have replaced an earlier model of global eukaryotic evolution based on small subunit ribosomal rna sequences . at just about the time the ssu rdna tree was adopted by major textbooks, it came under greater scrutiny largely due to developing conflicts with other molecular data sets  <cit> . analyses of long-branch indicators demonstrated that the global topology of the rdna tree was more consistent with variation in mode and tempo of evolution among sequences than with historical pattern  <cit> . the detailed analyses presented here suggest that the same is true of rpb <dig> sequences. yet there is no reason to presume that these two genes are unusually prone to artifact.

as the gene encoding the largest subunit of rnap ii, rpb <dig> has the attributes of a reliable phylogenetic marker. it supplies a coding region of about  <dig> kb, over half of which consists of conserved domains that can be aligned reliably across most of eukaryotic diversity; this a relatively large data set for a single-gene phylogeny. it performs the same core function in all eukaryotes. there is no evidence that rpb <dig> has been carried as a multi-gene family over broad stretches of eukaryotic evolution, reducing the chance of paralogous sampling. indeed, rpb <dig> phylogenetic analyses have been robust in the face of long-branch artifacts that plague microsporidian sequences in many other data sets  <cit> , and parametric methods can overcome clearly identifiable phylogenetic artifacts that occur using parsimony . therefore, it is a reasonable to conclude that the biases found in rpb <dig> sequences are comparable to, if not less than, those present in most molecular markers. indeed, lockhart and colleagues  <cit>  showed that changing distributions of sites that are variable and invariable can explain global tree topologies among major eubacterial lineages, suggesting that sequence-based phylogenies may provide little valid information about these ancient historical relationships.

CONCLUSIONS
although the subject has received increasing attention in recent years, phylogenetic investigations generally have operated under the assumption that tree-building artifacts are rare and restricted to odd and problematic taxa  <cit> . implicit in phylogenomics is the assumption that the dominant overall tree-building signal from large, multi-gene alignments overcomes "noise" or biases that lead to conflicts between smaller data sets and, therefore, converges on true historical pattern. indeed, this has been argued explicitly with respect to increasing support for a monophyletic plantae as the number of genes included in the analysis grows  <cit> . given both theoretical and empirical criteria, this assumption appears overly optimistic.

biochemically-based models of sequence evolution predict that historical patterns should not be recoverable in phylogenetic analyses covering timescales on which the broad diversity of eukaryotes emerged  <cit> . moreover, it has been demonstrated clearly that all phylogenetic algorithms can produce spurious outcomes when explicit or implicit model assumptions are violated ; when violations result in statistical inconsistency, artifacts worsen as data sets increase in size  <cit> . although parametric and probabilistic methods  overcome parsimony artifacts under some conditions, they can actually under-perform parsimony when variation among rates at sites changes through time  <cit> . presumably, complex patterns of sequence heterotachy and nonstationary covariation  <cit>  have been the rule rather than exception over several billion years of eukaryotic evolution.

covariation of parallel or convergent selection on functional constraints in sequence evolution has not been studied extensively, particularly with regard to its impact on phylogenetic analyses. this is for good reason; such covariation can be difficult to identify, even when the sequences in question  have relatively well-characterized functions and biochemical interactions  <cit> . little to nothing is known about the functional interactions of most sequences used in phylogenomic investigations, nor can available phylogenetic methodologies yet compensate for such complex covariation, even when physical and biochemical constraints are known  <cit> .

the indications of localized lba and sbe uncovered in this investigation are subtle; they would be easy to miss, or to dismiss as too weak to affect tree topology. nevertheless, they provide the most reasonable explanation for the aberrant grouping of glaucocystophyte and amoebozoan sequences. they must, therefore, be considered seriously with respect to other regions of the tree as well, including those that agree with expectations from prior molecular phylogenies. it is common in large phylogenomic treatments to remove overtly long-branch taxa to avoid tree-building artifacts, or to constrain "well-defined" groupings  to make computation more tractable  <cit> . these practices may well increase the impact of cryptic sources of covariation in the sequences retained.

there are serious conflicts among molecular data sets with respect to virtually all inferences about ancient eukaryotic relationships . this is true even for the most strongly supported and widely accepted hypotheses of relationships among eukaryotic lineages  <cit> . the overall lack of congruence of phylogenetic signal within genomes has prompted some researchers to question whether ancient relationships can be considered to be tree-like at all  <cit> . when two or more phylogenetic signals are present, there appears to be no basis for an a priori assumption that the dominant signal recovers historical relationships. instead it may reflect parallel function or other constraints on sequence evolution that are difficult to detect. as molecular sequence data sets grow ever larger in size and complexity, it is critical that they be scrutinized thoroughly for potential biases that could affect phylogenetic inference; in particular, sequences with relatively slow apparent divergence rates should be examined carefully for evidence of short-branch exclusion. finally, it is essential that alternative approaches to reconstructing evolutionary history continue to be explored.

