BACKGROUND
phytomyxea  are a poorly known group of obligate biotrophic, endobiotic parasites of plants, diatoms, brown algae, and oomycetes  <cit> . their phylogenetic position was long debated but molecular phylogenies now robustly place them within the eukaryote supergroup rhizaria, as sister group to the omnivorous vampyrellid amoebae  <cit> . the group is subdivided into two orders: phagomyxida  and plasmodiophorida . phagomyxids are very poorly known with only four characterised lineages, comprising two pairs of closely related species in the genera phagomyxa  and maullinia . in addition to these described species, several morphologically uncharacterised dna-lineages have been detected by environmental sequencing  <cit> .

plasmodiophorids are better known because they include plant parasites causing significant diseases of crops including brassicas, potatoes, and grain crops . the best studied species is the clubroot-causing plasmodiophora brassicae, a parasite of crucifers which accounts for up to 10% loss of the worldwide production of brassica crops  <cit> . other well-studied species include spongospora subterranea, which causes powdery scab of potato and can serve as a vector for potato mop top virus  <cit> . the otherwise symptomless polymyxa graminis transmits economically important viruses to a number of grain crops  <cit>  while polymyxa betae is the vector for beet necrotic yellow vein virus, the cause of sugar beet “rhizomania”  <cit> . given the impact of plasmodiophorids on staple crops it is not surprising that research has been focussed on the species causing economic damage, while research on species from outside of agricultural environments has been rare.

phytomyxids are biotrophic parasites, i.e. they infect and multiply in a host without killing it, as opposed to hemi-biotrophic or nectrotrophic parasites, which ultimately kill the host  <cit> . upon infection phytomyxids use an arsenal of methods to manipulate host physiology and to escape defence responses  <cit> . a dependence on living hosts to survive and to complete their life cycle is invariably associated with high host specificity because of the highly specialised interactions involved  <cit> .

phytomyxids have a complex life cycle consisting of two functionally different zoosporic stages , which upon infection of a suitable host develop into multinucleate plasmodia inside the infected host cell . these plasmodia either develop into a zoosporangium which rapidly releases large numbers of secondary zoospores or into resting spores which are the survival stage of the parasite and from which primary zoospores are released  <cit> . the resting spores can be aggregated into so-called sporosori and this arrangement is characteristic for each genus. because of their complex six-stage life cycle  <cit> , their small size , and the fact that some life cycle stages are difficult to find and identify morphologically, there have been no recent studies of plasmodiophorid biodiversity; previous studies date back to the pre-molecular era  <cit> . phytomyxids are not well represented in dna databases: sequences are only available for nine of the  <dig> described species. an ecologically and evolutionary important group missing from molecular phylogenies are the phytomyxean oomycete parasites. these were originally placed in the now superseded taxon plasmodiophoromycetes, then still included within fungi  <cit> . the taxonomy of one genus of oomycete parasites–woronina spp.–was studied two decades ago using ultrastructural studies, but woronina has not previously been included in molecular phylogenies including more recently discovered parasites of other stramenopile hosts  <cit> .

molecular biodiversity studies are important for understanding the evolution, abundance and the possible economic and ecological impact of parasites, especially as global parasite numbers are thought to be hugely underestimated  <cit> . this unknown parasite biodiversity may have a large impact in a changing environment, where the emergence of existing and ‘novel’ diseases can have devastating effects  <cit> . therefore, a targeted study of phytomyxid biodiversity is overdue, because of their known potential to damage crops directly by causing diseases or indirectly by transmitting viruses  <cit> .

to further investigate phytomyxid biodiversity we used a parallel approach to screen selected soil ecosystems: microscopically examining potential hosts, coupled with targeted molecular screening of rhizosphere-associated and root-free soil from the same sites. soil samples were obtained from sites ranging from intensively farmed to those with restricted anthropogenic input; we hypothesised that sites harbouring different host communities will also differ in parasite biodiversity. we also aimed to test whether phytomyxids that parasitise oomycetes group with phagomyxids or plasmodiophorids using a combination of isolation, microscopic identification, and 18s rdna clone libraries. through analysing 18s rdna sequences we identified cross kingdom host shifts within plasmodiophorida and phagomyxida.

RESULTS
new phytomyxid isolates and phylogenetic analyses
18s rdna sequences were generated for  <dig> phytomyxid isolates for which resting spores could be characterised by microscopy . these isolates were identified following morphotaxonomic concepts . resting spore size, shape, and arrangement are the primary defining taxonomic characters of phytomyxids, along with the identity of their host species  <cit> . the new sequences were included in bayesian and maximum likelihood phylogenetic analyses with phytomyxid sequences from previously characterised specimens, phylogenetically informative environmental sequences  <cit> , and the closely related environmental lineage ‘novel clade 9’  <cit> . our new isolates represent six previously described species as well as two undescribed lineages . we provide the first 18s rdna sequences for sorosphaerula viticola , ligniera junci , woronina pythii from the oomycete pythium sp. , and plasmodiophora diplantherae from the angiosperm sea grass halodule wrightii . we also sequenced five isolates of polymyxa graminis from the grass poa sp., two of plasmodiophora brassicae from the crucifers sinapis sp. and brassica sp., and a plasmodiophorid we identified as p. graminis from poa sp.  which formed a distinct clade branching basally to p. graminis, s. veronicae, p. betae, and s. viticola in the 18s phylogeny. the two orders phagomyxida and plasmodiophorida, as previously conceived, were robustly supported. seven distinct lineages could be resolved within the phagomyxida and eleven within the plasmodiophorida. according to this analysis, all plasmodiophorid genera  that are represented in our phylogeny by more than one species are polyphyletic .

cross-kingdom host shifts of closely related phytomyxids
we show that plasmodiophorids infecting angiosperms are paraphyletic with respect to those infecting oomycetes, as are stramenopile-associated phagomyxida to the angiosperm parasite plasmodiophora diplantherae. p. diplantherae branches robustly within phagomyxids, sister to two environmental sequences which were found in clone libraries of deep-sea/anoxic saline sediments  <cit> . the oomycete parasite woronina pythii grouped within plasmodiophorids, closely related to spongospora nasturtii and plasmodiophora brassicae, both parasites of cruciferous plants . however, the branching order of these lineages within plasmodiophorida is not resolved; woronina may in fact be the most basally branching plasmodiophorid lineage. light microscopy of w. pythii showed that size, arrangement and development of the resting spores from sporogenic plasmodia were very similar to that seen in other plasmodiophorids  . the resting spores of p. diplantherae  on the other hand strongly resembled those of the phagomyxid maullinia sp.  in ornamentation and a loose aggregation at maturity.

furthermore, plasmodiophorids are known to rarely infect a range of so-called alternative hosts in which very limited  infections can be observed. therefore, we conducted a comprehensive literature study to identify and summarise possible alternative hosts . interactions with alternative hosts remain highly understudied; however one characteristic common to those known is that resting spores are rarely or never formed. according to these data some plasmodiophorid species can infect host plants belonging to two or more plant families; ligniera junci, polymyxa graminis, plasmodiophora brassicae, and spongospora subterranea are known to parasitize both monocot and eudicot host species . plasmodiophorid parasites of oomycetes and the phagomyxid m. ectocarpii  can infect a range of distantly related oomycetes or brown algae respectively .

despite an extensive sampling of living plants in this study, no alternative host associations in nature could be confirmed by microscopic observation. however, direct and clone sequencing of rhizosphere samples revealed phytomyxid sequences associated with possible alternative host plants . sequences closely related to polymyxa graminis  <dig>  were found associated with taraxacum sp., veronica sp., and vitis sp.; sequences with a  <dig> - <dig> % similarity to polymyxa betae  with vitis sp.; a spongospora nasturtii-like sequence  from carex sp.; and s. subterranea-like sequences  from trifolium sp. the nature of these associations remains unclear; microscopy of the associated root samples was not conclusive and sequence data alone does not provide sufficient information about organismal associations.

the division of phytomyxea into phagomyxida and plasmodiophorida was confirmed by our phylogenetic  and morphological analyses, and also corresponded to the environment in which the host species were found rather than host taxonomy: plasmodiophorids are a monophyletic lineage of parasites of land plants and soil-dwelling oomycetes, while phagomyxids are a monophyletic lineage infecting marine plants and stramenopiles. we tested our plasmodiophorid-specific primer combination on phagomyxid isolates , and on a selection of marine algae  and marine  sediment from the south coast of the uk . all results were negative: no plasmodiophorids were detected in marine environments.

environmental sequence analysis of plasmodiophorids
plasmodiophorid-specific pcrs were carried out on  <dig> individual rhizosphere and soil samples , of which  <dig> gave positive results. after pooling of amplicons for cloning, a total of  <dig> 18s rdna reads were obtained from  <dig> clone libraries and direct sequencing of rhizosphere samples . after quality and chimera checks  <dig> of these sequences were analysed further. a total of  <dig> different plasmodiophorid sequence-types  were detected . these grouped into  <dig> phylogenetically well supported clades within the plasmodiophorida . ten clades included sequences from at least one microscopically confirmed isolate, whereas six comprised only environmental 18s-types. clade  <dig>  and clade  <dig>  are monotypic clades. the environmental lineages clade  <dig>  clade  <dig>  clade  <dig>  clade  <dig> each consist of two 18s-types. clade  <dig> , clade  <dig>  and clade  <dig>  comprise three 18s-types each, while clade  <dig>  consists of four 18s-types. clade  <dig>  contains five, clade  <dig>  six, clade  <dig>  seven and clade  <dig>  eight, respectively. clade  <dig> which contains w. pythii was shown to comprise eleven distinct 18s-types from five independent samples, indicating a substantial diversity of probable oomycete parasites. clade  <dig>  includes thirty 18s-types of which five belong to isolates.

all six unidentified environmental lineages  were each found in one geographically/ecologically distinct sample set only: clade  <dig> was found associated with plant roots of a glacial succession site, clade  <dig>  and clade  <dig> were found only in south africa fynbos soil samples, and clade  <dig>  clade  <dig> and clade  <dig> in samples from volga flood plains.

positive pcrs from rhizosphere samples generally could be directly sequenced without cloning, while soil samples needed to be cloned even if the diversity within the individual samples was generally low . every soil sample contained at least two 18s-types . nevertheless the sequenced plasmodiophorid 18s-types detected in any individual clone library were never assigned to more than four of the  <dig> clades defined in figure  <dig> 

from a german vineyard sampled repeatedly over a period of two years only five 18s-types  could be identified from  <dig> sequence reads obtained from four independent soil clone libraries. at the same time, three different species of plasmodiophorids were morphologically identified in plant samples from the same site: sorosphaerula viticola was abundant in vitis sp. roots, p. betae was identified from the roots of a chenopodium sp., and polymyxa graminis was frequently seen in the roots of poa species. the latter was the most abundant sequence type from the soil clones and rhizosphere samples, while s. viticola and p. betae were not detected in the soil clone libraries, but were found when rhizosphere samples from primary host plants were sequenced. therefore the 18s-types detected morphologically were a subset of those detected by sequencing: all species identified by microscopy were detected in the respective soil/rhizosphere/plant samples at least once, but not all dna types could be assigned to actual isolates. across all samples, plasmodiophorids were generally more easily detected in the rhizosphere of their assumed host than in neighbouring bulk soil.

discussion
two host shifts between plant and stramenopile hosts were found in the phytomyxids . prior to this study it was thought that phagomyxida were exclusively parasites of stramenopiles and plasmodiophorida exclusively plant parasites  <cit> . however, we have shown that woronina pythii, a parasite of the oomycete pythium spp., branches within the plasmodiophorida . conversely, plasmodiophora diplantherae, a parasite of an angiosperm sea grass, branches robustly amongst parasites of diatoms and brown algae. there is to our knowledge no other group of obligate biotrophic eukaryote parasites showing such pronounced cross-kingdom host shifts. in the eukaryotes cross-kingdom host shifts are known from less host-dependent opportunistic or necrotrophic parasites belonging to fungi and oomycetes  <cit> , while host shifts within other biotrophic parasites seem to occur only between relatively closely related hosts  <cit> . biotrophic oomycetes include parasites of both nematodes  and brown algae , but these parasites show distinct morphologies and adaptations to their hosts  <cit>  suggesting strongly divergent adaptations to different host conditions. phytomyxid parasites on the other hand have a very similar lifecycle, morphology and development inside the host  without any obvious specialised adaptation to a particular group of hosts. thus, in phytomyxids, closely related lineages can be parasites of a wide range of fundamentally different hosts  in different environments .

our morphological analyses are concordant with the cross-kingdom host jumps as revealed by molecular phylogenies. resting spores and development of w. pythii strongly resemble that of plasmodiophorid parasites of vascular plants, especially spongospora spp. and sorosphaerula spp. . the resting spores of p. diplantherae are morphologically very similar to those recently identified in maullinia sp. from the kelp durviellea antarctica in their ornamentation and loose aggregation . such loose arrangement of the resting spores is also seen in the plasmodiophorid p. brassicae, but ultrastructurally p. diplantherae is significantly different from p. brassicae  and all other plasmodiophorids  <cit> . ultrastructural studies have shown that the timing and morphology of meiosis in woronina phythii are very similar to those in the closely related p. brassicae . taken together, our new sequence data, phylogenetic analyses, and complementary morphological investigations question existing concepts of phytomyxid parasitism. based on our phylogenetic analysis  we infer that in the marine environment parasitism of stramenopiles developed first, followed by a host switch towards angiosperm hosts. the direction of the host switch within plasmodiophorids is equivocal, because of the unresolved branching order of the deep branching taxa, including woronina. however, we raise the hypothesis that the ancestral plasmodiophorid might have been a parasite of stramenopiles, which then bifurcated into lineages with plant hosts and those with oomycete hosts. further sampling of the lineage diversity at the base of the phytomyxid radiation and determination of their parasitic status would enable this hypothesis to be tested further, as would characterisation of novel clade  <dig>  the immediate sister group to phytomyxids  <cit> , and multi-gene phylogenomic analyses of characterised members of the whole vampyrellid-phytomyxid radiation.

during the last decade it has become clear that cases of co-speciation between parasites and their hosts are rare and that the diversification of obligate parasites is more often shaped by host shifts  <cit> . however, how parasites and their hosts co-evolve alongside each other remains a key issue in understanding both partners  <cit> , and can also influence policy decisions on quarantine and control measures by authorities  <cit> . phytomyxids require their primary host plant to complete their life cycle and to successfully reproduce and persist in the environment, but they can also develop infections at a low level in many alternative, non-primary host plants figure  <dig>  additional file 1: table s1;  <cit> . however, the nature of such interactions remains enigmatic. we detected phytomyxid sequences in the rhizosphere of potential alternative host plants, but could not microscopically confirm any infections of alternative hosts. the ability to infect diverse hosts without causing a distinct, visible response or by causing restricted infections over a number of generations could be a highly advantageous trait when the primary host is transient or rare. restricted infections of phytomyxids in alternative hosts breach the first barrier to extending host range and may open the way to integrated adaptation to new hosts  <cit> . based on our findings, we hypothesise that the main evolutionary driver of phytomyxids is related to their ability to infect a wide range of hosts, while the main constraint is ecological. we also conclude that speciation in phytomyxids is based on host shifts rather than other co-evolutionary processes  <cit>  because of the fundamental  differences between the respective host species.

phagomyxida are apparently exclusively marine and plasmodiophorida are apparently exclusively non-marine, but we show that potentially the host range of both groups is larger than previously thought. a division in marine and freshwater/soil lineages is common in protists; very few free-living protist 18s-types are found in both marine and non-marine habitats  <cit> , and in some protist groups evolutionary transitions from one environment to the other appear to be infrequent  <cit> . ecological structuring also operates at taxonomically lower levels within plasmodiophorids: we revealed distinct,  lineages and radiations from geographically and ecologically separated samples . this supports the hypothesis that ecological barriers phylogenetically compartmentalise the diversification of phytomyxids.

overall, we show a high 18s-type diversity of plasmodiophorids in soil ecosystems . isolates from p. graminis, for example, seem to be highly variable at this level, e.g. average similarities  <dig> ?±? <dig> % between the  <dig> individual 18s-types of clade  <dig> . however, within this clade we could identify no pattern in 18s-type–host-plant species association, although the branching order is not always well resolved. it is possible that this cryptic diversity displays the natural variation within p. graminis, as result of evolutionary failure to speciate along with their hosts  <cit> . but on the other hand it is possible that sequence clusters deriving from within similar environments in this clade represent p. graminis strains  with different, locally advantageous host preferences, a phenomenon reported previously for p. gramins <cit> , but otherwise are currently unknown. the nature of species complexes or cryptic species which are specialised on specific hosts/environments is increasingly recognised for fungal and oomycete plant pathogens  <cit>  and is likely to be valid for phytomyxids in general and p. graminis in particular  <cit> . cryptic speciation and infection of novel hosts via host shift speciation is considered to be the most frequent reason for the development of emerging diseases in fungi and oomycetes  <cit> . host shifts between closely related parasites can also lead to more severe disease symptoms  <cit> . our findings raise the possibility that host shifts and subsequent adaptation of phytomyxids to new hosts could become more frequent or intensified in changing environments.

the overall diversity of phytomyxids in individual samples was relatively low, especially when compared to the diversity found within many groups of free-living protists, where often tens of relatively closely related but biologically distinct 18s-types can be found in a few cm <dig> of soil  <cit> . in soil samples of the intensively sampled vineyard  only five 18s-types belonging to two clades  could be identified via soil clone libraries while at the same site three species were identified microscopically and from targeted rhizosphere clones . this contrasts with the detection of eleven 18s-types belonging to five species found in a smaller volume of targeted root and rhizosphere samples from the same site, highlighting that the soil clone libraries on their own underestimate the abundance and biodiversity of plasmodiophorids.

CONCLUSIONS
within each of the two major phytomyxid clades there have been cross-kingdom host shifts between closely related parasite taxa: from stramenopile to angiosperm hosts in phagomyxids and between the same two host groups by plasmodiophorids. such large-scale host shifts between closely related obligate biotrophic eukaryote parasites is to our knowledge unique to phytomyxids. the fundamental constraint in lineage radiation seems to be the environment: plasmodiophorids and phagomyxids are monophyletic groups with, respectively, non-marine and marine hosts. environment type also seems to compartmentalise lineage radiation within plasmodiophorids at lower taxonomic levels. our results indicate that the current research focus on a few economically significant phytomyxid lineages may lead to a limited understanding of this highly varied and largely enigmatic group of parasites of plants and stramenopiles. some phytomyxid plant pathogens also have the ability to develop at least part of their life cycle in alternative hosts. further work into phytomyxid diversity and their interactions with hosts in marine and non-marine  habitats will determine  if high level taxonomic host shifts are more frequent,  whether other high level eukaryote taxa  are used as hosts, and  whether the diversity and spatial occurrence of more closely related  phytomyxid lineages is most strongly determined by host specificity or a wider range of environmental factors.

