BACKGROUND
fusarium head blight  or head scab is one of the most devastating plant diseases of wheat  and barley . wheat holds a leading position in human nutrition in the world. therefore, sustained wheat production is vital to ensure world food security. the international maize and wheat improvement center  has identified fhb as a major factor limiting wheat production in many parts of the world  <cit> . symptoms of the disease include brown colored lesions on wheat and barley spikelets. the disease is caused by the fungus fusarium graminearum inflicting tremendous economic losses by reducing grain yield and quality in these two important crops. the fungus readily forms its sexual stage  producing ascospores that are forcibly shot into the air with the increased ability to disseminate from colonized residue where perithecia form. losses are compounded by mycotoxins  that are produced by the fungus in diseased grains. in general, there is a  <dig> ppm limit for don in all finished wheat products that may be consumed by humans. head blight causes severe and increasing crop losses worldwide  <cit> . since  <dig>  wheat and barley farmers in the united states alone have lost over $ <dig> billion dollars due to fhb epidemics. the disease has recently reemerged in the midwestern and eastern states of the usa and continues to cause extensive losses  <cit> .

there are no reports of true resistance against f. graminearum within cultivable species and there are only very few commercial agronomic cultivars partially resistant to the pathogen. there are only a few fungicides, prosaro®  & proline®  from bayer and caramba®  from basf, reported to be effective against fhb and no suitable alternatives exist to control the pathogen in organic production systems. even the optimal fungicide applications may only provide a 50-60% reduction in fhb incidence  <cit> . use of biological control has often proved inconsistent or did not work at all under field conditions  <cit> . although none of the available commercial cultivars is immune to infection, different varietal reactions to fhb are known. two main types of resistance, type i and type ii, are most commonly recognized  <cit> . type i resistance reduces the number of initial infections as measured by the number of infected spikelets following a spray inoculation. type ii resistance restricts spread of the fungus in infected tissue and is measured by the number of spikelets infected in a spike beyond an initial inoculated infection site on the spike. other types of resistance or tolerance are also known to occur based on the ability to resist kernel infection, degrade mycotoxins or to maintain a decent yield despite fhb infection  <cit> .

in the absence of adequate natural genetic resistance, transgenic introduction of resistance may be a sustainable alternative to chemical approaches to disease management  <cit> . there are a number of reports describing transgenically induced resistance with various genes against several fungal diseases emphasizing the importance of testing transgenic resistance against fhb  <cit> . recently published approaches such as, expression of a pectin methyl-esterase  <cit> , a polygacturonase inhibiting proteins  <cit> , an antifungal radish defensin  <cit> , a truncated form of yeast ribosomal protein l <dig>  <cit>  and a phytoalexin zealexin  <cit>  have all shown to provide quantitative resistance against fhb. makandar et al.  <cit>  showed that over-expression of the arabidopsis npr <dig> gene in wheat, a master regulator of systemic acquired resistance, confers resistance to fhb. detoxification of don in genetically engineered crops  <cit>  has also been shown to be effective against fhb. a recent review by kazan et al depicted current advancements in fhb pathogenomics and host resistance  <cit> .

numerous experiments have shown the benefits of antimicrobial peptides for disease resistance  <cit> . introduction of resistance against a broad range of plant pathogens is also encouraged for disease management. lactoferrin, a cationic iron-binding glycoprotein of  <dig> kda belonging to the transferrin family  <cit> , is present in milk, tears, saliva, and mucous secretions of most mammals and plays a major role in the immune system of newborns by modulating immune functions. the n-terminal peptide of lactoferrin, which can be released by proteolytic cleavage, is highly bactericidal  <cit> . this peptide, lactoferricin, is the shortest active amino acid sequence that is resistant to further enzymatic cleavage  <cit> . another prominent property of lactoferrin or lactoferricin is its potent activity against a wide range of microorganisms including both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria, as well as fungi and viruses  <cit> . in addition to its anti-microbial as well as anti-inflammatory properties, lactoferrin may have role in iron absorption and/or excretion and in gastric health of newborns  <cit> . recombinant lactoferrin has been produced in filamentous fungi, plants and animals for biopharmaceutical purposes  <cit> . we have previously shown that lactoferrin expressed in tobacco inhibited several phytopathogenic bacteria in vitro  <cit> . in addition, transgenic tobacco and tomato plants expressing lactoferrin significantly delayed wilt symptom development caused by ralstonia solanacearum, in a dose-dependent manner  <cit> . similarly, expressed lactoferrin in transgenic pear showed an increase in resistance against erwinia amylovora  <cit> . takase et al  <cit>  evaluated transgenically expressed human lactoferrin and lactoferricin in rice against disease-causing burkholderia plantarii , rice dwarf virus and pyricularia oryzae . however, they found significant resistance only against b. plantarii. bovine lactoferricin-derived peptides were shown to have significant in vitro antimicrobial activity against many plant pathogenic filamentous fungi including fusarium and magnaporthe species  <cit> . in the present investigation, we evaluated if a bovine lactoferrin gene can be utilized for controlling fhb caused by the fungus f. graminearum. we developed and tested transgenic wheat to evaluate possible resistance conferred by expressed lactoferrin against f. graminearum in vitro and in planta. the results demonstrated that lactoferrin imparts partial resistance to wheat against the fhb pathogen.

RESULTS
transformation and regeneration of transgenic wheat
the plasmid vector pam <dig> containing a bovine lactoferrin gene and an nptii selectable marker gene  was transformed into bobwhite wheat cultivar by the agrobacterium-mediated transformation method  <cit> . a total of  <dig> independent transformants were generated over a period of two years. to insure independent events, only one transformant was retained from each immature embryo used for transformation. the transgenic wheat seedlings grew normally to maturity and produced fertile seeds, except  <dig> lines  that failed to produce viable seeds.

all transgenic lines were screened using southern blot and fungal inoculation to determine the number of t-dna inserts and for resistance against fhb. of the  <dig> transgenic lines,  <dig> contained a single copy transgene and were selected for further testing. these transgenic lines were selfed to obtain homozygous lines. seven single-copy independent transgenic lines with highest levels of fhb resistance were selected for further studies.

expression of lactoferrin in transgenic plants
the t <dig> progeny of the  <dig> selected transgenic wheat lines were subjected to molecular analyses to confirm and compare expression of lactoferrin protein. northern blot analysis was conducted to investigate the expression pattern of the lactoferrin gene using a gene fragment to generate a gene-specific probe. the result indicated that lactoferrin was expressed in all seven transgenic lines. there was only minor variation in the lactoferrin mrna levels among these lines  presumably due to stable expression of a single copy transgene in t <dig> generation.

results of the immuno-blotting experiment with lactoferrin-specific antibody demonstrated that lactoferrin is expressed in all transgenic wheat lines tested. transgenic wheat expressing lactoferrin protein demonstrated the presence of a band at  <dig> kda, the predicted molecular weight of lactoferrin . the bands co-migrated with a band from purified lactoferrin protein. transgenic lines produced lactoferrin ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> ng per mg of leaf tissue. the line blfw  <dig> showed the highest level whereas the line blfw  <dig> had the lowest level of lactoferrin protein. although the steady state lactoferrin mrna levels in these lines did not differ significantly, the protein levels varied  <dig> fold.

in vitro agar-gel diffusion inhibition assay
fungicidal activity of total protein extracts from the transgenic wheat leaves was determined in vitro using an agar-gel diffusion inhibition assay. in figure  <dig> the wells in plate-a contained total protein extracts from four control wheat plants, and plate-b contained extracts from four transgenic wheat lines expressing lactoferrin. the inhibitory effect of transgenic leaf extracts expressing lactoferrin was clearly noticeable in plate-b. inhibition was not detected in the presence of either control plant extracts not expressing lactoferrin protein or protein extraction buffer used to prepare the extracts . the assay showed significant reduction of fungal growth in the presence of lactoferrin protein extracts from transgenic wheat plants. the fungal growth reached near the wells containing the extracts, but failed to advance further. efforts to retrieve viable fungal cultures using peripheral hyphal tips from plate-b were unsuccessful after  <dig> days of growth in plate-b, presumably due to the fungicidal activity of lactoferrin.

greenhouse evaluation of transgenic wheat expressing lactoferrin
a large number of transgenic wheat plants were generated and subjected to successive screenings and selection of fhb resistant plants starting with the primary transformants for a period of over four years. only plants that showed resistance of at least 50% compared to bobwhite control were carried forward by selfing to the next generation. the plants showing the highest levels of resistance were then screened for the copy number of the transgene. seven lines with a single copy transgene and highest resistance levels were further selected and selfed until they became homozygous. these seven homozygous transgenic wheat lines of t <dig> generation were tested for scab resistance in greenhouse conditions. the greenhouse testing was done in eight independent experiments using over  <dig> transgenic wheat plants. the disease severity was determined as the percentage of infected spikelets per head. all visually detectable discolored spikelets were counted as infected spikelets. a typical resistant reaction from a single experiment is shown in figure  <dig> using  <dig> replicates of each transgenic line. a transgenic bobwhite wheat line containing an empty vector was used as a control along with the untransformed wheaton and nd  <dig> cultivars. both wheaton and nd  <dig> are conventional hard red spring wheat varieties. while wheaton is susceptible to fhb, nd  <dig> was bred for fhb resistance at the north dakota state university  <cit> .

mean percent of infection in transgenic lactoferrin wheat varied from  <dig> - 46% while mean percent infections in bobwhite, wheaton and nd  <dig> were 82%, 61% and 39% respectively. the level of resistance in individual lines was consistent in all experiments within the error margin. disease resistance in transgenic lines was also consistent in several independent greenhouse assays at various times of the year. these lines not only consistently showed significant resistance compared to the cultivar bobwhite, six out of seven lines also provided higher levels of resistance than wheaton and nd  <dig>  furthermore, five transgenic lines, blfw-  <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig>  and -  <dig>  were about  <dig> times more resistant than nd  <dig>  most discoloured  spikelets produced normal grains. occasionally the grains were slightly smaller but never shrivelled and there was no visible fungal growth on the grains. a few discoloured spikelets did not produce any grains. more importantly, don levels in five transgenic lines, blfw-  <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig>  - <dig> and -  <dig>  were below the  <dig> ppm limit established by the food and drug administration  for finished wheat grain products for human consumption. under similar greenhouse conditions artificially spray-inoculated control bw lines had an average of  <dig>  ppm don. although natural infection in nebraska wheat fields varies widely, we routinely detect over  <dig> ppm don in mildly infected wheat fields and over  <dig> ppm in moderately infected wheat fields.

differential expression of lactoferrin in wheat leaves and glumes
as glumes are the outermost structures of wheat florets, they are exposed to the fungus spore at the onset of the disease pathogenesis. hence, the transgene expression level must be adequate in the glumes to be effective in providing resistance against the scab fungus. we separated glumes from transgenic wheat florets and determined the level of lactoferrin expression at the protein and rna levels by western and northern blots, respectively. quantitative determination of lactoferrin protein in transgenic wheat leaves and glumes was made using elisa. the level of lactoferrin expression in the glumes was significantly less than the expression in the leaves. both northern blot and western blot assays clearly depicted this difference . the lactoferrin concentration in the glumes was  <dig> % of total soluble protein, whereas lactoferrin concentration in the leaves was  <dig> % of the total soluble protein. hence, a much reduced level of lactoferrin protein is available in wheat glumes. detection of low levels of lactoferrin in the glumes could be due to a lower level of the promoter activity in glumes. alternatively, there may also be differential protein stability in the glumes or the overall soluble protein extraction from glumes is inefficient due to the presence of high amounts of phenolic compounds and lignin polymers.

the concentration of lactoferrin in the apical wheat consisting of the inflorescence and two top leaves  were also determined and compared with the fhb severity . the highest level of lactoferrin was found in the transgenic line blfw  <dig>  and the lowest in the line blfw  <dig> . there was a clear correlation between the concentration of lactoferrin and the level of resistance in various transgenic lines, higher levels of lactoferrin protein, in general, resulted in higher levels of fhb resistance .

discussion
fusarium head blight has emerged as a major threat to wheat and barley crops around the world. the disease can occur on all small grain crops when the spore of the fungus germinates and infects developing kernels on the wheat head. fhb not only reduces grain yield and quality, but is frequently associated with fungal toxins which are hazardous to the health of humans and animals  <cit> . the united states department of agriculture  ranks fhb as the worst plant disease to hit the usa since the stem rust  epidemics over fifty years ago  <cit> . improving fhb resistance is a high priority in wheat and barley breeding programs. in this paper we used a broad-spectrum antimicrobial gene for fhb resistance in transgenic wheat. a bovine lactoferrin gene was introgressed into a wheat cultivar susceptible to fhb using agrobacterium mediated transformation method. a large number of transgenic plants expressing the lactoferrin protein were generated. constitutive expression of this antimicrobial protein did not visually alter morphology and physiology of wheat plants.

we demonstrated that lactoferrin inhibits the growth of a fungal plant pathogen f. graminearum both in vitro and in vivo. we also showed that transgenic expression of lactoferrin in a spring wheat cultivar bobwhite imparts considerable resistance against fhb. all transgenic lines exhibited a significant level of resistance compared to untransformed bobwhite and two cultivated wheat varieties wheaton and nd  <dig> 

the total soluble protein from transgenic wheat leaf tissues was very effective in inhibiting the fungus in vitro; however, the transgenic plants were not immune to the disease. to investigate this difference further, we determined the actual level of lactoferrin in transgenic wheat leaves and in floret glumes. we had observed that the glumes are infected first during the manual inoculation of wheat inflorescence with a spore suspension. hence, we tested the glumes of the transgenic spikelets for lactoferrin protein expression. the actual lactoferrin expression in wheat glumes was about one-fifth the expression level in leaves. it is anticipated that the resistance levels in the transgenic wheat lines can be significantly enhanced if the glumes had similar lactoferrin levels as the leaves. it is conceivable that using a glumes-specific promoter would further significantly enhance lactoferrin effectiveness against fhb in transgenic wheat. huang  <cit>  reported a five-fold higher level of lactoferrin in transgenic rice grains using a proprietary expresstec system.

the variation in the resistance levels among the independent transformation events was correlated with the actual amount of lactoferrin in the transgenic lines. the results of northern and western blots corroborated the resistance of transgenic wheat lines expressing bovine lactoferrin protein. the northern-blot analysis of the seven advanced lines did not show a significant variation in the levels of lactoferrin mrna in the transgenic plants . the actual accumulation of lactoferrin protein, however, varied among the seven transgenic lines as evident from the western blot assay . as these lines were selected after many screenings and self-pollination cycles, the level of variation in these selected lines was relatively small. it is possible that transgenic lines blfw- <dig> and -  <dig> produced mrnas that were not translated efficiently due to mutations in the 5' untranslated region of lacoferrin mrna. overall, there was a good correlation between the levels of lactoferrin protein produced in transgenic wheat lines and the level of resistance against fhb. a mendelian segregation pattern for a single locus insertion was observed in all seven transgenic lines selected for disease resistance studies and the trait was stable after the eighth generations. high level expression of foreign proteins in plants often leads to gene silencing  <cit> , so expression stability must be assured in transgenic lines. gene silencing was not observed in lactoferrin expression in the seven advanced wheat lines in the course of experimentation for eight generations.

lactoferrin appears to be one of the promising non-plant antibacterial genes with the potential for the control of aggressive fungal pathogens such as f. graminearum. experiments and results described here show promise for a new approach to manage a potentially devastating disease caused by f. graminearum. use of a lactoferrin transgene may provide a critically important tool for the integrated management of fhb in sustainable production environments. recent incorporation of a source of resistance from sumai  <dig> into spring wheat cultivars such as alsen, faller, glenn, howard and steele-nd has already improved fhb resistance in these varieties  <cit> . introducing the lactoferrin gene into these varieties will likely enhance fhb resistance of these varieties.

lactoferrin is ubiquitous. copious amount of lactoferrin can be readily detected in milk and other routinely consumed dairy products  <cit> . the level of lactoferrin protein in transgenic wheat lines is substantially lower than lactoferrin in supermarket milk. transgenic expression of lactoferrin also seems to impart a broad-based resistance against plant bacterial and fungal pathogens. this together with the fact that lactoferrin is one of the safest and occurs in the diet of humans; make this gene a potentially highly desirable candidate to introduce plant resistance against diseases.

CONCLUSIONS
wheat production in the united states has already become less profitable and unpopular due to the sporadic low market prices, increasingly stringent requirements for very low mycotoxin levels, and lack of effective and economically viable methods for controlling pathogens. the lactoferrin-expressing transgenic wheat provides wheat breeders an avenue to incorporate fhb resistance into commercial wheat cultivars combining biotechnology with conventional breeding approaches. as the northern us states primarily grow hard red and white winter wheat cultivars, crosses to elite winter wheat are necessary to understand how the lactoferrin gene works in those cultivars under winter field conditions.

