BACKGROUND
aphids are hemipteran pests responsible for major agricultural losses, notably due to vectored viral pathogens. they also have peculiar and poorly understood ecological and evolutionary features, which offer unparalleled opportunities to address evolutionary issues. more particularly, their tight association with bacterial symbionts makes them an ideal model to study the evolution of the immune system and the modulation of immune interactions . aphids can be attacked by various natural antagonists including endoparasitoid braconid wasps from the subfamily aphidiinae. these solitary parasitic wasps lay eggs inside the body of host juvenile stages or adults. the hatching larva then develop through three larval stages to become a pupa, protected inside the hardened host body called “mummy”, from which an adult wasp will emerge  <cit> .

aphidius ervi is a widely used biological control agent that parasitizes several macrosiphinae aphid species, including the pea aphid model acyrthosiphon pisum <cit> . to ensure development inside the host, a. ervi regulates its development and metabolism and possibly evades or overcomes its immune response. its success relies on the injection of venom at oviposition, as well as the release in the host of teratocytes, cells that derive from the dissociation of a membrane surrounding the embryo . until now, the physiological effects observed in the host are mainly associated with parasitoid nutrition. venom injection, for instance, induces the degeneration of host ovaries and the arrest of its reproduction, thus redirecting host nutritional resources to the developing parasitoid larva . in contrast, egg encapsulation has seldom been reported for aphid parasitoids and whether they may suppress or evade host immune response, as described for most parasitoids of diptera and lepidoptera  <cit> , remains to be determined.

despite the high amount of data on a. ervi behavior and physiology, only sparse information is yet available on its venom molecular composition. more surprisingly, there are no data on venom of other parasitoids of aphids and more generally of hemipteran hosts although they include many pests of remarkable economic importance. until now, the only factor identified from the venom of a. ervi is a γ-glutamyl transpeptidase  that was named ae-γ-gt  <cit> . γ-gts enzymes play a pivotal role in glutathione metabolism by hydrolyzing and transferring the γ-glutamyl moiety from glutathione  to various acceptors  <cit> . although γ-gts are usually membrane-bound proteins, ae-γ-gt was found as a soluble enzyme of 57 kda  in venom. it was also shown to be involved in castration of its aphid host possibly because it may interfere with the delicate balance of glutathione, causing oxidative stress in ovarian cells and triggering fatal apoptosis of ovaries and early aphid embryos  <cit> .

to identify the main a. ervi venom protein components, we performed a large-scale analysis using a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach. such broad approaches recently allowed thorough investigations of venom components in several parasitoid species, thus improving our knowledge of their nature and diversity . the present study is the first in-depth venom analysis of a parasitoid of hemiptera, as well as of a braconid parasitoid devoid of polydnaviruses , key factors of host regulation in several braconid and ichneumonid species  <cit> . comparison of venom data sets for a. ervi and pdv-associated braconid wasps, such as chelonus inanitus <cit> , microctonus sp.  <cit>  and microplitis demolitor <cit> , will provide insights on how the use of various parasitism strategies impacts venom evolution. although we identified a large number of transcripts and proteins, we have focused our analysis on the major venom components since they are the most likely involved in parasitism success  <cit> .

RESULTS
identification of the main secreted proteins in a. ervi venom through a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach
the transcriptomic analysis was performed on a french  and an italian  a. ervi strain, using cdna libraries from venom apparatus . as our objective was to identify the major venom proteins, and since no reference genome was available, we decided to use the sanger technology to produce long, high quality sequences . the obtained number of sequences was approximately five times higher for the fr library than for the it library . tests of assembly performed on the pool of all it and fr ests, using different parameters, revealed that a large part of the ests were shared between the it and fr libraries. moreover, go terms comparison on the trimmed ests suggested a similar distribution for the two libraries . the final assembly, therefore made using all pooled ests and default parameters, yielded a total of  <dig> unisequences , with a high level of redundancy . as expected from the relative number of sequences, a majority of it ests  were found in mixed contigs, whereas a majority of fr ests  were found in the fr library only . among the  <dig> abundant transcripts , nearly 80% were mixed contigs suggesting a rather similar venom composition in the a. ervi strains . functional annotation was performed using  sequence similarity searches against public databases as well as the main available predicted insect proteomes and  automated open reading frame  prediction, followed by search for signal peptide and interpro domains on the translated sequences . as already evidenced in previous venom analyses  <cit> , more than 60% of unisequences had no significant similarity in databases and could not be assigned an interpro annotation .

the proteomic analysis was performed on the a. ervi fr strain, on venom gland and reservoir samples separately. on a 6-16% sds-page, the protein content of each compartment was resolved in bands from less than 15 kda to more than 250 kda . as expected, most of the major bands observed in the venom glands were also detected in the reservoirs, despite an overall quantitative difference in protein load between these tissues due to the small amount of venom in the reservoirs. all the major bands on electrophoretic patterns as well as a number of minor bands  were excised, and tryptic peptides were analyzed by lc-ms-ms . the integrated analysis of transcriptomic and proteomic data resulted in  <dig> matches, among which a putative function was found for  <dig> unisequences . however, most of the unisequences found in proteomics were detected in the venom gland only , and many of them probably corresponded to cellular proteins  . some of the cellular proteins also found in the reservoir had a predicted muscular function , thus supporting the main role of the reservoir in pumping and injecting venom during oviposition. the presence of cellular proteins likely resulted from tissue contamination since cell leakage was difficult to prevent during venom collection from the gland , while venom could only be extracted from the reservoir by crushing the tissues. although this likely resulted in under-evaluating their number, we therefore only considered as putative venom proteins the  <dig> unisequences  found in proteomics in both venom glands and reservoirs and  predicted to be secreted or for which secretion could not be predicted due to the incompleteness of the sequence .figure  <dig> 
comparison of venom gland and reservoir protein profiles, and proteomic analysis. proteins from a. ervi venom glands and reservoirs were separated on a 6-16% sds-page under reducing conditions and visualized by silver staining. all stained protein bands numbered on the gel were excised and submitted for protein identification by lc-ms-ms. molecular mass is in kda.


classification of unisequences found in proteomics according to putative function. putative venom proteins are highlighted in italic



elongation factor 2

endoplasmin

γ-glutamyl transpeptidase

leucine rich repeat domain-containing protein

serine protease homologue

serpin

auniseq: number of unisequences.


best: number of ests.


cmascot: number of matches with peptides.


dsp: prediction of peptide signal by targetp. a ? means that prediction of secretion could not be performed due to the incompleteness of the sequence. a # indicates that a sp was predicted for some but not all unisequences.
venn diagram showing the repartition of unisequences found in proteomics between venom glands  and reservoirs . the green and red rectangles highlight the number of unisequences for which sequence was complete and that were predicted to be secreted  or predicted not to be secreted , respectively. the blue ellipse corresponds to considered “putative venom proteins”.
putative venom proteins classified according to the number of ests



aest: number of ests.


bmascot: number of matches with peptides.


csp: prediction of peptide signal by targetp. a ? means that prediction of secretion could not be performed due to the incompleteness of the sequence.

putative function of the main identified a. ervi venom proteins
a putative function was predicted for  <dig> of the  <dig> unisequences considered as venom proteins . among them,  <dig> sequences were considered as abundant based on the number of ests. moreover, we generally observed a good correlation between the number of ests and the number of matches with mass spectrometry peptides, although the proteomic analysis was not strictly quantitative. the abundant unisequences were   <dig> γ-gts,   <dig> serine protease homologue,   <dig> leucine rich repeat domain-containing protein,   <dig> serpin and   <dig> endoplasmin . real-time pcr analysis of the relative expression of a selection of these unisequences  evidenced a venom tissue-specific expression , as expected for putative venom proteins.table  <dig> 
mean relative expression in venom apparatus and bodies without venom apparatus for a selection of unisequences coding for putative venom proteins and toxin-like peptides




γ-glutamyl transpeptidases
our analysis led to identification of three different γ-gts in a. ervi venom , including ae-γ-gt, which represent by far the most abundant proteins . γ-gts are found in bacteria, plants, and animals. they are key-enzymes in glutathione  homeostasis that catalyze the transfer of the γ-glutamyl moiety from gsh, as well as other γ-glutamyl compounds, to amino acids or gsh itself  <cit> . γ-gts thus play an important role in intracellular redox status, cytosolic iron metabolism, and inflammation. although considered as heterodimeric cell-surface enzymes, γ-gts are also found under soluble circulating forms in body fluids, as ae-γ-gt in a. ervi venom  <cit> . accordingly, all three a. ervi venom γ-gts identified in our analysis were predicted to contain a peptide signal and thus could be secreted or shed from the cell surface .

among the three a. ervi γ-gts, the amino acid sequences of cl1contig <dig> and cl1contig <dig> were respectively identical and very close  to the ae-γ-gt previously published sequence . interestingly, cl1contig <dig> was the most abundant venom γ-gt in the italian strain, while cl1contig <dig> was the most abundant in the french strain  suggesting they might be alleles occurring at different frequencies. this is in agreement with our observation of a rapid decrease in the frequency of cl1contig <dig> in the french strain under our rearing conditions . whether these two γ-gts similarly contribute to induce apoptosis in the pea aphid ovarian cells remains to be investigated. strikingly, cl1contig <dig>  which is highly expressed in the french strain, shares only 51% identity to the published sequence . moreover, although overexpressed in the venom apparatus , it contains two mutations previously described to strongly reduce the enzymatic activity of human γ-gt <dig>  <cit> . the corresponding residues are otherwise conserved in other hymenopteran ggt sequences belonging to the same clade . this raises the questions whether it is a fully active γ-gt and which role it may play in a. ervi parasitism success.figure  <dig> 
multiple alignment of γ-gt sequences. the three a. ervi γ-gt sequences identified were aligned with the published a. ervi γ-gt sequence  and the human γ-gt <dig> sequence . residues identical or similar are highlighted in black and grey, respectively. stars indicate mutations in the aerv_cl1contig <dig> that were described to affect the enzymatic activity of human γ-gt <dig>  aerv, a.ervi; hsap, h. sapiens.

maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree of hymenopteran γ-gt sequences. the blue, orange, and green vertical lines correspond to the three major clades  obtained for hymenopteran γ-gt sequences. a. ervi and n. vitripennis venomous γ-gt sequences are marked with blue and orange rectangles respectively. numbers at corresponding nodes are bootstrap support values . the outgroup is the human γ-gt <dig> sequence . aech, acromyrmex echinatior; aerv, aphidius ervi; aflo, apis florea; amel, apis mellifera; bimp, bombus impatiens; bter, bombus terrestris; cflo, camponotus floridanus; hsal, harpegnathos saltator; hsap, homo sapiens; mrot, megachile rotundata; nvit, nasonia vitripennis.




using hymenopteran databases, we were able to identify three distinct types of non-venomous γ-gts forming three distinct phylogenetic clades . interestingly, the three a. ervi venomous γ-gts group with clade a, while the two γ-gts recently identified in n. vitripennis venom, which function is yet unknown  <cit> , group with clade b . the venomous γ-gts of these parasitoid species may thus originate from distinct duplication events of two different genes coding for γ-gt "classical" proteins.

interestingly, γ-gts can be used by bacteria as virulence determinants. for instance, a γ-gt contributes to helicobacter pylori tolerizing effects on murine dendritic cells and suppressive activity on t cells, mainly via the depletion of glutamine  <cit> . campylobacter jejuni virulence and colonization of the avian gut is also dependent upon the activity of a γ-gt that participates in its cell apoptosis-inducing activity by a yet unknown mechanism  <cit> . whether venom γ-gts can also act as virulence factors in parasitoids remains to be assessed.

serine protease homologues
serine proteases are endopeptidases whose active site contains a serine and which are involved in various biological processes, including immunity. serine protease homologues  lack one or more residues essential for catalytic activity  <cit>  and do not have proteolytic activity. the five unisequences identified in a. ervi venom apparatus libraries, with a total of  <dig> ests , encode different sphs , all with mutation on the catalytic triad . the four sphs for which the 5' coding sequence was complete contain a signal peptide, suggesting that they are secreted. based on our criteria, only one of these sphs could be classified as a venom protein: it was considered as abundant, with a total of  <dig> ests, and it was found in proteomics in the venom reservoir . besides, it was specifically overexpressed in the venom apparatus . however, two other sphs were also abundant although not found in the reservoir. members of the serine protease family have been described in the venom of several other parasitoids  <cit> , the most studied being vn <dig>  secreted in cotesia rubecula venom and devoid of serine protease activity. vn <dig> acts as an inhibitor of the hemolymph melanization in the host pieris rapae, presumably by competing with host serine protease homologs for binding to propo, while remaining non-cleaved and stable in the haemolymph  <cit> .

leucine-rich repeat domain-containing proteins
two different unisequences encoding leucine-rich repeat  domain-containing proteins, never described yet in a parasitoid venom, were found in our analysis with a total of  <dig> ests . interestingly, the sequences were mostly found in the french library since only  <dig> ests came from the italian strain . the unisequence that was complete contains a signal peptide at n-terminus suggesting the secretion of the protein. it also contains a total of  <dig> canonical lrr motifs separated by one to three amino acids , although a manual analysis suggested the presence of six to seven additional, though cryptic, repeats. interestingly, the conserved lxxlxlxxnxlxxlxxxxf sequence present in the  <dig> canonical lrr motifs is similar to the one described in toll like receptors   <cit> . however, a. ervi predicted proteins only contain the lrr domain by contrast to the majority of tlrs that are multidomain proteins. with the loss of all but the lrr domain, a. ervi venom proteins might act as scavengers for the pea aphid tlrs, thus impairing the host immune response via the toll pathway. interestingly, the use of a truncated single-domain protein as a virulence factor has already been described for a parasitoid venom protein  <cit> .

serpins
serpins  are a large family of functionally diverse protease inhibitors. they share a conserved structural architecture with an exposed reactive center loop  of about  <dig> amino acids, which acts as bait for target serine proteases  <cit> . interestingly, the involvement of a leptopilina boulardi venom serpin in suppressing host immunity was already demonstrated. lbspny indeed prevents melanization in the drosophila host through inhibition of po activation  <cit> . more recently, serpins were described in the venom of hyposoter didymator <cit>  and m. demolitor <cit>  but their role in parasitism success remains unknown. the two identified a. ervi serpin-like unisequences were both found in the french library only and detected in the venom reservoir . however, only one of these unisequences, overexpressed in the venom apparatus  could be considered as abundant with  <dig> ests. interestingly, both serpins lack the consensus hinge sequence  essential for the conformational change involving the rcl and necessary to inhibit the target protease  <cit> . the identified venom protein thus probably belongs to the group of non-inhibitory serpins that have varied roles such as chaperones or transport molecules  <cit> .

endoplasmin
endoplasmin, which belongs to the heat shock protein  <dig> family, is a molecular chaperone located in the endoplasmic reticulum  and involved in the final processing and export of secreted proteins  <cit> . although three incomplete endoplasmin-like unisequences were identified in a. ervi, they match to different regions of the same n. vitripennis endoplasmin sequence  and thus likely correspond to a single gene. the endoplasmin protein was considered as abundant based on the number of ests and accordingly detected at high levels in a. ervi venom reservoir . the a. ervi sequence contains the c-terminal heel motif that normally prevents secretion of er-resident proteins . however, this er retention is not absolute  <cit> . endoplasmin has never been described yet in any parasitoid venom but it has been associated with the secretion of pancreatic lipases and their further internalization by intestinal cells  <cit> . this suggests a possible role of this chaperone in the secretion, stabilization, transport and host cell targeting of the different a. ervi venom proteins.

two other unisequences having putative functions in venom were found in low abundance in a. ervi based on the number of ests:   <dig> elongation factor and   <dig> neprilysin-like protein .

elongation factor
one transcript of elongation factor  <dig> , an essential protein that regulates the process of polypeptide elongation during translation, was found in low abundance in the a. ervi french library . although ef- <dig> was also found in the reservoir , the sequence was not complete and accurate prediction of its secretion could not be performed. to our knowledge, there is no report yet of ef- <dig> involvement either as a virulence factor or a venom protein. interestingly, elongation factor 1-alpha  was found in the venom of another parasitoid, l. heterotoma <cit> , but its role in the host-parasitoid interaction is also unknown. ef-1α was identified as a secreted candidate virulence factor in leishmania protozoan parasites, being possibly involved in the induction of macrophage deactivation through direct binding and activation of a specific host tyrosine phosphatase  <cit> .

neprilysin-like 
one unisequence encoding a neprilysin-like protein was found in low abundance  in the a. ervi french library . nep-like proteins are zinc-dependent metalloproteases  belonging to the m <dig> peptidase family. they are involved in the degradation of a number of regulatory peptides in the nervous or immune system of mammals  <cit>  and insects  <cit> . although typically membrane-bound, ectopeptidases such as nep may also be shed from the membrane through a proteolytic process and found in the surrounding fluid  <cit> . nep-like proteins were detected in the venom of the parasitoids l. boulardi <cit> , microctonus hyperodae <cit> , h. didymator <cit>  and m. demolitor <cit> , and were also found associated with the vlps produced in the ovary of v. canescens <cit> . although the role of soluble ectopeptidases is still not understood, nep-like proteins have been hypothesized to modulate the host immune system by degrading immune-specific peptides  <cit> .

expression of genes encoding cystein-rich toxin-like peptides in a. ervi venom gland
three unisequences coding for small cysteine-rich peptides predicted to be secreted were found in our transcriptomic analysis and demonstrated to be specifically expressed in the venom apparatus . although two of these, cl1contig <dig>  and cl1contig <dig>  were considered as abundant, the small molecular weight of the predicted mature peptides  precluded their analysis by sds-page proteomics .table  <dig> 
summary of the toxin-like peptides analysis and comparison with defensin-nv 



number of ests

total
chilobrachys jingzhao
conus vitulinus
conus abbreviatus
apis mellifera carnica


blast hits were obtained with several small animal toxins for the three unisequences, although e-values were not highly significant due to the size of the peptide sequences . the toxin-like function of these unisequences was further confirmed using clantox . interestingly, multiple alignment revealed a highly conserved signal peptide sequence, suggesting a common evolutionary origin for the three peptides . by contrast, the sequences of the predicted mature peptides were strongly divergent, except for the conservation of six cysteine residues that may form three stabilizing disulfide bridges. these cysteine residues are conserved in each of the best blast hit for the three sequences , the corresponding peptides being classified as knottins, extremely stable small disulfide-rich proteins with a knotted topology  <cit> . remarkably, the three a. ervi toxin-like peptides also possibly correspond to knottins, never described in any parasitoid venom to date, although the prediction was not fully supported .figure  <dig> 
multiple alignment of toxin-like sequences. the three a. ervi toxin-like sequences were aligned with the mature peptide sequence corresponding to each blast best hit . residues identical or similar are highlighted in black and grey, respectively. the predicted signal peptide is underlined in red, the six conserved cysteine residues are identified by red stars. theraphotoxin: u8-theraphotoxin-cj1a from chilobrachys jingzhao ; conotoxin_vi: conotoxin vi <dig>  from conus vitelinus ; conotoxin_ab: conotoxin abvin from conus abbreviatus .



few peptides have been characterized to date from parasitoid venoms. one of them is vn <dig> , a short peptide of  <dig> amino acids required for the expression of cotesia rubecula polydnaviruses in pieris rapae host hemocytes and the following inactivation of these hemocytes  <cit> . the nasonia vitripennis venom analysis predicted occurrence of several cysteine-rich peptides with a protease inhibitor motif  <cit> . however, functional data on these peptides are lacking and only one defensin-like antimicrobial peptide, defensin-nv, was purified from n. vitripennis venom  <cit> . defensin-nv is a  <dig> amino acid peptide with six cysteines forming three disulfide bridges that has strong antimicrobial activity against wide spectrum microorganisms, but which is not predicted as a knottin . another n. vitripennis defensin-like peptide, nasinin- <dig>  with a similar structure but no antimicrobial activity was recently demonstrated as a potential inhibitor of host hemocytes’ melanization in vitro. it is however unclear whether it is found in venom  <cit> . interestingly, the three a. ervi toxin-like peptides also share weak similarities with defensin-like antimicrobial peptides , but their possible role as an antimicrobial factor or an inhibitor of melanization remains to be assessed.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper reports the first identification of the main putative venom proteins of a parasitoid of aphids, a. ervi, using the same combined large-scale transcriptomic and proteomic approach we successfully used previously  <cit> . the analysis focused on a restricted number of proteins based on their predicted abundance and the occurrence of proteomic matches both in venom gland and reservoir. a total of  <dig> putative venom proteins were considered, a low number compared to other analyses , suggesting possible occurrence of additional low-abundant venom proteins in a. ervi. however, this conservative approach largely precluded misidentification of cellular proteins as venom factors. interestingly,  <dig> out of the  <dig> considered proteins could be assigned a predicted function, in contrast to the majority of putative venom proteins in large broad analyses that did not display similarity to any known protein . the combined analysis of two datasets corresponding to different a. ervi strains  confirmed that the major venom proteins are shared by different parasitoid populations. however, it also identified striking differences in the abundance of transcripts for some of the main unisequences such as the γ-gts, suggesting variations in allele frequency and/or gene expression level among populations that remain to be explored.

our study confirmed the identification of ae-γ-gt as the most abundant protein by far in a. ervi venom, thus supporting its role as a key player in parasitism success  <cit> . in addition to an allelic form of ae-γ-gt, we identified a divergent, possibly non-functional, γ-gt, whose biological function, if any, remains to be explored. interestingly, we recently identified a multigenic family for a venom protein of a parasitoid of drosophila, with all members except one mutated in one or more essential amino acids  <cit> . γ-gts have also been observed in the venom of the ectoparasitoid n. vitripennis, although no information is available regarding their abundance and function. our data nevertheless add γ-gts as a new example of independent convergent recruitment of venom proteins in evolutionary distant parasitoid species.

among the abundant putative venom proteins, serpins and sphs were described in venom of other braconids and more distant parasitoid wasps, further suggesting occurrence of a conserved subset of venom proteins across parasitoid species  <cit> .

other putative venom proteins were unique to a. ervi, including endoplasmin or lrr domain-containing proteins, suggesting a rapid evolution of some venom components. finally, occurrence of toxin-like cystein-rich peptides was predicted in some parasitoid species but the diversity of their nature and function remains to be explored.

one main challenge will be now to decipher the biological function of the identified venom proteins and their role in the parasitism success of a. ervi. this might be performed using the rnai technique, as rnai-mediated complete extinction of a venom protein was recently evidenced in an endoparasitoid wasp  <cit> . results will open the way to a better understanding on aphid-parasitoid immune and nutritional parasitoid interactions.

