BACKGROUND
one of key challenges of the post-genomic era is to understand the complexity of molecular networks, and describe their applications to elucidate essential principles of cellular systems and disease machinery  <cit> . spurred by advances in technology, several types of molecular networks, e.g. protein-protein interaction networks , transcriptional regulatory networks , and phenotype networks have been identified, providing us with a global landscape of how biological molecules may interact with one another. many studies have demonstrated that ppins and trns are essential for controlling the expression levels of genes and the activity of proteins, which mediates coordinated responses and adapted modifications to multifarious cellular stimuli  <cit> . given this landscape, integrative analysis of both ppins and trns is a major focus in systems biology and bioinformatics. many computational strategies based on integrated ppin and trn networks have been devised and used to decipher specific network structures  <cit>  or their potential biological implications  <cit>  that underlie disease traits.

in molecular networks, genes, proteins, and other molecules form components called 'functional modules' that are densely interconnected, but relatively isolated from other networks  <cit> . recent surveys have shown that genes within a module or a cluster appear to have similar expression patterns, share common underlying regulatory mechanisms, and thus have strong associations with specific biological functions that determine the behaviour or phenotype of the cell  <cit> . complex diseases are known to result from the loss of one or more normal essential functions. one such example is cancer. in the recent years, an increasing number of cancer studies have combined human gene expression profiling and computational-based module searching algorithms to obtain a more comprehensive view of the molecular underpinnings and regulatory relationships of cancer  <cit> . segal et al.  <cit>  have identified gene sets with similar behaviour across microarrays, and constructed 'cancer module maps' to characterize a variety of clinical conditions. whitfield et al.  <cit>  have detected modules in which genes shared both similar expression profiles and similar transcription factor binding profiles. pomeroy et al.  <cit>  have explored regulatory modules using the conservation of co-expression relationships across a diverse range of organisms. the utility of microarray analysis provides more interpretable results than using gene lists alone. a study by chuang et al.  <cit>  have combined microarray analysis and the human ppin to identify sub-network biomarkers for breast cancer, and proposed that integrated network-based approaches could help researchers acquire additional and more accurate molecular mechanisms for cancers. another study by cui et al.  <cit>  have demonstrated that the co-regulatory mechanism of molecular networks could mediate cancer-related genes, convey their abnormal states through several functional modules, and eventually lead to uncontrolled cell growth, invasion, and metastasis in distant planes of the body. thus, uncovering co-regulated modular structures in integrated molecular networks could provide valuable insights into the pathogenesis of cancer.

in this paper, we introduce a probabilistic model termed co-regulatory analysis using integrated networks  to detect human co-regulated modules using an integrative weighted network of a ppin and a trn. then the performance of our analysis is evaluated by cross-validation with biological evidence. furthermore, we figure out biological relevance of our modules for assembling or rewiring biological entities such as genes, protein complexes, and metabolic pathways. finally, exemplified by cancer, we investigate whether co-regulated modules are capable of assembling different biological entities with underlying mechanisms in tumorigenesis.

RESULTS
overview of the identification of co-regulated modules
we scaled and merged a human ppin and trn, and constructed a highly quality integrated network of protein and transcription regulation interactions. adopting a probabilistic model, we evaluated whether a cluster of co-regulated proteins was likely to form a module in the integrated network. under this model, we formulated a log-likelihood ratio to compare the fit of a cluster to the desired structure with its likelihood, given that the interaction map was randomly constructed. highly scoring sub-networks corresponded to likely modules. we used a heuristic strategy for module-detecting procedures consisting of:  seed initialization;  seed expanding; and  overlap filtering. finally, we obtained  <dig> co-regulated modules , each of which was co-regulated by one or more specific transcription factors . and furthermore, we used three bipartite graphs to map our modules onto the biological entities of genes, protein complexes, and metabolic pathways to uncover the underlying biological significance of the modules. from our analysis, we concluded that in each module, co-regulated relationships might play important roles in packaging their binding genes, then extending to regulating complexes maintained by several physical interacting proteins, and thus involving in some metabolic pathways or disease traits.

performance evaluation
analysis of module robustness
we assessed the internal connectivity of each co-regulated module by comparison with its control clusters. to generate a control for a given module, we conducted random replacements for 10%, 20% or 30% of the module nodes with an equal number of proteins/tfs outside the module. we repeated this replacement process  <dig> times, and used the average connectivity for all analytical runs. figure 1a shows the internal connectivity of the extracted modules and their controls. inside connections of co-regulated modules decreased significantly with an increase in the replacement size during randomization experiments. we also studied the average connecting ratio of the nodes within each module to the ones outside of it. we found that the ratio in the real dataset was higher than in the randomization experiments , suggesting that each of the identified modules was indeed densely connected, and robustly formed a local sub-network.

analysis of module functional coherency
using the tango toolkit  <cit> , we performed gene ontology  enrichment analysis for our extracted  <dig> modules, to identify strongly-associated functional categories. the tango algorithm includes all levels of go, and computes raw enrichment p-values using a standard hyper-geometric test with a significant level of p <  <dig> . annotation results showed that  <dig> modules  were significantly enriched in biological function .

to quantify the functional consistency of each discovered module, we computed the hit-rate and miss-rate proposed by milenkoviae et al.  <cit>  for each module m :  

for a given module m,   is the intersection gene set of module m and its enriched go term i, and |m| is the size of m. a higher hit-rate indicated that more genes in module m convey a centralized biological function; a lower miss-rate provided additional confirmation of our deduction. we binned the hit-rates and miss-rates in grades of 10%, and compared the hit-rates and miss-rates between our predicted modules and their controls  . in the go: biological process  branch,  <dig> investigated modules in the real team had a hit-rate above 90%, and  <dig> had a miss-rate below 10%, while  <dig> modules in the control team had a hit-rate above 90%, and  <dig> had a miss-rate below 10%. the same observations for higher hit-rate and lower miss-rate were seen when analyzing the functional consistency of our investigated modules in the molecular function  and cellular component  categories. these results suggested that our method was capable of finding co-regulated modules with strong biological relevance. similar results were found for the 10% and 20% node replacements .

multiple methods comparison
we validated the performance of crain by comparison with four other module identification algorithms  <cit> : connected components , biconnected components , clique percolation method , and markov cluster algorithm . for this process, we predicted modules using these four methods. enrichment was computed using the standard hyper-geometric test by tango toolkit . for each method, we defined sensitivity as the proportion of annotations enriched in at least one module at p < 10- <dig>  and specificity as the proportion of modules enriched with at least one annotation at p < 10- <dig>  <cit> :  

the f-score summarizes the two measures, and is defined as follows:  

biological association of co-regulated modules with cancer
cancer-related genes are often assumed to mediate each other through the co-regulatory mechanisms of molecular networks, causing abnormal states through several functional modules, and eventually leading to uncontrolled cell growth, invasion, and metastasis to distant planes of the body  <cit> . to investigate this, we used fisher's exact test to check biological associations between cancer-mutated genes and each of the  <dig> identified modules. we found that  <dig>  of modules were associated with cancer .

packaging features of co-regulated modules
furthermore, to determine the biological importance of the co-regulated modules, we investigated the role of transcription regulation in assembling or rewiring genes, protein complexes, and metabolic pathways within modules.

gene packaging
for all  <dig> co-regulated modules, we labelled tfs and proteins with their associated biological functions. we found that each module could work as an 'assembler' to assemble a set of genes with similar biological functions that were regulated by one or more tfs. for example, figure  <dig> illustrates one module associated with a 'biopolymer metabolic process' . in this module, two groups of regulated subsets were identified: one group consisted of jun and three tumour-mutated genes . recent studies have reported that jun, a key cancer-related regulator, is important in carcinogenesis: inappropriate gene activation or numerous different genetic defects of jun or its target genes could lead to cell growth inhibition, dna damage or cell cycle delay, and these series of unexpected variations could finally have effects on tumour emergence, promotion and metastasis  <cit> . another group contained five tfs  and their target genes . brca <dig> and brca <dig> are important tumour suppressor genes, whose loss of function is closely associated with tumorigenesis  <cit> . several studies have reported that these two genes are involved in dna recombination and dna repair  <cit> . a mutation in brca <dig> or brca <dig> compromises interaction with replication protein a , and these two proteins are essential for dna replication, repair, and recombination  <cit> . lack of interaction first inhibits the recruitment of double-strand break repair proteins, then leads to an accumulation of carcinogenic dna abnormalities, eventually causing predisposition to early onset cancer. these findings demonstrated that one or more tfs in co-regulated modules could package different genes with specific functions. cancer-related modules could assemble a set of cancer-mutated genes and regulate specific biological functions associated with cancer, thus contributing to the pathogenesis of disease traits.

to address whether genes that link to genes mutated in cancer in co-regulated modules are more likely to be cancer-associated, we interrogated non-mutated genes within modules associated with 'biopolymer metabolic process' , using manual literature validation. we found that all non-mutated genes were implicated in tumorigenesis . these results suggested that genes in cancer-related co-regulated modules had a high disease risk for tumours, and might be tumour candidate biomarkers. additional analysis found that similar results could be obtained for all other cancer related co-regulated modules .

complex packaging
to access the association of co-regulated modules with protein complexes, we acquired  <dig> human protein complexes from the mips database as a reference set, and analyzed the packaging characteristic of our modules  <cit> . a hyper-geometric test was used to evaluate the significance of overlap between our modules and the mips functional categories. the results showed  <dig>  modules that could organize numerous protein complexes . as an example of these significant results, a sample module that is involved in 'biopolymer metabolic process' , packages  <dig> protein complexes involved in eight functional classes . the complexes and this module share a set of cancer-related functions such as dna repair, cell cycle regulation, and transcription from rna polymerase ii promoters. many studies have shown that gene alterations in cancer patients, such as malignant changes in dna sequence and chromosomal fragment amplifications, cause subtle divergence of the dna sequence with subsequent mistakes in replication during 'dna repair' and 'dna replication', altering 'transcription activity' and 'cell cycle', resulting in the evolution of mutinous cells, and resulting in the ability to invade and metastasise  <cit> . similar packaging results for the other co-regulated modules are in additional file  <dig>  these results suggested that our co-regulated modules had the functionality of rewiring different protein complexes, and that cancer-related modules could package complexes that underlie carcinogenesis.

pathway packaging
to further investigate the assembling power of co-regulated modules on metabolic pathways, we performed kegg annotation analysis for each module using david   <cit> , a useful tool that integrates different sources of biological information to obtain biological annotations, and ranks them by statistical significance. we found that  <dig>  modules had significant annotated pathway information . a sample module  assembled eight divergent metabolic pathways . we discovered two cancer-related tfs  that function as hub tfs, forming focal nodes in information exchange between eight metabolic pathways. these two tfs and their binding proteins in the module work in a complementary manner to rewire the mismatch repair, cell cycle, and homologous recombination pathways leading to the dysfunction of different cancer pathways  <cit> . in our prior studies, we found that genes in cancer development and progression are distributed sparsely among different metabolic pathways. according to pathway analysis, we concluded that our modules had the functionality of organizing multiple biological pathways and controlling numerous cell behaviours, which eventually contribute to cancer pathogenesis.

CONCLUSIONS
we devised and implemented a probabilistic model and a bipartite graph framework to infer human co-regulated modules. we analyzed their specific features in packaging different biological entities from an integrated molecular network with high confidence. through robustness analysis, we demonstrated that our algorithm identified probable co-regulated modules for homo sapiens. the performance of our approach was evaluated by comparison with other four module identification approaches. further analysis using the bipartite graph framework uncovered packaging features for co-regulated modules, and showed that modules appeared to act as 'assemblers' dominated by several transcriptional regulations, and tended to coordinate complexes maintained by several physical interacting proteins, and indicating involvement in metabolic pathway cross-talk within neighbouring regions.

the success of our method can be attributed to the following factors. ppins and trns are based on the curated literature and experimentally-determined interactions, so an integrated molecular network can be used to identify co-regulatory modules. in addition, we introduced a bipartite graph framework to evaluate packaging features of co-regulated modules with different biological entities, which easily divided biological entities into piles according to each module. as shown by various examples, our method appears to be effective in the identification of human co-regulated modules, and in searching for their packaging features in biological entities.

however, our proposed method has some limitations. we introduced a greedy algorithm aimed to make the locally optimal choice at each expanding step. greedy algorithms are known to generally fail in finding globally optimal solutions, because they usually do not operate exhaustively on all the data. however, from our analysis results, we believe that the greedy algorithm was effective for module identification. the limitations of the proposed method for packaging  analysis are that two-thirds of human genes are annotated by at least one functional annotation, but the remaining one-third has yet to be annotated  <cit> . in addition, the incompleteness of information about complexes and biological pathways might miss some significant overlaps or packing relationships. although our proposed method has these limitations, the packaging features of co-regulated modules could still be deciphered in integrated molecular networks. with the accumulation of human data, we expect that our framework may facilitate the identification of additional modules and their packaging features.

