BACKGROUND
filamentous actinomycetes are high g-c gram-positive microorganisms commercially widely used as producers of natural products  and industrial enzymes
 <cit> . genome sequencing of representative microbes belonging to this group has shown that they possess a vast array of genes devoted to the production and secretion of enzymes, due to the role they play in recycling organic material in the biosphere
 <cit> . genome annotation of streptomyces coelicolor <cit> , which is the model system for this microbial group, revealed that it encodes  <dig> potentially secreted proteins including hydrolases, proteases/peptidases, chitinases/chitosanases, cellulases/endoglucanases, amylases and pectate lyases. moreover, filamentous actinomycetes are rich of novel enzymatic functionalities since each genome hosts twenty-thirty biosynthetic gene clusters  devoted to the production of chemically diverse bioactive metabolites
 <cit> . among filamentous actinomycetes, the most studied genus is the streptomyces one, whose members produce two-thirds of the known antibiotics
 <cit> . streptomyces spp. are also used as host systems for the production of heterologous proteins and of whole biosynthetic clusters originating from less easy-to-handle actinomycetes, such as those belonging to nonomuraea, actinoplanes, planomonospora, planobispora, microbispora genera
 <cit> . these uncommon actinomycetes possess a still-untapped richness of metabolic pathways - and some of them are valuable producers of new drugs - but their exploitation is often limited by the lack of genetic manipulation tools
 <cit> .

streptomyces spp. as heterologous hosts for gene expression and protein production offer some advantages in comparison to escherichia coli, the preferred cell factory for industrial enzymes and therapeutic proteins
 <cit> . production and isolation of heterologous proteins from e. coli is often limited by insolubility, citotoxicity, uncorrect folding, aggregation in inclusion bodies and lack of secretion
 <cit> . secretion capability of streptomyces spp. may prevent the local accumulation of the over-expressed recombinant proteins, reduce their toxicity to host cells, eventually aid correct folding and favour increased production and purification yields
 <cit> . heterologous expression is often facilitated when the selected host cells are phylogeneticaly related to the homologous producer. this is due to the similarity of codon usage, compatibility with translation machinery, molecular chaperons, and/or redox state of the cells
 <cit> .

we recently started studying the role of genes involved in the biosynthesis, regulation, transport and self-resistance of glycopeptide antibiotics in producing strains which belong to uncommon actinomycetes such as actinoplanes teichomyceticus producing teicoplanin
 <cit>  and nonomuraea sp. atcc  <dig>  which produces a40926
 <cit> . a <dig> is the precursor of the semi-synthetic derivative dalbavancin, which is a second generation glycopeptide currently in phase iii clinical development for its improved activity, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
 <cit> . the dbv cluster, which is a contiguous set of  <dig> orfs devoted to the production, regulation and transport of a <dig>  contains the vanyn gene, whose function was proposed to confer glycopeptide resistance to the producing strain by reprogramming peptidoglycan cell wall biosynthesis
 <cit> .

the aim of this work was developing an appropriate heterologous expression system for vanyn characterization to help deciphering its role in glycopeptide resistant cells. our attention was given to screening different streptomyces spp. as hosts for recombinant vanyn secretion in biologically active form. conditions for production  of functional vanyn were finally successfully settled in streptomyces venezuelae atcc  <dig> at flask and at fermentor-scale.

RESULTS
heterologous expression of vanyn in streptomyces spp
vanyn encoding gene  was amplified by pcr using chromosomal dna template from nonomuraea sp. atcc 39727
 <cit>  and cloned in the multicopy vector pij <dig>  under the control of the heterologous constitutive promoter erme* <cit> . the gene was cloned in frame with a sequence encoding for a histidine hexamer added at the c-terminus  or at the n-terminus  of the protein product.

pij86Ωc-his6-vanyn, pij86Ωn-his6-vanyn, and the empty pij <dig> used as a control, were introduced in three different streptomyces spp. by intergeneric conjugation from e. coli. streptomyces lividans tk <dig> was selected as one of the hosts since it is used for heterologous protein production due to its proven excellence in secretion capacity and low extracellular protease activity
 <cit> . streptomyces venezuelae atcc  <dig> is a fast growing streptomyces naturally susceptible to glycopeptides
 <cit> . streptomyces coelicolor a <dig> represents the model system
 <cit>  and possesses a complete set of vanrshax genes conferring high resistance to vancomycin: consequently a glycopeptide susceptible mutant deleted in the two component regulatory system Δvanrs was used in our experiments
 <cit> .

growth curves at shake flask-scale of the ex-conjugants s. coelicolor Δvanrs, s. lividans and s. venezuelae carrying pij86Ωc-his6-vanyn or pij86Ωn-his6-vanyn were compared with control strains containing the empty vector in two different cultivation conditions, i.e. by using the limpid yeme medium or the rich and complex btsb medium . figure 
1a and
1b show the growth curves of s. venezuelae recombinant strains, which produced abundant biomass in both the media. introduction of vanyn slightly affected biomass productivity. growth kinetics was similar among s. venezuelae carrying either c-his6-vanyn or n-his6-vanyn constructs and the control strain. maximum biomass production  was achieved after 72 hours from the inoculum in both yeme and btsb media. glucose was consumed with different kinetics between the two media, but it was anyhow completely depleted within 72 hours of growth. observation at the optical microscope showed that mycelium in recombinant strains was more fragmented than in the control one .

streptomyces spp. recombinant strains carrying different constructs  were grown in yeme or btsb for 72 hours. vanyn was quantified by immunoblotting on crude extracts as reported in the methods.

data in table 
 <dig> shows that s. coelicolor Δvanrs recombinant strains grew better in btsb than in yeme, whereas recombinant s. lividans strains did not grow in yeme medium. different effects of medium composition on growth rate and morphology of suspension cultures  among diverse streptomyces hosts have been previously observed
 <cit> . production of his6-vanyn was evaluated by western blot analysis after 72 hours of growth in s. venezuelae, s. coelicolor Δvanrs and s. lividans recombinant strains. in btsb medium, recombinant vanyn volumetric and specific productivities ranged between  <dig> to more than 30 mg per liter of culture and from  <dig>  to more than 1 mg per gram of cells, within the different recombinant strains. in yeme medium, the highest values of volumetric  and specific  productivities were achieved only for s. venezuelae recombinant strains. considering that btsb medium contains complex components which may later on interfere with protein purification, yeme medium was preferred for large-scale protein preparation. accordingly, s. venezuelae was selected as the preferable host for protein production scaling-up and purification.

cellular localization of his6-vanyn was analyzed after 72 hours of growth in s. venezuelae, s. coelicolor Δvanrs and s. lividans recombinant strains by western blot analysis on different fractions . figure 
2a shows a ~ 25 kda band corresponding to his6-vanyn  in the insoluble and soluble cell-free fractions and in the cell wall fractions from s. venezuelae recombinant strains grown in yeme medium. recombinant vanyn was never found in the concentrated broths . densitometric analysis demonstrated that his6-vanyn preferentially accumulated  in the cell wall fractions obtained by the step of spheroplast preparation, independently on the localization of the his6-tag . only 6% and 4% of recombinant protein was detected in insoluble and soluble cell-free fractions following spheroplast burst, respectively. for all recombinant strains grown in btsb or yeme , the heterologous protein distribution was exactly as for s. venezuelae, with most of vanyn recovered from the cell wall fraction .
1: figure s <dig>  : quantitative analysis of recombinant vanyn present in each fraction, performed using the quantity one program  and his6-vanyn as comparative standard. total protein content in each fraction was determined by biuret method .

vanyn production by s. venezuelae in 3 l bench-bioreactor scale
both the forms of recombinant his6-vanyn were produced growing s. venezuelae recombinant strains in yeme medium at 3 l bench-bioreactor scale. figures 
3a, b and c show the time course of growth and vanyn production of s. venezuelae carrying pij86Ωc-his6-vanyn. exponential growth was actually completed within 48 hours and gave a maximum biomass yield of 40 g/l dry weight. this growth phase was accompanied by a complete depletion of glucose from the medium and by a transient reduction of dissolved oxygen . medium ph slightly decreased during the exponential growth phase and then tended to increase during the stationary growth phase. an estimated maximum of production of ~ 30 mg vanyn/l in the crude extract was determined at the peak of biomass production, i.e. at 48 hours from inoculum. an overlapping profile of growth curve and vanyn production was similarly obtained for s. venezuelae carrying pij86Ωn-his6-vanyn .
2: figure s <dig> 

vanyn purification from s. venezuelae
purification of both the recombinant forms of his6-vanyn from s. venezuelae cells grown in yeme medium, was attempted by means of metal-chelating chromatography on hitrap chelating column of crude extracts obtained by whole cell sonication, as described in the methods section. n-his6-vanyn was eluted following standard procedures. in the same conditions, c-his6-vanyn did not bind to the column, suggesting that the six histidines at c-terminus were masked. accordingly, a denaturing agent such as urea was added to both the loading and equilibration buffers. the partially denatured c-his6-vanyn protein interacted with the matrix and was subsequently re-folded directly on the column by a linear gradient of decreasing urea concentration. sds-page analysis  confirmed that both the tagged forms of his6-vanyn migrated as a single band of 25 kda and were > 90% pure. final purification yield was comparable between the two forms: approximately 12 mg of c- or n-his6-vanyn protein from one liter of culture were recovered.

enzymatic activity of pure recombinant vanyn
activities of purified c-his6-vanyn and n-his6-vanyn from s. venezuelae recombinant strains were assayed on commercially available surrogates of peptidoglycan precursors, in parallel with the previously characterized c-his6-vanyn produced by recombinant e. coli <cit> . these results were obtained by the d-amino acid oxidase/peroxidase colorimetric coupled reaction
 <cit> , and confirmed by a fluorimetric assay
 <cit> . as shown in table 
 <dig>  c-his6-vanyn from s. venezuelae cleaved the last d-ala from the tripeptide nα,nε-diacetyl-l-lys-d-ala-d-ala and acetyl-l-lys-d-ala-d-ala, this activity being only slightly affected by the acetylation grade of the lys. the activity was halved if the substrate was the d-ala-d-ala. thus, c-his6-vanyn showed a higher d,d-carboxypeptidase activity  than a d,d-peptidase activity . surprisingly, n-his6-vanyn from s. venezuelae did not show any activity on the three substrates , suggesting that the tag position dramatically influenced enzyme competence.

specific activity  was determined using 40 μg of his6-vanyn added to 10 mm solutions of the indicated compounds. the activity was assayed at 25°c as described in the methods section. results are the average of three independent experiments.

these results were supported by the circular dichroism  spectra of the recombinant proteins. cd spectrum of c-his6-vanyn produced in s. venezuelae overlapped with that of the protein produced in e. coli : analysis of secondary structure indicates a predominance of β-sheets  and ~ 15% of α-helices. this structure content was altered for the n-his6-vanyn , indicating that n-terminal tag interfered with the proper protein folding and secondary structure content of the recombinant enzyme.

resistance phenotype in s. venezuelae recombinant strains
role of different constructs of vanyn, when over-expressed in a glycopeptide-susceptible heterologous host such as s. venezuelae, was investigated in vivo by determining the d,d-peptidase/d,d-carboxypeptidase activity of alkaline cell extracts and the glycopeptide resistance phenotype of recombinant strains. as shown in table 
 <dig>  d,d-peptidase/d,d-carboxypeptidase activity was detectable only in s. venezuelae pij86Ωc-his6-vanyn and s. venezuelae pij86Ωvanyn , but not in s. venezuelae pij86Ωn-his6-vanyn neither in s. venezualae wild-type or in s. venezualae containing the empty vector. table 
 <dig> also reports the minimal inhibitory concentrations  of vancomycin and teicoplanin to the recombinant strains in comparison with the wild-type. accordingly to the expression of the d,d-peptidase/d,d-carboxypeptidase activity, s. venezuelae expressing c-his6-vanyn and s. venezuelae producing vanyn without any tag showed an increased resistance level against both glycopeptides. resistance phenotype of s. venezuelae producing the n-his6-vanyn was the same as in the control strain with empty vector or in the wild-type.

mics of glycopeptides were determined by plating 106 cfu/ml of each strain on agar medium added with different antibiotic concentrations. results are the average of three independent experiments in which the standard deviation was less than 5%. specific activity  was determined in alkaline cell extracts added to 10 mm solutions of acetyl-l-lys-d-ala-d-ala or d-ala-d-ala. the activity was assayed at 25°c as described in the methods section
 <cit> . results are the average of three independent experiments.

these data confirm the role of vanyn in conferring glycopeptide resistance to a susceptible host and indicate that c-terminal his6-vanyn behaved in vivo as the native vanyn, whereas the addition of his <dig> at the n-terminus of the protein abolished its biological activity.

discussion
c-his6-vanyn was previously produced in bl <dig> star e. coli cells as a cytoplasmatic soluble protein
 <cit> . in that case, codon usage optimization of the synthetic gene was essential since e. coli is a low g-c ratio  gram-negative bacterium whereas nonomuraea sp. is a high g-c gram-positive actinomycete. the g-c ratio of vanyn is  <dig> % which is similar to the genomic ratio of the reference s. coelicolor a <dig>  and s. venezuelae eth <dig> 
 <cit> . the g-c ratio of the dbv cluster is  <dig> %. notwithstanding our efforts in optimizing cultivation, induction and purification conditions, the best productivity achieved in recombinant e. coli was  <dig>  mg/l culture 
 <cit> . similar level of expression was obtained by other authors who cloned vanxyc from enterococcus gallinarum bm <dig> in e. coli jm83
 <cit> , vanx from enterococcus faecium bm <dig> in e. coli w3110
 <cit>  and vany from enterococcus faecium bm <dig> in e. coli jm83
 <cit> . vanxyc, vanx and vany are d,d-carboxypeptidases/d,d-peptidases homologous to vanyn involved in conferring glycopeptide resistance to enterococci, which are gram-positive pathogens with low g-c content
 <cit> .

by cloning vanyn from nonomuraea sp. atcc  <dig> in the taxonomically closely related s. venezuelae, pure protein production was at least three folds higher  than in e. coli. since estimated volumetric productivity in the harvested cells was around 30 mg of protein per liter of culture, there is still room to improve the final yield by further optimization of the purification procedure. estimated specific productivity of around 1 mg vanyn per gram of cells in streptomycetes was much higher than the one achieved in e. coli  confirming that streptomycetes are preferable hosts for vanyn production. comparable biomass and protein production were achieved at flask and at 3 l bioreactor-scale: maximum values being one day anticipated in bioreactor runs. fermentation and downstream technologies are well developed for streptomycetes, which are industrially relevant microorganisms producing many valuable antibiotics and other bioactive metabolites
 <cit> ; thus they can be successfully further applied to improving and scaling-up vanyn production.

an important difference between heterologous production of vanyn in recombinant streptomycetes and e. coli is the preferential subcellular localization of the protein. vanyn  contains three different putative domains: a cytoplasmatic domain at the n-terminus , an hydrophobic trans-membrane portion , followed by the c-terminal domain exposed on the external face of cytoplasmatic membrane. this extracellular domain contains conserved motifs  for the coordination of zinc ions and the catalytic active site
 <cit> . in e. coli recombinant cells, c-his6-tagged-vanyn was accumulated in the cytoplasm, whereas in streptomycetes the most  of the tagged enzyme was recovered from the cell wall fraction. the localization of vanyn confirms its role in the extracellular phases of cell wall biosynthesis
 <cit> . the addition of detergents did not improve purification from the whole cell extract, confirming that the protein is easily detached from membranes. vany d,d-carboxypeptidases from glycopeptide resistant enterococci are in fact involved in the extracytoplasmatic hydrolysis of the last d-ala from the udp-pentapeptide pg precursors
 <cit> .

the enzymatic activity and the spectral investigation  confirmed the identity of c-his6-vanyn produced by recombinant cells of either s. venezuelae or e. coli. on substrates that mimic peptidoglycan precursors, vanyn showed d,d-carboxypeptidase and d,d-dipeptidase activity, resembling more vanxyc from vanc-type enterococcus gallinarum <cit>  than typical vany d,d-carboxypeptidases and vanx d,d-peptidases firstly characterized in enterococcus faecium bm4147
 <cit> . on the other hand, the introduction of an histidine hexamer at the n-terminus of vanyn abolishes the enzymatic activity and alters protein secondary structure, suggesting that it interferes with the folding of the active protein. till now, vany family of d,d-carboxypeptidases have not been structurally investigated. the possibility to produce discrete amounts of pure vanyn by using s. venezuelae as a cell factory open the way to better investigate the peculiar bifunctional activity of this d,d-dipeptidase/d,d-carboxypeptidase and its interaction with substrates and inhibitors.

finally, the functional study of recombinant vanyn activity in cellular extracts confirmed the role of this protein in conferring glycopeptide resistance in a susceptible host such as s. venezuelae, which lacks those vanrshax genes commonly considered essential to confer glycopeptide resistance
 <cit> . our data show that when vanyn gene was produced in the biologically active form , its expression conferred resistance in the absence of vanrshax genes, albeit at a reduced level, as previously demonstrated in the homologous producer nonomuraea sp. atcc 39727
 <cit> . as proof of this, expression of the inactive n-his6-vanyn form did not increase the level of resistance towards two glycopeptides  of the recombinant hosts, which remains the same as in the wild-type and as in the control recombinant strain containing only the empty vector.

CONCLUSIONS
streptomyces spp. were demonstrated valuable hosts for the production of specific peptidases, involved in cell wall turnover of glycopeptide resistant microbial cells. the novel d,d-dipeptidase/d,d-carboxypeptidase vanyn from the glycopeptide producer nonomuraea sp. atcc  <dig> was successfully produced in a good yield and in the biologically active form conferring resistance to the glycopeptide susceptible s. venezuelae strain. developing such streptomyces cell factory system for vanyn production opens the way to a further characterization of the enzyme, to a better comprehension of its role in glycopeptide resistance, and to its use as novel biocatalyst.

