BACKGROUND
invertebrate reproductive systems are frequently manipulated by inherited symbionts. in insects, three forms of manipulation, cytoplasmic incompatibility, feminisation of genetic males, and induction of parthenogenesis, are largely the province of a single genus of bacteria, the wolbachia. however, a fourth manipulation, the biasing of secondary host sex ratios in favour of females by killing males, has been shown to have evolved in six different clades of bacteria: group ii spiroplasma from drosophila species, first identified in drosophila willistoni  <cit> ; group vi spiroplasma from a. bipunctata  <cit> , harmonia axyridis  <cit> , danaus chrysippus  <cit>  and anisosticta novemdecimpunctata  <cit> ; γ-proteobacteria, from nasonia vitripennis  <cit>  and cheilomenes sexmaculatus  <cit> ; rickettsia from adalia bipunctata  <cit>  and adalia decempunctata  <cit> ; a flavobacterium from colemegilla maculatus  <cit> , adonia variegata  <cit>  and coccinula sinensis  <cit>  and wolbachia from a. bipunctata, several species of acraea butterfly, first reported in acraea encedon  <cit> , another butterfly, hypolimnas bolina  <cit>  and two drosophila species, d. bifasciata  <cit>  and d. innubila  <cit> . the diversity of male-killers identified to date raises the question as to whether male-killing is a potential property of a few, many or almost all maternally inherited bacteria. to address this question, more bacteria associated with the male-killing phenotype need to be characterised and placed phylogenetically.

in addition, the vertical transmission efficiency of different male-killing bacteria varies from almost perfect  to less than 72% for rickettsia in some samples of a. bipunctata  <cit> . the vertical transmission efficiency is a critical parameter in the dynamics of male-killer invasion and spread  <cit> . assessments of the vertical transmission efficiencies of newly discovered male-killers are thus valuable to allow assessment of whether levels of vertical transmission are consistent within bacterial clades, or vary case by case as a result of interactions between each symbiont and its host.

the aphidophagous coccinellid beetles are a 'hot-spot' for invasion by male-killers  <cit> . aspects of the ecology and certain life-history traits of these beetles mean that female progeny of infected females gain an advantage over those of uninfected females as a result of the death of male siblings, through the reallocation of resources from the dead males. aphidophagous coccinellids lay eggs in batches, indulge in sibling egg cannibalism/consumption and suffer high neonate larval mortality due to starvation if they fail to catch and subdue aphid prey within a short period after dispersing from their egg clutch. consequently, the daughters of females infected with a male-killer will benefit from the consumption of the soma of their dead  brothers. the additional nutrients thus gained, which will be denied to daughters of uninfected females, reduce the starvation likelihood of daughters of infected females, for they have a longer time to search before starving to death. furthermore, they are larger, so that they may be able to catch and subdue a greater size range of aphids  <cit> .

female-biased sex ratios, shown or assumed to result from male-killing have been reported in three species of japanese coccinellid, harmonia axyridis  <cit> , cheilomenes  sexmaculatus  <cit>  and coccinula sinensis  <cit> . we here report the detection and identification of a male-killer in a fourth japanese coccinellid, propylea japonica . we show that the male-killer involved belongs to a bacterial clade known to be associated with male-killing, but not previously reported from japan. finally, we assess the male-killer's vertical transmission efficiency and compare this level with male-killers of the same clade from other coccinellid hosts.

RESULTS
detection of the male-killing trait
the sex ratio  in a sample of p. japonica from fuchu was  <dig>  . this does not differ significantly from 1: <dig> .

the egg hatch rates of  <dig> p. japonica families , all of which produced both male and female progeny, varied from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . ten matrilines, in which egg hatch rates were greater than  <dig>  and progenic sex ratios were not significantly different from 1: <dig>  were designated normal . three families , with hatch rates below  <dig>  produced significantly female biased sex ratios, but with some males, and were designated female biased .

one matriline  produced  <dig> female progeny and no males. the egg hatch rate from this female was  <dig> . this low hatch rate is consistent with male-killing, and in conjunction with the total absence of males leads to the conclusion that line pf <dig> bears a male-killing element, designated sex ratio .

egg hatch rates of the sr and three fb lines were all below  <dig> , while those of the n lines all exceeded  <dig> . the difference between the two groups was significant . the relationship between egg hatch rate and progenic sex ratio is illustrated in figure  <dig>  the prevalence of the trait in this sample depends crucially upon the true infection status of the three fb lines. additional phenotypic and molecular analysis was carried out on these lines and is discussed below.

inheritance and vertical transmission of the male-killing trait
sr line
in crosses designed to examine the inheritance of the male-killing trait in the sr line pf <dig>  two of the pairs  failed to produce sufficient adult progeny for analysis. results from the remaining eight pairings are given in table  <dig>  all the progeny of these eight pairs produced over this period were female , with the egg hatch rates being less than  <dig>  for each pair. the sr status in these lines is maternally inherited.

data from initial crosses of pf <dig> f <dig> females, prior to treatments with tetracycline.

fb and n lines
crosses involving n f <dig> females all had high hatch rates  and produced progenic sex ratios that did not differ significantly from 1: <dig> , irrespective of whether males were drawn from n families, fb families, or from f <dig> progeny of the sr family, pf <dig>  after treatment with tetracycline. further, there was no evidence of a female biased sex ratio in the f <dig> of any of the n families tested.

it was found that the fb lines all had high hatch rates and produced roughly equal numbers of male and female progeny , suggesting that the female bias in these lines may not be due to the presence of a male-killer. this result was assessed further by molecular analysis.

it is concluded that the female bias in pf <dig> is the result of distortion of the secondary sex ratio by a male-killer. furthermore, the sr trait in pf <dig> is maternally inherited with a very high vertical transmission rate.

assessment of vertical transmission efficiency
the vertical transmission efficiency of the sr trait from mother to adult daughter, calculated as  <dig> -   <cit> , assessed from pf <dig>  pf <dig> - <dig>  pf <dig> , pf <dig> , pf <dig>  and the ten additional pf <dig> f <dig> pairs was  <dig>  .

sensitivity to tetracycline
the results of experiments to assess the effect of tetracycline treatment are given in table  <dig>   the egg hatch rates and progenic sex ratios for the pairs administered tetracycline increased following this treatment, indicating that the antibiotic produces alleviation of the effects of the male-killer, as would be expected if it is bacterial. there was no significant change in either trait in the four control pairs.

pre-treatment egg hatch rates and sex ratios are given in table  <dig> 

does tetracycline treatment produce a heritable cure of the sr trait?
as there was no effect of the control treatments on pf <dig> , pf <dig> , pf <dig>  and pf <dig> , it is not surprising that all eight pairs from these lines retained their sr status  in the next generation. conversely, all four females from the two tetracycline treated lines produced increased egg hatch rates and progenic sex ratios that did not differ significantly from 1: <dig> .

results of breeding from female progeny of tetracycline treated lines.

it is concluded that treatment with tetracycline produces a full heritable cure of the sr trait, with an increase in egg hatch rate and concomitant production of male-progeny. the effect of tetracycline treatment occurred within four days of the commencement of treatment. these factors strongly suggest that the male-killer is bacterial in nature.

identification of the agent associated with male-killing
to determine the identity of the causal agent of male-killing in pf <dig>  on the assumption that the male-killer was a bacterium, the 16s rrna gene was characterised from two f <dig> females from pf <dig> 

blast database comparison of the 16s rdna sequence isolated from two pf <dig> f <dig> females listed rickettsia bellii as the closest match  . it is concluded that the sr trait in p. japonica is caused by a male-killing α-proteobacterium of the genus rickettsia.

correlation between the sr trait and rickettsia presence
in order to ascertain whether rickettsia presence correlates with the male-killing phenotype a larger number of individuals were tested. females from the parental, f <dig> and f <dig> generations of the sr line, pf <dig>  individuals from each of the three fb lines, along with one female and one male from each of seven of the n lines, three female progeny from pf <dig>  after golden syrup treatment and two male and two female progeny from each of pf <dig>  and pf <dig>  produced after tetracycline treatment, were screened via a rickettsia-specific pcr from the  <dig> kda antigen gene. in addition, the parental female of one line  and an f <dig> female of another  that had failed to produce enough progeny for analysis, were tested in the same way.

none of the individuals from n lines gave a positive result with rickettsia-specific primers, confirming that absence of the bacteria coincides with absence of the male-killing trait. conversely, all the individuals from the pf <dig> matriline, gave a positive  <dig> kda antigen gene pcr result , with the exception of one female, produced in the control line pf <dig>  from the antibiotic sensitivity experiment. all the other individuals from the antibiotic sensitivity experiment  tested positive for rickettsia. this confirms that the bacteria in line pf <dig> are vertically inherited with very high transmission efficiency. furthermore, it suggests that where alleviation of the symptoms of male-killing has occurred following antibiotic treatment, bacteria  may still be present.

the situation in the fb individuals is less clear cut. for pf <dig>  six f <dig> females were tested, one of which was positive. for pf <dig>  seven f <dig> females were tested, three of which were positive. although larger numbers of individuals would be required to be confident that this was an accurate indicator, these results suggest very low vertical transmission efficiency in these two lines. this could be due to a very low bacterial density in the parental female, meaning that only a small proportion of her eggs inherited the infection. alternatively, there may be some host interaction with the bacteria that reduces their transmission to the eggs. for pf <dig>  the parental female tested negative, suggesting that the female bias in this line may have another cause and can be considered to represent a type one error.

the two female individuals  lacking breeding data that were tested did produce a pcr product band. this indicates that they were infected with rickettsia and it may be suggested that if they had produced sufficient progeny for analysis they would have exhibited the phenotypic indicators of male-killing.

combining the phenotypic data with the molecular identification of rickettsia infection in the two incompletely ascertained lines brings the prevalence of the male-killing trait in this sample of p. japonica to  <dig>  .

it is concluded that where it has been possible to test, rickettsia presence correlates with the sr trait, but that there is some variation in the phenotypic expression of the trait, either due to interaction with host factor, low bacterial density or variable bacterial vertical transmission efficiency.

phylogenetic analysis
to assess the phylogenetic position of the rickettsia male-killer from p. japonica two phylogenetic trees were produced. sequences chosen for comparison comprised those most similar as identified by a blast search  <cit>  and other relevant related bacteria, with known reproductive phenotypic effects. where possible the same species were included in both trees to allow comparisons between the two to be made, however data were not always available to allow this.

the 16s rdna sequence from the p. japonica male-killer was aligned with those from  <dig> other rickettsias and two outgroups  . this tree is not particularly informative. the p. japonica male-killer appears most closely related to r. canadensis, followed by r. bellii and, interestingly, a secondary endosymbiont of a. pisum. however, the bootstrap values on this tree, with the exception of that separating the outgroups from the rest, are all fairly low. also full 16s rdna sequences for the a. bipunctata and a. decempunctata male-killers were not available meaning this tree can not be used for phylogenetic comparison with other ladybird male-killers. hence, a second tree was produced, aligning the  <dig> kda antigen gene sequences from the p. japonica male-killer and those from  <dig> other rickettsia species, including the male-killers from a. bipunctata and a. decempunctata .

this tree is broadly consistent with the 16s tree, although again many of the bootstrap values are low. the ladybird male-killers form a clade distinct from the other rickettsias. the p. japonica male-killer is most closely related to that from a. bipunctata from the u.k., whereas the male-killer from a. bipunctata from denmark clusters with that from a. decempunctata. this is suggestive of horizontal transfer between ladybird species .

discussion
the results of these studies have revealed sex ratio distortion in a single matriline of p. japonica, leading to severely female biased sex ratios in this line over three generations. the trait is maternally inherited, is sensitive to tetracycline treatment and shows a strong correlation with presence of a rickettsia. in addition, the same bacteria appear to produce a much weaker male-killing phenotype in two other matrilines, leading to less strongly, but still significantly, female-biased sex ratios in these lines.

the phylogenetic analysis of this rickettsia male-killer confirms that it is closely related to the other male-killers in the analysis. further, the  <dig> kda antigen tree provides some evidence of horizontal transfer between ladybird hosts, as the male-killers in the two populations of a. bipunctata are more closely related to those in p. japonica and a. decempunctata, than they are to each other. whilst there has been no demonstration of how ladybirds might acquire male-killers in the wild, it is tantalizing to note that the aphid prey species a. pisum contains bacteria phylogenetically related to those causing male-killing in the three ladybird species. further molecular investigation of these bacteria, involving more rapidly evolving regions of the genome may allow further insight into possible origins of bacterial male-killers.

as similar members of bacterial clades are found to cause male-killing in related hosts, such as a single family of beetles, comparisons of the vertical transmission efficiencies of the male-killers can be made both within and between bacterial clades. in this study, the third instance of male-killing within the coccinellidae has been found for rickettsia. flavobacteria and spiroplasma have been identified in  <dig> and  <dig> instances respectively . in addition, it has previously been established that male-killing is caused by two different strains of wolbachia in a single species of coccinellid, a. bipunctata  <cit> .

examination of the vertical transmission efficiencies of the bacterial male-killers in each of these four clades  shows transmission efficiencies to be highly variable both between clades and in most cases within clades.

variation in vertical transmission is most clearly demonstrated by the rickettsial male-killers. for some lines of p. japonica the vertical transmission efficiency appeared to be very low , based on assessment of male-killer status via molecular analysis, whilst in pf <dig> it appeared to be close to 100%. the a. decempunctata male-killer exhibits vertical transmission efficiency greater than 90%, at least for some lines, whereas rickettsia infected lines of a. bipunctata consistently have lower vertical transmission efficiencies of between 72% and 87%. again there is evidence of inter-individual variation in different matrilines of a. bipunctata, with lines exhibiting vertical transmission efficiencies as low as 54%  <cit> .

the male-killing flavobacterium in c. maculata shows highly variable vertical transmission, both between families and within the lifetime of single females that exhibit a progressive sex ratio trait. this differs from the vertical transmission efficiency of the a. variegata male-killer, which is generally high, but can exhibit progressive sex ratio  and that of the c. sinensis male-killer which is high, with few males being produced by infected females.

whilst caution must be exercised when considering single lines, particularly when the number of individuals may be small, it is pertinent to note that variation in either the host or endosymbiont genotype is likely to play a part in these differences. although it is not possible to rule out environmental factors affecting the phenotypic expression of the male-killer, it is unlikely that these can be the main causes of the differences seen here. this is due to the fact that the breeding experiments for all six of these host species were carried out in the same laboratory under fairly constant conditions.

the correlation between rickettsia presence and the sr trait in this matriline, ascertained using the  <dig> kda gene was exact, apart from in progeny of tetracycline treated females. here, females 'cured' of the sr trait and their male siblings gave positive results when assayed for rickettsia. there are two possible explanations of the apparent presence of rickettsia in non-killed males and 'cured' females, despite the evidence that tetracycline produces a full heritable cure of the trait. first, bacteria may be present in very low numbers in the progeny of treated individuals. if the pathogenicity of the rickettsia towards males is density dependent, as has been suggested e.g. for the rickettsia male-killer of adalia decempunctata  <cit> , there will be alleviation of male-killing expression, despite continued bacterial presence. tetracycline is bacteriostatic, hence time is required for the bacteria to be eliminated by the host. some bacteria may pass into the egg and hence into the progeny, despite having their growth inhibited by the antibiotic. as pcr is a very sensitive test, a very small number of target molecules in the dna input would be enough to generate a visible product. second, the apparent presence of rickettsia, may be the result of pcr amplification of dna from dead bacteria. bacteria may pass into the egg before death and dna from dead bacteria may be amplified. the alleviation of male-killing symptoms would then be due to a lack of viable bacteria and not necessarily dependent on bacterial density.

a model in which a threshold bacterial density is required to cause male-killing can similarly explain the situation in the  <dig> fb lines for which a proportion of the female progeny tested positive for rickettsia presence, but which were part of sibships where males survived. if it is assumed that the maternal bacterial levels were low, survival of male embryos and hence non-sr phenotypic status would follow. however, it could be argued that in this instance increase in bacterial numbers should lead either to late male-killing or progressive sex ratio once enough time has elapsed and potentially that once a high enough bacterial density had been established in the parental female, high vertical transmission  would be exhibited by all infected females. in this sample of p. japonica, however, virtually none of the unhatched eggs were grey. this suggests that, at least during egg development, male-killing occurs very early and there is no further male-death later in development after bacterial multiplication. this supports the suggestion that host factors are affecting the actions of the male-killer; however, it would fit equally well with a model in which the endosymbiont either kills early or not at all. interestingly, male-killing wolbachia in d. innubila show variation in transmission and expression, and this variation is correlated with the density of wolbachia within host flies  <cit>  and has been shown not to be related to host genetic factors  <cit> . it would be worthwhile investigating both male-specific effects on egg hatch-rate and progenic sex ratio, as well as screening larger numbers of males and females for rickettsia presence and testing for variation in bacterial density in fb and sr families of this species.

CONCLUSIONS
propylea japonica is host to a rickettsia male-killer that is closely related to rickettsia male-killers in two other ladybird host species. phylogenetic analysis indicates that there may have been horizontal transmission of rickettsia within the clade of ladybird male-killers. there is wide variation in vertical transmission efficiency of the rickettsia male-killers, both within and between the different host species, indicating that host genetic variation may be influencing the phenotypic expression of these male-killers.

