BACKGROUND
retrotransposons are a major component of the genomes of higher eukaryotes and have been identified as a significant source of loss-of-function and regulatory mutations  <cit> . over evolutionary time host genomes have developed mechanisms to mitigate the mutational potential of retrotransposons by transcriptionally silencing or otherwise blocking their transpositional activity  <cit> . one of the primary mechanisms by which retrotransposons are transcriptionally silenced is by methylation and/or other epigenetic mechanisms. indeed it has been hypothesized that most, if not all, epigenetic mechanisms originally evolved as a defense against retrotransposons and have subsequently been co-opted for other essential cellular functions  <cit> .

approximately 10% of the drosophila melanogaster genome is comprised of retrotransposons, the majority of which are ltr retrotransposons. ltr retrotransposon insertions are a major source of mutations in d. melanogaster and are believed to have contributed significantly to genome evolution  <cit> . while histone acetylation and other epigenetic mechanisms are believed to play an essential role in dosage compensation and other vital functions in d. melanogaster, little is known about the role of these mechanisms in the regulation of retrotransposons in this species . in this paper, we present genetic and molecular evidence that the histone acetyltransferase, mof, is involved in the transcriptional repression of the copia and perhaps other families of ltr retrotransposons in drosophila. our findings are consistent with the hypothesis that mof may have originally functioned to silence retrotransposons and was subsequently co-opted for its role in dosage compensation.

RESULTS
a series of drosophila melanogaster strains transformed with a copia ltr-cat  reporter construct  was monitored for cat activity in larvae and adult flies carrying the construct in the hemizygous vs. the homozygous state. inconsistent with a simple additive model, cat activity was found, on average, to be ~7-fold higher in strains homozygous vs. hemizygous for the construct . in contrast, cat activity of strains in which two copies of the hemizygous construct were present at non-homologous locations was consistent with an additive model . thus, the observed non-additive effect between hemizygous and homozygous copia elements is cis-dependent.

the results demonstrate a nearly seven-fold average increase in cat activity in flies homozygous vs. hemizygous for the copia ltr-cat construct

cat activity of transformed d. melanogaster strains carrying a single hemizygous ltr-cat construct inserted at various locations.

cat activity of strains carrying two hemizygous copies of the ltr-cat construct  are approximately equal to the values expected under the additive model .

previous studies in other experimental systems have demonstrated that transposable elements are often partially or totally repressed due to host-mediated modifications in chromatin structure . to determine if the non-additive effect we observed in copia expression is also associated with alterations in chromatin structure, we tested the ability of the apai restriction enzyme to access and digest a site in the copia ltr-cat construct in larval chromatin extracts  <cit> . the results indicate that hemizygous copies of the copia ltr-cat construct are being down regulated due, at least in part, to a chromatin mediated effect .

a number of genes have been shown to regulate chromatin structure in drosophila . to determine if members of this class of genes are involved in repressing the expression of hemizygous copies of the copia ltr-cat construct, we monitored cat activity in larvae or adult flies hemizygous for the construct within a series of genetic backgrounds mutant for genes known to affect chromatin structure in drosophila  <cit>  . with the exception of mof <dig>  each of the alleles tested display a dominant mutant phenotype in heterozygotes and are  lethal when homozygous. males hemizygous for the mutant  mof1allele develop to the 3rd instar stage but fail to metamorphose and hatch. in contrast, the phenotype and viability of females homozygous for the mutant mof <dig> allele is unaffected.

copia ltr-cat in a transformed strain  made wild type or heterozygous for dominant mutant alleles of genes known to affect chromatin structure [low-lightening of white; hdac  <dig>  hdac  <dig> -histone deacetylase; e <dig> , e28-enhancer of zeste; psc25-posterior sex combs; sxlfl-sex lethal or hemizygous for the x-linked recessive mof <dig>  allele. a slight but significant decrease in activity was observed in strains heterozygous for the dominant mutant hdac  <dig> , hdac  <dig> , e <dig> and psc <dig> alleles. a highly significant increase in activity was observed in the strain hemizygous for the recessive mutant mof <dig> allele

expression levels of copia ltr-cat in males made hemizygous for the construct in a series of transformed strains  in wild-type vs. mof <dig> genetic backgrounds. the results indicate a position independent repression of hemizygous copies of the copia ltr-cat by the wild-type mof allele .

no significant effect on ltr-cat expression was detected in genetic backgrounds heterozygous for the dominant mutant low, e <dig> and sxl fl alleles . flies heterozygous for the dominant mutant hdac  <dig>  hdac  <dig>  e <dig> and psc <dig> alleles and for the presence of an extra y chromosome or absence of a y chromosome displayed a slight but significant  decrease in cat activity relative to controls . in contrast, a highly significant  increase in the expression of the copia ltr-cat constructs was observed in male larvae mutant for the recessive  x-linked mof  <dig> allele  . this increase in expression in the mutant mof  <dig> background was observed in all of the independent copia ltr-cat transformants examined . thus, the effect is not dependent upon the chromosomal location of the construct.

the protein product of the mof gene  is a member of the myst family of histone acetyltransferases and, as part of the drosophila msl  complex  <cit> , has been shown to play an essential role in dosage compensation . our results are consistent with the effect of mof on copia ltr-cat expression being chromatin-mediated .

since most active transposable elements  are considered to be hemizygous in wild collected populations, we tested the effect of the mutant mof  <dig> allele on global expression levels of copia and other families of ltr retrotransposons in a strain established from a natural population . the results of a series of rt-pcr and northern analyses presented in figure  <dig> demonstrate that males carrying the mutant mof  <dig> allele display a consistent and significant increase in the expression of all families of ltr retrotransposons examined. this suggests that the association of mof with down regulated expression of hemizygous copies of copia may extend generally to other families of ltr retrotransposons in drosophila.

while mof is known to bind predominately to the male x-chromosome, weak binding also occurs at multiple locations on autosomes of drosophila melanogaster  <cit>  . we observed a substantially reduced level of autosomal binding of mof in drosophila simulans, a species closely related to melanogaster but known to have significantly fewer numbers of ltr retrotransposons   <cit> . this suggests that at least some of the autosomal binding of mof may be to ltr retrotransposon sequences.

to directly determine if mof can bind to copia elements, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation  analyses using the drosophila melanogaster kc <dig>  cell line and previously described drosophila mof, msl- <dig> and msl- <dig> antibodies  <cit> . in males, these three proteins combine with msl- <dig>  and are sequestered to the x-chromosome as part of the msl complex  <cit> . in females, mof, msl- <dig> and msl- <dig> have been shown to be associated with all chromosomes at a reduced but significant level  <cit> . since copia elements are known to be located on the x-chromosome, we chose to conduct our chip assays with the female kc <dig> cell line in order not to confound copia specific binding by mof with the more generalized x-chromosome binding that occurs in males. spt <dig> is an autosomal gene previously shown not to be subject to dosage compensation  <cit> . rox is a well-established binding site for mof within the context of the msl complex  <cit> . since it has been shown that msl- <dig>  msl- <dig> and mof bind with reduced affinity to the x-chromosome in females, we selected rox as a putative positive control.

the results presented in figure  <dig> indicate that all three proteins bind to copia elements in vivo  but presumably not within the context of the msl complex since msl- <dig> is not expressed in females . previous studies have demonstrated that the function of mof within the context of the msl complex is to acetylate lysine  <dig> on histone h <dig>   <cit> , resulting in chromatin decondensation and increased transcription. in contrast, our results indicated that mof is associated with reduced transcription of hemizygous copies of copia and perhaps other drosophila ltr retrotransposons. although the acetylation of histones is generally associated with transcriptional activation, it can also be involved in transcriptional repression  <cit> . further studies will be required to determine the molecular basis of these findings.

discussion
a determination of the mechanistic basis of mof mediated silencing of copia remains to be determined. nevertheless, the fact that hemizygous copies of copia and perhaps other families of drosophila ltr retrotransposons are the target of epigenetic repression, appears to be analogous to msud  in neurospora where dna unpaired in meiosis causes silencing of the unpaired sequence and all dna homologous to it  <cit> . similar phenomena have been reported in c. elegans  <cit>  and mice  <cit> , and have been associated with epigenetically mediated modifications in chromatin structure. our results indicate that the repression of hemizygous copies of copia and other drosophila ltr retrotransposons is also mediated by changes in chromatin structure. the fact that this repression appears to be mediated by mof implies a relationship between retrotransposons and the evolution of dosage compensation in drosophila.

while it is generally acknowledged that mof plays an essential role in equalizing the expression of x-linked and autosomal genes in drosophila males, the mechanism by which this is achieved remains controversial  <cit> . one model postulates that mof, in association with other members of the msl complex, binds to the hemizygous x-chromosome resulting in a two-fold increase in x-linked gene expression  <cit> . according to this model, mof acetylates h <dig> on lysine  <dig>  resulting in a relaxed chromatin configuration and a consequent elevation in gene expression. while our data indicate that mof interacts with hemizygous copies of copia, the consequence is repression rather than elevation in expression. this suggests that the regulatory functions of drosophila mof may be context dependent.

the alternative "inverse regulator model" of dosage compensation postulates that hemizygosity of the male x-chromosome results is a genome-wide elevation in gene expression  <cit> . the significance of the sequestering of the msl complex to the male x-chromosome in this model is two-fold. first removal of the mof acetyltransferase from autosomes is postulated to attenuate the increased level of autosomal gene expression due to the x dosage affect. secondly, the binding of the msl complex prevents x-linked genes from responding to the elevated levels h4ac <dig>  the mechanism underlying this second proposed function is unknown, although it has been demonstrated that the expression of at least some x-linked and autosomal genes are significantly elevated in male mof mutants  <cit> . this suggests that mof alone or within the context of the msl complex can act to repress expression of at least some x-linked genes. this finding is consistent with our observation that mof represses copia expression in the hemizygous condition.

since retrotransposons significantly predate the evolution of dosage compensation, our results suggest that the original function of mof and perhaps other members of the msl complex was to silence retrotransposons and that these functions were later co-opted in the evolution of dosage compensation in drosophila.

CONCLUSIONS
a growing body of evidence in both plants and animals indicates that epigenetic mechanisms originally evolved as a defense against transposable elements and were subsequently co-opted for a variety of cellular functions  <cit> . our findings are consistent with this model and suggest that at least some of the mechanisms underlying dosage compensation in drosophila may have their origins in processes originally evolved to defend against the mutagenic potential of transposable elements.

