BACKGROUND
multi-cellular eukaryotes are made of two fundamental cell types—germ cell and somatic cell. the distinguishing characteristic of a germ cell is its capability to undergo meiosis. meiosis is a highly specialized cell division that converts diploid germ cells into haploid sperm or eggs, cells that are primed to meet for the propagation of the organism. mammalian meiosis is initiated by an extrinsic signal—retinoic acid—and consists of meiosis i and ii, each of which is divided into prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase  <cit> . prophase of meiosis i  is the first and most complex stage of meiosis, when maternal and paternal homologs pair to allow the exchange of genetic information. based on chromosomal packaging, prophase itself is subdivided into five stages: leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene, and diakinesis.

although the components of meiosis are similar in both sexes—pre-meiotic germ cell proliferation and differentiation, initiation and progression through meiosis, and gamete maturation—the fundamentals are dramatically different with respect to timing, outcome, and ability to produce normal gametes  <cit> . the first wave of spermatogenesis begins in puberty and proceeds relatively synchronously, which is followed by continuous and asynchronous spermatogenesis throughout life. in contrast, initiation of oogenesis is confined to a narrow window of fetal development. the entire pool of oocytes initiates meiosis in a semi-synchronized manner, but the process arrests at the end of prophase, before birth. one arrested oocyte, on average, then resumes oogenesis during each ovulation cycle starting from puberty  <cit> . at the end of meiosis, a single egg is produced in females, compared with four sperm in males. an additional difference is that the incidence of aneuploid gametes produced in humans is at least an order of magnitude greater in the female than the male  <cit> .

meiotic entry and progression require highly precise and ordered gene expression. identifying these gene expression signatures is imperative to circumvent clinical disorders, including infertility, birth defects, and germ cell tumors. however, our understanding of the factors that control germ cell entry into and progression through meiosis remains rudimentary. this is because studies of mammalian germ cells are usually limited to in vivo animal models. further, oocytes enter meiosis during fetal life, when access to ovarian tissue is extremely limited. while time-series transcriptome studies of mammalian gonads have delineated the temporal sequence of genome-wide expression  <cit> , identifying germ cell-specific genes necessary for meiosis has been difficult due to the mixture of germ and somatic cells in gonads, each of which contributes to the total transcriptome. although it is possible to isolate germ cells from the testis using physical separation methods  <cit> , isolation of pure oocyte populations from the fetal ovary has been challenging due to the limited amount of ovarian tissue. further, gene expression and cell physiology may differ in sorted germ cell samples versus in vivo populations, and the purity of isolated samples has been questioned.

ideally, germ cell expression signals would be deciphered from whole-gonadal expression without physically isolating germ cells. here, we applied a machine-learning algorithm, support vector machine , to predict mouse germ cell genes during meiotic initiation and prophase from time-course gonadal microarray profiles. this timeframe was selected for two reasons. first, prophase is the most important and complicated stage of meiosis. second, the entire germ cell pool progresses through prophase in a relatively synchronized fashion during oogenesis and the first wave of spermatogenesis, thus global gene expression can be monitored by microarrays. our approach allowed us to locate hidden germ cell patterns at high resolution and outperformed other methods in detecting germ cell-specific expression from mixed gonadal samples. further, our method ranked genome-wide mouse genes according to the probability of being expressed by germ cells, enabling prioritization of candidate genes for experimental follow-up. in summary, results from this study increase our knowledge of germ cell-specific expression during the critical stage of meiotic initiation and prophase. predicted germ cell genes advance our understanding of the genetic control of germ cell development, sex-specific differences in meiosis, as well as factors predisposing to infertility and birth defects.

RESULTS
computational models to predict germ cell genes during meiotic initiation and prophase
germ cells, but not somatic cells, of the testis and ovary undergo meiosis. microarray profiles of mammalian gonads, however, record combined signals from both germ cells and somatic cells. we built svm classifiers to predict mouse germ cell genes in meiotic initiation and prophase from gonadal microarray data. svm identified a combination of expression patterns in the microarray profile that maximally separated genes expressed by germ cells from those not expressed by germ cells. we developed two versions of the svm classifier: the spermatocyte model predicted germ cell genes using spermatocyte training examples and microarray studies on postnatal testis during prophase of the first wave of spermatogenesis; the oocyte model predicted germ cell genes using oocyte training examples and microarray studies on embryonic ovary during prophase  <cit> . genes known to be expressed by germ cells in prophase served as the positive training set, and genes known not to be expressed by germ cells served as the negative training set. our positive training data were all derived from single-gene studies  <cit> . importantly, the training data were completely independent from the microarray studies, which served as the features of the svm classifiers.

for each gene in the mouse genome, our germ cell models predicted the probability the gene was expressed by germ cells during meiotic initiation and prophase. the probability ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  where  <dig> indicated the gene was not expressed by germ cells, and  <dig> indicated the gene was expressed by germ cells. we examined the model prediction on mouse genes genome-wide. a clear bimodal distribution was observed for predicted probabilities from both the spermatocyte model and oocyte model: most genes had either high or low probability of being germ cell genes . this demonstrated that our models built upon the training set could predict germ cell expression from analysis of whole-gonad microarray data. the top-predicted spermatocyte genes and oocyte genes are listed in additional file 1: tables s1-s <dig> 

performance evaluation of the germ cell models
cross-validation is to assess whether a statistical model can be generalized to datasets independent of the training data used for building the model. to evaluate the classification accuracy of our germ cell models, we employed a five-fold cross-validation, whereby 80% of the training examples were used for building the classifier while the remaining 20% were reserved for evaluation and the process iterated five times. we repeated the five-fold cross-validation  <dig> times, and then sorted genes in the descending order of predicted probability of being a germ cell gene. precision and recall were computed from the ranked sequence of genes. precision is the fraction of correctly predicted germ cell genes over predicted germ cell genes. a perfect precision of  <dig> means that every predicted germ cell gene is true. recall is the fraction of correctly predicted germ cell genes over all germ cell genes. a recall of  <dig> means complete coverage of germ cell genes, i.e., all germ cell genes are predicted to be true. we plotted precision-recall curves to display results from cross-validations of the germ cell models .

&random precision was the precision when recall equaled one.

*the value was computed based on linear interpolation.

the precision of identifying a spermatocyte gene at random was 45% based on the training data . the spermatocyte model reached a precision of 90% at 10% recall, a two-fold improvement from random precision. the precision of identifying an oocyte gene at random was 25%, as estimated from the training data . the oocyte model yielded a precision of 94% at 10% recall, close to a four-fold increase from the random precision. average precisions of 78% and 52% were achieved for the spermatocyte model and oocyte model, respectively, equivalent to  <dig>  and  <dig> -fold increments of random precisions. the average recall is 68% for the spermatocyte model and 57% for the oocyte model. these results suggest that our models are highly accurate in predicting top-ranked germ cell genes, but not necessarily sensitive in overall classification of germ and non-germ cell genes.

we further evaluated the performance of germ cell models by receiver operating characteristic  curves . true positive rate  is the fraction of correctly predicted germ cell genes over all germ cell genes while false positive rate is the fraction of incorrectly predicted germ cell genes over all non-germ cell genes. we observed that the spermatocyte model performed better than the oocyte model based on the area under the roc curve . however, the lower left portion of the roc curves indicated comparable performance. for a true positive rate of 10%, the spermatocyte and oocyte models showed a false positive rate of 1% and  <dig> %, respectively, suggesting the top-ranked germ cell genes are the most reliable predictions.

performance comparison with other prediction methods
to further assess the performance of the germ cell models, we developed two alternative approaches to identify germ cell genes from microarray studies of whole gonads. the first was to directly extract genes that were preferentially expressed in the gonad. training genes were ranked by their gonadal expression levels in microarray studies, and precision and recall were computed from this sorted list . at 10% recall, precisions of 76% and 67% were reached for expression levels of the testis and ovary, respectively, equivalent to 14% and 27% precision reductions compared to the corresponding germ cell models. the average precision of testis expression levels was 67%, 11% lower than that of the spermatocyte model. the average precision of ovary expression levels was 59%, 7% higher than that of the oocyte model.

the second approach was to compute pearson correlation of gonadal expression across prophase for each training gene pair. pairs of two germ cell genes or two non-germ cell genes were positive correlation examples, while pairs of one germ cell gene and one non-germ cell gene were negative correlation examples. training gene pairs were sorted in descending order of correlation coefficient, and precision and recall were computed from the sorted list . the results showed that precisions at 10% recall and average precisions were both close to random precisions, suggesting limited power of this method in predicting germ cell genes.

it is also possible to identify new germ cell genes by performing hierarchical clustering on microarray profiles across all time points of meiotic prophase . genes specifically expressed in germ cells  exhibited a particular expression pattern, which allowed separating them from other genes. the advantage of our germ cell models over hierarchical clustering is that they can prioritize genes for experimental testing based on the probability of being germ cell genes.

performance comparison with microarray expression of male germ cell isolates
although it remains challenging to isolate a very small number of oocytes from the embryonic ovary, techniques have been developed to isolate male germ cells of different stages with reasonable purity. two published studies performed global expression profiling on spermatogonia and spermatocytes isolated via gravity sedimentation and sequential enzymatic digestion  <cit> . spermatogonia undergo proliferation and differentiation prior to meiotic initiation; pachytene spermatocytes are in the prophase stage. therefore, we evaluated expression levels of isolated spermatogonia and pachytene cells in predicting spermatocyte genes during meiotic initiation and prophase.

training genes were ranked by their expression levels in germ cell isolates, and precision and recall were computed from this sorted list . at 10% recall, pachytene spermatocytes reached higher precision while spermatogonia had lower precision compared to the spermatocyte model. the average precision of the spermatocyte model, however, was superior to any isolate expression. this comparison suggests that svm prediction of germ cell genes from whole-gonadal expression achieved comparable performance to the expression of germ cell isolates, but without going through the tedious experimental isolation procedure.

&random precision was the precision when recall equaled one.

*the value was computed based on linear interpolation or extrapolation.

characterization of predicted germ cell genes
our models assigned probabilities to mouse genes genome-wide, allowing prioritization of potential germ cell genes for analysis. we focused on the top- <dig>  predicted spermatocyte genes and oocyte genes; limited overlap existed between the two gene lists . we first identified the chromosome location of predicted germ cell genes. strikingly, both top spermatocyte and oocyte genes were significantly enriched on the x chromosome, and the enrichment was more significant in the female than the male . no enrichment was observed in any other chromosome: 1– <dig> and y.

we performed the gene ontology  enrichment analyses to characterize the function of the top- <dig>  germ cell genes . these genes had annotations consistent with the germ cell function during meiotic initiation and prophase. go terms directly relevant to meiosis included “meiosis”, “mitosis”, “cell cycle”, and “cell division”. recombination is the hallmark event of prophase, in which two homologous chromosomes pair and exchange genetic information through dna double strand breaks and repairs. recombination-relevant go terms consisted of “response to dna damage stimulus” and “dna repair”. other go terms described general transcriptional and translational regulation, including “mrna transport”, “mrna processing”, “chromatin modification”, “protein transport”, “regulation of translation”, and “ubiquitination”.

essential genes are required for mouse viability. we determined whether predicted germ cell genes in meiotic prophase were enriched for essential genes. mouse essential genes were obtained from the database of mouse genome informatics based on the phenotype of homozygous knockouts   <cit> . there were  <dig>  essential genes among  <dig>  genes genome-wide. thus, the chance of identifying an essential gene at random was 7%. genome-wide genes were ranked in descending order of probability of being a germ cell gene, and the percentage of essential genes was computed with an increment of  <dig>  genes. as a control, we randomized the order of genome-wide genes and again calculated the percentage of essential genes with an increment of  <dig>  genes . we found the top genes predicted from both the spermatocyte model and the oocyte model were enriched for essential genes. the fraction of essential genes was 9% for the top- <dig>  spermatocyte genes and 12% for the top- <dig>  oocyte genes. the percentage of essential genes decreased with the inclusion of more genes along the sorted list and eventually reached 7%, the random level of essential genes. in contrast, the fraction of essential genes stayed constant at 7% for the randomized list of genes. the fraction of essential genes was significantly higher in the sorted list than the randomized list for both the spermatocyte model and oocyte model .

potential transcription factors activating predicted germ cell genes
meiotic initiation and progression through prophase depends on a robust, germ cell-specific transcription program. however, the transcription factors for prophase genes remain uncharacterized. here, we uncovered putative transcription factors by detecting over-represented sequence motifs in the promoter regions of the top- <dig>  predicted germ cell genes using fire  <cit> .

one cg-rich motif was significantly enriched among the top- <dig>  spermatocyte genes . this motif was identified as the binding site for c2h2-type zinc finger domains. the closest matching transcription factor was hinfp, which activates histone h <dig> gene transcription at the g1/s phase transition  <cit> . hinfp was highly expressed in prophase of spermatogenesis, but its function during germ cell development has never been reported.

one cg-rich motif was also significantly over-represented among the top- <dig>  oocyte genes. although this motif was different from the one enriched among top spermatocyte genes, it was also recognized as the binding site for c2h2-type zinc finger domains; both motifs had a position bias towards transcription start sites . sp <dig> was the transcription factor most closely associated with the oocyte cg-motif. sp <dig> binds to cg-rich motifs and regulates the expression of a large number of genes involved in a variety of processes. in particular, sp <dig> mediates transcriptional activation of male germ cell genes that are expressed during meiotic initiation and prophase  <cit> . one lim homeodomain motif was also enriched among the top- <dig>  oocyte genes, and exhibited a strong positive co-occurrence with the cg-rich motif. lim-homeodomain proteins play fundamental roles in tissue patterning and differentiation  <cit> . although lhx <dig> was identified as the best matching transcription factor for this motif, it was barely expressed in the embryonic ovary and had no association with germ cell development. instead, lhx <dig> is known to express in the embryonic ovary and is essential for mouse gonad formation  <cit> . our results suggest that lhx <dig> might be a potential regulator for oocyte genes during meiotic initiation and progression.

potential micrornas repressing predicted non-germ cell genes
like transcription factors, micrornas have emerged as critical developmental regulators. micrornas are small endogenous rnas that typically bind their target 3’utrs through exact or near-exact complementarity. this binding event leads to translational repression and mrna degradation of target genes. we were interested in identifying micrornas that could potentially repress non-germ cell genes predicted from the models.

we obtained target genes of mouse micrornas from two databases that used distinct prediction algorithms: targetscanmouse and miranda  <cit> . our germ cell models assigned probabilities of prophase expression to genome-wide mouse genes. thus, for each microrna, we calculated the area under the roc curve to evaluate whether the targets of the microrna were predictive for non-germ cell genes. in this way, we identified four and five micrornas from the spermatocyte model and oocyte model, respectively, that may mediate the repression of non-germ cell genes . the expression and function of most of these micrornas have not been characterized. all these micrornas are located on autosomes except mmu-mir- <dig>  which was x-linked and predicted to inhibit oocyte genes. studies have revealed that mmu-mir- <dig> was ubiquitously expressed in many adult mouse tissues, including the testis and ovary. in particular, it was expressed in isolated spermatogonia, suggesting a potential function in regulating mrnas during early stage of spermatogenesis  <cit> . our result indicates that mmu-mir- <dig> might play a conserved role in pre-meiotic oocytes.

an auc value was calculated for each microrna in targetscanmouse   <cit>  and miranda   <cit>  to evaluate whether microrna targets overlap with predicted non-germ cell genes. top- <dig> micrornas based on auc values were obtained from each of the two databases. the micrornas identified from both databases are shown in the table.

experimental validation of predicted germ cell genes
our models predicted preferential localization of germ cell genes on the x chromosome. we further focused on x-linked spermatocyte genes because functional characterization of knockout mice was relatively easy. males have one copy of x-linked genes, thus the phenotype of loss-of-function mutations would not be masked by a second allele. among top- <dig>  spermatocyte genes,  <dig> were x-linked and unique to the male, i.e., not overlapping with top- <dig>  oocyte genes. we manually went through the list to identify candidates that were not previously linked to spermatocyte expression and function. rps6ka <dig>  emerged as an interesting candidate because it encodes a growth-factor-regulated protein kinase and is a known disease gene for which knockout mouse lines and commercial antibodies are available  <cit> . mutations in this gene are responsible for coffin–lowry syndrome, which is characterized in male patients by mental retardation, growth retardation, and skeletal anomalies. the estimated incidence is 1: <dig>  to 1: <dig>   <cit> . in addition, our previous co-expression study also identified rps6ka <dig> as a candidate prophase gene  <cit> .

to verify rps6ka <dig> as a spermatocyte gene, we performed immunofluorescence on cross-sections of adult mouse testis using commercial rps6ka <dig> antibody  <cit> . we found rps6ka <dig> expression was germ cell-specific; no expression was detected in the gonad interstitium or in somatic cells . protein signals were localized to mitotic and meiotic prophase cells including spermatogonia and leptotene and pachytene spermatocytes; no signal was detected in round and elongated spermatids. protein expression was mainly confined to the cytoplasm of germ cells. this experiment provided “proof of concept” data, supporting our prediction of rps6ka <dig> as a spermatocyte gene expressed during meiotic initiation and prophase.

discussion
germ cells initiate meiosis in response to the extrinsic factor retinoic acid. meiotic initiation is followed by prophase, a critical developmental stage of germ cells when homologous chromosomes undergo recombination to generate genetic diversity in offspring. examining patterns of gene expression at a genomic level is necessary to better understand the process of meiotic initiation and progression as well as to identify key factors involved in the process. further, comparison of male and female expression time courses allows for better understanding of the sexually dimorphic aspects of germ cell differentiation that may contribute to the inherently high meiotic error rate in the female  <cit> . microarrays have been utilized extensively in transcriptome profiling of mammalian gonads  <cit> . a major complication, however, is that the mrna expression represents a combination of signals from both germ cells and somatic cells.

to overcome this obstacle, we outlined a framework for determining germ cell expression during meiotic entry and progression through prophase from gonadal microarray data in male and female mice. svm was used to detect hidden patterns of germ cell signals and did not require cell-type frequency in gonadal samples. our germ cell models accurately predicted spermatocyte genes with a 90% precision and oocyte genes with a 94% precision at 10% recall. further, our models outperformed other methods substantially in predicting germ cell genes from whole-gonadal expression studies. although experimental methods have been developed to isolate mrna samples enriched for spermatogonia and spermatocytes  <cit> , oocyte sorting from the embryonic ovary is not yet feasible. it remains a challenge to examine gene expression in embryonic oocytes. therefore, our study is particularly valuable for identifying oocyte genes from the ovary microarray data.

we have demonstrated that top-predicted germ cell genes had go annotations consistent with gonadal tissue in prophase. top-predicted germ cell genes were also significantly enriched for essential genes. this suggests that many genes expressed during meiotic initiation and prophase are essential for mouse viability. one interesting observation is that top-predicted germ cell genes were preferentially located to the x chromosome, but not to any other chromosome. the enrichment on the x chromosome was more significant in the female than in the male. this observation was in strong concordance with sex chromosomal dynamics in pre-meiotic and meiotic stages. in the male, both x and y chromosomes are active in spermatogonia prior to meiotic entry. in fact, spermatogonium-expressed genes are more densely populated on the x chromosome in both human and mouse  <cit> . the x and y chromosomes continue to be active entering prophase but become transcriptionally silenced at the pachytene stage, a process called meiotic sex chromosome inactivation. this inactivation is mainly driven by the unpaired state of the sex chromosomes  <cit> . in contrast, in the female, one x chromosome is usually silent due to gene dosage compensation. the inactive x chromosome is reactivated preceding meiotic entry such that both x chromosomes remain active throughout meiosis  <cit> . therefore, we expected to observe more significant enrichment of germ cell genes on the x chromosome in the female during meiotic initiation and prophase. the characterization of top-predicted germ cell genes suggests that our models are truly informative for germ cell-specific expression.

the use of regulatory sequence motifs to identify potential transcription factors has been successfully applied in many areas  <cit> . we located sequence motifs in the promoter region of top-predicted germ cell genes to determine putative regulators. a c2h2-type zinc finger domain was enriched among both spermatocyte genes and oocyte genes. in addition, a lim homeodomain was identified only for top oocyte genes. the use of sequence motifs to locate regulators has its limitations: the presence of a motif does not necessarily represent the binding and/or functional activity of a transcription factor, and binding motifs of many transcription factors are unknown. nevertheless, this approach can serve as an initial screen for potential transcription factors.

transcriptional regulation of germ cell genes is further complicated by micrornas  <cit> . for example, the expression of the let- <dig> family of micrornas is increased in spermatogonia after treatment with retinoic acid  <cit> . testis-specific micrornas are preferentially mapped to the x chromosome and most of the x-linked micrornas are expressed in pachytene spermatocytes, suggesting possible roles in post-transcriptional regulation of prophase genes  <cit> . in contrast to the male, studies of micrornas in prophase oocytes are scarce  <cit> . based on predicted targets of micrornas and our germ cell model predictions, we identified several candidate micrornas that may repress gene expression during meiotic initiation and progression, including the x-linked mmu-mir- <dig> 

using the germ cell models, we were able to rank genome-wide genes and make high-quality predictions for genes expressed during meiotic initiation and prophase. we were particularly interested in x-linked spermatocyte genes because loss-of-function mutations can be easily obtained by deleting one copy of x-linked genes in the male. we experimentally validated rps6ka <dig>  an x-linked disease gene previously unknown to have meiotic function, in the mouse testis using immunofluorescence. protein expression was germ cell-specific and was mainly confined to spermatogonia and spermatocytes in prophase, concordant with the model prediction. thus, this experiment lays a foundation for future meiotic functional study of rps6ka <dig> by characterizing knockout mouse lines  <cit> . further, this validation experiment serves as a proof of concept and indicates that our systems biology approach integrating computation and experimentation is valuable in the identification of novel meiotic genes. such large-scale, unbiased, and quantitative studies provide an essential complement to the traditional reductionist approaches by studying individual genes.

CONCLUSIONS
results from this study provide a fundamental understanding of germ cell genes active in meiotic initiation and prophase, a critical developmental stage. we have demonstrated that, through the use of machine-learning methods, it is possible to detect germ cell-specific signals from gonadal microarray datasets. our ability to make such predictions will likely improve with the increased number of germ cell genes being characterized in the future. while we are primarily motivated by meiotic prophase studies of germ cells, this approach is applicable to a variety of areas in which it is not yet possible to obtain pure cell samples  <cit> .

