BACKGROUND
many biomedical applications rely on the ability to co-express multiple proteins within the same cell. these may include co-expression of genes encoding subunits of hetero-multimeric therapeutic proteins , multiple therapeutic genes for a combined and/or synergistic effects , and co-expression of therapeutic genes plus required co-factor or marker gene  for detection or selection of transduced cells .

various conventional approaches for protein co-expression have been utilized such as the use of multiple internal promoters, internal ribosome entry sites , messenger rna splicing, fusion proteins, and post-translational proteolysis. there are, however, disadvantages associated with each of these approaches. for example, steric effects often lead to loss of function of fused proteins. in order to avoid such problems, proteinase cleavage sites can be incorporated. in this case both the polyprotein substrate and the processing enzyme must, however, be co-expressed in the same subcellular site. when multiple promoters have been employed, interference has occurred between promoters leading to promoter suppression and rearrangement. ires elements, identified both in viral and cellular eukaryotic mrnas, differ in length . the most efficient viral ireses successfully utilized in vectors used for biomedical purposes are about 500 bp. however, their size can cause problems in packaging within size-restricted vectors commonly used for biomedical applications such as adeno-associated and retroviral vectors. furthermore, expression from ireses is dependent on various cellular binding factors which vary amongst different cell types. critically, the protein downstream of the ires is only expressed to ~10% of that upstream  <cit> .

picornavirus  f2a and ‘2a-like’ sequences are now widely used for co-expression of multiple genes. the 2a region of the fmdv encodes a sequence that mediates self-processing by a translational effect variously referred to as ‘ribosome skipping’, ‘stop-go’ and ‘stop-carry on’ translation  <cit> . analysis of recombinant polyproteins and artificial polyprotein systems in which 2a was inserted between two reporter proteins showed that the fmdv 2a oligopeptide  co-translationally ‘self-cleaved’ at the glycyl-prolyl pair site corresponding to the 2a/2b junction . the use of longer versions of 2a with n-terminal extensions derived from fmdv capsid protein 1d upstream of 2a  was reported to produce higher levels of cleavage  <cit> .

for simplicity, the co-translational ribosome skipping event will be referred to as ‘cleavage’. the merits of this system are:  co-expression of proteins linked by 2a is independent of the cell type ,  multiple proteins are co-expressed in equimolar amounts from a single transcript mrna  under the control of only one promoter and,  2a is smaller  compared to ires elements. this makes this unique sequence an attractive substitute for previously used approaches for co-expression of multiple genes  <cit> . however, it should be noted that  2a remains as a c-terminal extension of the upstream product, and  proline forms the n terminus of the downstream protein.

to date, various reporter proteins together with proteins requiring discrete co- and post-translational subcellular localization have been successfully co-expressed in in vitro and in vivo heterologous systems using f2a sequences of various lengths  <cit> . however, some limitations of using this strategy were reported. firstly, whilst the longest f2a sequence  tested to date was shown to produce the most efficient cleavage, the c-terminal f2a extension of the upstream translation product may have an effect on protein confirmation and activity - such as in the production of monoclonal antibodies or expression of enzymes. to minimise this effect, a number of laboratories have used shorter versions of f2as  <cit> , or, incorporated a furin cleavage site between the c-terminus of the upstream protein and n-terminus of the 2a sequence such that the c-terminal extension is ‘trimmed’ away. this approach can only be used for secreted proteins, however, since furin is primarily localised within the golgi apparatus  <cit> .

it has been reported, however, that the efficiency of f2a cleavage may be greatly inhibited in certain cases where the c-terminal sequences of the upstream gene were shown to lower f2a activity  <cit> . it was proposed that such inhibition could be overcome by the use of different lengths of the sequence between the c-terminal region and f2a  <cit> . to further investigate f2a cleavage efficiency and to optimise the 2a system for the coordinate expression of two genes from a bicistronic vector, we generated constructs encoding two fluorescent ‘reporter’ proteins, gfp and cherryfp, in different positions linked by f2a sequences of various lengths. the co-expression of these cytoplasmic proteins and the comparative cleavage efficiencies were determined both in vivo in hela cells, a human cell line most commonly used in biomedical applications , and in vitro .

RESULTS
co-expression of gfp and cherryfp fluorescent proteins from pgfp-f2a-cherryfp constructs
a series of constructs were produced encoding gfp and cherryfp fluorescent ‘reporter’ proteins under the control of both cmv and t <dig> promoters. sequences encoding gfp and cherryfp were separated by either the longest f2a sequence  or n-terminally truncated versions of various lengths , to establish the optimal length of f2a sequence for co-expression of two proteins and their relative cleavage efficiencies. the expected translation products were cleaved  and cherryfp, and the uncleaved polyprotein  .

for the in vitro translation studies, rabbit reticulocyte lysates were programmed with the pgfp-f2a-cherryfp series of constructs and the translation products resolved by 12% sds-page . as expected, two major translation products  were observed. in each track the upper slower migrating product corresponded to either  ,  ,   or  . the second product corresponded to the cherryfp cleavage product. translation profiles derived from pgfp-f2a-cherryfp constructs also showed a low level of internal initiation which produced products of lower molecular weights. the bands, based on the gradual decrease in molecular weight, were comparable to the  cleavage products and correspond to products produced by leaky scanning, initiating within gfp at met <dig>  in favourable kozak context .

hela cells were transfected with this panel of constructs and cell lysates analysed 30 h post transfection. similarly, the two major cleavage products were detected by western blotting either with an anti-gfp antibody showing s of decreasing size , or, an anti-cherryfp antibody . uncleaved polyproteins were also detected, their accumulation increasing as the length of f2a decreased, being highest for the pgfp-f2a30-cherryfp construct. these data, together with our in vitro analysis, demonstrated that the cleavage efficiency is slightly reduced when a shorter version  is used, compared to that observed for the 58aa version.

fluorescence imaging was used to directly visualise co-expression of fluorescent proteins. to demonstrate that gfp and cherryfp proteins linked via f2a were co-expressed within the same cell, we transfected hela cells with the panel of pgfp-f2a-cherryfp constructs . in each case transfected cells efficiently co-expressed both gfp and cherryfp for up to 48 h post-transfection , with both proteins localised to the cytoplasm of transfected cells . we could not detect any effect of increasing the length of the c-terminal extension of gfp by f2a  upon fluorescence.

in contrast to our constructs with f2a of 58– <dig> amino acids, translation directed by plasmids pgfp-f2a20-cherryfp and pgfp-f2a18-cherryfp showed three major translation products . in each gel track, the most slowly migrating band corresponded to the uncleaved polyprotein forms  and  of the expected molecular weights . the bands corresponding to the two cleavage products,  or  and cherryfp could not be resolved due to the similar molecular weights. in addition, three extra minor products were observed in each of these translation reactions. internal initiation within the upstream gfp gene  produced both the fastest migrating cleaved product, corresponding to protein of ~20 kda which was almost undetectable on the gel  and the second slow migrating uncleaved product of ~50 kda . the third slower migrating minor product corresponded to a protein of unknown identity , although we suspect that this represents a translation product with a c-terminal adduct of trna.

our in vivo studies were consistent with the in vitro data: the western blotting data demonstrating that the major products were the uncleaved  and  polyproteins . small amounts of the cherryfp cleavage product, compared to f2a58-30-based constructs, were still detectable with anti-cherryfp antibody , the upstream cleavage products were, however, either almost undetectable  or absent  . it is important to note that the amounts of proteins observed in these blots is a function of detection using two quite different antibodies, raised against either gfp or cherryfp and they have different affinities for their antigens. interestingly, extracts of hela cells transfected with plasmids pgfp-f2a20-cherryfp and pgfp-f2a18-cherryfp also contained an unexpected protein with an estimated size of ~45 kda , similar to that detected in reticulocyte lysates, which reacted with the anti-gfp, but not anti-cherryfp antibodies. the nature of this protein, which could be generated by a leaky scanning mechanism, or, be a product of degradation of the uncleaved precursor is under further investigation.

interestingly, in the case of constructs which produced a high level of cleavage, the fluorescent signals from both gfp and cherryfp were distributed throughout the cytoplasm, in the case of constructs which produced low levels of cleavage, the fluorescent signals were accumulated mostly around the nucleus .

tandem repeated cherry fluorescent proteins
to determine if the c-terminal region of the protein upstream of 2a affected the cleavage activity, we substituted the upstream gene  with that of cherryfp . again, these sequences were linked by either f2a <dig>  f2a <dig>  f2a <dig>  f2a <dig>  f2a <dig> or f2a <dig>  similar to our previous results, when reticulocyte lysates were programmed with constructs encoding f2as of diminishing lengths, the uncleaved polyprotein  formed a very minor translation product for f2a of  <dig> to 30aa . in the case of these f2as, a doublet was observed corresponding to the  cleavage product. the fastest migrating product corresponded to the cleavage product downstream of f2a, cherryfp. the translation profiles derived from all pcherryfp-f2a-cherryfp constructs showed a high level of internal initiation, and produced minor translation products which corresponded in size to products from internal initiation at one of three start codons within the n-terminal cherryfp sequence . it should be noted that internal initiation at met <dig> produces the same decrease in molecular mass as that observed when the length of 2a was designed in 10aa increments.

these observations in vitro were confirmed by our in vivo experiments. cells were transfected with the panel of pcherryfp-f2a-cherryfp constructs and cleavage activities determined by western blotting . as with the pgfp-f2a-cherryfp constructs, uncleaved  polyproteins were barely detectable by the anti-cherryfp antibodies. the major products in these cases were the  and cherryfp cleavage products. again,  migrated as a doublet, with the fastest migrating product corresponding to the cherryfp cleavage product - of uniform size across the gel tracks . although easily detectable for the 30aa version, the uncleaved form accumulated to a somewhat lesser degree than the two major cleavage products. as we observed for the in vitro translations, the upstream cleavage products  were detected by an anti-fmdv2a antibody , but the uncleaved  was not. using this antibody, two non-specific proteins were detected both in transfected and mock-transfected cells . interestingly, the amounts of the upstream and downstream cleavage products detected by both anti-cherryfp and anti-fmdv2a antibodies in hela cells transfected with pcherryfp-f2a58-cherryfp construct were lower than those expressed from constructs with shorter 2as.

similar to our data obtained for pgfp-f2a20-cherryfp and pgfp-f2a18-cherryfp, both in reticulocyte lysates  and in transfected hela cells , the uncleaved polyproteins  and  represented the major translation products. the cleavage products upstream of f2a  migrated as doublets, as discussed above. the cleavage product downstream of f2a, cherryfp, was of uniform size across all the gel tracks. interestingly, it appeared that cleavage was more efficient when cherryfp was upstream of 2a, rather than gfp – shown using both anti-cherryfp  and anti-fmdv2a antibodies . we assume the higher amounts of cleaved products arose from the changes in the c-terminal sequences of the upstream gene , as the linker sequences connecting them to f2a were identical in all constructs . in addition, similar to the data presented for pgfp-f2a-cherryfp constructs, two extra bands were observed in both reticulocyte lysates and hela cells transfected with constructs containing f2as of  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids. the slow migrating band corresponded to protein produced by internal initiation within the upstream cherry gene . this product was also detected in hela cells using anti-cherryfp antibodies . the extra doublet  we observed using reticulocyte lysates  was also detected in hela cell extracts using anti-cherryfp antibodies , but not anti-fmdv 2a antibodies.

co-expression of cherryfp and gfp fluorescent proteins from pcherryfp-f2a-gfp constructs
the downstream cherryfp sequences were replaced with gfp to create pcherryfp-f2a-gfp, again linked with the different lengths of f2a . the pattern of accumulation of uncleaved polyproteins was as observed before: an increase as the length of f2a decreases. the uncleaved polyprotein formed the major product in the case of pcherryfp-f2a20-gfp and pcherryfp-f2a18-gfp both in reticulocyte lysates  and in hela cells . the cleaved upstream proteins, s, expressed from all six constructs, migrated as a doublet in the case of translation in vitro  and in vivo - in the latter case detected by western blotting using anti-cherryfp antibodies . the second major band corresponded to the downstream cleavage product, gfp . translation profiles derived from pcherryfp-f2a-gfp constructs with f2as58- <dig> showed a certain level of internal initiation  within the upstream cherryfp gene. this produced fast migrating bands corresponding to cleaved products of decreasing molecular weights .

the f2a <dig> and f2a <dig> versions showed poor cleavage: the gfp cleavage product was almost undetectable in western blots using the anti-gfp antibody . internal initiation was observed in the reticulocyte lysate translation in vitro. the faster migrating bands corresponded to n-terminally truncated  proteins . initiation at this site also accounts for products migrating somewhat more rapidly than the full-length  polyprotein . this extra product was observed in both reticulocyte lysates programmed with the plasmids encoding f2as of  <dig> and 18aa, and in extracts of hela cell transfected with these constructs. in these cases, the poor cleavage activity leads to an accumulation of uncleaved products and enabled sufficient material to accumulate to be observed directly , or, be recognised by both anti-cherryfp and anti-gfp antibodies.

‘fine-tuning’ of shorter f2a sequences
to assess the utility of shorter f2a sequences for co-expression, we produced a series of constructs in which sequences encoding gfp and cherryfp ‘reporter’ proteins were linked by the panel of n-terminally single-residue truncated versions of f2a . these constructs were analysed together with the previously described pgfp-f2a-cherryfp constructs containing f2a <dig>  f2a <dig>  f2a <dig> and f2a <dig>  based upon the data shown in figure  <dig>  pgfp-f2a58-cherryfp / pgfp-f2a30-cherryfp were used as exemplars of highly efficient 2a cleavage and pgfp-f2a20-cherryfp / pgfp-f2a18-cherryfp as exemplars of inefficient cleavage. analysis of the translation products showed three major bands which corresponded to the three predicted translation products and their molecular weights: uncleaved  polyprotein and the two major cleavage products,  and cherryfp . while the intensities of the latter bands were much higher in reticulocyte lysates programmed with constructs containing f2as of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 23aa , the translation products derived from the four constructs encoding shorter 2a sequences were mostly uncleaved. translation profiles derived from all constructs showed a low level of internal initiation  within the upstream gfp gene. the fast migrating band corresponded to n-terminally truncated cleaved products  and slow migrating band corresponded to n-terminally truncated uncleaved polyprotein . again, the additional translation product of ~45kda was observed , but was absent in constructs with f2a <dig> and f2a <dig>  this additional translation product was detected by anti-gfp , but not anti-cherryfp antibodies . from f2a <dig>  the intensity of this band increased as the length of f2a decreased. in the cases of f2a of 23aa and longer, the translation products upstream of f2a  and downstream  were easily detected by anti-gfp  and anti-cherryfp antibodies , respectively. in the case of f2as22- <dig>  cleavage products were barely detectable, whilst for f2a <dig> no cleavage products could be detected.

discussion
initial characterization of the fmdv 2a region by ryan et al.  <cit>  showed that while the fmdv 2a/2b cleavage activity was mediated by residues located within the  <dig> amino acid version of f2a, n-terminal truncation of f2a reduced cleavage efficiency. ryan and drew  <cit>  further described the construction of plasmid  in which a  <dig> amino acid version of f2a was inserted between the reporter genes chloramphenicol acetyl transferase  and β-glucuronidase . analyses of in vitro translation products derived from a series of constructs in which sequences were progressively deleted from the n-terminal region of f2a showed that activity was ablated in versions with less than  <dig> residues . it was concluded that residues comprising the n-terminal portion of the f2a region ‘whilst being influential were not critical for cleavage activity’  <cit> .

according to the model for 2a-mediated cleavage, residues that may influence the activity are predicted to reside within the exit tunnel of the ribosome. the use of longer versions of f2a with n-terminal extensions derived from capsid protein 1d  were reported to produce higher levels of cleavage  <cit> . specifically, in a series of constructs based upon pgfp2agus, n-terminal extension of 2a by 5aa of 1d  improved cleavage, but extension by  <dig>   <dig> and 39aa  produced complete cleavage and an equal stoichiometry of both translation products in vitro  <cit> .

these observations are consistent with our in vitro and in vivo data on cleavage efficiency in constructs expressing gfp and cherryfp fluorescent ‘reporter’ proteins separated by f2as of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 30aa. for all constructs tested, the in vitro analyses showed the polyprotein was efficiently cleaved, the upstream protein bearing the f2a ‘tail’ at its c-terminus. in transfected hela cells, however, small amounts of uncleaved polyprotein were detected by western blotting  in constructs encoding the f2a <dig> version. swapping the gene order had no effect on cleavage efficiency when longer versions of 2as were used, showing that for these particular lengths, cleavage is not sensitive to the c- terminal sequence of the upstream protein - since this has already transited through the exit tunnel of the ribosome.

further experiments demonstrated that the cleavage efficiency was gradually reduced with each n-terminal amino acid deletion, shown by both our in vitro and in vivo data when pgfp-f2a-cherryfp constructs with f2as of 25aa to 18aa were used. the length of f2a of 23aa was demonstrated to be the most efficient of the shorter versions of 2a, and deletion of just one amino acid from its n-terminus resulted in a substantial decrease in cleavage efficiency, whereas truncation to f2a <dig> essentially ablated cleavage: data apparently at variance with those previously reported for f2a <dig>  where cleavage was efficient . cleavage efficiency was improved somewhat in constructs where the upstream gene was cherryfp .

the exit tunnel of the ribosome accommodates 30– <dig> amino acids. for fmdv, the c-terminal region of protein 1d  must have evolved to interact with the exit tunnel such that f2a  mediates cleavage highly efficiently. in the case of artificial polyproteins, the ‘authentic’ upstream context of 2a is replaced with foreign gene or linker sequences which may create an unfavourable environment for ribosome ‘skipping’: their presence inside the exit tunnel may adversely affect the interaction of f2a with the ribosome. low cleavage efficiency may arise, therefore, due to  the nature of the c-terminal region of the upstream gene, or,  the manner in which it is linked to the shorter versions of f2a.

the data presented here is in agreement with many previously published studies that successfully used f2a and ‘2a-like’ sequences in a wide range of heterologous systems, notably, adoptive cell cancer gene therapies, genetic engineering of human stem cells and the co-expression of transcription factors for the induction of pluripotent stem cells  <cit> . our findings also help explain previously published studies in which incomplete cleavage was observed. to avoid using longer 2a sequences , researchers used shorter versions of f2a. conflicting cleavage efficiencies have been reported for 2as of the same lengths  <cit> . for example, furler et al.  <cit>  showed that within the context of a poliovirus vector, 2a-mediated cleavage was incomplete when f2a <dig> was used. fang et al.  <cit>  described similar results for the constitutive expression of full-length two-chain antibodies from a single orf by linking the heavy and light antibody chains with f2a <dig>  different cleavage efficiencies depending on protein arrangement were observed when gfp, egfp and hrgfp were co-expressed with cytochrome p <dig> 2b <dig>  via f2a <dig>  <cit> . in addition, donnelly and co-workers, using f2a <dig> in gfp2agus and gus2agfp, also reported the presence of small amounts of uncleaved polyprotein  <cit> . with f2a <dig>  cleavage was reported to be less efficient  in  context, with some uncleaved polyprotein still present  <cit> , while de felipe and co-workers  <cit>  used an f2a <dig> version in the generation of retroviral vectors and also observed uncleaved polyprotein. the cleavage was, however, reported to be complete when the sequence was extended to 58aa  <cit> . finally, ma and mitra used f2a <dig> to co-express gus and cat proteins in different arrangements and demonstrated that  and  were cleaved to completion, while  was not  <cit> .

interestingly, we show here that pgfp-f2a20-cherryfp and pgfp-f2a18-cherryfp produced poor cleavage both in vitro and in vivo, apparently at variance with our own previously published data  <cit> . in these studies, the pgfp2agus construct contained the same upstream gfp gene and the same f2a <dig> sequence and produced efficient cleavage. sequence comparison of pgfp-f2a20-cherryfp and pgfp2agus constructs shows that the differences are only observed in the sequence immediately upstream of 2a . ironically, this seven amino acid stretch is a part of neither f2a nor c terminus of the upstream gfp, but is actually composed of two different restriction sites introduced for cloning purposes during the construction of both plasmids. the effect of the differences in this particular region on the efficiency of 2a-mediated cleavage is the subject of a separate report  <cit> .

swapping the order of fluorescent ‘reporter’ proteins in our expression systems had no effect on the general pattern of cleavage efficiency. however, while two genes could be effectively co-expressed  when linked by a longer version of f2a , we did observe a small effect for the shorter f2a <dig> and f2a <dig> versions.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, f2as are used widely in biotechnology and biomedicine and we wished to identify the source of apparent discrepancies in the literature with regards to cleavage efficiency. while constructs containing f2a of 58-23aa in length exhibited enhanced abilities for cleavage compared to the constructs with f2a of 22aa and shorter, with least efficient 2as being those of 20aa and 18aa, we suggest that researchers use f2a <dig> if opting for a shorter sequence. this 2a proved to be most optimal in terms of both length and cleavage efficiency, and, in our hands, was unaffected by the sequence of the upstream gene. a more extensive characterization of sequence requirements between the c-terminal region of the upstream protein and the n-terminal part of f2a is underway to test the speculation that this particularly interesting region of the sequence may have certain effect on 2a-mediated cleavage. ultimately, the fine-tuning of the f2a sequence can help researchers in their efforts to efficiently co-express various multiple proteins for successful biomedical strategies.

