BACKGROUND
periodontitis is one of the most common chronic infections in humans, in which overgrowth of subgingival gram-negative bacteria leads to chronic inflammation and gradual degradation of tooth-supporting tissues. the gram-negative bacterium aggregatibacter  actinomycetemcomitans is implicated in aggressive forms of periodontitis  <cit> . the oral cavity is its natural habitat, but the bacterium can also translocate from the oral cavity into the blood circulation, as evidenced by the occurrence of severe non-oral a. actinomycetemcomitans infections  <cit> .

increasing evidence points to a link between periodontitis and cardiovascular diseases  <cit> . however, the pathogenic mechanisms that would render periodontitis patients to increased cardiovascular risk are still poorly understood. previous experimental studies on the background of the association between periodontitis and cardiovascular diseases have mainly worked on the basis of the infection hypothesis that suggests that chronic low-grade bacterial and/or viral infections have a causal role in the development of atherosclerosis and its sequels, such as myocardial infarction and stroke  <cit> . it is believed that infections raise systemic inflammatory status, as evidenced by elevated circulating levels of proinflammatory cytokines and acute phase reactants, which in turn may promote endothelial dysfunction and proatherogenic and proinflammatory phenomena in arterial walls  <cit> .

living bacteria can extend their pathogenicity by active extracellular release of surface components. a major route for the release of outer membrane components from gram-negative bacteria is via shedding of outer membrane vesicles , which also allow the delivery of pathogenic effector proteins to eukaryotic target cells  <cit> . in addition, secretion of free-soluble outer membrane proteins  from bacterial cultures of e.g. acinetobacter radioresistens and escherichia coli could be suggested from previous studies  <cit> , although the dependence of vesicles was not elucidated. recently, we addressed the question whether live periodontal pathogens release free-soluble surface components, which could serve as an additional mechanism for spreading bacterial material from periodontal pockets to blood circulation. interestingly, our results from an in vitro insert model, designed to control for bacterial viability and omv, demonstrated release of peptidoglycan-associated lipoprotein  and lipopolysaccharide  in addition to unidentified material from live planktonic a. actinomycetemcomitans cells, independent of omv  <cit> .

in periodontal pockets, bacteria grow on tooth surfaces as biofilms. whether the biofilm bacteria also have the capability to release free-soluble surface material to the surrounding environment is not known. as a. actinomycetemcomitans pal in purified form provoked proinflammatory responses in human whole blood ex vivo  <cit>  we hypothesize that the extracellular release of free-soluble surface material from live a. actinomycetemcomitans cells could constitute a novel pathogenic mechanism that may be of particular importance in chronic localized infections, such as periodontitis. the present study was undertaken as, except for secretion via specialized secretory systems  <cit> , there is limited knowledge of the proinflammatory effects of free-soluble surface material released from live gram-negative bacteria. our aim was to investigate in an ex vivo model the pathogenic potential of the pool of components released in free-soluble form by live planktonic and biofilm a. actinomycetemcomitans cells, and to make an attempt to delineate the identity of the secreted components.

RESULTS
free-soluble material released by a. actinomycetemcomitans induces proinflammatory responses in whole blood
to study the pathogenic potential of free-soluble material released by a. actinomycetemcomitans cells, we implemented our cell culture plate insert model for stimulation of human whole blood as described in methods. similarly to our previous studies using the insert model  <cit> , the absence of a. actinomycetemcomitans cell lysis in the wells during the experiments was confirmed by immunoblot analysis of samples taken from the wells outside the inserts , using an antiserum raised against the cytoplasmic protein cyclic amp receptor protein  . in addition, plating revealed no apparent death of a. actinomycetemcomitans cells, or contamination in the wells .

according to our findings from the cytokine antibody array analysis, used to screen for the cytokine responses in human whole blood, the free-soluble material released by strain d7s , grown in planktonic form, caused clearly enhanced production of the interleukins il- <dig> and il- <dig>  and of macrophage inflammatory protein , relative to no bacteria controls . the same was observed when whole human blood was stimulated with free-soluble material released from a. actinomycetemcomitans strain d7ss  . in addition, very similar results were obtained when whole blood from another donor was used , indicating no apparent inter-individual differences. interestingly, production of il- <dig>  il- <dig> and mip-1β was also induced when d7s cells grown in biofilm were used . this suggests that a. actinomycetemcomitans cell populations growing in biofilms also release free-soluble material with proinflammatory activity to the surrounding environment. taken together, we concluded that the free-soluble components released by live a. actinomycetemcomitans cells, grown either planktonic or in biofilm, could indeed induce proinflammatory effects in whole blood.

free-soluble material released by a. actinomycetemcomitans stimulates tnf-α and il-1β production in whole blood
according to the above-described cytokine analyses  the free-soluble material released from the test strains appeared to have no effect on the production of tnf-α and il-1β. as a previous report indicated increased production of these cytokines in human whole blood, stimulated with a. actinomycetemcomitans lps  <cit> , the levels of tnf-α and il-1β were also quantified using a highly sensitive approach . as shown in fig.  <dig>  a significant increase in both tnf-α  and il-1β  production was detected when whole human blood was stimulated with free-soluble material released from planktonic d7s cells in the cell culture model , relative to no bacteria controls. why this was not seen using the cytokine array  is unclear. according to our findings , the increase in tnf-α and il-1β production was less pronounced in the presence of polymyxin b , which blocks lps activity  <cit> . however, there was still a clear upregulation , indicative of an lps-independent effect on tnf-α and il-1β production. thus, we concluded that in addition to il- <dig>  il- <dig> and mip-1β, the production of tnf-α and il-1β in whole blood was also enhanced by the free-soluble material released by d7s.

free-soluble material released by a. actinomycetemcomitans enhances cytokine gene transcription in whole blood
to confirm our observations of increased production of the above proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines in stimulated whole blood . as indicated in fig.  <dig>  there was up to 1000-fold increased transcription of each cytokine gene when human blood was stimulated with free-soluble material released from planktonic d7s cells relative to no bacteria controls. although the increase in cytokine gene transcription was less intensive  when the whole blood stimulation was done in the presence of pmb , each gene was still clearly upregulated, indicating that this effect was also lps-independent. we could therefore conclude that transcription of il- <dig>  il- <dig>  mip-1β, tnf-α and il-1β in whole blood was enhanced by the free-soluble material released by d7s.

lps-independent cytokine stimulation in whole blood: possible involvement of additional factors released in free-soluble form
as the free-soluble material released by strain d7s provoked proinflammatory responses in human whole blood also independently of lps, we investigated the possibility that this was due to release of leukotoxin a  and/or cytolethal distending toxin . these immunomodulatory toxins were earlier shown to be extracellularly secreted by a. actinomycetemcomitans  <cit> . to test the contribution of ltxa and cdt we constructed a derivative of strain d7s having both the ltxa and cdtabc gene loci deleted . the abolished production of ltxa was confirmed by immunoblotting, using specific antibodies . according to our findings using the ex vivo insert model for stimulation of whole blood, inactivation of cdtabc and ltxa had no major effect. instead, the free-soluble material released by the d7s double mutant, grown in planktonic form, induced a proinflammatory response in whole blood similar to that of the parental strain, d7s , i.e. production of il- <dig>  il- <dig>  and mip-1β was clearly enhanced  relative to no bacteria controls . when this experiment was carried out in the presence of pmb  to inhibit lps activity, the production of these cytokines was still induced relative to no bacterial controls , again indicating lps-independent stimulation. however, the cytokine stimulation was less intensive, compared to when pmb was absent . lack of contribution of ltxa and cdt to cytokine stimulation in human whole blood is consistent with the absence of these toxins in the filtrates released by strain d7s to pbs, which was also confirmed by immunoblotting .

as pal was identified in the free-soluble material released by both d7s and d7ss  <cit> , a pal mutant derivative  was subsequently tested in the ex vivo model. according to our results, the free-soluble material released by planktonic d7ss-p induced a cytokine response in whole blood very similar to that of the parental strain, d7ss . these findings together suggest that other factor released in free-soluble form by a. actinomycetemcomitans may be involved in the induction of proinflammatory responses in whole blood.

groel-like protein is a major protein released in free-soluble form by a. actinomycetemcomitans d7s
to obtain more information about the free-soluble proteins secreted by a. actinomycetemcomitans, we used the cell culture insert model with pbs instead of serum/whole blood . plating revealed no apparent death of a. actinomycetemcomitans cells, or contamination in the wells . as in our previous studies using the insert model  <cit> , the absence of a. actinomycetemcomitans cell lysis in the wells during the experiments was confirmed by immunoblot analysis of filtrates, using an antiserum raised against the cytoplasmic protein, crp . sds-page analysis of filtrates from d7s and d7ss, grown both planktonic and in biofilm form , revealed several bands after silver staining. finding similar band profiles of material released through the  <dig> nm pores of the inserts from both d7s and d7ss is in accordance with the cytokine induction by these strains as determined by the present antibody array .

since our results hitherto obtained with d7s and d7ss were very similar with each other, we continued our analyses mainly using filtrates from d7s. as shown in fig. 5b, two major protein bands could be detected in filtrates from d7s, by using coomassie staining. these bands represented proteins of approximate molecular masses of  <dig> and  <dig> kda, respectively. bands of these sizes  were also obtained with immunoblot analysis of the d7s filtrates, using an antiserum raised against whole-cell antigen of a. actinomycetemcomitans serotype a. our previous results show that this antiserum reacts to multiple epitopes in a. actinomycetemcomitans  <cit> . our current findings  therefore suggest that the  <dig> and  <dig> kda-proteins are the two major protein antigens released in free-soluble form under the present conditions. as the  <dig> kda-protein band was not detected in filtrates from the pal-deficient strain d7s-p , we concluded that this protein band represents pal. this was consistent with immunoblotting .

to determine the identity of the  <dig> kda protein we used maldi-tof-ms, which identified a. actinomycetemcomitans groel-like protein  . the release of groel-like protein in free-soluble form to pbs by both planktonic and biofilm d7s was confirmed using immunoblotting and an antiserum raised against e. coli groel . according to sds-page , the pal-deficient strain d7s-p released a higher amount of groel-like protein than the parental strain. this observation is consistent with the role of the tol-pal complex in maintaining outer membrane integrity  <cit> . taken together, we could conclude that groel-like protein is a major protein released in free-soluble form by a. actinomycetemcomitans d7s.

release of free-soluble material with proinflammatory effect by e. coli o18
to assess the specificity of our present findings to a. actinomycetemcomitans, the ex vivo culture insert model , controlled as above , was used to stimulate human whole blood with free-soluble material released from planktonic e. coli strain ihe <dig> . as shown in fig. 7a–c, there was a clear stimulation of il- <dig>  il- <dig>  and mip-1β relative to no bacterial controls, indicative of a proinflammatory effect in whole blood caused by the e. coli free-soluble material. this observation is in accordance with previous studies using e. coli strains j <dig> and  <dig>   <cit> , which demonstrated the release of outer membrane protein a , a prime target of the host immune system  <cit> . the release of ompa in free-soluble form to pbs by planktonic ihe <dig> was confirmed using immunoblotting and an antiserum against ompa . omv-independent secretion of ompa by e. coli is consistent with subcellular localization studies, finding ompa in the fraction of soluble secreted proteins in addition to vesicles  <cit> . in contrast to ompa, groel was absent from these filtrates . this is in agreement with the cytoplasmic localization of groel and its presence in omvs released by e. coli  <cit> . our results therefore show that release of free-soluble surface material with proinflammatory effects in human whole blood is not restricted to a. actinomycetemcomitans.

discussion
our present findings using an experimental setup  designed to exclude the presence of omv and bacterial death or lysis in the samples, demonstrated that a. actinomycetemcomitans biofilms can release free-soluble surface material. this is consistent with our previous results showing extracellular release of free-soluble surface material  from live planktonic a. actinomycetemcomitans cells  <cit> . this apparently novel, yet uncharacterized mechanism to release soluble material from biofilm to the surrounding environment could be of significance in periodontal pockets, where the biofilm life-form provides persistent bacterial colonization on tooth surfaces. our present results on e. coli show , however, that release of free-soluble surface material is not restricted to a. actinomycetemcomitans, but may differ between bacteria.

by employing the cell culture insert model, we also showed that the released free-soluble material not only from planktonic but also from biofilm a. actinomycetemcomitans promoted proinflammatory responses in blood, i.e. il-1β, il- <dig>  il- <dig>  mip-1β and tnf-α . this is in agreement with our previous results showing that in addition to elevated serum antibody response to periodontal pathogens in periodontitis patients  <cit> , purified a. actinomycetemcomitans components induced proatherogenic  and/or proinflammatory  responses from murine macrophages  <cit>  as well as production of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines  from human whole blood  <cit> .

the number of live bacteria  in the present ex vivo model exceeded the expected blood concentrations of cultivable bacteria in chronic infections. in serious acute infections the circulating bacterial concentrations appear to be substantially higher by dna-based than by culture methods as exemplified by a study on meningitis: neisseria meningitidis genome copy density in blood samples ranged from  <dig> to 108/ml in patients' blood, although it is likely that these figures also contained dead bacteria  <cit> . on the other hand, in biofilms bacteria can grow in numbers comparable to our test inoculum  <cit>  and they may release free-soluble material to surrounding tissues or circulation on long-term basis.

although a substantial stimulatory effect on the production of proinflammatory cytokines in blood was due to lps, there also was a marked lps-independent stimulation, which prompted us to also survey the contents of the released free-soluble material. a. actinomycetemcomitans has previously been shown to extracellularly secrete two toxins with immunomodulatory activity, leukotoxin a  and cytolethal distending toxin   <cit> . to assess the contribution of these toxins to cytokine stimulation in whole blood we constructed and tested a novel ltxa cdtabc double-deletion mutant derived from a clinical isolate, a. actinomycetemcomitans strain d7s. however, as the free-soluble material released from the double mutant had a stimulatory activity, very similar to that secreted from the wildtype strain , we concluded that released components other than these toxins are likely to be of greater significance. this observation is consistent with our present immunoblot analyses suggesting the absence of ltxa and cdt from d7s filtrates . the lack of ltxa in the filtrates could be a combined result of low levels of leukotoxin produced by d7s under the experimental conditions used , and of the association of leukotoxin with omv  <cit> . it is possible that this could be the case also for cdt, analogous with its association with omv in e. coli  <cit> . in line with our previous findings using planktonic a. actinomycetemcomitans  <cit> , the outer membrane lipoprotein, pal, was also released in free-soluble form from biofilms . however, similarly to ltxa and cdt, we did not see a contribution of pal to cytokine stimulation by using cytokine antibody arrays, i.e. inactivation of pal had no apparent effect in this experimental setup. this is in contrast to our previous findings that purified pal stimulated proinflammatory cytokines in whole blood  <cit> . this discrepancy from the present whole-cell experiment might be a result of enhanced release of lps in the pal deficient mutant strain  <cit> .

in addition to having a crucial role in protein-folding, vital for cell survival during stress  <cit> , groel -like proteins from several bacteria, including a. actinomycetemcomitans, can activate a plethora of mammalian cells, including macrophages, keratinocytes and periodontal ligament epithelial cells  <cit> . interestingly, our maldi-tof-ms and immunoblot results  revealed that both bacterial phenotypes, biofilm-form and planktonic a. actinomycetemcomitans, released significant amounts of groel-like protein in free-soluble form. this observation is consistent with previous studies in which groel-like protein was localized to the surface of a. actinomycetemcomitans  <cit> , as in several other bacteria, e.g. borrelia burgdorferi, helicobacter pylori, haemophilus ducreyi, and legionella pneumophila  <cit> . this supports the previously postulated hypothesis that bacterial groel-like proteins may act as direct cell-to-cell virulence factors for host cells  <cit> , albeit the release mechanism is not yet understood. furthermore, due to the molecular mimicry, the immune response to bacterial groel could crossreact with human hsp <dig> expressed on endothelial cells, leading to inflammatory reactions. this is supported by finding bacterial groel within atherosclerotic lesions in close association with activated inflammatory cells  <cit> , adding further evidence to the involvement of persistent infections such as periodontitis, with atherosclerosis. however, the specific contribution of groel to the proinflammatory responses induced in human whole blood would be difficult to assess as this protein is essential for bacterial growth  <cit> . it also appears to copurify with lps, suggesting a physical association between these two molecules  <cit> . analogous to this, it was recently demonstrated that human hsp <dig> bound bacterial lps and synergistically enhanced lps-induced innate and adaptive immune responses  <cit> . thus, the exact nature of the released material that lead to the lps-independent proinflammatory effects in whole blood is yet to be identified.

taken together, our present data support that, if entered into the blood circulation, the free-soluble material released from a. actinomycetemcomitans has potential to induce proinflammatory responses that are considered important in atherogenesis and used as biomarkers of an elevated risk of cardiovascular events  <cit> . within the limitations of our single-species biofilm experiments, we suggest that the release of free-soluble bacterial material from live subgingival biofilms may be a crucial mechanism how chronic inflammation in tooth-supporting tissues is perpetuated and systemic dissemination and immunostimulation are sustained. after entering the parenteral space through the ulcerated periodontal pocket epithelium, free-soluble material may readily gain access into the abundant blood/lymph vascular network immediately under the epithelium, which then opens the route for systemic spread. the hypothesis of the release of free-soluble surface material by live biofilm bacteria, independent of omv, is new, and although not restricted to oral microorganisms , it may help extending the knowledge of mechanisms for the host's exposure to pathogenic material originating from the bacterial biofilm in this unique nonparenteral ecological habitat. the next step involves testing the hypothesis in in vivo models due to the obvious restrictions in simulating responses to circulating bacterial material by using blood without knowledge of other immunoinflammatory responses of the challenged host.

CONCLUSIONS
our present study demonstrates that a. actinomycetemcomitans, grown in biofilm and planktonic form, releases free-soluble surface material independent of outer membrane vesicles, and that this material induces proinflammatory responses in human whole blood. our findings therefore suggest that release of surface components from live bacterial cells could constitute a mechanism for systemic stimulation and be of particular importance in chronic localized infections, such as periodontitis.

