BACKGROUND
alveolar hydatidosis due to infection with the larval stage of echinococcus multilocularis is one of the world major zoonoses  <cit> . e. multilocularis depends on its definitive and intermediate hosts, which harbour the parasite at intestinal level and in internal organs, respectively. in various endemic regions, different definitive and intermediate hosts may be involved in the transmission cycles, but the most important definitive host is the red fox , whereas several small rodents  may act as intermediate hosts. therefore, transmission of e. multilocularis usually occurs in a sylvatic cycle, which is sometimes linked, via infected small mammals, to domestic dogs and cats. the infected fox sheds viable eggs of e. multilocularis with his faeces, thus contaminating the food of small rodents and infecting them. a fox devouring the parasitized rodents then closes the cycle. man is an accidental host; infection takes place by swallowing infectious eggs present on possibly contaminated materials and produces, as in all intermediate hosts, tissue alveolar hydatidosis, a potentially lethal disease.

e. multilocularis is widespread all over the northern hemisphere. the wide distribution of foxes and the ubiquity of susceptible small mammals in most european habitats suggest that virtually all regions might be suitable for e. multilocularis transmission; however, in some european regions the parasite has so far not been recorded. now, reports on a growing number of areas where the parasite has been observed  <cit> , a raise of prevalence of infected animals  <cit> , an increasing fox population  <cit> , the establishment of the parasite cycle in urban areas  <cit>  and, finally, a growing number of alveolar hydatidosis in humans and other accidental hosts  <cit>  put some questions on the real distribution area of the parasite.

in europe, the parasite has been observed in several countries, especially in and around the alps and in the european part of turkey  <cit> ; italy has been considered e. multilocularis-free until  <dig>  former surveys performed in the alpine regions  <cit>  suggested that alpine mountains may act as an insurmountable  barrier for the parasite spreading  <cit> . then the worm was observed for the first time in red foxes of the province of bolzano, the northernmost part of the country, and its presence was subsequently confirmed by several studies in the same geographical area  <cit> . here, its relatively high prevalence suggests that the parasite has an autochthonous life cycle, hypothesis supported by the results of recent genetic studies that recognized the italian isolates as a cluster of e. multilocularis genotypes, unique if compared to the genotypes from europe and alaska  <cit> . therefore, its presence in the area is probably not a result of the recent immigration of infected foxes from surrounding regions, but it is an ancient presence, very slowly consolidated and only now detected. thus, more surveys need to be done in other italian regions in order to monitor the existence of e. multilocularis and its strains, and to define its possible intermediate hosts. the study area has to have a high density of suitable hosts  and be in a mountainous region, as shown in the alpine area where the parasite is abundant. furthermore, the study area has to be at some distance from the province of bolzano in order to fix the distribution limits of the parasite. the central apennines turned out to be an appropriate site to start our survey.

the second aim of the present study was to evaluate the efficacy of innovative laboratory techniques for the rapid examination of fox samples. the quick screening of a high number of samples is particularly helpful in areas such as the one under study, where the prevalence of the pathogen is expected to be low or even zero. high levels of sensitivity and specificity of the parasitological test are relevant for an accurate epidemiological definition of the study area  <cit> .

finally, a collateral aim of the study was to evaluate the role of the fox as definitive host for e. granulosus, in areas where cystic hydatidosis heavily affects the sheep.

RESULTS
 <dig>  macro- and microscopical examination
after the macroscopic inspection and after the examination with the stereomicroscope of the intestine content of  <dig> foxes, we found  <dig> positive subjects , in which we could identify  <dig> helminthic genera, often in association: taenia, dipylidium, mesocestoides, toxocara, toxascaris, trichuris, capillaria, ancylostoma, uncinaria, and opisthorchis. further examinations of all the results are in progress, however, we can assess that, as for cestodes found in  <dig> foxes collected in tuscany , dipylidium spp. was the most prevalent parasite , occurred with high mean intensity  and was the dominant species . mesocestoides spp., the second most frequent genus, had a prevalence of  <dig> % and was codominant . their prevalence and density were higher in mountain areas than in other considered environments. only twelve foxes had t. taeniaeformis . no sample containing e. multilocularis neither e. granulosus could be found.

by light-microscopy of faeces in fresh state, concentrated by flotation, and concentrated by sedimentation we could identify cestode eggs in 6/ <dig> animals . this finding could not give a definitive answer on the presence of e. multilocularis/e. granulosus, since their eggs are morphologically indistinguishable from other cestode eggs.

 <dig>  coproantigen
after the screening of  <dig> faeces by the elisa kit chekit echinotest monophasic®  <dig> samples were positive and  <dig> were ambiguous. the re-examination of the same  <dig> faeces samples with the elisa kit chekit echinotest biphasic® gave  <dig> positive and  <dig> ambiguous results. comparing the two kits the positive results of the monophasic kit, i.e.  <dig> samples, were confirmed in the biphasic kit by  <dig> samples and  <dig> sample was ambiguous. out of the  <dig> ambiguous samples at the first test,  <dig> turned out to be positive and  <dig> negative at the second test. furthermore,  <dig> positives at the first test were negative at the second, and  <dig> negatives at the first test were positive at the second. if we consider positive the ambiguous results, the two tests may be compared as reported in table  <dig>  the two tests concord in  <dig> % of the results. following the evaluation table of altmann the index k is  <dig>   that means the results are fairly discrepant.

all foxes positive to the echinotest harboured at least tapeworms.

 <dig>  molecular analyses
after screening by pcr for the identification of at least  <dig> species of cestodes we found that out of  <dig> intestinal contents  <dig> were positive  and out of  <dig> faeces  <dig> were positive . these positive samples were tested again by the nested pcr, which did not identify any sample positive to e. multilocularis or e. granulosus. the sensitivity of these analyses, evaluated on samples positive to detectable tapeworms , was  <dig> % . the amplicons obtained at the first and at the second pcr from samples of intestinal content are shown in the figure  <dig>  in the first photograph the positive samples are on the application sites s <dig> and s <dig>  on their right is the positive control for e. multilocularis . in the second photograph the nested pcr shows the characteristic band  of e. multilocularis on the application site of the positive control only.

as identified in the morphological examination, the sequencing of the amplicons confirmed the presence of parasites of the genera mesocestoides  and of t. taeniaeformis  explaining thus the positive results of the first pcr.

discussion
alveolar hydatidosis is an emerging zoonosis due to a parasite whose life cycle is still not completely defined, as is its real geographic distribution. the increase of its distribution area in europe now registered  <cit>  could be due to its spreading into previously parasite-free areas or to a previous lack of information from these areas. italy is one of these newly positive countries, where the finding of the parasite in an eastern alpine region raised the question whether an autochthonous cycle exists in italy or whether the focus evidenced originated from the neighbouring countries. multi-locus microsatellite analysis supports the hypothesis of the presence in italy of an ancient autochthonous cycle of e. multilocularis  <cit> , and justifies further surveys to characterize the entity of this focus and its current spatial limits.

the survey we started was in an area at some distance from the positive province, where climatic conditions are favourable to the dispersal and the viability of the eggs and where susceptible small rodents are present  <cit> . in view of the wide distribution of the foxes, the apenninic area might be suitable for the parasite transmission. however, e. multilocularis was not found, although we detected t. taeniaeformis, which shares the same transmission route , and m. lineatus, which includes rodents among its intermediate hosts.

the fox sample size might have hampered the detection of positive animals, since the distribution of parasite numbers in the fox population is rather heterogeneous, with a small number of foxes carrying most of the parasite biomass.

concerning the diagnosis, at present the reference method to detect e. multilocularis in the fox is the removal of the intestine during necropsy and the application of the sedimentation and counting technique , which has a 100% sensitivity and specificity  <cit> . however, this method is laborious and time-consuming, thus actually not suitable for epidemiological surveys. for this reason, techniques that simplify the searching for e. multilocularis in the fox have been developed, as the identification of amplified dna or the screening for antigens in the faeces. the first technique has a 100% specificity  <cit>  as confirmed by the present study, but shows an 89% sensitivity  <cit>  or even less  <cit> . in this survey the considerable quantity of mixed helminthic species often present in the same intestinal content could have affected the equal distribution of the material , hampering thus the performance of the first pcr in the detection of m. lineatus and t. taeniaeformis dna. nevertheless, this technique is especially appropriate for the screening of areas where the prevalence is unknown and it is particularly indicated for the identification of cestode eggs in faeces, which may also be collected from the ground, when fox carcasses are not available. on this sample molecular diagnostics allowed the identification of each tapeworm and was more sensitive than the concentration method .

the elisa test for the identification of e. multilocularis coproantigens is scarcely sensitive and specific  <cit> . since no positive specimen for e. multilocularis has been found in the present study, an evaluation of the test sensitivity could not be done. the biphasic elisa test showed some improvement in the specificity if compared to the monophasic elisa, but not enough to take this test in consideration.

as a collateral result of the survey, since e. granulosus in these regions is present , our data confirm the thought that this tapeworm prefers a different definitive host.

CONCLUSIONS
none of the  <dig> foxes examined during the years 2004- <dig> was infected by e. multilocularis , and this enables a subsequent survey in the same area to assess a possible spreading of the parasite from other areas. however, further investigations on the small rodents that act as intermediate host of the italian e. multilocularis isolates are necessary, and future surveys need to be done to investigate whether e. multilocularis will still be absent in the southern part of europe or whether it is spreading southwards. in fact, considering the epidemiological evidences that suggest that migration or dislocation of infected hosts can play a role in the parasite spread  <cit> , the absence of e. multilocularis in the foxes examined in the present study does not exclude definitively its presence in areas where the ecological and environmental conditions are favourable to its transmission. on the contrary, the absence of e. granulosus, confirms that the fox doesn't seem one of the preferred definitive hosts of this parasite.

finally, we can assess that the low specificity shown by the elisa kit make this test not suitable for epidemiological surveys, especially in areas like that screened in the present study, where the expected prevalence is low or zero. in this case molecular diagnostics applied to faecal samples produce useful results.

