BACKGROUND
kinesins are a large super-family of microtubule motor proteins that can use the energy of atp hydrolysis to produce force and move along microtubules  <cit> . based on their motor domain location within the primary sequence of the proteins, different kinesins may have their motor domains affixed at c-terminal, n-terminal or internal positions  <cit> . the c-terminal and n-terminal motor kinesins transport various vesicles and organelles toward the microtubules minus-terminal or plus-terminal, respectively. the internal motor kinesins found in animal cells are not able to move along the microtubules in the conventional form, but instead depolymerize microtubules from both ends  <cit> . the completed arabidopsis genome contains at least  <dig> genes encoding polypeptides with the kinesin catalytic core. among these kinesins, atkinesin-13a and atkinesin-13b are two internal-motor kinesins  <cit> . however, the similarity of atkinesin-13a and atkinesin-13b to kinesins of the same subfamily from other kingdoms is only limited to the catalytic core, and they lacks a lys-rich neck motif commonly found in animal kinesin-13s. plant kinesin-13a and animal kinesin-13s also have different localization patterns  <cit> . lu et al. reported that atkinesin-13a was co-localized with golgi stacks in various arabidopsis cells, indicating that atkinesin-13a is a special plant internal-motor kinesin  <cit> . however, the precise localization of atkinesin-13a as well as its biological function in plant golgi apparatus is unclear.

cellular trafficking is the foundation of cellular morphology and function, where the golgi apparatus plays an important role in the secretion and transportation of cellular vesicles  <cit> . in animal cells, the golgi apparatus is positioned near the microtubule-organizing center, and its localization and organization depend on intact microtubules  <cit> . in addition, microtubules and microtubule-based motor proteins play critical roles in golgi dynamics  <cit> . both the conventional kinesins and kinesin-related proteins have been reported to regulate golgi structure and function in animal cells  <cit> . actin microfilaments have also been found to be necessary in maintaining the sub-cellular localization of the animal golgi complex  <cit> . both microtubules and microfilaments cooperate in maintaining the balance of golgi dynamics within animal cells.

unlike in animal cells, the golgi apparatus of plant cells consists of a large number of small, independent golgi stacks that are distributed throughout the cytoplasm  <cit> , with the number of golgi stacks being different among different kind of cells. the number of the golgi apparatus is typically abundant in plant root-cap peripheral cells, in which very large vesicles are produced by each golgi apparatus  <cit> . this is in accord with the high secretory activity needed for root growth in soil  <cit> . on the other hand, it is generally believed that the movement of plant golgi stacks is solely dependent on actin microfilaments  <cit> .

in plant cells, it has been reported that microtubules play a key role in organelle movement  <cit> , but it is unclear whether microtubule-based motor kinesins take part in regulating the structure and function of golgi apparatus. in the present study, atkinesin-13a was detected on golgi-associated vesicles in root-cap cells of arabidopsis. additionally, the golgi structure was abnormal in root-cap peripheral cells of the kinesin-13a- <dig> mutant. these results suggest that atkinesin-13a may participate in regulating the formation of golgi-associated vesicles in arabidopsis root cap peripheral cells.

RESULTS
atkinesin-13a co-localization with golgi stacks in arabidopsis root tip cells
the expression of atkinesin-13a was not tissue-specific in arabidopsis  <cit> . on the other hand, there are different types of golgi stacks in plant root tip cells. therefore, for further studying the localization and function of atkinesin-13a, arabidopsis root tip cells were used. n-acetylglucosaminyl transferase i -gfp fusion protein specially decorates golgi stacks in plant cells  <cit> . to co-localize atkinesin-13a with golgi apparatus in arabidopsis root tip cells, we used an arabidopsis line expressing the nag-gfp fusion. root tip cells were used to verify the relationship between atkinesin-13a localization and individual golgi stacks marked by nag-gfp. confocal microscopic observation revealed that atkinesin-13a was co-localized with nag-gfp in arabidopsis root tip cells , suggesting that atkinesin-13a is localized to the golgi stacks in these cells.

atkinesin-13a is mainly localized on golgi vesicles in arabidopsis root-cap cells
to determine the localization of atkinesin-13a on golgi stacks at the ultra-structural level, ultra-thin sections were immuno-gold labeled with anti-atkinesin-13a antibody in arabidopsis root-cap cells. the immuno-gold labeling with the affinity-purified anti-atkinesin-13a antibody and electron microscopy revealed that atkinesin-13a was specifically linked with the golgi stacks of arabidopsis root cap cells. electron microscopic observation detected that gold particles were associated with the golgi vesicles in the root-cap cells . quantitative analysis of the gold particles distribution showed a preferential association of atkinesin-13a with the golgi vesicle, accounting for  <dig> % of the total gold particles . we additionally found that gold labeling was located mainly on the margin of golgi vesicles in arabidopsis root cap cells . this result suggests that atkinesin-13a may locate on membranes of golgi vesicles in these cells. control sections, incubated with the secondary antibody alone, did not show gold particles association with golgi vesicles . in addition, we also found that atkinesin-13a antibody can not label golgi vesicles in the root cap cells of kinesin-13a- <dig> mutant line .

note: number represented the percentages  of the total labeling in distinct locations in root-cap cells of arabidopsis.

n: the number of cells analyzed. golgi-associated vesicles: the vesicles around golgi stacks. other vesicles: the vesicles beyond golgi stacks. non-vesicles: cytoplasmic labeling not associated with vesicles or golgi vesicles.

atkinesin-13a gene inactivation caused obvious structural changes of golgi stacks in root cap peripheral cells
lu et al  <cit>  reported two independent arabidopsis t-dna insertion mutations at the atkinesin-13a locus, which led to the loss of function of kinesin-13a in arabidopsis. in lu et al. paper, it was concluded that two atkinesin-13a mutant lines  exhibited identical phenotypes. they have confirmed that the mutant phenotypes were indeed caused by the t-dna insertion at the kinesin-13a locus based on their complementation results  <cit> . the kinesin-13a- <dig> mutant line was used for current study.

the golgi apparatus is the main executer of secretory activity in root-cap peripheral cells  <cit> . root-cap peripheral cells of the kinesin-13a- <dig> mutant were compared with those of wild-type arabidopsis using transmission electron microscopy. peripheral cells of the kinesin-13a- <dig> mutant lines contained a few large vacuoles, but few vesicles . in contrast, numerous vesicles were found in the peripheral cells of the wild type root cap . in addition, golgi-associated vesicles were also rare and small in the peripheral cells of the kinesin-13a- <dig> mutant , compared to how abundant secretory vesicles around the golgi stack in wild type root-cap peripheral cells . a different morphology was also found in cisternal morphology of golgi stacks between wild and mutant line. normally, cisternae swell at the ends in golgi stacks of root-cap peripheral cells . however, this does not occur in the kinesin-13a- <dig> mutant line . therefore, it appeared that the morphology of the golgi apparatus in the kinesin-13a- <dig> mutant line is significantly different from that of the wild type for root-cap peripheral cells.

in the meristematic cells and columella cells of the root cap, however, the golgi morphology of the kinesin-13a- <dig> mutant was not significantly different from that of wild type .

discussion
golgi apparatus is a vital organelle in the process of cellular secretion. in animal cells, the high level of activity at the golgi apparatus is sustained largely through the combined effects of microtubules, actin-microfilaments, and some intermediate filaments  <cit> . in plant cells, the golgi apparatus consists of a large number of small, independent golgi stacks that appear to be randomly distributed throughout the cytoplasm that take on rapid stop-and-go movements  <cit> . the golgi apparatus is a polar organelle. from its cis-cisternae to the trans-network, there are multi-compartments that carry out versatile functions. within different functional compartments there are also special proteins that perform different biological functions. previous studies have shown that a number of molecular motors are around golgi apparatus and involved in maintaining its proper structure and function in animal cells  <cit> . however, few motors were found to locate on plant golgi apparatus before. recently, lu et al reported that atkinesin-13a decorated golgi stacks of various arabidopsis cells  <cit> . results from immuno-gold labeling and electron microscopy presented here further indicated that atkinesin-13a located to the margin of golgi vesicles in arabidopsis root cap cells. this result suggests that atkinesin-13a may associate with membranes of golgi vesicles in arabidopsis root cap cells. on the other hand, there is no predicted trans-membrane domain in the atkinesin-13a protein sequence. taken together, these results imply that atkinesin-13a may be a cytoplasmic oriented peripheral membrane protein of golgi-associated vesicles in arabidopsis.

the root cap consists of a large number of parenchyma cells. during the growth of the root system, root-cap cells initially stem from the root-cap meristem by mitosis, then progress through a series of distinctive developmental stages. ultimately, these cells separate from the periphery of the root cap to produce border cells  <cit> . during differentiation from meristematic cells into peripheral cells, the number of golgi stacks per cell as well as the size and the number of golgi-associated vesicles per golgi apparatus increase visibly. in root-cap peripheral cells, there are large populations of active secretory golgi apparatus, and the secretory vesicles around the golgi are large and abundant, while the size and number of golgi-associated vesicles in root-cap meristematic cells are relatively few and small  <cit> . in this paper, electron microscopy observation showed that the atkinesin-13a gene inactivation induced a significant decrease of the size and number of golgi-associated vesicles in root-cap peripheral cells. in addition, no swelling was observed at the ends of trans-cisternae of golgi stacks in root-cap peripheral cells of the mutant line. the large golgi-associated vesicles often come from trans-cisternae swelling and budding in root-cap peripheral cells  <cit> . these results suggest that atkinesin-13a may be involved in the trans-cisternae swelling and budding of golgi-associated vesicles in root-cap peripheral cells, and then regulates the size and number of golgi-associated vesicles in these cells.

the expression of atkinesin-13a was not tissue-specific in arabidopsis  <cit> . however, some unconventional golgi apparatus behaviors were only observed in the root-cap peripheral cells of the arabidopsis kinesin-13a- <dig> mutant line. recently, poulsen et al also reported that aminophospholipid atpase <dig> , a member of the p4-atpase subfamily in arabidopsis, localizes to the golgi stacks and that mutations of ala <dig> result in devoid of the characteristic golgi vesicles in only arabidopsis root-cap peripheral cells  <cit> . taken together, these results indicated that both atkinesin-13a and ala <dig> mutations have similar phenotype of golgi vesicles in root-cap peripheral cells. the root-cap peripheral cells secrete mucilage to protect and lubricate root cap as they force their way between soil particles. hence the golgi apparatus in root-cap peripheral cells are very specialized and possess a high secretory activity. so there may be some special golgi-associated vesicles or some special vesicle formation/budding mechanism in root-cap peripheral cells in which the atkinesin-13a and ala <dig> play essential roles.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we found that atkinesin-13a located on golgi-associated vesicles in arabidopsis root-cap cells, and the inactivation of the atkinesin-13a gene caused a sharp decrease of golgi vesicles number and size in root-cap peripheral cells. based on these results, we speculate that there may be a novel mechanism by which atkinesin-13a controls golgi vesicles formation or budding in plant root cap peripheral cells.

