BACKGROUND
micrornas  are a class of ~ <dig> nt, non-coding rnas present in plants and animals that play important roles in regulating gene expression by directing translational repression and/or mrna destabilization  <cit> . recognition and interaction between mirna and mrna take effect only if the 5' end seed  of the mirna is complementary to the 3' utr site of the mrna. a mirna typically targets multiple, even hundreds of, genes  <cit> , which makes mirnas potentially global regulators responsible for spatio-temporal gene expression patterns.

like let- <dig>  <cit> , some mirnas are highly conserved throughout evolution and participate in pivotal biological processes  <cit> . lineage- or species-specific mirnas may contribute to the uniqueness of organisms  <cit> . with recent advancements in mirna microarrays and next-generation sequencing, mirna expression profiles of many species are being generated at a rapid pace. these profiles are invaluable resources for better understanding gene expression dynamics  <cit> . some mirnas have been well characterized and have been shown to have important functions in normal development  <cit> . the deficient expression of some mirnas also presents severe phenotypic abnormalities  <cit> . the role of mirnas in responses to cellular and environmental stress has been discovered in a variety of organisms  <cit> . a few of these mirnas have been characterized as key regulators of the stress response  <cit> . for example, mir- <dig> family mirnas were shown to be indispensable in the response of zebrafish embryos to osmotic stress  <cit> . despite this progress, most studies to date have only examined mirnas' functions at individual level. the global contributions of micrornaomes  to environmental adaptations remain largely unexplored.

the zebrafish, an important model organism, is an eurythermal fish with temperature tolerance ranging from approximately 7°c to 40°c  <cit> , making it a useful experimental subject for exploring the molecular mechanisms underpinning thermal responses. almost all of the previous work on the molecular underpinnings of thermal responses has focused on the fluctuated expression of protein-coding genes in response to warm or cold acclimation  <cit> . many mirnas have been discovered in zebrafish  <cit> , and their expression profiles  <cit>  and functions in developmental regulation have been studied  <cit> . our goal was to determine how the zebrafish mirnaome responds to thermal acclimation and to assess the roles of mirnas in thermally challenged transcriptomic plasticity. toward this end, we systematically characterized the mirnaomes of zebrafish brains under normal and cold-acclimated conditions using solexa sequencing. we also identified genome-wide gene expression patterns under each of these conditions using microarray profiling. we then examined the potential links between the changes in mirna levels and the transcriptomic shifts and found that mirnas may play minor roles in transcriptomic plasticity during cold acclimation in the zebrafish brain.

RESULTS
deep sequencing of the zebrafish brain small rna and mirna prediction
total rnas from brain of cold-treated  and normal control  zebrafish were extracted and electrophoresed to enrich the 18- <dig> nt small rnas and then subjected to solexa sequencing. the numbers of high-quality reads were  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> for the normal control  and cold-acclimated  rna libraries, respectively. the length distributions of the sequence reads from the two samples both peaked at  <dig> nt, conforming to size distribution patterns characteristic of mirna libraries . after filtering short  and adaptor-contaminated reads, we obtained  <dig> , <dig>  and  <dig> , <dig>  redundant reads that corresponded to  <dig>   and  <dig>   unique reads.

we ran the soap <dig> program  <cit>  to map the unique reads to the zebrafish genome . stem-loop structures were predicted from the putative mirna precursor sequences using mireap . overall, we identified  <dig> stem-loop precursors that coded for  <dig> mirnas. among them,  <dig> were previously known mirnas  <cit> , constituting over 80% of the unique mirnas  deposited in the mirbase database .  <dig> are newly identified mirnas . to cross-validate these newly identified mirnas, we adopted another mirna prediction software, mirdeep  <cit>  by invoking the quantifier.pl script  in the software package. results showed that the mirna prediction outcomes are almost the same, independent of the prediction methods used and the mirna expression levels are also highly consistent between the two methods . to further evaluate the accuracy of mirna prediction, we examined the predicted mirnas with a higher stringency by adding another two criteria: 1) they cannot be exon-derived ; 2) their precursors need to be recognized as genuine stem-loop structures by the mipred  <cit>  software. consequently, the number of newly identified mirnas in our dataset was reduced from  <dig> to  <dig> . however, mipred does not ensure 100% accuracy in determining the authenticity of mirnas. for instance,  <dig> of the  <dig> well-known zebrafish mirnas were incorrectly assigned in this prediction. in addition, "exon-derived" mirnas are possible to exist if the relevant exons do not code for proteins or are transcribed under alternative promoters or from alternative strand. therefore, the number of authentic mirnas in the zebrafish brain is very likely higher than  <dig> . to verify the authenticity of the newly identified mirnas, we selected  <dig> mirnas expressed at various levels to perform rt-pcr. all of them can be successfully amplified . cloning and sequencing of the pcr products confirmed that they are in correct forms. these results showed that the newly identified mirnas are very likely true mirnas. remarkably, the newly identified mirnas are expressed at substantially lower levels than previously known mirnas . this may partially explain why the new mirnas were missed by traditional cloning and sequencing methods.

solexa sequencing are known for its short reads, and errors can be pervasive in short-read sequencing  <cit> . to address this concern, we clustered the raw reads using the freclu software  <cit> , which takes the read count into consideration. the results showed that this clustering process can improve the accuracy of short reads mapping . however, it did not improve the data quality of the predicted mirnas . hence, we performed all of the follow-up analyses of the mirnas identified using the original reads.

wc: cold-acclimated condition; nc: normal condition.

the mirna expression profile in cold acclimation
based on normalized read counts of each mirna in the control and cold libraries, we deduced the expression changes of the brain mirnaome in response to cold acclimation. because low-expressed sequences have more noise than high-expressed sequences, koh et al. proposed an adaptive thresholding method using kolomogorov-smirnov statistics to determine the threshold value for identifying significant mirnas  <cit> . we observed a similar pattern in the present study. the less abundant mirnas showed a greater divergence than the more abundant mirnas . we hypothesized that the low-expressed mirnas showing greater divergence likely have more noise than the high-expressed ones and that the high-expressed mirnas have a high probability of playing an important biological role. we borrowed the concept of koh et al. to define mirnas differentially expressed under the normal and cold conditions as the ones that have a greater than 2-fold change between the two libraries and a mean expression level greater than  <dig>  as a result, we found  <dig> up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated mirnas in the cold library; a majority of them are known mirnas .

#wc: the number of mirnas in the cold library; #nc: the number of mirnas in the normal library; fold△: normalized fold change of mirnas in the normal over the cold library. ↑ denotes the up-regulation.

to reveal which biological processes might be regulated by the changed mirnaome, we predicted the target genes of the differential mirnas using pita  <cit> . we then projected the functions of these differential mirnas onto the overrepresented gene ontology  terms of their targets using the go:termfinder package  <cit>  with a corrected p value of ≤ <dig>  as a cutoff. in total, we found  <dig>  and  <dig> mirnas  with overrepresented biological process and molecular function go terms, respectively . in addition, we assembled all target genes of the up-regulated and down-regulated mirnas and examined whether any overrepresented functions would emerge. our results showed that genes related to "purine nucleotide binding" and "nucleotide binding" were enriched in the targets of up-regulated mirnas.

nd: not determined. fold△: fold change of mirnas in the cold over the normal library. ↑ denotes the up-regulation.

gene expression profiling and differentially expressed genes
gene transcription changes between the cold-acclimated and normal samples were obtained by microarray-based hybridization using three sets of rna samples prepared from fishes of three acclimation experiments. the gene expression level was measured as the intensity of probe sets on an affymetrix microarray. after filtering the probe sets and retrieving the map relationship between the probe sets and the genes, we obtained gene expression profile recordings of  <dig> protein-coding genes. the differential genes were determined using a two-class, unpaired comparison in the sam  program  <cit> . using a 5% false discovery rate  cut-off, we found that  <dig> genes were down-regulated and  <dig> genes were up-regulated in the cold-acclimated samples . there were  <dig> and  <dig> genes with more than 2-fold changes in mrna abundance that were down- and up-regulated, respectively.

we then investigated the functional enrichment of these differential genes using the go:termfinder package  <cit> . as shown in table  <dig>  under cold stress, the genes with a functional annotation related to "mrna processing" were enriched in the up-regulated differential genes, and genes associated with "cellular macromolecular complex subunit organization" were overrepresented in the down-regulated genes. an interesting observation here is that the identified molecular functions and biological processes changes in the cold-acclimated zebrafish brain bear no apparent overlap with those predicted from the potential targets of the differential mirnas , suggesting the role of mirnas might be minor in the transcriptomic changes in cold stress. we thus examined the possible regulation roles of the micrornaome in cold adaptation by other statistical approaches.

# genes: the number of genes in the category; nd: not determined.

verification of the expression pattern of the protein-coding genes and mirnas by quantitative rt-pcr 
the reliability of statistical analyses depends on the quality of the microarray and solexa profiling data. to evaluate the accuracy of the microarray screening and the mirna profiling results, genes and mirnas with change direction either down-regulated  or up-regulated  were selected for quantitative rt-pcr verification. q-pcr showed that the direction of expressional change for each selected gene correlated perfectly with the results of the microarray screening or solexa sequencing . although the changed folds of expression in a few genes  and the dre-mir-152-3p showed some discrepancy between the q-pcr results and the '-omic'  profiling data, the other genes/mirnas are in good agreement. since we evaluate only the direction of change of the genes and mirnas when delineating the potential relationship between mirna-mediated regulation and transcriptomic shifts , the gene and mirna expression profiles obtained from the '-omic' profiling approaches are generally useful for statistical analyses.

statistical tests for the potential correlation between the expression levels of mirnas and protein-coding genes
mounting evidence has shown that mirnas can orchestrate the expression of mrnas and that the well-balanced interplay between the mirnaome and protein-coding gene expression plays a crucial role in an organism's development  <cit> . to investigate the influence of mirnas on the global expression of protein-coding genes in cold stress, we adopted four different approaches. first, we estimated the effect of mirnas on differentially regulated genes using fisher's exact test. using pita target prediction methods, we obtained  <dig> pairs of mirna-target interactions in total. our results showed only one mirna  with target genes overrepresented in the down-regulated gene set. no mirnas showed targets enrichment or depletion in the up-regulated gene set . the mirna dre-mir-34-3p was expressed at very low levels  in the brain and was not significantly different between the two conditions. we speculate that it is not probable that dre-mir-34-3p plays an important role in the changed gene expression patterns observed under cold stress. to address concerns over potential target prediction bias by pita, we performed target prediction by miranda software  <cit> . under this methodology, we obtained  <dig> pairs of mirna-target interactions, which is about 3-fold of the number  obtained by pita prediction method. we then examined the composition of targets predicted by the two methods for each mirna. our results showed that  <dig> mirnas shared at least one predicted target between pita and miranda; however, as a whole, the overlap is relatively low . for example, among a group of  <dig> mirnas for which each has more than ten targets by whatever target prediction methods, the median value of the proportion of overlap is only  <dig>  . in average, each mirna targets ~ <dig> protein-coding genes and each gene is likely to be regulated by 7- <dig> mirnas in return. based on these interaction data, our statistical analyses recaptured the fore-mentioned mirna-mrna interacting pattern, i.e., no mirnas targeted over- or under-represented genes in either up- or down-regulated gene set.

recently, chen et al.  <cit>  proposed a novel concept for the regulatory effect score  to measure the inhibition capability of a mirna on its targets. in principle, the re score is calculated as the average difference in expression levels between a target and a non-target group. by calculating the re scores on the pita and miranda methodology, respectively, we checked whether some of the mirnas would changed regulatory effects on their targets between the two conditions. consistent with previous results, we again found that no mirnas exhibited a significant change in their regulatory effect after correcting the raw t-test p-values by the multiple hypothesis test  whatever the target prediction method was used. taken together, our results indicate that individual mirnas are unlikely to be major factors leading to the changed transcriptomic phenotype of zebrafish brain under cold stress.

to further reduce the concerns over target-prediction bias induced errors, we applied the sylamer algorithm  <cit>  to re-examine the potential relationship between the mirnaome and transcriptome under cold acclimation. we sorted the protein-coding genes from the most significantly up-regulated to the most down-regulated. we then calculated the distribution of the enrichment/depletion of words in the 3' utr sequences that could be complementary to the seed sequences of mirnas. since positions 1- <dig> and 2- <dig> of the 5' end of a mature mirna are the most important sequences for target recognition  <cit> , we took the  <dig> nt region as a mirna seed in this study and examined whether some over- or under-represented words corresponded to certain mirnas.

as shown in figure  <dig>  there are no obvious peaks in the region containing the most down-regulated genes, suggesting that the analysis failed to identify any mirnas being the major and direct factors contribute to the decreased expression levels of the down-regulated gene sets; on the other hand, few than ten words seem to be overrepresented in the 3' utr regions of the up-regulated genes. the three most overrepresented words are taataga , gcgaatt  and gttcacg . however, these words are not complementary to any seed region of the profiled zebrafish mirnas. we then examined the composition of the top  <dig> most enriched words and found only one, gctagtt , that was complementary to the seed region of the newly identified mir_ <dig> . however, this mirna was hardly expressed in the brain , suggesting that it was unlikely to be the major factor responsible for the changed gene expression patterns observed.

to systematically investigate the extent to which mirnaome-mediated regulation could have influenced the transcriptome under cold-acclimation, we designed a novel, network-based methodology to parse the subtle regulatory effects of a group of mirnas on a group of protein-coding genes at the system level. based on the predicted mirna-target relationship predicted from the pita method, we first built a mirna-mrna network of  <dig> differential mirnas and  <dig> mrnas . the mirna-target relationship showed that the majority of the differential gene transcripts do not possess any potential targeting sites in the 3' utrs that correspond to the differentiated mirnas. in addition, approximately half of the differential mirnas do not target any genes in the differentiated gene list. the resultant mirna-mrna network involved only  <dig> nodes  and  <dig> edges when the isolated nodes were separated. as seen in figure  <dig>  the mirna-mrna interaction networks are composed of six unconnected components. one component contains  <dig> of the  <dig> nodes, whereas the others are formed by only  <dig> or  <dig> mirnas situated in the network center. the node with the highest number of edges is the up-regulated mirna mir_ <dig> that was predicted to target  <dig>  gene transcripts. among the  <dig> mirna-targeted differentially expressed genes, over four-fifths  are predicted to be targeted by only  <dig> mirna and one-fifth by  <dig> or more. we then computed the "regulatory density"  of the network by formula  . we developed this formula and define it as a proxy for the regulatory potential of a group of mirnas upon gene transcripts by calculating the proportion of coherent over incoherent regulatory links within a mirna-mrna network. our analysis showed that the observed rd was  <dig> . however, the values of the 95th- and 99th-quantiles were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, for the  <dig> cohorts of random networks that were constructed by shuffling the original mirna-mrna network while maintaining the degree distribution. we further analyzed the topologic property of a similar network derived by using the miranda prediction data. the produced mirna-mrna network consisted of  <dig> edges that link  <dig> and  <dig> differential mirnas and protein-coding genes, respectively. as seen in additional file  <dig>  a majority of the mrnas are targeted by a few mirnas; and only a few mirnas have > <dig> target genes. calculation showed that the rd score of this network is  <dig> , again not significantly greater than random expectation . taken together, results from all the above statistical analyses suggested that the mirnaome is unlikely to be the major regulatory component responsible for the changed expression profiles of the protein-coding genes under cold stress.

mathematical models  <cit>  and statistical associations  <cit>  have shown that mirnas frequently intertwine with transcription factors  in regulatory circuits and play essential roles in signal transduction. recently, tu et al.  <cit>  proposed a two-layer network wherein mirna-initiated regulation was mediated and propagated through the mirnas' targeted transcription factors. we investigated whether the mirnas had indirectly, through their transcription factors, led to the observed transcriptomic plasticity. we first filtered the transcription factors from the arrayed gene list according to the go annotation. we treated the genes with any one of the go terms, "dna binding", "transcription factor activity", "transcription activator activity" or "transcription repressor activity", as putative transcription factors. accordingly, we predicted  <dig> tf-coding genes among the  <dig> protein-coding genes. notably, only  <dig> of these tfs showed differential expression in cold acclimation, and they were significantly underrepresented in the differential expressed gene list . among the differential tf genes, only  <dig> were predicted to be the targets of  <dig> differential mirnas . of the  <dig> tfs,  <dig> showed coherent regulatory direction with their respective mirna partners . given that the gene emx <dig> represented slightly up-regulatoin  under cold-acclimated condition, we speculate that it was not a driven gene responsible for the changed mrna expression pattern. there is no evidence that the ikzf <dig>  and h3f3c  are related to stress response when we examined their annotations in multiple databases and in the literature. additionally, almost no differential tf-coding genes were targeted by differential mirnas. taken together, we conclude that the mrna phenotypic plasticity seen under the cold environment was not dominantly modulated by mirnas, even if these factors were directly or indirectly mediated by transcriptional factors.

discussion
the repertoires of mirnas have been constantly revised and updated with the advance of in silico prediction methods and more intensive cloning and sequencing efforts in broader tissues and developmental stages. the number of unique, mature human mirnas is now up to  <dig> in the mirbase database . in contrast, there are only  <dig> mature mirnas now registered for zebrafish. this relatively low number could be the result of genomic between-species differences or incomplete mirna identification in zebrafish. by solexa sequencing, we comprehensively profiled the mirna repertoire in the zebrafish brain. the number of predicted mirnas in this tissue reached  <dig>  in this study and greatly expanded the mirnaome in zebrafish. of note is that the expression levels of the newly identified mirnas in the zebrafish brain are mostly low. the authenticity of these newly identified mirnas remains to be further investigated to determine their biological functions. however, a population analysis on  <dig> randomly selected novel mirnas currently carried out in the laboratory showed that almost half of them are subjected to purified selection suggesting that many newly identified mirnas may have high potentials to be functional in vivo despite their low expression levels. it is possible that some of these newly identified, low-expressed mirnas could be expressed at higher levels in tissues other than the brain and play roles in gene regulation. the mirnaome of the zebrafish is much larger than those of the lower chordates such as the amphioxus species, which had been determined by small rna library sequencing  <cit>  and solexa sequencing  <cit> . this suggests the expansion of the mirna regulome in the evolution of vertebrates.

to study the function of the mirnaome in environmental adaptation, we designed the cold-acclimation experiments in this study. we profiled both the mirnaome and the transcriptome of the brain under low- and normal-temperature conditions. we adopted four approaches to examine how mirnas, either individually or globally, could have influenced the transcriptomic plasticity under cold conditions. using statistical methods we first examined the potential effects of individual mirnas on gene expression patterns. we found one or two mirnas exhibiting regulation signatures on mrna expression based on enrichment/depletion analysis of target genes among the differential gene set. however, we argue that these mirnas are unlikely to have been responsible for the different expression patterns after further investigation of their expression levels. our results show that at the individual level, the mirnas were not a main factor shaping the mrna expression patterns observed under the cold-acclimated conditions. we then attempted to clarify whether the cold-stress response of mrna expression is governed by mirnas indirectly and is mediated by tfs. tf-mediated transcriptional regulation is thought to be stronger than the post-transcriptional regulation usually mediated by mirnas  <cit> . for this purpose, we assigned a set of tfs according the go annotation and found that tfs were significantly underrepresented in the differential protein-coding genes; there were only  <dig> tfs targeted by differential mirnas. again, our results suggest that there is hardly any influence from mirnas on the changed mrna expression patterns. a recent study by nunez-lglesias et al.  <cit>  suggested that a subtle regulation relationship between mirnas and their targets can be observed in the global mirnas-mrna network using more sensitive experimental designs and a systems biology approach. aiming to discern the subtle regulatory effects, we employed a novel network-based analysis. we found that the mirna-mrna network  does not possess a significantly higher percentage of coherent edges than the random expectation. furthermore, this regulatory network consists of only  <dig> pairs of coherent edges between mirnas and tf genes. therefore, our data also rule out the possibility that mirnas as major factors indirectly modulate mrna expression in the brain of cold-acclimated zebrafish. one might argue that many tfs are often expressed in low abundance and that some of them might go beyond the detective sensitivity of the current affymetrix array screening methodology, causing the observed underrepresentation of the tfs in the differential gene set. this situation might eventually lead to incomplete evaluation of the regulatory effects of mirnas on the transcriptome. to evaluate this possibility, we calculated the mean expression level of the  <dig> predicted tfs and the non-tf genes in the array. as seen from figure  <dig>  though the tfs showed slightly lower average expression levels than the non-tf genes, the distribution pattern of expression intensity for tfs as compared with non-tfs within the differential genes is very similar as that within the whole set of the arrayed genes, indicating that the relatively low expression of tfs did not hinder the screening of the differential tf genes in this study. evidence from various developmental biology studies has been continuing emerged favoring the hypothesis that mirnas are capable of imparting robustness on gene regulation networks that involve several classes of recurrent circuits composed of mirnas and their corresponding targets  <cit> . for example, a study by hilgers et al.  <cit>  revealed that mir-263a/b plays an important role in protecting drosophila mechanosensory bristles from apoptosis and ensures the developmental robustness of this organ. in our study, we found mirnas are minor factors in transcriptome changes in the cold acclimated zebrafish brain. this difference may reflect that mirnas in animal brains act more as developmental regulators than adaptability regulators.

thermally invoked responses can be generally classified as cellular stress responses, homeostatic responses or body remodeling-related responses that correspond to short-term, mid-term or long-term acclimation processes, respectively  <cit> . our samples were taken after 10-day cold acclimation, which can be classified as mid-term acclimation. we reason that the current results reflect only the gene regulatory patterns of the zebrafish brain at this temporal scale of acclimation. the involvement of mirnas as a pivotal regulator in an earlier or later cold adaptation phase remains to be further investigated.

persistent efforts have identified and characterized some cold stress-induced protein-coding genes  <cit> ; among them, rbm <dig>  which encodes a glycine-rich rna binding protein, has been suggested to regulate global protein synthesis by affecting mirna expression levels  <cit> . in the present study, we also observed two homologous genes in zebrafish, cirbp  and zgc: <dig> , with significantly up-regulated expression levels under cold-acclimated condition.

lopez-maury et al.  <cit>  have pointed out that post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms, compared to transcriptional mechanisms, are largely unknown under stress conditions. to our knowledge, there are few studies jointly analyzing mirnas and mrna profiles to explore the roles of mirnas on the cold adaptation of fish. such a study would extend our understanding of mirnas and environmental adaptation and undoubtedly lead to a more challenging and interesting question: whether and how mirnas have integrated into cold-adaptive processes and contributed to the unique physiology of fishes endemic to extreme temperature conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we systematically characterized the mirnaome of zebrafish brain under normal and cold-acclimated conditions using solexa sequencing. our data has greatly extended the zebrafish mirnas repertory from the  <dig> unique, mature mirnas  to more than  <dig> ones. besides, our results showed that the mirnas, either individually or together, either directly or indirectly play only a minor role in transcriptomic plasticity during cold acclimation in the zebrafish brain, suggesting that the cold-stress response of mrna expression may be governed mainly through regulatory modes other than post-transcriptional regulation by mirnas. mirnas in animal brains may act more as developmental regulators than thermal adaptability regulators.

