BACKGROUND
whole genome shotgun  sequencing of novel environmental bacterial isolates or single amplified genomes  of uncultured bacteria using next-generation sequencing  technologies opens up new perspectives in microbial ecology studies. species with defined genomes increase the value of many different biological studies, e.g. to compare the roles of organisms in the environment at different levels - microbial evolution, metabolism, and ecology  <cit> . fully sequenced bacterial genomes are superior to genome fragments because they provide the only accurate reference for interpreting meta-genomes and -transcriptomes. relatively inexpensive ngs technologies can produce large quantities of sequencing data, but most ngs methods produce relatively short sequence fragments i.e. short read sequences . these srss need to be assembled, perhaps into full genomes. bacterial genome assembly is a computational process in which srss are compiled into whole genome sequences; in the case of de novo assembly no preliminary information about the genome is available, while reference mapping uses existing reference genome sequences to assemble srss from re-sequencing projects.

recent advances in next-generation sequencing  technologies have moved whole genome sequencing from large centres to small research groups and even individual scientists. this move is largely fuelled by a reduction in sequencing costs. however, what is lacking is a set of standardized analysis tools that can be used by non-bioinformaticians. there are millions of uncharacterised environmental microbes that lack close relatives with finished and annotated genomes, and several essential computational problems need to be addressed before the information contained within these genomes can be fully accessed. several algorithms have been developed to assemble short  and medium reads , including efforts by the commercial providers of sequencing technologies . currently,  <cit> , the roche  <dig> flx titanium provides up to a 1 kb read length, which is comparable to sanger sequencing, so the coverage needed to assemble bacterial genomes will decrease along with the computational power required per bacterial genome. an emerging and competing technology  that is able to produce ~400 bp read via paired end sequencing is the 2×250bps by illumina miseq.

assembly is followed by gene prediction/annotation, a computational process in which regions of the dna containing coding genes are identified. advanced gene annotators typically use complex probabilistic models such as hidden markov models  or blast  <cit> . hmms need to be trained, a process that depends on existing information, i.e. on genomes that are already annotated, so genes with very different nucleotide compositions may be missed using this approach. second-generation annotation tools combine various gene prediction algorithms, which ought to increase their accuracy in performing gene annotations  <cit> .

it is clear that existing tools for sequence annotation involve extensive manual work which is currently not feasible for coping with the increasing amounts of genome data from numerous species simultaneously. however, the use of fully automated annotation tools may lead to error propagation and biologically irrelevant data. to date, there has been no exhaustive evaluation of genome analysis pipelines from assembly to annotation . to complicate such an evaluation there is an increasing variety of online and locally-running pipelines . probably the best-known online automated annotation systems are rast , img , jcvi annotator , pgaap , and ratt  <cit> . the rast system  <cit> , which is integrated within the seed environment  <cit> , allows one to browse the annotated genomes and supports the use of external comparative tools to analyse them. gene calling in img  is based on blastp, after which genes are assigned using various annotation databases such cog, pfam, tigrfam and gene ontology. functional annotations can be characterized by cog functional categories, kegg and metacyc pathway collections. ncbi pgaap is based on hmmer gene prediction methods with a sequence similarity-based approach, which combines comparison of the predicted gene products with the non-redundant protein database, entrez protein clusters, the conserved domain database, and the cogs . a prerequisite for jcvi tools is a maximum of five contigs/pseudocontigs, which makes them difficult to apply when there are tens of contigs. artificially-created pseudocontigs formed from too many contigs may add artefacts. for closely-related strains, the transfer of annotation may be the best tool , however, in this study we did not use these tools because we found no suitable sibling strains.

the objective of the present study was to test and compare open source short read assemblers with online integrated annotation tools for their potential to automate work flow in de novo genomics, with as little human intervention, manual operations, and curation as possible. for de novo analysis we used two novel strains from the genus flavobacterium and one strain from the genus marinomonas; for quality control we used a fully re-sequenced organism with a finished genome . bacteria for de novo sequencing originated from the same environment , two bacteria are very closely related on the basis of an initial 16s rdna comparison, while a third bacterium is presumed to possess similar ecophysiological properties.

RESULTS
sequencing output
genomes were sequenced on two runs using four multiplex identifier  adaptors for each run. rapid library  sequencing yielded poor results because of the relatively low read lengths, so the sequencing was repeated using general library preparation . the sequencing outputs are presented in additional file 1: table s <dig>  the average read length was shorter using the rl kit than the glp kit, with fewer total bases and less total coverage. pooled data with ~  <dig> fold coverage from both sequencing runs were used in all downstream data analysis.

reference mapping of re-sequencing and annotation/re-annotation
for reference mapping, we used the completed genome of alcanivorax borkumensis sk <dig>  and re-sequenced data from our a. borkumensis sk <dig> strain. reference mapping did not result in assembly of the full genome. out of the complete genome , the number of matching bps found depended on the genome assembler used . the best performing assembler was mira <dig> which produced  <dig> ,125 bps, followed by newbler , and mosaik . the number of contigs varied depending on the software, from  <dig>  to  <dig>  with mira <dig> yielding  <dig> contigs. manual evaluation of the mapping results of all reads revealed that the most complete coverage was achieved using mira <dig>  the break-up of the reference mapping into several contigs happened because seven regions were covered by a few ends of reads with lower quality or by a single highquality read. in addition, three regions with gaps between  <dig> to 762 bp were not covered by any reads. the overall quality of the mira <dig> mapping was considerably better than that produced by other genome assemblers.

the difference between nc_ <dig>  and the number of nucleotides covered corresponds to the total length of the genome not mapped. disagreements are indicated as conflicting positions in the consensus sequence between reference genome and mapped reads. ns – number of fully ambiguous nucleotides within mapped regions.

the automated annotation pipelines rast, img, and pgaap were evaluated with reference-mapped contigs found using the mira <dig> and mosaik assemblers. these annotations were compared to the original annotation of the a. bokrumensis sk <dig> ; in addition, the raw sequence of sk <dig> was re-annotated with these three annotation pipelines . re-annotation of the finished genome sequence increased the number of coding sequences  by about 5–6%, and the number of trna and rrna operons did not change. the length of the cdss did not change remarkably and the average length of cdss in the finished genome was 993 ±  <dig> , and in the re-annotated genome 934 ±  <dig> . in contrast, when using truly re-sequenced data, both the mira <dig> and mosaik assemblers predicted considerably more cdss. the cds size clearly decreased using pgaap annotation, e.g.  <dig> contigs from mira <dig> mapping resulted in an average cds of 490 ±  <dig> . this occurred because in the reference mapping mode 100% of the consensus contigs contained many artificial indels, and many more artificial stop codons were introduced . these artificial indels originated mostly from homopolymeric regions or other sequencing errors of different pyrosequence reads from the same fragment. different independent reads contained different numbers of homopolymeric nucleotides of high quality, which led to a consensus of less than 100%, because re-mapping algorithms are optimized to discover snps. for example, one aconitase a cds was fragmented into five pieces using both the img and rast annotation pipelines . pgaap behaved even worse as it tended to annotate only the longest cds with the same name/function, so the remaining sequence regions were left unannotated, and therefore the proportion of non-coding parts increased substantially.

a full comparison of the matching annotation results  obtained from the genome assemblers and annotation pipelines used is presented in figure 1a; cdss were compared on the basis of sequence match at 100% similarity – to compare cdss with exact start and stop matches. all pipelines, including the re-annotation pipeline, predicted more cdss than the original sequencing . some of these cdss were unique to each pipeline and were not identified by the others. the number of matches identified increased by  <dig> % when re-sequenced and de novo assembled data was used compared with the re-annotated sequence data from the finished genome . this was corroborated by comparing raw sequences; while both the reference mapping and the de novo assembly contained sequencing errors , these errors influenced the consensus of reference-mapped reads more severely.

further manual comparison revealed differences in gene calling that could affect the accuracy and annotation details of genome analyses. the trna and rrna operons were used as examples . annotation of mira <dig> mapping by rast was in good agreement with the nc_ <dig> re-annotation; all three rrna operons were annotated accurately, and the number of trnas was  <dig> . img-er annotation of the same mapping was very similar to rast: three rrnas and  <dig> trnas. in contrast, pgaap failed to find the rrna operons and only three 5s rrnas were annotated; the rest of the operon was found in the assembly but was not recognized by pgaap. annotation results for trnas were similar to rast and img-er. the greater number of contigs  that resulted from mosaik assembly induced suboptimal results, e.g. rast failed to annotate any rrna operons and predicted one fewer trna. an exact sequence-based comparison of all three rrna operons in the re-annotation of nc_ <dig> and re-sequencing/annotation of our a. borumensis sk <dig> are provided in additional file 1: figure s <dig> 

de novo assembly
three assemblers  were compared on the basis of output statistics of the de novo assembly using their default parameters in the assembly process . all de novo assemblies of the four strains were highly fragmented into relatively small contigs when assembled using cabog. they contained more contigs in total, and had lower n <dig> values when compared with the other assemblies. mira <dig> assemblies resulted in longer contigs and higher n <dig> values when compared with the other assemblies . de novo assembly of the re-sequenced genome of a. borumensis sk <dig> using mira <dig> covered  <dig> %  of the reference genome, which is lower than the reference mapping of the same number of reads. in addition, the pairwise similarity of the reference genome and de novo assembly was  <dig> % . in contrast, de novo assembly using cabog covered only  <dig> % of the total genome . newbler covered slightly fewer base pairs than mira de novo assembly -  <dig> % .

the genome sizes of novel strains subjected to true de novo assembly varied: flavobacterium strain gobb3- <dig> had ~ <dig>  mbps  and gobb3-c103- <dig> ~ <dig>  mbps , and marinomonas gobb3- <dig> had ~ <dig>  mbps . the number of assembled contigs for the small genome bacterium  was comparable to a. borkumensis sk <dig>  which has roughly the same genome size. therefore, we assume that our de novo assembly might cover ~99% of the total genome of gobb3- <dig>  larger genomes  were more fragmented and thus it is difficult to estimate how much of the total genome was covered and annotated using our approach.

comparison of de novo assembled genomes annotated by automated pipelines
all de novo sequenced genomes were annotated using three pipelines: img, pgaap, and rast. we compared these annotation pipelines using a more robust method. in contrast to the above comparison, we used annotations of protein coding genes that were based on cogs instead of directly comparing the nucleotide sequences of cdss . the cog annotations allowed us to compare the performance of the different pipelines in predicting the general metabolic features of novel organisms – a method predicted to be useful for general genome analysis. at the cog categories level, the numbers of annotations on the same strain were statistically different . using cog annotation, the number of annotations was statistically different in very few cases and occurred only with data from the gobb3-c103- <dig> assembly. in general, img-er annotated fewer cogs than either pgaap or rast. in addition, the differences and the number of cog annotations missing between comparison annotations were greater for strain gobb3-c103- <dig>  which has a larger genome and a more fragmented draft assembly .

sk <dig> – alcanivorax borkumensis sk2;  <dig> – flavobacterium sp. gobb3-209; c103- <dig> – flavobacterium sp. gobb3-c103-3;  <dig> – marinomonas sp. gobb3- <dig>  genome size is given as newbler default prediction. missing cogs are cogs that are absent from the annotation compared to nc_ <dig> annotation in genbank.

discussion
the relative value of draft versus completely finished genomes has been debated for over a decade , over which time the finishing of genomes, including bacterial, remains time consuming and costly. however, this is expected to change because techniques to simplify the finishing process are expected to progress in the near future  <cit> . at the same time, ngs technologies are developing very rapidly in terms of sequence output and reduced cost, which allows genome sequences to be obtained at a reasonable cost. in addition, some ngs technologies can already produce sequence reads comparable in length to traditional sanger sequences with high coverage  in hours, which should simplify analysis. it is for these reasons that we conducted an update study to assess the usefulness of these data for rapid and preliminary genome studies. this study compares only free and open source tools because these alone open up the possibility for individual researchers and small research groups to both assemble and annotate sequence reads into completed genomes, and tune the analysis pipelines.

before embarking on bioinformatic genome analysis, researchers are faced with a multitude of choices regarding which analytical protocols and tools to apply – a choice which is especially critical for small and independent research groups. many bioinformatic tools are either free and open source or freely available for academic use, and are thus natural choices. however, these two types of software differ. often, the installation, operation, and maintenance of free and open source software requires specific technical expertise and current best practice are either poorly documented or entirely lacking – drawbacks that are expected to decrease rapidly over time. closed-source tools that limit our academic freedoms, including those without licencing fees, also limit the transparency of their pipelines which may adversely affect the reproducibility of computed results.

analogous to the choice of analysis tools, the choice of sequencing technology to apply has not been clearly settled. our results show that roche  <dig> pyrosequencing might be a good choice for obtaining de novo draft assemblies of environmental bacterial strains relatively economically, however, it remains problematic for re-sequencing projects because of its high error rate. the errors give high quality signals at the single nucleotide level in homopolymeric regions and therefore introduce ambiguities or contradictions into the reference mapping assembly. on the other hand, roche  <dig> technology is suitable for de novo sequencing and draft assembly, and allows for the automatic annotation of wgs bacterial genomes with relatively low sequencing effort, i.e. currently one or two bacterial genomes per run. because de novo assemblers use a more probabilistic approach, they are less influenced by the erroneous reads of roche  <dig> in homopolymeric nucleotide regions. these erroneous nucleotides in individual reads with high quality signals are levelled off by the average frequencies of nucleotide positions, so no artificial indels are introduced and therefore the errors do not disturb the consensus in the same way as in the reference mapping.

automated annotation of draft genomes provides preliminary information about the genomes of novel organisms and this annotation approach ought not to yield highly erroneous results that may mislead the researcher. on this level, all of the pipelines we tested performed very well; the artefacts in the annotation data mostly originated from the re-mapping assembly and not from the annotation process itself. however, the coding regions were not precisely located  when compared between different automated annotation tools because none of these tools attempts to locate the origin of replication  <cit> .

assembly algorithms
two algorithms are widely employed in de novo genome assembly. the first is the overlap layout consensus  or overlap contig consensus approach, and the other is the de bruijn graph  or eulerian path  <cit> . the latter is more useful for shorter reads  numbering hundreds millions compared to a few million  <dig> titanium pyrosequencing reads . we used our data to conduct preliminary tests on the effectiveness of velvet, which implements a dbg-based approach  <cit> , however, the assemblies were highly fragmented . for a comprehensive review of de novo assembly algorithms we refer the reader to miller et al.  <cit> .

mira <dig> is a hybrid combination of the olc and greedy algorithms  <cit> , and is an iterative assembler that learns from past mistakes with olc and greedy components . the mira <dig> project is being actively developed and has a growing group of users. mira <dig> performed better in all aspects of bacterial genome assembly using roche  <dig> reads and currently seems to have the greatest potential. in addition, it can be combined with high quality reads from illumina technology into hybrid assembly, which potentially evades bottlenecks in de novo genome assembly of relatively simple bacterial genomes and hopefully will allow this step to be fully automated in the near future.

newbler is a commercial product, and probably uses the olc approach, developed by roche diagnostics, but it is usually freely available to laboratories running roche  <dig> sequencing. it is not a free and open source software package, and release descriptions indicate that the originally published algorithm may differ from the current one. in our hands, the available version of newbler performed almost as well as mira <dig>  however, commercial tools cannot be evaluated in full detail. celera assembler  is another open source olc based tool that evolved from a sanger-era assembler; the revised pipeline for ngs reads including roche  <dig> data is generally called cabog  <cit> .

it should be mentioned that we did not apply paired end  library sequencing and it is clear that such mate pairs would allow more contigs to be closed into scaffolds or at least a list of ordered and orientated longer contigs. we disregarded this kind of approach in the search for the most simple and cost efficient method for assembling bacterial genomes, and in theory a coverage of  <dig> times should allow an average bacterial genome to be assembled. the bacterial wgs in the contigs we obtained should not lose the correct prediction of too many genes, and from this point of view proper scaffolding is more important for eukaryotic genomes with larger size.

reference mapping is a different field of genome assembly related to the exercise of alignment; it should be much easier to map ngs reads to very close reference sequences. we used reference mapping only with our test strain and our initial approach was to use only mosaik  <cit>  for this purpose. mosaik is a specific reference-guided assembler using the smith-waterman algorithm to align a hashed table of short reads to the reference genome. the purpose of this analysis was to compare the finished genome with re-sequenced  <dig> reads mapped to the reference and to the de novo assembly; we did not expect surprises in this process. however, mosaik was initially unable to close all gaps between the contigs  resulting from re-sequenced data, leaving ~  <dig>  bps out . because the preliminary results were somewhat suboptimal, including several regions that were not covered, we tested the reference mapping performances of newbler and mira <dig> for comparison. newbler performed better, but as with the mosaik mapping it left some regions without mapped reads . mira <dig> reference mapping revealed that there were still a few weakly-covered regions although the total coverage  should be acceptable. fine-tuning of the mira <dig> reference mapping would allow all gaps to be closed with coverage of very few reads that were not accepted and thus not mapped by the software.

gene prediction and annotation - tools
in most so-called automated online tools, a truly automatic process with no manual intervention remains a design goal of annotation in terms of predicting trna, rrna and protein coding genes – coding sequences . the usual pipelines for finding a gene in a raw dna sequence involve detection of an orf, finding the gene and predicting its function by comparing it with genes in existing databases . automated annotators normally use several hmms  and blast-based gene prediction methods, e.g. trnascan-se  <cit> , and blastp and blastn for protein coding and rna genes, respectively.

thereafter, the cdss are assigned to annotations based on various functional resources such as cog clusters  <cit> , pfam  <cit> , tigrfam, gene ontology etc. functional annotations may be further “grouped” into metabolically relevant “pathways” such as cog functional categories, entrez protein clusters . re-annotation of these finished genomes after a re-sequencing project  using automated pipelines may be less useful; in our hands, no improvement was observed after re-annotation. for example, even the prediction of rrna operons was suboptimal; only one copy in all de novo sequenced and assembled genomes was located, although most bacteria described so far have more than one rrna operon  <cit> .

however, it is worrying that most genomes currently deposited in the public database rely on automated methods, because it has been reported that their performance seems not to have improved over several years  <cit> . the deposited data sets may contain genomes and gene annotations that differ in their degree of precision and resolution owing to the use of different sequencing methods and annotations. the most severe problem is that erroneous and incomplete annotations are often carried over into the public resources and are difficult to trace and correct afterwards. for example, several hundred cdss might be removed or added and the start sites corrected , totalling more than  <dig> changes when such data are re-evaluated carefully. even when many biochemical, physiological, and genetic data support broad genome similarity, the current automated annotation tools can fail to predict certain metabolic pathways. therefore, more detailed studies that combine all types of available data are needed  <cit> .

bottlenecks to be considered
the computational efficiency of de novo assembly algorithms implemented in free and open source software  no longer seems to be a bottleneck. at least with longer reads with ~30-fold coverage, a reasonable draft genome can be produced within hours and without manual intervention on direct shotgun sequencing.

on the other hand, the tools supplied by bioinformatic service providers such as rast, pgaap, and img cannot yet be fully automated and involve manual intervention. it is clear that the performance of these tools will improve as more carefully curated and finished genomes become available to aid in the automation process. however, considering the number of genomes from unique species available today , and because the potential abundance of microbes in nature is huge  <cit> , progress in this area will take time. nevertheless, the bacterial genomes used in our study are relatively well covered by existing knowledge of phylogenies and databases of fully sequenced and finished genomes. in the gold database  <cit>  there are closely-related bacteria from the genus marinomonas: m. mediterranea mmb- <dig>  atcc  <dig> , m. posidonica ivia-po- <dig>  marinomonas sp. mwyl <dig>  and alcanivorax borkumensis sk   <cit> ; and from the genus flavobacterium: f. columnare atcc  <dig> , f. branchiophilum fl- <dig> <cit> , f. johnsoniae uw <dig>  <cit> , and f. psychrophilum jip02/ <dig>  <cit> . therefore, after true finishing of the drafts, the genomes of these organisms can be described with no particular effort, after manual curation, at the same level as phylogenetic relatives of finished genomes. further justification and re-annotation would be based directly on new biological discoveries.

the usefulness of detecting snps has been discussed previously  <cit> , and because the error rate of  <dig> pyrosequencing is higher than sanger sequencing and probably more than illumina , it might be a suboptimal choice for re-sequencing and reference mapping projects. pop & salzberg  <cit>  reasoned that fragmented draft genomes would produce fewer annotated genes because of false stop codons; our observations differ but lead to a similar result with regards to reference mapping. the flaws in reference mapping caused by errors introduced by  <dig> pyrosequencing led to frame shifts and thus to a greater number of cdss.

we did not use paired-end  libraries because we wanted to keep the preparation cost of sequencing as low as possible. our results indicate that the pe approach is useful for scaffolding truly de novo-sequenced data to a sufficient degree of coverage  even in assembly of relatively small and simple bacterial genomes. complex genomes containing repetitive elements may need more attention, although the same is true for annotation of genomes containing genomic and/or pathogenic islands. isolation of genomic dna by standard methods often fragments the chromosomal dna into smaller pieces with a size limit of a few tens of kbs, so extended pe libraries with very large fragments are not easy to construct and need specific treatment of the genomic dna prior to sequencing. therefore, it is not possible to assemble larger repetitive elements correctly compared to the fragments in dna extracts.

CONCLUSIONS
de novo assembly software and algorithms are powerful enough to allow average bacterial genomes to be assembled within hours or a few days, opening up the possibility for small research groups to study tens or even hundreds of previously unsequenced genomes. automated annotation allows vast quantities of sequencing results to be processed into meaningful preliminary data, which are useful for general comparison of novel bacterial strains. however, even well-finished bacterial genomes require manual curation and continual updating, especially for key reference genomes. in conclusion, we have to recall a statement made previously  <cit> : standardization of gene prediction and annotation is of the utmost importance to prevent a heavy burden of incorrect gene calls in genome databases; on the other hand, finer justification of genome annotations is an almost never-ending process, pushed forward mostly by experimental studies .

material and methods
origins of the strains
three environmental bacterial strains, flavobacterium sp. gobb3-c103- <dig>  flavobacterium sp. gobb3- <dig> and marinomonas sp. gobb3- <dig>  were obtained from estuarine enrichment cultures based on samples from a watershed in the northern baltic sea  <cit> . the genbank accession numbers of the 16s rrna gene sequences were af <dig>  af <dig>  and af <dig>  respectively. one bacterium, type strain alcanivorax borkumensis  ), was chosen as a reference strain because its genome was fully sequenced and annotated in the pre-ngs era .

growth conditions of strains
strains were isolated from enrichment cultures when the total bacterial abundance reached ~1–2 ×  <dig> cells ml- <dig> . cultivable bacteria were isolated by spreading 100 μl samples on triplicate zobell medium or more nutrient-poor ac medium agar plates with 60 mmol l- <dig> riverine dissolved organic carbon. zobell medium  <cit>  was made from 800 ml,  <dig>  μm filtered  seawater and 200 ml of milliq ultrapure water . this was supplemented with 5 g casein pancreatic digest , 1 g yeast extract  and  <dig>  g fepo <dig> h2o . plates were incubated in the dark at 15°c until no more colonies appeared . isolates were purified by serially streaking a single cell colony three times on to new agar plates. the purified isolate was grown in zobell medium  in the dark at 15°c . after the purity of the isolate was confirmed by one more plating it was re-grown in liquid zobell medium and  <dig>  ml of this cell suspension was mixed with 50% glycerol  and stored at -80°c. type strain alcanivorax borkumensis sk <dig> was routinely maintained on marine broth  <dig> at 30°c, for plating with agar .

genomic dna preparation and quantification, 16s rrna gene amplification, and sequencing
genomic dna was extracted from pelleted pure isolates using a qiagen dneasy blood and tissue kit . the amount of genomic dna was measured using a qubit fluorometer . to check the isolate identity, a partial 16s rdna gene from the isolated bacteria was amplified and directly sequenced using the applied biosystem 3730xl according to the manufacturer’s directions. the bacterial universal primers 27f  and 1492r  were used for amplification. the pcr product was purified with pcr kleen spin columns  and the nucleotide sequences determined from three partial fragments of the 16s rrna gene covering almost the full length of the gene. nucleotide sequences were determined from the purified 16s rrna gene with the primers 27f , 800r , 1492r , and 347f .

whole genome sequencing
purified dna from each isolate was directly sequenced using roche standard technology . the sequencing libraries were prepared with a gs rapid library kit  together with a gs rapid library mid adaptors kit  using 500 ng of dna. in addition, a general library preparation kit  together with a titanium library mid adaptors kit  was employed using  <dig>  μg dna from alcanivorax borkumensis sk <dig>   <dig>  μg from flavobacterium sp. gobb3-c103- <dig> and 5 μg from both marinomonas sp. gobb3- <dig> and flavobacterium gobb3- <dig>  according to the manufacturer's protocol. the sequencing reactions were performed using a roche  <dig> genome sequencer flx with the gs titanium sequencing kit xlr <dig>  using the 2-region gasket of the gs titanium picotiterplate kit  , according to the manufacturer's instructions. imaging and signal processing were done using gs flx sw v <dig> , gsrunprocessor fullprocessing.

analysis of sequencing data – reference and de novo assembly and rapid annotations
for reference mapping, mosaik release  <dig> . <dig>  <cit> , newbler version  <dig>   and mira <dig> version  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  were used; raw reads from the roche sequencing of alcanivorax borkumensis atcc  <dig> dna isolated in the laboratory and the backbone of alcanivorax borkumensis sk <dig>  were downloaded from ncbi. de novo assembly was performed using the roche reads obtained from all four strains; the assemblers were mira <dig>  newbler v.  <dig>  , and modified celera assembler . multiple contigs obtained from the reference mapping and de novo assembly were subjected to three automated annotation tools: rast  <cit> , ncbi-pgaap  <cit> , and img-er  <cit> .

abbreviations
blast: basic local alignment search tool; cds: coding dna sequence; cog: clusters of orthologous groups of proteins; dbg: de bruijn graph; glp: general library preparation; img: integrated microbial genomes; pgaap: prokaryotic genomes automatic annotation pipeline; olc: overlap layout consensus; ngs: next generation sequencing; pe: paired end; rast: rapid annotation using subsystem technology; rl: rapid library; rrna: ribosomal rna; sag: single amplified genome; snp: single-nucleotide polymorphism; srs: short read sequences; trna: transfer rna; wgs: whole genome shotgun.

competing interests
the authors declared that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
vk's contribution was to build the concept of the study; he designed the acquisition of data, performed all lab work besides roche sequencing, and conducted the analysis and interpretation of data. he also drafted most of the manuscript. tl was involved in providing the funding, drafting the manuscript and critically revising the final version. both authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
downloadable files with various annotations of rrna operons from alcanivorax borkumensis sk <dig>  files contain the original finished genome annotation on rrnas, re-annotation of the finished genome sequence by rast, img, and pgaap, and re-sequenced and re-annotated rrna operons. formats used include the raw sequence in fasta, annotations in genbank and sam alignment.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was supported by the european regional development fund through the center of excellence in chemical biology. we thank dr. johan wikner  for sharing the marine strains, dr. marzanna künzli-gontarczyk  for sequencing, dr. armin lahm  and dr. gemma atkinson  for critical reading of the manuscript, dr. david schryer  for the linguistic corrections.
