BACKGROUND
the liver is the central organ of metabolic and energy homeostasis. it regulates levels of endogenous metabolites such as glucose, triglycerides and cholesterol, and detoxifies xenobiotics. these endobiotic and xenobiotic metabolic processes are frequently regulated by the same nuclear receptors. car, the constitutive androstane receptor, was initially described as a pure xenosensor of the liver. it activates the detoxification system in the presence of drugs and endogenous molecules, such as bile acids and bilirubin. therefore, car activators are used to treat cholestasis and jaundice in humans and mice  <cit> . tcpobop ]benzene) and phenobarbital, two representative car activators, have strong tumor-promoting effects in mice. they increase hepatocyte proliferation, suppress apoptosis  <cit>  and through c-myc and foxm <dig> mediated pathways stimulate the proliferative program leading to liver hyperplasia  <cit> . car activators also increase metabolism of the thyroid hormone and thereby affect metabolic homeostasis  <cit> .

the fact that car is not only a xenosensor but also has a role in the endogenous liver metabolism has recently been accepted. for example, long-term treatment with phenobarbital lowered plasma glucose levels in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients  <cit> . this has been explained by car-dependent repression of mouse liver gluconeogenesis through a mechanism involving hnf4α and foxo <dig>  <cit> . phenobarbital also increases serum triglycerides in patients and mice  <cit> . this was recognized as a car-dependent effect where the car pathway interacts with pparα signaling, which is crucial for maintenance of liver lipid homeostasis  <cit> . a pparα-car inverse regulation has been implicated in inhibiting the β-oxidation of fatty acids, and car inverse agonists were proposed as potential drugs for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease   <cit> . another side-effect of phenobarbital is an increase in total serum cholesterol in humans and rats  <cit> , which results in increased the hepatic cholesterol synthesis by an as-yet undetermined mechanism  <cit> . most recently, car activation in mice was shown to decrease circulating hdl, probably by down-regulating apoa-i gene expression  <cit> .

despite numerous studies regarding the beneficial or harmful roles of activated car, little is known regarding the role of car and its cross–talks with metabolic processes in the liver of cholesterol fed mice. this study describes the systemic effect of car activation by tcpobop on the mouse hepatic transcriptome and lipid metabolome in a state of diet-induced hyperlipidemia.

RESULTS
cholesterol homeostasis
effect of tcpobop
treatment of normal chow fed mice with tcpobop resulted in lower total serum cholesterol, as a result of reduced ldl- and hdl-cholesterol . the liver transcriptome data as measured by microarrays  provide an explanation. up-regulation of the ldl receptor gene  and the cholesterol ester-break down enzyme  reflect higher up-take of ldl particles from blood to the liver. at the same time acat <dig>  which is primarily responsible for formation of cholesterol esters destined for vldl, is down-regulated. several genes linked to the uptake of hdl to the liver , cholesterol efflux to lipid poor apolipoproteins , or representing parts of either hdl particles or chylomicrons remnants  were down-regulated. due to higher liver uptake of ldl cholesterol from serum and lower hdl cholesterol efflux, we would expect an increase in total liver cholesterol. in fact, total liver cholesterol has been lowered . transcriptome data indicated that this may be due to increased bile acid synthesis, but of the alternative pathways . the ratio of c <dig>  an intermediate of the classical cyp7a <dig> pathway, to liver cholesterol , shows an increase in bile acid synthesis, although rna measurements did not confirm cyp7a <dig> up-regulation . rt-pcr analysis reveals considerable inter-individual differences in the level of cyp7a <dig> expression, resulting in a lack of statistical significance. down-regulation of cyp8b <dig> and up-regulation of alternative bile acid synthesis could lead to production of more hydrophilic muricholates and therefore to a potential change in composition of the bile  <cit> . microarray data also indicate the influence of car activation on enterohepatic circulation. as described before, car stimulated hepatic export system of bile acids through canalicular  and basolateral  bile acid transporters, but also uptake in the liver  . four genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis  were up-regulated ; however, the ratio of lathosterol to cholesterol did not confirm increased cholesterol biosynthesis . many genes of the srebp <dig> signaling pathway, the main regulatory pathway of cholesterol biosynthesis, are up-regulated , but not srebp <dig> itself .

serum parameters in mice fed either standard or 1% cholesterol diet and treated either vehicle or tcpobop. each value represents mean ± sd of  <dig> mice per group. student t-test was used for calculation of statistical significance . *statistical significance compared to vehicle treated group on standard diet. #statistical significance compared to vehicle treated group on high-cholesterol diet.

differentially expressed genes involved in cholesterol homeostasis in mouse liver after tcpobop treatment or cholesterol diet as detected by the steroltalk microarray. data represent log <dig> ratios of tcpobop treated versus vehicle treated on the same diet  and vehicle treated group on cholesterol diet versus standard diet. six animals per group were used and p-value was calculated using t-test as implemented in brb-array tools. genebank accession numbers are available in additional file  <dig>  nc – no change.

the expression of key genes involved in cholesterol homeostasis and drug metabolism as measured by rt-pcr. data represents fold change ± standard deviation of tcpobop treated versus vehicle treated on standard diet, cholesterol diet, and vehicle treated group on cholesterol diet versus standard diet. six animals per group were analyzed and statistical significance was determined using student t-test. unigene symbols are used as abbreviations. *p <  <dig> .

diet-induced hyperlipidemia
one week of 1% cholesterol diet, as expected, increased total cholesterol, hdl-, ldl-cholesterol, total triglycerides and glucose levels . the diet also increased total liver cholesterol, resulting in repression of cholesterol biosynthesis observed on the metabolite , and transcriptome levels . also srebp <dig> and ldl receptor were down-regulated as a result of high liver cholesterol. no changes were detected in primary, cyp7a1-mediated bile acid synthesis pathway on metabolite  or transcriptome levels. however, bile acid transporters on basolateral and canalicular membranes were up-regulated .

tcpobop in diet-induced hyperlipidemia
tcpobop treatment of hyperlipidemic animals has significantly lowered serum total cholesterol levels, by lowering the ldl . liver transcriptome data show up-regulation of ldl-receptor and enzyme for cholesterol ester break-down , and lower ester formation by acat <dig> . however, levels of hdl-cholesterol remain unchanged , even if transcriptome data revealed down-regulation of genes connected to hdl particles , except for apoa <dig>  tcpobop lowered the total liver cholesterol of cholesterol-fed mice back to pre-diet levels . this result indicates that tcpobop can induce removal of excess dietary cholesterol from the liver and serum in mice. we again see increased primary cyp7a <dig> pathway of bile acid synthesis on the metabolite level, as indicated by c <dig> and cholesterol ratio , and no change in expression of cyp7a <dig> . we also see an increase in alternative bile acid synthesis pathways , and down-regulation of cyp8b <dig>  all leading to possible formation of more hydrophilic muricholic bile acids. down-regulation of cholesterol transporter from liver to bile  is also observed, again potentially affecting the composition of the bile . controversially, under these high-cholesterol conditions, tcpobop has up-regulated the liver cholesterol synthesis as measured by lathosterol and cholesterol ratio  and transcriptome levels .

in summary , car activation by tcpobop leads to lower total serum cholesterol due to activation of the ldl uptake from the circulation and repression of hdl export. the paradoxical drop in liver cholesterol can be explained by activation of the bile acid synthesis and activated pathways for bile efflux from the liver, enabling removal of excess liver cholesterol. even if the cholesterol diet leads to increased serum and liver cholesterol and the expected decrease in cholesterol synthesis capacity, tcpobop is able to reverse these processes. a list of all differentially expressed genes is available in additional file  <dig> and additional file  <dig> is a more detailed figure depicting tcpobop effects on mouse liver under normal and 1% cholesterol-containing diet.

triglyceride and glucose metabolism
the role of tcpobop
the xenobiotic increased total serum triglycerides, but had no effect on glucose levels . transcriptome data are in agreement with elevated triglycerides . they indicate up-regulation of fatty acid synthesis  and ketogenesis , down-regulation of degradation of fatty acids , and up-regulation of the gene responsible for the formation of acetyl-coa , a substrate for cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis. synthesis of hepatic glycogen is down-regulated . this also holds for gluconeogenesis , while glucose transport  is modulated. several genes involved in the regulation of glucose and fatty acid homeostasis were down-regulated , but chrebp  was up-regulated.

differentially expressed genes involved in glucose and triglyceride metabolism in mouse liver after tcpobop treatment or cholesterol diet as detected by the steroltalk microarray. data represent log <dig> ratios of tcpobop treated versus vehicle treated on the same diet  and vehicle treated group on cholesterol diet versus standard diet. six animals per group were used and p-value was calculated using t-test as implemented in brb-array tools. genebank accession numbers and are available in additional file  <dig>  nc – no change.

diet-induced hyperlipidemia
serum metabolite measurements show that the cholesterol diet increased triglycerides and glucose , again in agreement with the liver transcriptome data . strong up-regulation of stearoyl-coa desaturase  <dig>  and ppara was measured, which indicates activation of the pparα signaling pathway. up-regulated was also the leukotriene b <dig> omega-hydroxylase , indicating an increase in fatty acid metabolism. gluconeogenesis  was up-regulated while ketogenesis  and glycogenesis  were down-regulated.

tcpobop in diet-induced hyperlipidemia
in mice fed a 1% cholesterol-containing diet, tcpobop had no effect on total serum triglycerides but lowered the serum glucose . liver transcriptome analysis  indicated up-regulation of the gene involved in formation of acetyl-coa  and ketogenesis , no change in fatty acid synthesis , and down-regulation of fatty acid metabolism . glycogen synthesis  and gluconeogenesis  were down-regulated and the glucose transporter  up-regulated. again, genes involved in regulation of liver glucose metabolism  were down-regulated with exception of chrebp, which was up-regulated.

data mining approaches
gene annotations using genecodis and kegg pathways were used to evaluate the expert knowledge based conclusions described above. for the tcpobop treatment, an effect of car activation on adipocytokine, ppar and insulin signaling pathways has been exposed . pathways metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome p <dig>  abc transporters, arachidonic acid, and linoleic acid metabolism were also significant due to tcpobop induction of drug metabolism. hyperlipidemia strongly exposed only biosynthesis of steroids. minor effects were repression of certain enzymes in pathway of metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochromes p <dig>  and importantly, activation of ppar signaling pathway, which is an adaptation to the diet. tcpobop in diet-induced hyperlipidemia exposed pathway biosynthesis of steroids as a result of up-regulation of cholesterol biosynthesis genes. again we see the effect on ppar and adipocytokine signaling. inhibition of ppar signaling represents a response to liver the adaptation on dietary lipids. pathways of drug metabolism were also exposed.

gene annotation of differentially expressed genes using genecodis software and kegg pathways, showing only pathways with at least four genes. down-regulated genes are underlined.

expression of cholesterogenic genes depends on car but not srebp2
tcpobop has up-regulated srebp <dig> target genes in mice fed a 1% cholesterol-containing diet for  <dig> week. this was unexpected since, under excess cholesterol, the cholesterol feedback loop should prevent proteolytic cleavage and activation of srebp <dig>  to check whether tcpobop would influence proteolytic activation of srebp <dig>  immunoblot analysis was performed. figure  <dig> shows that tcpobop and subsequent car activation did not increase the srebp <dig> active form in the nucleus. we therefore propose that the observed tcpobop up-regulation of cholesterogenic genes is srebp <dig> independent.

to evaluate whether the up-regulation of srebp <dig> responsive genes by tcpobop might be a direct effect of car, rt-pcr analyses in livers of wild type and car knock-out mice fed with standard chow diet were performed . three cholesterogenic genes  and two genes from the srebp signaling pathway  were selected while cyp3a <dig> and cyp2b <dig> served as positive controls for the car regulated genes. in wild-type mice tcpobop increased the expression of hmgcr, insig <dig> and sqle while expression of cyp51a <dig> and srebp <dig> remained unchanged. tcpobop in car deficient mice lowered expression of all measured genes. comparison of car -/- mice to wild-type showed a higher basal expression of srebp2-dependent genes. these results give two possible hypotheses: car without the ligand might serve as a direct or indirect regulator of these genes. since expression analysis indicated the possibility of direct regulation of srebp- <dig> dependent genes by car, analysis of hmgcr, sqle and insig <dig> promoters was performed to search for potential car binding sites. using specialized software for nuclear receptor binding site search nubiscan  <cit>  we found no car  binding sites in hmgcr, sqle promoters. however, a dr <dig> site in insig <dig> promoter was found, which was already confirmed experimentally  <cit> .

the effect of tcpobop and car on the expression of cholesterol synthesis and srebp <dig> signaling genes as measured by rt-pcr. cyp3a <dig> and cyp2b <dig> serve as positive controls for car activated genes. data represents fold changes ± standard deviation of treated versus vehicle treated or untreated car -/- versus wild type . all animals were fed standard chow diet. six animals per group were analyzed and statistical significance was determined using student t-test. unigene symbols were used as abbreviations. *p <  <dig> .

discussion
hyperlipidemias provoke cardiovascular diseases that represent a major cause of deaths in the developed world. studies in recent years show that metabolic disturbances in the liver contribute to metabolic diseases ) and cardiovascular diseases. nuclear receptors, such as ppars, lxr and fxr, are important regulators of the metabolic network and are the targets of new therapeutic agents for treatment of metabolic disorders  <cit> . increasing amounts of data also indicate that constitutive androstane receptor car plays a role in the development of metabolic disorders  <cit> .

in the present study, we investigated car activation by tcpobop in diet-induced hyperlipidemia in the liver by using a dedicated microarray approach, liver and serum sterol measurements. car activation by tcpobop resulted in systemic dyslipidemia that includes lower serum ldl and hdl cholesterol and increased triglycerides . lower ldl-cholesterol and total plasma cholesterol are considered beneficial effects of car activators that result from increased liver uptake of lipoproteins by up-regulated ldlr. in addition, liver pathways for the bile acid synthesis and their removal are up-regulated, contributing to decreased serum and liver cholesterol. we observed up-regulation of cyp7a <dig> pathway, but only on metabolite level and not on rna level. this discrepancy is probably due to large inter-individual variations in cyp7a <dig> expression which affects statistical significance. it seems that tcpobop activates both cyp7a <dig> and cyp27a <dig> pathways; however, without a detailed analysis of bile acid content it is not possible to conclude to what extent each pathway is affected. in diet-induced hyperlipidemia, which represents a lipid metabolic disturbance per se, car activation by tcpobop lowers total cholesterol and ldl, but not hdl cholesterol, whereas triglycerides remain elevated. the cholesterol diet by itself did not change the expression of the bile acid pathways, while application of tcpobop led to similar changes as in the control liver . as a consequence, in normal and hyperlipidemic livers this may result in altered composition of bile. a parameter of dyslipidemia is also the tcpobop-mediated repression of cholesterol influx from hdl to the liver in normal and hyperlipidemic mice, where hdl-cholesterol levels remain elevated. the influence of tcpobop on formation of hdl was shown by another study, where car-dependent decrease in hdl was linked to repression of apoa-i synthesis  <cit> . in our study, several acute phase proteins, such as serum amyloids  and apolipoprotein a-v, were down-regulated, while apolipoprotein a-iv was up-regulated. low-grade inflammation is associated with an increased risk of coronary events. the marker of this is crp  the expression of which was increased in tcpobop treated normal and hyperlipidemic mice. however, whether the changes induced by tcpobop are pro-atherogenic remains unknown.

the metabolic syndrome increases the risk for development of cardiovascular diseases, and vice versa. nonalcoholic steatohepatitis  is a nonalcoholic fatty liver disease . it develops from liver steatosis in the presence of oxidative stress, insulin resistance, hepatotoxins and other factors  <cit> . a study of diet induced nash in mice showed that car activation by tcpobop increased lipid peroxidation and oxidative stress, and thereby contributes to the development of nash  <cit> . another aspect of car activation and development of nafld is the effect of car on adiponectin, an adipocyte hormone, and on the pparα signaling pathway as indicated by pathway analysis of our transcriptome data in normal and hyperlipidemic liver. adiponectin can prevent the development of diabetes and metabolic syndrome, as it stimulates glucose utilization and fatty acid combustion in the liver  <cit> . our transcriptome analysis indeed reveals that several genes of the adiponectin signaling are modulated. for instance, the adiponectin receptor ii was down-regulated, a phenomenon also observed in patients with nash  <cit> . adiponectin stimulation of fatty acid degradation is mediated by pparα and car inhibition of this pathway might further contribute to promotion of a metabolic syndrome. more importantly, up-regulation of the pparα signaling pathway is also an adaptation of the liver to hyperlipidemia, and tcpobop disturbed this adaptation. car also increased expression of chrebp, which stimulates fatty acid synthesis  <cit> . our data thus indicate that car activation in some aspects mimics the effect of insulin on the liver. car, similarly to insulin, inhibits liver fatty acid oxidation, gluconeogenesis and stimulates fatty acid synthesis and glycolysis. however, unlike insulin, car activation represses glycogen synthesis. it therefore seems that car stimulates glucose metabolism to acetyl-coa, which can have a positive effect on elevated plasma glucose levels, as seen in hyperlipidemic mice. however, acetyl-coa is used later for fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis. elevated cholesterol biosynthesis does not result in higher liver or plasma levels, because car also up-regulates cholesterol removal pathways. however, increased fatty acid synthesis and repressed oxidation represent an important contribution of car to the development of nafld.

interestingly, tcpobop-induced car also up-regulated cholesterol synthesis in hyperlipidemic liver and affected the srebp signaling pathway  <cit> . our transcriptome data indicate that tcpobop activates the group of srebp <dig> regulated genes; however, immunoblot analysis revealed no increase in the nuclear srebp <dig>  this might result from a car-dependent up-regulation of insig <dig>  which inhibits the srebp <dig> cleavage  <cit> . rt-pcr analysis of car knock-out animals treated with tcpobop indicate that up-regulation of cholesterogenic genes and the srebp signaling pathway is car-dependent. since no car binding sites were found in the two most responsive genes, hmg-coa reductase  and squalene epoxidase , mechanisms other than direct transcriptional activation by car have to be considered. car can activate another common transcription factor, different from srepb <dig>  which can bind to proximal promoters of cholesterogenic genes. alternatively, a non-activated car could act as a repressor of cholesterogenic genes. again, in the absence of true car binding sites in promoters of these genes it is difficult to draw conclusions. however, it was reported most recently that sf3a <dig> functions as a co-repressor of car transcriptional activity independently of the presence of tcpobop  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
activation of car by tcpobop alters hepatic metabolism in the livers of mice fed normal and cholesterol-containing diets. tcpobop increases removal of excess dietary cholesterol in serum and liver, and lowers serum glucose and liver gluconeogenesis under conditions of hyperlipidemia. on the other hand, car activation increases serum triglycerides and liver fatty acid synthesis, represses adaptation to hyperlipidemia, and lowers responsiveness of the liver to adiponectin. these latter effects favor the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. finally, car affects downstream srebp <dig> signaling  and is thereby involved in the regulation of cholesterol synthesis.

