BACKGROUND
in the autumn of  <dig>  a previously unknown virus infecting ruminants named "schmallenberg" virus  was identified in dairy cows, in the eastern regions of the netherlands and in north-western germany  <cit> . this virus belongs to the simbu serogroup of the genus orthobunyavirus of the family orthobunyaviridae. like other orthobunyaviruses, it is transmitted by arthropod vectors, primarily by biting midges . in areas with a temperate climate, this leads to a seasonal pattern of spread  . acute sbv infection in adult ruminants has been reported either to cause a mild and transient disease  or to remain clinically unapparent  <cit> .

in pregnant ruminants, transplacental sbv infection during a delimited stage of gestation can lead to the birth of severely deformed offspring  . the type of malformation typically caused by viruses of the simbu serogroup is referred to as “arthrogryposis hydranencephaly syndrome”   <cit> .

due to the lack of sbv-specific knowledge, it has been assumed by analogy to akabane virus  that the vulnerable stage of gestation, when sbv foetal infection could lead to ahs, is the second month of gestation for small ruminants  and between the third and the sixth months of gestation for cattle   <cit> .

ahs in ruminant offspring due to sbv foetal infections was first reported in europe during the winter of 2011– <dig>  as of april  <dig>  according to the european food safety agency , sbv infections had been confirmed in about  <dig>  ruminant herds across europe, and about half of those were reported in france  <cit> .

we present the spatial and temporal patterns of sbv emergence in france. additionally, we assess the impact of sbv infection within the infected herds.

methods
national framework for emerging animal disease surveillance
detecting and responding to disease emergence requires robust human and technical capability, capacity and resources. in france, emerging animal disease surveillance and investigation is facilitated through the french platform for epidemiological surveillance in animal health , which was launched at the end of  <dig> to reinforce animal disease monitoring. this platform is coordinated by the french ministry of agriculture and involves various animal health stakeholders: national reference laboratories of the french agency for food, environmental and occupational health & safety , laboratories , livestock organisations , a veterinary organisation , an international research centre , and wildlife and hunting organisations .

the esa platform is a collaboration framework aiming at improving animal health by supporting the surveillance of established diseases and ensuring the timely detection and effective monitoring and investigation of emerging diseases  <cit> .

sbv emergence surveillance and investigation system
since december  <dig>  following a european alert of the emergence of ahs in ruminants due to sbv infection  <cit> , the esa platform has been coordinating the monitoring and investigation of sbv emergence in france. at the onset of the epidemic , the monitoring aimed at assessing the disease situation and providing knowledge on its impact within the infected herds . then, from september  <dig>  the level of concern about the sbv disease decreased but the monitoring was continued to keep track of trends in the epidemic .figure  <dig> 
national multi-stakeholder sbv surveillance and investigation system during the initial stage of alert .

simplified national multi-stakeholder sbv surveillance system during the second stage of alert .




initial stage - maximum level of alert: mandatory reporting of ahs in ruminants and in-herd impact investigations
surveillance of congenital sbv
a “congenital sbv-infected herd” was defined as any ruminant herd with one or more ruminant neonate or foetus showing ahs with a laboratory confirmation of sbv infection.

a national event-based sbv surveillance system based on the mandatory notification of clinical suspicions of ahs in ruminants, coordinated by the ministry of agriculture in the framework of the esa platform, was launched in early january  <dig> to help detect a potential introduction of the virus to france. after the first detection of congenital sbv-infected herds, this surveillance was continued to further assess the spread of the disease  <cit>  .

farmers were urged to contact their veterinarian when encountering cases of ruminant neonates or foetuses showing ahs. veterinarians reported suspected cases to the local veterinary services and collected samples for laboratory confirmation of sbv infection. the costs of the veterinarian’s visit and laboratory tests were covered by the government.

sbv diagnosis was performed in national and local reference laboratories. from january to april  <dig>  sbv infection was confirmed by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction   <cit> , preferentially from offsprings’ brain samples. upon april  <dig>  elisa kits were made available and sbv infection was confirmed by elisa, preferentially from offsprings’ blood samples collected before colostrum intake  <cit> .

the laboratory results were transmitted to the ministry of agriculture, which keeps records at the national level of congenital sbv-infected herds.

in-herd impact investigations
complementary to the surveillance, a national survey was launched to provide an estimate of the impact of the disease in congenital sbv-infected herds . agents of local animal health farmers' organisations  visited the congenital sbv-infected herds identified through the surveillance programme to investigate the impact of the disease according to a standardised investigation questionnaire.

in the herds where births were grouped , the impact assessment took into account the births from the beginning of the birth period to the time when the investigation was performed. in herds where the births were not grouped , the impact assessment considered births from three months before the first observation of ahs in that herd to the time when the investigation was performed. the total number of offspring born in congenital sbv affected herds over these periods was recorded by the farmer, as well as the total number of offspring showing various defects , and among them the number of offspring showing ahs. the types of congenital deformity encountered in the defective offspring were also recorded  <cit> .

at the beginning of the epidemic, any congenital sbv-infected herd identified through surveillance was investigated, provided that the farmer’s agreement was obtained. then, when more than  <dig> investigations had been performed for a species in a given département , only the first in every five congenital sbv-infected herds were investigated. the investigation results were entered by the agents of the local gds into a national web-based database. the centralised data was analysed jointly by the national animal health farmers’ organisation  and anses.

second stage - decreased level of alert: voluntary reporting of ahs in ruminants
in spring  <dig>  congenital sbv was declared a non-priority disease by both the world organization for animal health  <cit>  and the european union, so the level of alert for sbv was lowered. subsequently, the french ministry of agriculture disengaged from the coordination of sbv monitoring. from september  <dig>  in the framework of the esa platform, gds france took over the coordination of a reduced sbv monitoring system aiming at keeping track of trends in the epidemic .

notifying clinical suspicions of ahs in ruminant neonate or foetus was no longer compulsory, but farmers were strongly encouraged to report any suspicion to their veterinarian. veterinarians were then asked to report suspected cases to the local gds and to collect samples for laboratory confirmation. the costs of the veterinarian’s visit and sampling were covered by the government in the framework of the national scheme for abortion surveillance. however, unless specific local agreements had been defined, the laboratory costs for sbv confirmation were incurred by the farmers.

sbv infection was confirmed in local diagnostic laboratories, preferentially by elisa performed on offsprings’ blood samples collected before colostrum intake. the data collected by the veterinarians in the herds and the sbv laboratory results were entered by gds agents into a national web-based database. the centralised data was analysed by gds france.

no specific in-herd impact investigation was performed upon confirmation of infection. however, the data collected by the veterinarians when notifying the suspicion did include a description of the type of congenital deformities observed and also, in order to explore potential consequences of acute sbv infection during the early stages of gestation, a retrospective farmer’s statement on the occurrence of repeated oestrus or early embryonic deaths during the previous vector season.

description of the spread and impact of the sbv epidemic in france in 2012–2013
to describe the spread and impact of the sbv epidemic in france in 2012– <dig>  we analysed the data collected from january  <dig> to august  <dig> through the two consecutive sbv surveillance and investigation systems. the dataset was based upon data collected from january  <dig> to august  <dig> through the mandatory reporting of ahs in ruminants and the impact investigation in the affected herds, and the data collected from september  <dig> to august  <dig> through the voluntary reporting of ahs in ruminants.

dataset quality was checked for completeness. duplicates were eliminated using the national herd identification numbers. only the herds for which a laboratory confirmation for sbv infection was duly recorded were considered as congenital sbv-infected herds.

the dataset was used to compute indicators on the spread of sbv, both temporally , and spatially .

the dataset was also used to perform a univariate descriptive analysis of in-herd impact of congenital sbv, by calculating the median and average frequency of defective offspring.

RESULTS
disease situation
number of reported congenital sbv-infected herds
from january  <dig> to august  <dig>   <dig>  congenital sbv-infected herds were reported in france. among these,  <dig>   were cattle herds,  <dig>   sheep flocks and  <dig>  goat flocks .table  <dig> 
number of congenital sbv-infected herds reported by species 



herd species
number of herds
 <dig> 
number of congenital sbv-infected herds

1in france .


2with cows older than 24 months - ewes older than 12 months - goats older than 12 months.



overall, by august  <dig>  congenital sbv infection was reported in  <dig> % of the  <dig>  cattle farms in france with cows older than 24 months, 6% of the  <dig>  sheep farms in france with ewes older than 12 months, and 1% of the  <dig>  goat farms in france with goats older than 12 months.

temporal patterns of spread
the first cases of congenital sbv were confirmed in north-eastern france in late january  <dig> in lambs that were born in early january. the first cases of congenital sbv reported in goat kids were born in mid-january and the first cases reported in calves were born in late january.

the number of new reports of congenital sbv-infected herds per month evolved over two epidemic waves . for small ruminants, the first wave of congenital sbv peaked in february  <dig> , and then declined rapidly . for cattle, the first wave peaked in may  <dig>  and then declined gradually .figure  <dig> 
number of new small ruminant congenital sbv-infected herds reported per month .

number of new cattle congenital sbv-infected herds reported per month .




the second epidemic wave of congenital sbv began and peaked about four months earlier than the first: the earliest cases were confirmed in cattle and small ruminants in september  <dig> , and the peak was reached in november for small ruminants , and in january  <dig> for cattle  .

the two waves of congenital sbv began at the same period for the different ruminant species . however, the peak occurred about three months later in cattle than in small ruminants .

spatial patterns of spread
sbv spread rapidly over france from the initial north-eastern area of detection. all of the regions but two  were affected during the first wave . the magnitude of the outbreak resulting from the first wave was however much greater in north-eastern france, where about 85% of the reported congenital sbv-infected herds were located .figure  <dig> 
number of congenital sbv-infected herds reported by region during the two epidemic waves .

areas of concentration of congenital sbv-infected herds reported over the two epidemic waves .




during the second wave, sbv spread further, and outbreaks were reported throughout france, including corsica . the magnitude of the outbreak resulting from the second wave was much greater in western and southern areas, where about 80% of the reported infected herds were located .

impact assessment
in-herd congenital sbv morbidity rate
in-herd impact investigations were performed in over a thousand congenital sbv-infected herds from january to august 2012:  <dig> infected cattle herds,  <dig> infected sheep flocks and  <dig> infected goat herds were investigated, accounting respectively for 23%, 48% and 60% of the infected herds reported during this period.

the median frequency of offspring defects  in the congenital sbv-infected herds was significantly higher in lambs than in calves  or kids . on average, 8% of the lambs, 3% of the calves and 2% of the kids that were born in the congenital sbv-infected herds showed typical sbv deformities . for a given species, there was a significant variability in the morbidity rate between herds.table  <dig> 
congenital sbv morbidity in ruminant offspring in reported infected herds 



offspring species
offspring born in congenital sbv-infected herds
dead or deformed offspring
offspring showing ahs

number 
frequency 
number 
frequency 

number 
median 
mean 
std dev
median 
mean 
std dev


deformities observed in the congenital sbv-infected herds
the average frequency of deformities was documented in almost  <dig>  reported congenital sbv-infected herds from january  <dig> to august  <dig>  for all of the ruminant species, arthrogryposis was the most frequent sign reported in the congenital sbv-infected herds, followed by malformations of the vertebral column  . arthrogryposis, which was observed in 94% of the infected sheep flocks, 82% of the infected cattle herds, and 81% of the infected goat flocks, appears to be a sensitive criterion on which to form a clinical suspicion of congenital sbv disease in ruminants.figure  <dig> 
average frequency at herd level of disorders encountered in reported congenital sbv-infected herds .




acute sbv infection & early stages of gestation
retrospective farmers’ statements on the unusual occurrence of repeated oestrus or early embryonic deaths during the  <dig> vector season were obtained in 99% of the congenital sbv-infected herds reported from september  <dig> to august  <dig>  overall, about 30% of the farmers stated that during the  <dig> vector season they had noticed more repeated oestrus or early embryonic deaths than usual . this reported frequency was significantly higher in goat and sheep flocks  than in cattle herds  . in the sbv-infected herds where more frequent repeated oestrus or early embryonic deaths than usual had been noticed during the  <dig> vector season, farmers were able to give an estimate of the proportion of females that had been affected: on average, this was 27% of the females in sheep flocks, 15% in cattle herds and 13% in goat flocks.table  <dig> 
congenital sbv-infected herds where farmers retrospectively reported more frequent repeated oestrus or early embryonic deaths during the  <dig> vector season 



species
number of congenital sbv-infected herds
number of herds with more frequent repeated oestrus or early embryonic deaths
n
n
%


discussion
congenital sbv emerged in france during the winter of 2011– <dig>  a national multi-stakeholder surveillance and investigation system was promptly implemented to monitor the spread of this new disease, and assess its impact in ruminant herds. field data collected from january  <dig> to august  <dig> showed that sbv spread rapidly throughout the country and that congenital sbv morbidity levels were generally moderate.

spread of sbv epidemic
number of reported outbreaks
the number of outbreaks of congenital sbv reported through surveillance provides important indications about trends in the sbv epidemic but does not provide an accurate estimate of the number of herds that were actually infected by sbv, as some of the sbv-infected herds were either not detected  or not reported. moreover, under-reporting of congenital sbv may have increased from september  <dig> onwards since sbv was no longer a notifiable disease in france, and costs of laboratory analysis for confirmation were sometimes incurred by the farmers.

temporal patterns of spread
extrapolation of the estimated dates of foetal infection from the dates of birth would indicate that the first reported cases of congenital sbv in france in small ruminants in january  <dig> must have resulted from infections that occurred in september or october  <dig>  while the first reported cases in calves in january  <dig> must have resulted from infections from june to october  <dig>  this suggests that the circulation of sbv in france started in october  <dig>  at the latest. on the other hand, retrospective serosurveys carried out in two french departments  showed that sbv was circulating in these departments in october  <dig>  while the virus was not detected from serum samples collected in august or september  <dig>  <cit> . all together, these data suggest that sbv was not present in france before september  <dig> 

the seasonality in the number of reported congenital sbv-infected herds is consistent with the seasonality in midge vector activity: each wave of congenital sbv corresponds to cases of congenital sbv resulting from foetal infections that occurred during the previous vector season. the two waves of congenital sbv started approximately at the same period for cattle and small ruminants. this observation is consistent with the minimal interval between foetal infection and birth, which is estimated to be similar for the different ruminant species . it is however noticeable that the epidemic peaked three months later in cattle than in small ruminants, which is due to the longer gestation period and the longer time period during which transplacental infection can lead to foetal damage. the second epidemic wave of congenital sbv began and peaked about four months earlier than the first wave, probably due to an earlier onset of viral circulation in the vector season in  <dig>  than in  <dig> .

spatial patterns of spread
the spatial distribution of congenital sbv incidence rates cannot be assessed through surveillance, due on the one hand to the underestimation of the number of infected herds, and on the other hand to the lack of knowledge of the number of susceptible herds . however, congenital sbv surveillance data still provide valuable information on the trends of the epidemic’s spread. the findings indicate that the virus spread rapidly across north-eastern france during the first wave. consistently, serosurveys conducted during the spring of  <dig> indicated that sbv within-herd seroprevalence was high in north-eastern france  <cit> . in that area, outbreaks of congenital sbv were reported rather sporadically during the second wave. numerous infected herds were identified in southern and western parts of the territory during the second wave. providing that sbv infection results in long-term protective immunity  <cit> , and despite considerable uncertainty concerning the level of immunity at the population level in the infected areas, the epidemic peak of congenital sbv seems behind us, even if sporadic outbreaks of congenital sbv resulting from the infection of previously unexposed animals are still being reported during the third epidemic wave. as of the 15th of august  <dig>   <dig> congenital sbv-infected herds had been reported throughout france since the first of september  <dig> during surveillance of the third wave  <cit> . comparatively,  <dig>  congenital sbv-infected herd were reported during thefirst wave, and  <dig>  during the second wave.

sbv impact assessment
in the infected herds, sbv impacts were primarily due to the birth of stillborns or deformed foetuses and neonates. while all of the abortions or stillbirths observed in the infected herds might not have been due to sbv infection, congenital deformities known to be fairly specific manifestations of sbv congenital infection represent a valuable indicator of sbv impact . on average, 8% of the lambs, 3% of the calves and 2% of the kids born in sbv-infected herds showed sbv-typical deformities s. this provides a rough estimate of the direct impact of sbv virus infection, although it should be noted that this is only based on farmers’ statements, and a potential information bias cannot be ruled out.

such a large scale impact study is so far unique in europe. our estimate of the median morbidity rate in offspring is consistent with the results of smaller-scale studies carried out in belgium  <cit> . for a given ruminant species, there is great variability in the morbidity rate of congenital sbv that could be influenced by within-herd seroprevalence, husbandry and reproduction practices, etc., as shown elsewhere  <cit> .

although the direct impact of acute sbv infection on adult ruminants has so far been considered as minor, some farmers reported decreases in reproductive capability in the infected herds during the previous vector season, suggesting a potential impact of acute sbv infection on reproduction performance , presumably due to foetal death caused by sbv infection of naive females in early stages of gestation. such observations were also reported by farmers in the netherlands  <cit>  and belgium  <cit> . specific studies are planned to further explore the impact of sbv infection during the early stages of gestation and to assess whether the reproductive capability is durably damaged.

monitoring an emerging disease situation
about half of the sbv outbreaks reported at the european level as of april  <dig> were located in france  <cit> . that does not imply that the disease incidence has been higher in france than in neighbouring countries, but may rather result from the surveillance of the epidemic spread in france, which has greatly benefited from the quality of collaboration across sectors in the framework of the esa platform. indeed, in the context of sbv emergence, the esa platform proved to be a valuable tool for enhancing stakeholder coordination, building synergy between disciplines and sectors, and relaying surveillance efforts over time to make it sustainable.

CONCLUSIONS
sbv rapidly spread across france upon its emergence in the autumn of  <dig>  after two seasons of sbv circulation, all the regions had been infected. france continues to monitor congenital sbv outbreaks, and updated information is made available online on a regular basis . outbreaks of congenital sbv may occur sporadically from now on, unless further epidemics occur if the immunity at population level declines.

animal ethics
our work did not include any experimental research on animals. data was collected on the farms only if the farmer’s agreement  had been obtained.

competing interests

the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions

md contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol and the impact study protocol, participated in the coordination of the national multi-stakeholder surveillance and investigation system, analyzed the data and drafted the manuscript. kg contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol and the impact study protocol, contributed to the coordination of the national multi-stakeholder surveillance and investigation system, coordinated the second stage of surveillance, coordinated data collection, participated in data analysis. at coordinated the impact study, contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol and the impact study protocol, participated in the coordination of the national multi-stakeholder surveillance and investigation system, contributed to the data interpretation. jbp contributed the definition of the surveillance protocol and contributed to data interpretation. af contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol and the impact study protocol, participated in the operational coordination of the initial stage of the surveillance, participated in the coordination of the national multi-stakeholder surveillance and investigation system, and contributed to data interpretation. ec contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol and the impact study protocol, participated in the coordination of the national multi-stakeholder surveillance and investigation system, and contributed to data interpretation. eb contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol and performed sbv laboratory diagnosis, and contributed to data interpretation. cs contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol, performed sbv laboratory diagnosis and contributed to data interpretation. cv performed sbv laboratory diagnosis and contributed to data interpretation. gz contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol and contributed to data interpretation. sz contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol, contributed to data interpretation, and performed sbv laboratory diagnosis. ph contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol and the impact study protocol, participated in the coordination of the national multi-stakeholder surveillance and investigation system, and contributed to data interpretation. dc contributed to the definition of the surveillance protocol and the impact study protocol, participated in the coordination of the national multi-stakeholder surveillance and investigation system, and contributed to data interpretation. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

