BACKGROUND
microalgae and cyanobacteria could be used for large scale outdoor cultivation, e.g. for the production of biofuels. this has led to a revamped interest in biotechnology of cyanobacteria in recent years  <cit> . wild-type strains however are not ideal for such artificial growth environments. one possibility to create better production strains is classical strain improvement by adaptive evolution, which is defined as the propagation of advantageous mutations through positive selection. genome wide random mutagenesis can be used to increase the rate of mutations above its natural level, while in vivo selection is used to apply the selective pressure. herein, with only little knowledge about the underlying molecular biology, significant alterations in the phenotype may be promoted. it is also possible to achieve effects which require simultaneous modifications of many seemingly unrelated genes  <cit> .

one important target for optimization is the growth temperature range, in particular when considering desert areas for outdoor cultivation. in a previous work we demonstrated the use of adaptive evolution to produce a mix of strains of synechocystis sp. pcc <dig> – a model organism for cyanobacteria and phototrophs as a whole - with a significantly increased thermal tolerance compared to the parental wild type  <cit> . however this work was limited to the description of the mutagenesis method itself, as well as the phenotype of the generated mix; no monoclonal strains were isolated and no genetic characterization was performed. the genetic modifications leading to the phenotypes of the newly generated strains are the focus of this work.

with the combination of agents used for the generation of the mutants  and methyl-methanesulphonate ), all kinds of mutations  are possible, though the mutagens used have varied tendencies towards the induction of different kinds of mutations. uv induces mainly transitions from guanine/cytosine to adenosine/thymine, while deletions mainly occur in a/t rich regions  <cit> , whereas mms induces all kinds of base substitutions , though mainly transversions from gc to ta and vice versa  <cit> . introduced mutations can be repaired by specific cellular mechanisms, though the mutagenesis protocols used should minimize their activity  <cit> . additionally unspecific, error-prone cellular repair mechanisms  occur, which are able to induce any type of indirect mutations  <cit> .

synechocystis is polyploid with the number of genome copies per cell reported to vary from  <dig> to  <dig>  <cit> . numerous genes are already known to be related to synechocystis heat shock response, such as hrca  <cit>  and hik <dig>  <cit>  which regulate the expression of heat shock proteins. the heat shock response however, while related, is distinct from long term temperature tolerance. the knockout of hik <dig> for example, while strongly increasing expression of heat shock proteins in synechocystis, barely affected its survival at the elevated temperature of 47°c   <cit> . many genes  have been shown to be differentially expressed after short term acclimation to higher temperatures  <cit> , however, there is very limited published data concerning the specific genes involved in long term thermal tolerance in synechocystis.

inoue et al. analyzed the growth of synechocystis at various temperatures and determined a very similar growth rate for temperatures ranging from  <dig> to 40°c. above  this temperature the growth rate drops rapidly, with no growth at 45°c  <cit> . they speculated that cell death at higher temperatures does not occur directly because of photosynthesis inhibition, as is often assumed because of photosystem ii sensitivity to higher temperatures  <cit> , but rather because of damage to other cell mechanisms, such as the functions of the plasma membrane  <cit> .

before the genotype of the various previously generated thermo-tolerant strains can be analyzed to determine which genes were affected by the mutagenesis, they have to be isolated and cultured as individual strains. a screening method to determine the individual temperature tolerances of many clones would allow narrowing the focus towards the best performing strains. however, there are currently no commercial systems available for mid- or high-throughput screening of phototrophic microorganisms such as cyanobacteria. we have previously developed a prototype for such a system with the capability for precise temperature control. furthermore this prototype has recently been greatly expanded and improved with subsequent adaption to a more modern and larger pipetting platform .

the availability of an annotated genome for synechocystis <cit> , which can be used as a mapping reference greatly reduces the amount of sequencing-reads needed at any given position for a sufficient coverage. together with increasingly inexpensive next generation sequencing  techniques it became feasible to sequence various strains with enhanced temperature tolerance , to identify genes of interest.

we utilized the  <dig> gs junior  and the ion torrent pgm  bench-top sequencers, both of which have enough throughput for the re-sequencing of bacterial genomes. while their technical implementations differ, in both platforms, insertions or deletions  in homopolymer regions are the main source of errors  <cit> . this leads to an overall higher error rate compared to the competing myseq platform ; however both have higher accuracy when detecting base substitutions at the same coverage  <cit> . though it has been noted for the iontorrent, that while the percentage of correctly called true snps is higher compared to illumina’s myseq, the false positive rate is also increased  <cit> .

here we use our established screening platform, as well as a more conventional system based on a shaking incubator, to screen for the best strains out of the previously generated mix, i.e. those with the highest thermotolerance. the phenotypes of these strains are then characterized and their genetic makeup analyzed with ngs and sanger sequencing. various mutations conferring the increased thermal tolerance to the strains are identified and their possible effects discussed.

RESULTS
wild type reference
to identify new mutations generated after mutagenesis and selection under thermal stress, the parental wild-type strain was sequenced as a baseline for further analysis. the combined sequencing coverage was 19-fold with an average raw accuracy across each individual base position in a read of  <dig> % and a median read length of 524 bp. several changes were found compared to the originally published kazusa-wild-type:

there were four large deletions detected in the genome; three on the chromosome  and one on plasmid psysm . also various snps  were identified. all alterations in the wild type were also present in the sequenced thermo-tolerant strains. additionally, the plasmids pcc <dig>  and pcb <dig>  could not be identified; no single read properly mapped unto them, even with separate blast alignment.

screening and characterization of temperature tolerant strains
a mix of thermo-tolerant strains  was previously generated through random mutagenesis and adaptive evolution  <cit> . to obtain monoclonal strains dilutions were plated on agar-media and single colonies then picked. it is important to note however that while strains obtained via this method originate from a single ancestral cell and are thus by definition monoclonal, due to the polyploidic character of synechocystis each monoclonal strain could possibly contain various differing variants of genes within the many genome copies per cell.

initial attempts at isolating random single clones from plate without screening for performance yielded strains without notably increased thermal tolerance compared to the wild type . therefore two distinct screening methods were applied.

the first is based on culturing isolated monoclonal strains in small cell culture flasks within a commercially available shaking incubator . in this screening, out of  <dig> strains analyzed,  <dig> demonstrated higher thermal tolerance than the wild type  controls. the second approach is based on an automated high throughput screening system for phototrophic microorganisms within deepwell plates , which was developed in house. this system identified  <dig>  strains with significantly higher thermal tolerance than the parental wild type. none of the control wells containing only media showed any increase in od, which would have indicated cross contamination.

for both approaches the growth rates were determined over a range of temperatures and data then fitted using a modified ratkowsky-equation. the data-fitting was not used to determine the maximum tolerated temperature of the strains but merely to allow an easier visualization and comparison of data. in the incubator screening, the strain c5k was identified as having the highest temperature tolerance  and was therefore validated with bioreactor cultivation as well as sequenced. figure  <dig> shows the results of the robot screening for four strains , which were selected for further validation in a 1 l bioreactor and sequencing, since their temperature tolerances were the most promising. in the bioreactor validation the maximum temperature was determined by stepwise increase in temperature until stable growth was no longer possible.

the results for the determined maximally tolerated temperature for the various strains  as identified either in the screening systems or the 1 l photobioreactos, as well as the number of mutations identified are summarized in table  <dig> 

the goal of the screening was to identify strains with notably increased thermal tolerance over the wild-type. this was achieved in both screening setups for the selected strains, though the wild-type control did outperform many other strains included in the screening . meanwhile the previously generated thermo-tolerant strain-mix, out of which all strains were isolated , was also included in the screening as a positive control and consistently demonstrated the highest thermal tolerance. the thermal tolerances of the strains selected for bioreactor validation and subsequent sequencing  while considerably higher than the wild type's, but did not quite match mutiv-mix. the mix also appears to have a somewhat more robust growth rate over a range of temperatures while the single clones have a sharper optimal range. this effect is especially noticeable in the incubator screening .

the characterization of the selected strains in the target bioreactors yielded maximally tolerated temperatures between  <dig>  and  <dig> °c. the determined tolerances are very close to the 45°c the strain mix  was growing stably at, at the point they were isolated.

mutations in selected thermo tolerant stains
the total dna from the five individual strains selected by the screening process, as well as a wild-type control, were each sequenced with ngs technology. the sequencing coverage for all sequencings was sufficiently high  and the average raw accuracy across each individual base position in a read was well above 99% with a median read lenght between 141 bp and 226 bp . as expected the wild-type control did not show any new mutations compared to the parental wild type, even after the screening process.

for the thermo-tolerant strains various mutations were identified. to exclude false positives introduced by the sequencing technology or the mapping algorithm used, results were confirmed with sanger sequencing. table  <dig> shows a matrix of the true positive mutations which were identified in the thermotolerant strains by ngs and validated with sanger sequencing. as suspected, all tested indels in homopolymer regions identified with ngs were artifacts of the sequencing technologies  and were confirmed as false positives through sanger sequencing.

mutations marked with *indicate mixed reads in sanger , where the wt variant can also still be detected.

prolonged in vivo selection within the strain mix
the various strains used for screening were isolated out of mutiv-mix, a mix of many strains generated through random mutagenesis and in vivo selection growing stably at 45°c. continuing selection on mutiv-mix for one year after isolation of the monoclonal strains  further raised the maximally tolerated temperature with stable growth up to  <dig> °c . this new strain-mix with higher thermal tolerance was dubbed mutiv-mix- <dig>  it was sequenced with ngs to validate mutations identified in the monoclonal strains and to gauge the distribution of mutations after prolonged selection. to asses the distribution in of the mutations within the mix a high coverage was achieved ; the average raw accuracy across each individual base position in a read was at 99% with a median read length of 188 bp. the results are listed in tables  <dig> and  <dig> 

positions marked with a *correspond to identical mutation positions for monoclonal strains.

identified genes
the gene that stands out the most from those identified  is 
clpc
, an atp-dependent clp protease atpase subunit. in total five distinct mutations where identified in this gene. four within the monoclonal strains, and an additional one in the strain mix. no single strain appears to contain all of the mutations however. c5k contains the most, with three distinct mutations, one of which a <dig> also carries, while h <dig> has another unique mutation . proteases are responsible for digesting misfolded proteins, and are typically up-regulated as part of the heat shock response. in synechocystis clpc has been linked to various stress responses, its expression has been shown to be increased after heat shock  <cit> , high-salt acclimation  <cit>  and uv or high-light irradiation  <cit> . four of the mutations found in clpc  are located between the known domains of the protein. of these, the mutation at position  <dig> is by far the most common in mutiv-mix- <dig>  being represented in 45% of all reads. the last mutation  is located in the first atpase  site of the protein and is the second most common in mutiv-mix- <dig> 

a second gene presenting more than one mutation is 
pnp
, a polyribonucleotide nucleotidyltransferase. it has one amino acid  change in a <dig>  h <dig>  c5k & mutiv-mix- <dig>  and an additional one in c5k . though in c5k both mutations again seem to be not fully segregated. in mutiv-mix- <dig> the first mutation was found in all reads, while the second was not detectable. pnp is part of the degradosome, which is involved in the processing of ribosomal rna and the degradation of messenger rna. the expression of pnp has previously been reported to be up-regulated in synechocystis in acid stressed  <cit>  and cold acclimated  <cit>  cultures. the first identified mutation  lies in the s1-like superfamily region, which contains the rna binding sites, while the second  is located within the rnase domain of the protein.

another very interesting mutation was identified is the amino acid exchange in 
sigf
, a group  <dig> rna polymerase sigma factor. sigf has been shown to affect various processes in synechocystis. it is needed for high-salt and high-light tolerances  <cit>  and for the expression of thick pili  <cit>  and motility  <cit> . the identified mutation occurred in the region- <dig> domain, which is the region of sigma- <dig> proteins containing the dna binding sites.

the same three strains  with a mutation in sigf also showed an amino acid exchange in 
pilj
, a chemotaxis protein required for thick pili and motility  <cit> . the identified mutation lies within the signaling  domain of the protein.

the final gene showing more than one mutation  is 
pyk2
, the gene coding for pyruvate kinase  <dig>  which is essential for glycolysis  <cit> . no strain contains both mutations; with the exception of a <dig>  all contain either one or the other. in mutiv-mix- <dig> the first mutation is in  <dig> % of the reads, while the second is barely measurable. both mutations are located within the conserved domain of the protein.

additionally an intergenic mutation at position  <dig> was found in c5k, a <dig>  h <dig> as well as mutiv-mix- <dig>  it is upstream of 
nlpd
, a putative peptidase, and thus might affect its expression. in e. coli nlpd has functions in cell wall formation and maintenance  <cit> , and has been shown to be required for cell separation   <cit> .

both the a <dig> and c5k strains, presented a mutation in 
pyrr
, an uracil phosphoribosyltransferase. in mutiv-mix- <dig> two separate frameshift mutations were detected in pyrr, one insertion at position  <dig>  and a second one at position  <dig> . pyrr catalyzes conversion of uracil back to uridine 5'-monophosphate, and thereby allows its use for new rna synthesis without de novo synthesis. the mutation in a <dig> and c5k inserted a repeat sequence  into the end of the gene, and thus changed the end of its amino acid sequence from velikg to ws, shortening the  <dig> aa long protein by four amino acids. the mutations detected in mutiv-mix- <dig> also changed the terminal part of the protein. the more common mutation from kg to nstn, the other removes a stop-codon changing the last  <dig> aa and adding  <dig> new aa . the pyrr multi-domain and its active sites are not affected by any of the mutation.

two distinct frameshift mutations introducing a stop codon were detected in the gene 
cya1
, the major class iii adenylate cyclase in synechocystis: an insertion in the the strain a <dig>  and a deletion in  <dig> % of mutiv-mix- <dig> reads. the mutation in a <dig> truncates the  <dig> aa long protein by  <dig> aa in length and changes the last eight aa . the mutation in mutiv-mix- <dig> reduces the length by  <dig> aa and changes the last aa.

in the strains c5k and h <dig> a not fully segregated mutation causing an aa exchange, was found in the active domain of 
sll0064
, a putative polar amino acid transport system substrate-binding protein located in the periplasm. in mutiv-mix- <dig> a different mutation causing a frameshift leading to a truncation of  <dig> aa outside of the active domain was detected.

three distinct mutations where detected in the hypothetical protein 
slr1098
. two aa exchanges  and one frameshift . the frameshift detected in mutiv-mix- <dig> inserts a stop codon early in the sequence, reducing the protein to just 38aa.

additionally a base substitution was also identified on position  <dig> in the strain a <dig> and in  <dig> % of mutiv-mix- <dig> reads. the mutation upstream of the hypothetical proteins 
sll <dig> & slr0876
.

a few mutations were only fond in mutiv-mix- <dig> but not in any of the monoclonal strains . these include mutations the genes 
recg
, 
cmpa
, 
rpoc2
, 
glga
 and 
hemh
 as well as a mutation at position  <dig> .

the most prevalent of these are the mutations in 
recg
  and in 
cmpa
 . recg is involved in dna repair over homolog recombination  <cit> . the mutation leads to a aa change in the nucleotide binding region of the helicc-domain. cmpa is part of the cyanobacterial carbon concentrating mechanism  and specifically binds bicarbonate  <cit> . the mutation leads to an aa exchange in the active domain .

discussion
temperature tolerances
we were able to identify strains with superior characteristics than the wild type by two different screening approaches. the modified ratkowsky-equation used for data fitting, allowed for good visualization and easier comparison of the data. the maximally tolerated temperatures determined during the screening  however varied somewhat from those seen in 1 l photobioreactor cultivation. the actually tolerated temperature is expected to vary to some degree depending on other cultivation conditions, such as, light, aeration, and cultivation vessel shape. therefore selection and validation should be performed in the target cultivation system if possible. in our case the whole approach is based on the conditions in the 1 l bioreactor,  which are a good approximation for outdoor bioreactor conditions.

the variation between cultivation systems is especially high for the incubator screening: the maximally tolerated temperature of the c5k strain determined in this system for example, is quite a bit lower  than the one determined in the photobioreactor validation. meanwhile for the strain mix  a far higher thermal tolerance was determined in the incubator screening compared to the photobioreactor validation . in comparison the maximally tolerated temperatures determined in the high throughput robot system were much more in line with bioreactor cultivation data, demonstrating the superiority of this system, not only in throughput and handling, but also in the quality of generated data.

during screening, the strain mix  also showed a more robust growth over a range of temperatures, which is to be expected as the measured curve results from the average of a number of strains with differing optima. overall validation of the selected strains in 1 l photobioreactors showed them to be as thermo tolerant  as the strain mix they were isolated out of, underpinning the validity of the approach.

prolonged cultivation of the starting mix  over one year under selective conditions in the bioreactor further increased temperature tolerance by an additional  <dig> °c . we assume that no new mutations took place during the cultivation of mutiv-mix- <dig>  after the isolation of the monoclonal strains described above. this is likely to be the case due to the relatively short time frame, lack of additional rounds of mutagenesis and low natural mutation rate. thus this further increase in thermo-tolerance can probably be attributed to further selection and enrichment of higher performing strains already present within mutiv-mix. those better strains were not identified with the screening because of the relatively low throughput of the systems used with only  <dig> candidate strains in the incubator screening and  <dig> strains in the robot screening. unlike the incubator screening, the robot screening platform however is highly scalable and could be expanded to create a true high throughput culturing and screening system for phototrophic organisms.

it is also of interest that so few of the strains isolated from the mix outperformed the wild type at all. one would expect all strains contained within the mix to have a thermal tolerance to at least the temperature they were cultured at within the mix. otherwise they should have been out-competed by other strains, however this does not seem to have been the case. there are several possible explanations for this behavior. it could be, that many strains within the mix  are deficient in other aspects. they could be unable to grow on agar plates, or they could lack the ability to grow monoclonally in any medium . they could also have become dependent on specific factors within the photobioreactor cultivation system for fast growth, such as the controlled ph-range, the strong mixing, or the relatively high cell density, where other cells provide shading.

genetic mutations
the reference wild type appears to have amassed various mutations over time compared to the genome published in  <dig>  most are snps which may or may not affect the phenotype, while the larger genomic rearrangements appear to be due to mobile transposon elements . additionally, it should be noted, that the plasmids pcc <dig>  and pcb <dig>  could not be detected with ngs technology. this has previously been reported, and appears to be an artifact of the technologies used, as both plasmids are detectable by pcr  <cit> . the genetic drift of the parental wild-type strain during extended laboratory cultivation is not a main topic for this work however, and was not examined in detail. variation found in our parental wild-type strain compared to the kazusa strain sequenced in  <dig>  <cit>  were not validated with sanger sequencing. however a re-sequencing of a wt clone after screening  presented the same identified variations.

the lack of new mutations in the wild type, even after selective screening, shows a relative stability in the genome, and demonstrates the need for a mutagen to obtain advantageous mutations in an acceptable time frame.

in the enhanced strains various  mutations were found. as expected some mutations identified by ngs in homopolymer regions turned out to be false positives upon sanger validation and were excluded from the analysis. however, the remaining mutations identified are likely to offer some form of increased fitness at higher temperatures, as disadvantageous or neutral mutations are not expected to propagate through the many genomes in synechocystis and are thus likely to be lost after a couple of generations or at the very least not be detectable by ngs or sanger sequencing.

advantageous mutations in contrast are expected to multiply within synechocystis genomes during the long selection process, while separating from neutral or disadvantageous mutations which might have generated at the same time. this, together with the relatively low mutagen dosages used , explains the low number of specific hits, and lack of noise from other mutations within the sequencing data.

overall, the mutation distribution identified in the monoclonal strains selected via the screening procedure  is not easily explained trough linear ancestry between strains. at first glance it appears that within the  <dig> strains analyzed there are two distinct lineages, one containing the strains c5k & a <dig> and the other containing a <dig>  h <dig> & h <dig>  . a <dig>  h <dig> & h <dig> also showed very similar growth rates during the screening . however some of the strains share mutations across these two putative lineages. for example distinct mutations in pyk <dig> and pnp are found in c5k, a <dig> & h <dig> and another in sll <dig> is found in c5k and h <dig>  this indicates that at least some of the mutations must have occurred independently at the same position in various strains. this validates the significance and importance of these specific mutations to achieve a higher thermal tolerance in synechocystis.

all mutations identified are assumed to have at least some degree of effect on the strains temperature tolerances. speculation on the possible mechanism for these mutations to facilitate a higher temperature tolerance is presented below.

five distinct mutations were identified in the gene 
clpc
. it is very likely that these affect the activity of the protein, either making it better able to cope with the increased demand or helping it to keep its normal activity up at increased temperature. it is also interesting to note how the mutations are distributed. the monoclonal strain containing more than one mutation in clpc  always had mixed sequencing signals, indicating that they are not fully segregated through all of the genomes. the sequencing of mutiv-mix- <dig> also show various mutations, with differing percentages. these results indicate that the wild-type copy might still represented in some of the genomes, and that there are various differing mutant copies of the gene, each with one or more of the base substitutions present. overall the results point towards each point-mutation excluding others within the same gene copy, rather than a combination of various mutations within a single copy. for the first three mutation positions, which have less than 100 bp distance from each other and can thus be covered by a single sequencing-read, no read showed more than one of the mutations simultaneously. this implies that the various mutations are not complementary but instead reach a similar phenothypic outcome through different means. the most common mutation in mutiv-mix- <dig>  might provide the highest fitness advantage at increased temperatures, however this effect does not appear to be high enough to fully out-compete all other mutations even after one year of stringent selection.

both mutations detected in 
pnp
 again might increase its activity at higher temperatures. the position of the first mutation within the binding site could also indicate a change the enzymes specificity towards certain rnas, thus changing overall protein expression.

in mutiv-mix- <dig> however only the second mutation which lies within the rnase domain was found, indicating that this mutation is superior to the other and thus propagated across all strains during the prolonged cultivation. together with the intergenic mutation at position  <dig>  it is the only mutation found in all reads of mutiv-mix- <dig>  and thus appears to confer a large fitness advantage at increased temperature. a propagation of this mutation across all the strains merely through early formation can be excluded, as at the time of single clone isolation the monoclonal strains a <dig> and h <dig> did not contain it.

the identified mutation in 
sigf
 occurred within the dna binding sites and thus probably affects its binding characteristics. the effect of altered binding fro a sigma factor can potentially be very far reaching  by affecting the expression of many proteins. this characteristic has previously been exploited to significantly increase ethanol tolerance in yeast, in a method called global transcription machinery engineering , where a library of random mutagenized transcription factors is screened for their phenotypic effects  <cit> . two out of three monoclonal strains identified carrying this mutation  show only one or two additional mutations . these strains do however have a strongly increased thermal tolerance; comparable to that of strains with far more mutations , indicating the strong phenotypic effects of this single mutation.

sigf was one of only two genes for which, while they presented a mutation in some monoclonal strains, none could be detected in mutiv-mix- <dig> . this implies that there is a limit for the maximally tolerated temperature reachable with this mutation, as no strain form the mix growing at higher temperatures contains it. or it might also lead to negative consequences due to deregulation of other genes, giving other mutations conferring increased thermal tolerance an advantage in selection.

the postion of the 
pilj
mutation indicates it might affect the genes function. it could also have a synergistic effect with the mutation in identified sigf as these mutations were only ever identified in conjunction in the same three strains . either way, as discussed above, both mutations were not detectable in any reads of mutiv-mix- <dig>  demonstrating that they might only lead to a local maximum concerning temperature tolerance in synechocystis.

two mutations were detected in 
pyk2
. since pyruvate kinase is essential for glycolysis, and thus needed for the survival of the organism, a knockout or strong inhibition of pyk <dig> can be excluded. both mutations are within the conserved domain of pyk <dig> and could indicate that in synechocystis the reduced activity of the pyruvate kinase at higher temperatures could be one of the bottlenecks inhibiting growth, which is alleviated by either of the identified mutations. the distribution in mutiv-mix- <dig> indicates that the second mutation seems to be less effective at increasing temperature tolerance, as it has been practically completely displaced by the first.

the mutation upstream of 
nlpd
 could lead to increased or reduced expression of the protein, thus it might affect cell wall composition or aggregation behavior of the cells, making them more likely to stick together, thus protecting the inner cells from the increased temperature. within the screening platform the strains carrying this mutation where among those where a higher adhesion towards the well walls was observed . together with the previously discussed mutation in pnp this is the only mutation identified in all reads of mutiv-mix- <dig>  this indicates that all  strains contain this mutation in all genome copies indicating a high fitness advantage at increased temperature. a large distribution of this mutation due to early formation can again be excluded, as not all monoclonal strains contained it.

even though no mutation in 
pyrr
 was within the conserved domain, they could still affect protein activity. especially when considered in conjunction with the previously discussed mutations in pnp, this could indicate an increased activity for for both enzymes because of a higher turnover of mrna. in mutiv-mix- <dig> in total  <dig> % of the reads showed a mutation in pyrr, which demonstrates a high importance for increased thermal tolerance.

for 
cya1
 even the more conservative mutation identified, already removes some of the catalytic sites in the conserved cyaa domain of the protein, and thus probably inhibit its function. adenylate cyclases are important regulators for various cell processes. they generate camp, which is a second messenger that participates in a wide variety of signal transduction systems. in synechocystis a cya <dig> knockout has been shown to be impaired in motility  <cit> . the effects of a frameshift mutation in cya <dig> could be very far reaching however and affect cellular regulation in many ways beyond its motility. in mutiv-mix- <dig> the mutation from a <dig> was no longer detectable, instead a mutation was detected which is even more likely to inhibit protein function. its spread across  <dig> % of the reads indicates that this inhibition has a notable fitness advantage at higher temperatures.

for 
sll0064
, 
slr1098
 as well the mutation upstream of the hypothetical proteins 
sll <dig> & slr0876
 it is difficult to speculate upon the possible effects, as the full function of the proteins in synechocystis is still unknown.

while sll <dig> is classified as a putative amino acid transporter, sll <dig> & slr <dig> have unknown functions and have either very low identity to known proteins, or are only similar to other proteins of unknown function, making it impossible to speculate of the discrete effects. for slr <dig> ortholog search results however seem to indicate it contains a heat domain, and thus might be involved in intracellular transport.  <cit> . the early insertion of a stop-codon in slr <dig> definitely constitutes a knock out.

for sll <dig> and sll0875/slr <dig> the incidence of the mutations seams to have increased after the prolonged section process , indicating an advantage at higher temperatures.

meanwhile the mutations in slr <dig> do not appear to be as important for high temperature tolerance as only one of the monoclonal strains, and only a low percentage of mutiv-mix- <dig> reads, included one. the effects should also not be fully excluded however as three distinct mutations propagated across the stains/genomes.

for the mutations only identified in mutiv-mix- <dig> with very few reads  it is impossible to determine if these are very rare true positives, or if it is a sequencing error . a validation via pcr and sanger-sequencing can also not be performed as the competitive pcr process would confer an advantage the more common variant.

for the mutations identified in 
recg
 and 
cmpa
 however, the large number of reads identifies them as true positives. as no further mutagenesis was performed after the isolation of the monoclonal strains it is very likely that these two mutations were already present in the mix before the prolonged selection, albeit probably in lower numbers .

the mutations in recg and cmpa are both within the active  sites and thus might affects their binding characteristics . again these mutations could increase the activity or maintaining the activity at higher temperatures. the mutation at cmpa is especially interesting as phototrophic organisms typically require a more specific rubisco at higher temperatures to compensate for the different concentration ratios of dissolved o2/co <dig> <cit> . cyanobacteria instead increase the local co <dig> concentration via the ccm. thus this mutation might increase the overall efficacy of the ccm.

CONCLUSIONS
overall the approach of using random mutagenesis, followed by in vivo selection, selective screening, and then genetic sequencing was found to be very promising. many interesting mutations could be identified which increase the thermal tolerance in synechocystis. with only two exceptions all genes containing mutations in the isolated monoclonal strains were confirmed by sequencing the strain mix after prolonged selection, further validating the results. some mutations in genes  are not obvious candidates for temperature tolerance increases, and are thus very unlikely to have been identified by other approaches.

with quite a few genes now identified as being involved in the temperature tolerance of the strains, further strains could be selected at random and then analyzed at low cost with a pcr panel and sanger sequencing. thereby providing data to analyze the distribution of the mutations in the strain mix.

further studies beyond the scope of this work should isolate the individual effect on the temperature tolerance of each mutation by transforming it into a wt strain and characterizing it.

additionally gene expression profiling of some of the strains, or of a wild type with specific mutations introduced, would probably also yield very interesting results. this is of special interest for mutations such as the one found in sigma factor f  which could affect the expression of many different genes. sigma factor f is now also an obvious candidate  for global transcription machinery engineering .

the underlying functional differences resulting from the mutated genes could now also be characterized  and be compared to the wild-type protein.

the function of the hypothetical proteins found to be altered should also be investigated, by creating respective knockout strains in synechocystis.

introducing various identified mutations into a single strain and analyzing the resulting phenotype would also be of considerable interest. it is quite likely that some combinations could lead to strains with even higher temperature tolerances, which could then be used as a starting point for further enhancements, either with targeted methods on known genes, or with new rounds of random mutagenesis.

