BACKGROUND
a striking difference between metazoans and plants is the recent occurrence of whole genome duplication  events in plants . at least three wgd events have been confirmed in the ancestry of arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> , with the most recent one  occurring around  <dig> mya  <cit> . after a polyploidization event, the genome reorganizes and, although many duplicated sequences are deleted, a considerable proportion of duplicated genes remains as paralogs in the genome  <cit> . a. thaliana contains more than  <dig> paralogous gene pairs, accounting for about one-sixth of all protein-coding genes in this species  <cit> . due to the wealth of paralogous gene pairs arising from wgd and the reduced selection pressure on redundant gene copies, wgd is thought to provide the potential for adaptive radiation and evolutionary innovations .

several models of evolution following a wgd event have been proposed, the most prominent of which are balanced gene drive  <cit> , subfunctionalization of gene pairs  <cit> , and neofunctionalization  <cit>  . the balanced gene drive model is based on the gene balance hypothesis, which predicts that duplicates are retained when the duplication leads to a new balance between the products of dosage-dependent genes  <cit> . for instance, when the proteins encoded by paralogous genes function as part of a protein complex, the loss of one paralog would change the strength or nature of interactions in the complex, and therefore both copies are likely to be retained  <cit> . subfunctionalization describes the process of dividing an ancestral gene function between the two members of a paralogous gene pair. accordingly, fulfilling the ancestral function now requires duplicate genes  <cit> . mutations that lead to new functions of duplicated genes can occur in both protein-coding and non-coding regions  <cit> , and the functional classes of paralogs are suggested to be linked to gene expression  <cit> .

as predicted by the balanced gene drive model, genes encoding subunits of protein complexes or enzymes of the same metabolic pathway tend to be retained after wgd, as shown in ciliates  <cit> , yeast  <cit> , and plants  <cit> . genes involved in developmental processes, regulation of transcription, and signal transduction are preferentially retained as duplicates . these functional categories suggest that neo-/subfunctionalization drive retention of the duplicates. stress-responsive genes were found to be retained after wgd, suggesting that environmental challenges promote biased duplicate retention  <cit> . when paralogs were separated into pairs with similar or differential expression, it was found that dna- and nucleic acid-binding were overrepresented among similarly expressed paralog pairs, while functions related to biosynthesis and metabolism were overrepresented among the differentially expressed pairs  <cit> . during the course of evolution, paralogs diverge in amino acid sequence  <cit>  and gene expression profile  <cit> . furthermore, paralog coexpression correlates with the number of shared regulatory motifs . however, how the coding and non-coding sequences of the same paralog evolve is unknown.

orthologous conserved non-coding sequences  are a characteristic of eukaryotic genomes. as these sequences of non-coding dna are evolutionarily conserved across species  <cit> , they are thought to have a biological function  <cit> . such cnss are located in introns, intergenic regions proximal or distal to genes, and the 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions  of genes. comparative genomic studies have identified thousands of cnss in the genomes of humans and model organisms such as mouse and a. thaliana . in plants, cnss have been hypothesized to affect the transcription levels of neighboring genes  <cit>  and several studies have shown that cnss are enriched for transcription factor binding sites . published cns datasets often overlap to a limited degree only  <cit> , depending on the included species and the detection parameters. four studies report the identification of cnss using a. thaliana as a reference . baxter et al.  aligned four dicot species and reported  <dig> cnss in the region upstream of the transcription start site  of  <dig> genes  <cit> . hupalo and kern  identified cnss in  <dig> angiosperm species using deep whole-genome alignment  <cit> . haudry et al.  aligned the genomes of nine members of the brassicaceae family, identifying over  <dig>  cnss  <cit> . van de velde et al.  used phylogenetic footprinting and whole-genome alignment to identify cnss in  <dig> dicot species  <cit> .

in this study, we aimed to identify differences between wgd-derived paralog pairs with similar expression levels and those with different expression levels. we found that the genes of differentially expressed paralog pairs with reduced expression are under less purifying selection, exhibit more tissue-specific expression, and have lost orthologous cnss compared with paralogs that have equal or increased expression. paralog pairs with similar expression strength may be retained by gene-dosage constraints, while neo- and/or subfunctionalization may drive retention of differentially expressed pairs.

RESULTS
classification of paralogous genes based on expression levels
to estimate the average gene transcript levels in a. thaliana, we averaged the expression levels of  <dig>  genes in  <dig> tissues or cell types  <cit>  . among these genes, we identified a set of  <dig> highly similar paralogs resulting from the recent α-wgd event in a. thaliana . we classified paralogous pairs based on their relative expression levels, and grouped together  <dig> and  <dig> pairs with similar  and differential  expression levels, respectively. paralog pairs with differential expression were further categorized into those with higher expression and lower expression . to compare paralogs that exhibited similar expression with those that had higher and lower expression, one gene of every similarly expressed pair was randomly selected , and these randomly selected genes were used in further analyses.fig.  <dig> flowchart of the analyses described in this paper. based on their relative expression levels , paralogous pairs were grouped into those having similar  or differential  expression. differentially expressed paralogs were further grouped into “higher expression”  or “lower expression” . conserved non-coding a. thaliana sequences reported in three published studies were analyzed for their presence at paralogous gene pairs



differentially expressed paralogs are subject to relaxed purifying selection
to characterize the a. thaliana genes in each group , we compared their expression with that of their orthologs in arabidopsis lyrata. the two species diverged after the α-wgd event and the a. lyrata genome has been sequenced  <cit>  and transcript level data are available  <cit> .

firstly, we analyzed how many genes of the higher- and lower-expressed paralogs have orthologs in a. lyrata. amongst the  <dig> paralogous pairs with differential expression levels, the lower-expressed parologs had  <dig> orthologs, whereas the higher-expressed paralogs had  <dig> orthologs  .fig.  <dig> paralogs with lower expression experience relaxed purifying selection. a paralogs in the higher expression group  have more orthologs in a. lyrata than do their paralogs with lower expression  . white hatched bars show number of genes in a. thaliana that do not have an ortholog in a. lyrata. b the dn/ds ratio of a. thaliana and a. lyrata orthologs was compared between paralogs with similar expression  and paralogs in groups with higher expression and lower expression. letters indicate significant differences in sample distribution . c the gene expression profiles of paralogs with lower expression are less correlated with those of a. lyrata orthologs than are paralogs with higher or similar expression. spearman correlation coefficients based on expression in a. thaliana and a. lyrata were calculated for paralogs with lower expression , higher expression , and all orthologs , indicated by black arrows. the correlation coefficient for differentially-expressed paralogs is different from that for paralogs with similar expression; grey bars show the distribution of ρ values based on  <dig>  permutated sets of paralogs from pairs with similar expression . light grey bars indicate the distribution of 95 % of the resulting correlation coefficients, and dark grey bars indicate the  <dig>  % distribution on either side. for details of the statistical analysis see main text



next, to estimate the evolutionary rate of divergence of the paralogous genes’ dna sequences, we analyzed synonymous  and non-synonymous  substitution rates for a. thaliana and a. lyrata orthologs. a lower dn/ds ratio is indicative of purifying selection. we detected dn/ds ratios of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  for genes in the groups with similar, higher, and lower expression, respectively  .

lastly, we compared gene expression levels using data sampled in flowers at stages 1- <dig>  and total inflorescences containing flowers at stages 1- <dig>   <cit>  . we calculated spearman correlation coefficients  for all orthologs  and paralogs with higher  and lower expression  . expression correlation between lower- or higher-expressed paralogs and all orthologs was not significantly different . we performed the same analysis with ortholog expression data from four species of the brassicaceae family   <cit> . the results also showed reduced expression correlation of the lower-expressed paralogs compared to the higher-expressed paralogs . to further test differences in correlation of gene expression between a. thaliana and a. lyrata orthologs, we approximated the median correlation co-efficient for the similarly expressed paralogs. as the expression correlation for the similarly expressed paralogs would be different each time we randomly selected one gene from each pair, we computed the correlation coefficients for  <dig>  repeated random selections. the resulting correlations had a median ρ of  <dig>  , thus overlapping ρ of all orthologs, but not those with differential expression . taken together, these findings suggest that the lower-expressed gene of a paralogous pair experiences reduced purifying selection.

paralogous genes with different expression levels function in stress responses
we examined the functions of genes in groups with similar and differential expression by performing a gene ontology  term enrichment analysis . paralogs with similar average expression levels were found to be enriched for being components of ribosomes, whereas those with differential expression levels were enriched for responses to different abiotic and biotic stresses .table  <dig> go term enrichment of paralogous genes with similar or different expression levels

go term categoryc
fdrb

afor each pair, the gene with higher expression was selected for analysis


bfalse discovery rate 


cfor each go term category, the five entries with the highest subset ratio are shown



we reasoned that the stress response is often a rather local action, restricted to certain tissues. tissue specificity can be measured with the index τ  <cit> , for which values approaching  <dig> indicate broad gene expression and those approaching  <dig> indicate tissue-specific expression. we found that expression maxima for 22 % of differentially expressed paralogs were in the same tissue/cell type for both genes . interestingly, we found that paralogous genes with similar average expression levels had strongly correlating degrees of tissue specificity, whereas the lower-expressed genes of differentially expressed paralogous pairs were skewed towards tissue-specific expression . this finding suggests that members of differentially expressed paralogous pairs did not simply experience a reduction in average gene expression, but gained tissue-specific expression.fig.  <dig> differentially expressed paralogous pairs diverge in tissue specificity. paralogous pairs were selected for similar  or differential  average expression levels. a tissue specificity  is correlated for the two genes of a pair with similar expression levels. b lower-expressed genes of pairs with differential gene expression have stronger tissue specificity than do their higher-expressed paralogs



number of cnss in promoter regions, introns, and 3′ utrs correlates with relative gene expression
since cnss are indicative of cis-elements that regulate transcription, we compared the number of cnss associated with paralogous genes in each group. for paralogs with higher expression, no significant correlation was observed between the number of cnss in the promoter regions and the paralogous pair expression ratio . by contrast, for lower-expressed parolgs, we found a significant negative correlation between the number of cnss in the promoter regions and diverging paralog expression levels. the correlation was strongest for cnss of dataset  <dig> , but was observed for cnss obtained from all three cns datasets .fig.  <dig> with increasing expression divergence, lower-expressed paralogs have fewer cnss in their promoters, introns, and 3′ utrs. the two genes of each paralogous pair were classified as higher-expressed  or lower-expressed  paralog, and plotted according to their ratio in gene expression levels . y-axes show the average number of cnss within promoters  , introns , and 3′ utrs . three different cns datasets were analyzed . a significant negative correlation between the paralog expression ratio and number of cnss in promoters  was found for the lower expression group in all datasets. a correlation between paralog expression ratio and number of cnss in introns or 3′ utrs was limited . the higher expression group had no significant correlation with the number of cnss. error bars are given as s.e.m



similar results were obtained for cnss in introns and 3′ untranslated regions . in cns dataset  <dig>  we detected a negative correlation between the paralogous pair expression ratio and the number of cnss in introns from the lower-expressed gene  but not the number of cnss from the higher-expressed gene  . cnss from datasets  <dig> and  <dig>  showed no significant correlation with gene expression. for paralog expression ratio and cnss in 3′ utrs, we found negative correlations between the expression of the lower-expressed gene of a paralogous pair and the number of cnss in cns dataset  <dig>  and cns dataset  <dig>  . as with cnss in the promoter regions and introns, higher-expressed paralogs were not significantly correlated with the number of 3′ utr cnss.

it is possible that large stretches of conserved sequence in the genome of a common ancestor were fragmented into several shorter cnss  <cit> , resulting in a miscalculation of the number of cnss present today. therefore, we tested the correlation between divergence in gene expression and the sum of bases that form cnss at any given gene. the results are similar to those obtained in the analysis of single-element cnss , suggesting that cnss likely are not fragments of elements that were previously larger.

in conclusion, we observed that an increase in differential gene expression level is negatively correlated with the number of cnss located 5′ upstream, in introns, and in 3′ utrs of the lower-expressed member of the pair.

cnss at similarly and differentially expressed genes have comparable properties
we next analyzed if transcription factor  binding motifs were enriched or depleted in cnss located in promoter regions. for this, we mapped the positions of binding motifs from  <dig> tfs, belonging to  <dig> families, within cnss from cns dataset  <dig> . we found that tf binding motifs of several families were enriched or depleted in cnss present at paralogs in the groups of similar, higher, or differential expression. however, from  <dig> measurements, only two showed statistically significant deviations  . paralogs with higher expression are depleted  of myb tf binding motifs, and similarly expressed paralogs are depleted  of hd-zip tf binding motifs.fig.  <dig> length, gc content, transcription factor binding sites, and effect on mrna half-life are similar for cnss at paralogs. gc content  and length  of cnss from three datasets are compared between paralogs with similar , higher , or lower  expression in promoters, intronic regions, and 3′ utrs. no statistically significant differences were found . error bars are given as s.e.m. c transcription factor binding site enrichment  and depletion  within cnss located in promoter regions is shown. cnss are from cns dataset  <dig>  missing values  indicate complete absence of the transcription factor binding site motif from cnss in the respective paralog group. significant depletion was found for myb binding site motifs in the higher expression group and hd-zip binding site motifs in the similar expression group . d paralogs with no  or at least one  cns in their 3′ utrs show no difference in mrna half-lives . ns = not significant



having identified a negative correlation between paralog expression ratio and 3′ utr cnss, we examined whether 3′ utr cnss  influence mrna stability. for this, we compared the mrna half-life data of paralogous pairs that had one paralog that lacked cnss in the 3′ utr with those of paralogous pairs that had one paralog with one or more 3′ utr cnss . no significant difference in the corresponding mrna half-lives was found  .

we lastly compared the average length and gc content of cnss from all three cns datasets in the promoter regions, introns, and 3′ utrs . for paralogs in the groups of similar, higher, and lower expression, differences in either cns length or gc content were small and not statistically significant .

discussion
the aim of this study was to elucidate if and how the retention of paralogs is connected to gene expression. the results provide evidence for a concurrent purifying selection on coding and noncoding sequences of paralogous genes in a. thaliana.

mutation rates in coding sequences
in our study, we separated two paralogous genes based on their expression strength and measured dn/ds values by comparing each gene with its ortholog in the a. lyrata genome. this allowed us to gauge the evolutionary rate of two paralogous genes individually. we found that the lower-expressed genes have acquired more nonsynonymous mutations. this is supported by the finding that paralogs with more similar expression have lower sequence diversity than do paralogs with differential expression  <cit> . also, lower-expressed paralogs are more likely to be lost in a. lyrata, suggesting that the lost orthologs were under neutral selection. considering all this, the results suggest that the lower-expressed paralogs are under less purifying selection than are the higher- and similarly expressed paralogs.

mutation rates in non-coding sequences
paralogous genes with similar expression strength were found to have similar tissue specificity. genes of differentially expressed pairs, however, had diverged in tissue specificity. higher-expressed genes were broadly expressed, whereas their lower-expressed paralogs were more tissue specific, which is similar to the expression pattern reported for paralogs functioning in stress responses  <cit> . in the gene expression correlation analysis of a. thaliana paralogs and their brassicaceae orthologs, we found that the expression profiles of lower-expressed paralogs were less correlated with those of their brassicaceae orthologs than were those of the higher- and similarly expressed paralogs. this suggests conservation in expression profiles, but not for lower-expressed paralogs, possibly encoded by regulatory dna sequences  <cit> . that these differences were statistically not significant, though observed in two independent datasets and three species, might be due to a limited availability of expression data for the non-model organisms.

we used orthologous cnss as a measure of conservation for the non-coding sequences of paralogous genes. this made it possible to analyze the conservation for each gene of a paralogous pair individually. we found that the lower-expressed genes have fewer cnss in their promoters, introns, and 3′ utrs, compared to their higher-expressed paralogs. thus, we assume that the non-coding sequences of the lower-expressed paralogs have higher mutation rates  <cit> . the ratio of differential expression was negatively correlated with the number of cnss for genes with lower expression, suggesting that paralog expression divergence is linked to losses of cis-regulatory elements residing in cnss.

drivers of paralog retention following the α-wgd event
the retention of duplicated genes following wgd has been explained by several models  <cit> . our analysis has revealed that paralogous genes with differential expression are enriched for functions related to responses to different abiotic and biotic stresses. this finding supports the notion that polyploidy is a means to increase adaptability to changing environmental conditions  <cit> , in agreement with the neo- and subfunctionalization models  <cit> . indeed, we found that the lower-expressed paralogs of differentially expressed pairs were expressed in a more tissue-specific manner, which has been shown to facilitate neofunctionalization  <cit> .

by contrast, the products of paralogous pairs with highly similar expression levels were enriched for proteins that are subunits of ribosomes. paralogous genes of a. thaliana 80s ribosomal proteins have been shown to be retained by purifying selection and haploinsufficiency  <cit> , indicating that our findings support the notion of gene dosage sensitivity. the balanced gene drive model predicts similar transcript dosage  <cit> . accordingly, gene expression profiles must also be similar, and this we found to be the case .

cnss possibly function as promoter and enhancer elements
we showed that cnss are negatively correlated with increasing expression divergence between two paralogs. this effect was most striking for cnss identified among nine brassicaceae species , which was also the most closely related group of organisms analyzed. cnss in promoter regions are enriched for transcription factor binding sites  <cit>  and hence the correlation we observed between cnss and paralog transcript level ratios could be attributed to dna elements promoting transcription. our analysis of tf binding motif enrichment in cnss identified only two cases that were statistically significant. one of these was the depletion of myb binding motifs in higher-expressed paralogs. myb tfs are regulators of processes ranging from primary and secondary metabolism, over cell fate and identity to developmental processes and responses in biotic and abiotic stresses  <cit> , making it difficult to discern the reason for the depletion we found. similarly-expressed paralogs were depleted for hd-zip binding motifs. hd-zip tfs participate in organ development and are involved in responses to environmental conditions  <cit> . this may explain why hd-zip binding motifs are depleted at similarly expressed paralogs, which we found to be enriched for functioning as constituents of ribosomes. notably, the gc content and length of cnss were similar for all paralogs, suggesting that the significant depletion of tf binding motifs is not an artefact of general sequence differences.

in introns, cnss are frequently located in regions flanking exons, suggesting a function in splicing regulation  <cit> , which has been reported to diverge between paralogs in a. thaliana  <cit> . it is more difficult to fathom how the transcript level of a gene is affected by cnss in the 3′ utrs. in the datasets available to us, we did not find evidence that mrna half-lives are influenced by the presence or absence of cnss in the 3′ utrs, which has been reported for paralogous cnss  <cit> . alternatively, elements in the 3′ utrs may act as transcriptional enhancers  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
widely accepted models such as the ‘balanced gene drive’ and ‘neo- and subfunctionalization’ explain the retention of paralogous genes, but it is not known if these models apply to the coding and non-coding sequences of the same genes. our data link these models of paralog retention to gene function, coding and non-coding sequences, and gene-expression profiles. because gene expression profiles are in part established by cis-regulatory elements inside cnss, we propose that similar forces of purifying selection act on coding and non-coding sequences. taken together, our finding that lower-expressed paralogs have fewer cnss and are more tissue specific than are higher- or similarly expressed paralogs suggests that cnss promote or enhance transcription in a broad range of organs or cell types in a. thaliana. this is different from findings in metazoans, where cnss regulate transcription in specific cells  <cit> .

