BACKGROUND
the two most popular hypotheses put forward to account for scleractinian origins are that they are either descendants of late paleozoic rugose corals that survived the mass extinction at the permian/triassic boundary  <cit>  or, that they evolved from soft-bodied  ancestors by gaining the ability to deposit a calcified skeleton  <cit> . difficulties with the former hypothesis include that it requires major changes in both the composition of the skeleton, which was calcite in the case of rugosa, but is aragonite in scleractinia, and the symmetry of septal insertion  <cit> , characters that are otherwise highly conserved. by contrast with rugosa, some permian fossils  appear to have had aragonite skeletons  and may be the immediate ancestors of some triassic scleractinian coral lineages  <cit> . intriguingly, some early paleozoic "scleractiniamorphs"  have patterns of septal insertion that are indistinguishable from that of modern corals  <cit> , suggesting that these could represent the very early scleractinians. however, one objection to this idea has been the long time-gap separating the two groups in the fossil record.

beyond implying that most extant scleractinians fall into two major clades  that are assumed to have diverged in the late carboniferous, ca.  <dig> ma  <cit> , molecular data have so far not added significantly to our understanding of early coral evolution. one reason for this may be that molecular phylogenetics has focused primarily on shallow-water corals, most of which harbor symbiotic dinoflagellates commonly known as zooxanthellae, whereas azooxanthellate, deep-water corals that account for approximately half of extant scleractinian species, have largely been ignored in these analyses  <cit> . the few studies that have included sequences from azooxanthellate scleractinians have led to conflicting interpretations of scleractinian phylogeny. for example, the phylogenetic reconstruction based on mitochondrial  and nuclear  data for  <dig> scleractinian species  suggested that all azooxanthellate, deep-water lineages originated from symbiotic, shallow-water ancestors  <cit> . in contrast, another study based on cox <dig>  <cit>  found that members of the gardineriidae and micrabaciidae families formed a deeply diverging clade that may represent the oldest extant scleractinian lineage and that modern deep-water species diverge at or near the bases of both the robusta and complexa, implying that the evolutionary origin of scleractinians is best sought in deep-water rather than shallow-water  coral species. these contradictory interpretations motivated us to extend phylogenetic analyses of a large and representative range of deep and shallow water corals  beyond cox <dig>  to include data for the mitochondrial 12s and 16s rdnas, and the nuclear 28s rdna, in an attempt to clarify scleractinian origins and relationships. in addition, the ages of the major scleractinian lineages were estimated, and the origins of the order explored. the divergence time estimates generated here bridge the gap with fossils, allowing the integration of the morphologically similar paleozoic "scleractiniamorphs" into scleractinia.

RESULTS
initial phylogenetic analyses were conducted on single gene sequences from a broad range of members of the anthozoan sub-class  to which corals belong. the application of maximum likelihood and bayesian analyses to these datasets provided robust support for monophyly of the scleractinia , whereas paraphyly had been suggested in a previous study  <cit> . moreover, as has recently been reported  <cit> , the most deeply diverging scleractinian lineage was composed of representatives of the families gardineriidae and micrabaciidae, whose members are exclusively solitary and azooxanthellate.

the second, more extensive, phase of phylogenetic analysis was carried out not only to clarify relationships within scleractinia, but also to provide estimates of the timing of major divergences. for this purpose, 16s and 28s rdna sequences were concatenated, but we avoided the creation of chimeric sequences  in these analyses. for the estimation of divergence times, the molecular-clock was calibrated using the oldest mesozoic fossils that can be unequivocally assigned to extant genera/families, caryophyllia for caryophylliidae, flabellum for flabellidae, and palaeopsammia for dendrophylliidae . as can be seen in figure  <dig>  these analyses imply that the basal clade comprising gardineriids and micrabaciids split with the major scleractinian lineage deep in the paleozoic , significantly predating the robusta/complexa divergence, which our analyses place between the silurian and devonian  - more than  <dig> my earlier than previously thought  <cit> . in an attempt to test the accuracy of these divergence times, a second  relaxed molecular-clock analysis was performed on the coral dataset but with the inclusion of data for four homoscleromorph sponges as outgroups . for this analysis, the same parameters were used, including the same calibration points, but forcing the root node - homoscleromorpha/eumetazoa split - to ca.  <dig> my . including the sponge data did not significantly affect the divergence time estimates for the main scleractinian nodes , indicating that these estimates are relatively robust, but did affect the estimate of the corallimorpharia/scleractinia divergence, placing it more than 50% deeper than previously estimated.

the discrepancy between the complexa/robusta divergence age estimated herein and those from previous studies may be due to a wider taxon sampling in the present study, and the quality  <cit>  or absence of fossil calibration in the case of previous estimates  <cit> . for example, the first estimate of the timing of divergence between complexa/robusta  <cit>  was based on comparison of 16s rdna sequence divergence with that in orders of holometabolous insects, making no allowance for the possibility of different rates of evolution. additionally, recent divergence time analysis of the holometabola origin is placed in the early carboniferous , significantly older than in previous reconstructions  <cit> .

the divergence of unambiguous scleractinians  deep in the paleozoic removes the temporal disconnect between scleractinia and "scleractiniamorphs", the only substantial basis on which the two groups were previously distinguished. the known paleozoic "scleractiniamorphs" were solitary or quasi-colonial , which, under the evolutionary scenario outlined below, is consistent with the idea that the ancestral scleractinian was solitary and azooxanthellate. based on the clear similarity between "scleractiniamorph" skeletons and extant scleractinians, we consider that the paleozoic "scleractiniamorphs"  <cit>  should be reclassified as genuine scleractinians. moreover, other  hexacorallian fossils have been reported from as far back as the cambrian  <cit> , and the results presented here lend support to the idea that these might represent evolutionary precursors of the scleractinia  <cit> . there are several possible explanations for the discontinuity of the paleozoic record for scleractinia. paleozoic sediments containing corals may simply not yet have been found or are not preserved in the geological record. the only known lower paleozoic scleractinian  was recovered because shallow-water fossil-bearing deposits were transported to greater depth as the result of landslides  <cit> . this indicates that the currently known paleozoic record might not be representative of the true diversity of the group at that time. alternatively, skeletal formation in these early corals might have been an ephemeral trait  <cit> , or skeleton-forming coral lineages went extinct. the same interpretative challenges apply to the evolutionary history of micrabaciids: their sudden appearance in the fossil record  and lack of reliable ancestors among earlier scleractinian fauna suggest their emergence via skeletonization from an ancient "micrabaciid-gardineriid" skeleton-less hexacoral lineage, or points to huge gaps in the fossil record of deep-water scleractinians. another important implication of the present analyses and those from the earlier cox <dig> analysis  <cit>  is that modern shallow-water corals most likely had multiple independent origins from deep-water  ancestors , providing an explanation for the sudden appearance of the morphologically diverse middle triassic coral fauna.

like their extant relatives, at least some triassic scleractinia hosted dinoflagellate symbionts - such associations conceivably evolved as a consequence of widespread oligotrophic conditions  <cit> . the explosive diversification of scleractinians in the middle triassic  coincides with a massive radiation of dinoflagellates  <cit> , the former presumably being facilitated by the establishment of symbiosis.

in terms of skeleton composition, septal insertion and overall anatomy , micrabaciids and gardineriids are typical scleractinians  <cit> , but these two families have unique features that distinguish them from each other and from all other extant scleractinia  <cit> . whilst shared morphological traits could reflect convergence, at least at a superficial level, the quite different gross skeletal architectures of gardineriids and micrabaciids are each strikingly reminiscent of more ancient coral and coral-like fossils. in gardineriids, the epithecal wall is the only wall of the corallum, which is an unusual feature among modern corals, but was prevalent among early triassic scleractinians  <cit> ; for example, margarophyllia  or protoheterastraea  <cit>  from  <dig> ma bear a striking resemblance to gardineria. on the other hand, micrabaciids share a unique characteristic  with kilbuchophyllid "scleractiniamorphs"  but, whereas the later had well-developed epithecal walls, this is not true for micrabaciids. despite the basal position of the micrabaciid-gardineriid clade in scleractinian phylogeny, the first appearance of the micrabaciids in the fossil record is in the cretaceous   <cit> . there are currently no earlier triassic or jurassic corals sharing septal organization and microstructural features with micrabaciids, so the ancestry of this family is again unclear  <cit> . the late appearance of micrabaciids in the fossil record is generally consistent with late  divergence of micrabaciid and gardineriid lineages suggested by molecular phylogeny , but the lack of early mesozoic micrabaciid-like fossils is puzzling.

CONCLUSIONS
the analyses presented here support scleractinian monophyly and place the evolutionary origin of the order deep in the paleozoic, both of which are consistent with an independent origin from a soft-bodied ancestor but inconsistent with the rugosan ancestry hypothesis  <cit> . although skeletal evidence is still lacking, the molecular data presented here bridge the gap in the fossil record between the ordovician and mesozoic scleractinia. although our results are robust and largely consistent with molecular-clock based analyses of other groups  <cit> , the molecular markers used here may not be optimal for addressing deep-divergence events and should be verified using a range of additional markers.

the early origin of scleractinia implied by our results has important implications for the debate about the fate of corals in times of global climate change, since they imply that the scleractinian lineage has persisted through several episodes of dramatic climate change during the last  <dig> my. whilst on evolutionary time scales the scleractinia may be less vulnerable than is sometimes assumed, the short-term survival of coral reefs as we know them is far less assured.

