BACKGROUND
snakes are a large group of reptiles with a broad range of morphological features, of which many are evolutionarily selected by their habitats. snakes have conventionally been divided into two groups. the fossorial scolecophidians  are small snakes with a small gape size that feed on small prey on a frequent basis. the second major group, the alethinophidians  are more ecologically diverse and most species feed on relatively large prey on an infrequent basis. true snakes are further split into the henophidia and the caenophidia. the caenophidians, which are also called advanced snakes, include the aquatic genus acrochordus and the colubroidea. the colubroidea is subdivided into the families atractaspididae, elapidae, viperidae, and colubridae. a small colubrid subfamily, homalopsinae, was first attributed familial rank by günther in  <dig> <cit> , and was recognized as subfamily in the 20th century by most researchers until it was reassigned familial status in recent years  <cit> .

recent phylogenetic analyses, based primarily on molecular analyses of a few mitochondrial or nuclear genes failed to reach a consensus in several aspects  <cit> . for instance, the composition of the family colubridae, the putative paraphyly and the hierarchical structuring into subfamilies remain contentious issues. the mitochondrial genome has several advantages for phylogenetic studies  <cit> , and has been widely used in constructing animal phylogeny including snakes  <cit> .

previous studies of snake mitochondrial genomes have demonstrated that duplication of the control region and translocation of trnl are two visible features of the alethinophidian mtdnas  <cit> . moreover, translocation and pseudogenization of trnp have been found in some caenophidian snakes  <cit> . the texas threadsnake  possesses a different gene arrangement and loses its origin of light strand replication   <cit> . in the present study, we determined complete mitochondrial dna sequences from four snake families. the sequence information allowed the gene organizations, mitochondrial genome evolution, and phylogenetic relationships among these major snake families to be identified.

RESULTS
characteristics of the snake mitochondrial genomes
the general characteristics of four snake  mitochondrial genomes are summarized in table  <dig>  these complete mt genomes range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  bps in size. length differences are largely due to the variation in lengths and/or numbers of the control region. in three of the four genomes , two control regions are found in the positions identical to those in other alethinophidian taxa mtdnas. mtdna sequence for ramphotyphlops braminus is considerably smaller due to the absence of the control region duplication. all the genomes contain  <dig> protein-coding genes,  <dig> rrnas genes, and  <dig> trnas genes. the base compositions in these mtdnas are skewed similarly to other vertebrate mtdnas  <cit> , with more a-t base pairs than g-c base pairs and greater a+c content in the gene-rich strand than in the gene-poor strand.

family
by comparing the gene arrangements in  <dig> known snake mitochondrial genomes, six types of gene organization were summarized and shown in figure  <dig>  type i and ii represent gene organizations of two scoleophidian snakes. they both have similar organization to that of typical vertebrate except the absence of an identifiable origin of light strand replication  in the scolecophidian mtdnas. moreover, in the mitochondrial genomeof leptotyphlops dulcis , trnq was translocated from the iqm trna gene cluster to the wancycluster , giving rise to the im plus wqancyorganizations  <cit> . the common features of the remaining four arrangements  are the duplication of the control region and translocation of trnl, which have been noted in previous studies  <cit> . six alethinophidian snakes from six families shared type iii, and type iv represented an arrangement shared between colubridae and homalopsidae. in these two types, the functional trnp is located next to cri , with or without a pseudogene  close to cr ii . in several previous studies, the viperid snakes appear to have another gene rearrangement in which a functional trnp moved from the end of cr i to that of cr ii  <cit> . in this study, the positional switch of trnp is found for another viperid taxon deinagkistrodon acutus, and is not found for the nonviperid snakes . gene arrangements in viperids can be summarize as type v and vi, with only a difference in the pseudogene .

phylogenetic analyses
the results of the phylogenetic reconstructions are displayed in figure  <dig>  our phylogenetic estimates strongly support ramphotyphlops braminus being the sister lineage to all remaining species sampled, and that the scolecophidian snakes do not form a monophyletic grouping. all of the analyses were congruent in receiving the monophyly of alethinophidia . within this monophyletic clade, henophidia and caenophidia were clustered as monophyletic sister groups . our estimates of relationships among the henophidians are similar to that of dong and kumazawa  <cit>  in the rejection of the traditional expectations of a sister-group relationship between boids and pythonids  and the deep divergence of non-macrostomatan cylindrophiids . consistent with recent molecular phylogenies of caenophidian snakes  <cit> , we find support for the viperidae as the deepest diverging lineage within the colubroidea, sister to a clade containing colubrids, elapids, and homalopsids. the position of enhydris plumbea outside of the  cluster seems strongly supported by all phylogenetic methods . traditional placement of enhydris plumbea within colubridae based on morphology was not retrieved by our analyses. node d, corresponding to the position of acrochordus granulatus, is the only one not reconstructed in all tree-building methods. in bayesian and ml tree based on nucleotide data set and bayesian tree on amino acid data set, the placement of acrochordidae to the sister group to colubroidea was well supported.

to further substantiate the above premises, we performed the sh statistical test  <cit>  on both amino acid and nucleotide data sets that allows comparison of alternative phylogenetic hypotheses. results of the sh test strongly rejected the placement of enhydris plumbea within the colubrids cluster . the monophyly of scolecophidian snakes was not rejected using both amino acid and nucleotide acid data sets .

discussion
evolution of snake mitochondrial genomes
based on the phylogenetic relationships among the tested snakes and the comparisons of their gene organizations , we estimated the processes of evolutionary events occurred in snake mitochondrial genomes. in early snake lineages , gene arrangements are similar to that of typical vertebrate, but ol was lost within the wancytrna gene cluster. incompatible with the commonly accepted view on monophyly of scolecophidian snakes  <cit> , our phylogenetic estimates strongly supports ramphotyphlops braminus being the sister lineage to all remaining species sampled. given that the monophyly of scolecophidian snakes was not rejected in sh statistical test, loss of ol may occur in two different scenarios, independently  or descend from a common ancestry . after the divergence of the ramphotyphlops lineage, changes involving the iqm cluster took place. first in type ii, trnq underwent a long distance translocation  from one gene cluster to another . subsequently, in the early alethinophidian lineage, the control region was duplicated and trnl relocated to the iqm cluster, giving rise to type iii which is present in most alethinophidian snakes . new types emerged during the split in caenophidia. type iv is found in two branches, dinodon semicarinatus, pantherophis slowinskii , and enhydris plumbea , and characteristic changes  likely appeared ahead of node f, which then disappeared in elapidae. it is also conceivable that the present of p* was resulted from independent evolution in colubridae and homalopsidae. distinct arrangements  were found in viperids, suggesting that trnp was translocated in early stage of the viperid radiations  <cit> . type vi, with no pseudogenes close to cri, was found in two paraphyletic taxa, suggesting that p* could have been independently eliminated.

familial rank of homalopsidae
the homalopsinae have been generally recognized as a valid monophyletic clade within the colubridae  <cit>  and assigned a subfamilial rank, despite they being assigned familial  <cit>  or tribal  <cit>  status historically. recent molecular studies placed the homalopsinae as the sister group to most other members of the colubroidea  <cit> , and a familial status has been reassigned accordingly  <cit> .

in this study, the placement of enhydris plumbea, a representative of the homalopsidae, as the sister lineage to the colubridae + elapidae clade was strongly supported by all phylogenetic methods. moreover, sh test strongly rejected the hypothesis that enhydris plumbea falls within the colubrids cluster . the familial rank of homalopsidae is therefore considered well-supported. our work for the first time establishes the monophyly and distinctiveness of this family with phylogenetic evidence derived from complete mitochondrial genome sequences.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, six types of mitochondrial gene arrangement in snakes are summarized. two notable features of the alethinophidian mtdna, duplication of the cr and translocation of trnl, are presented. the gene arrangement in ramphotyphlops braminus mtdna is indentical to that found in typical vertebrates, suggesting an ancestral arrangement. the well supported phylogenetic topology helps to reconstruct the evolution of mitochondrial gene arrangements in snakes. we propose that, after the divergence of the early ramphotyphlops lineage, three types of changes involving the iqm gene cluster occurred. these include the translocation of trnq in the early leptotyphlops lineage, the duplication of cr and translocation of trnl in the early alethinophidian lineage, and the translocation of trnp in the early viperid lineage. all phylogenetic methods support the placement of enhydris plumbea outside of the  cluster, providing mitochondrial genomic evidence for the familial rank of homalopsidae. the monophyly of scolecophidia is not rejected in our study. however, a more comprehensive sampling of snake mitochondrial genomes is necessary to further refine the phylogenetic relationships among major groups of snakes.

