BACKGROUND
micrornas  are short rnas of 19– <dig> base pairs in length. in the latest release of mirbase , a sequence database of mirna hosted by the sanger institute  <cit> , there are  <dig> identified and known mirnas in human,  <dig> in mouse and  <dig> in rat. most of the well-defined mirnas are highly conserved across species, suggesting their importance in cellular regulation. these small rnas are processed from precursor molecules that are either transcribed as ordinary genes  or generated as by-products from splicing. the maturation takes place in the cytoplasm when the mirnas are assembled into mirna-ribonuclear protein complexes, which in turn selectively bind to a target mrna and modulate its translatability. at least five possible mechanisms for this mirna-dependent regulation of translation have been suggested  <cit> . if the sequences of the mirna and the target mrna are a perfect match it will i) trigger endonucleic cleavage. if the sequences are an imperfect match the mirna will instead ii) inhibit translation by promoting deadenylation of the poly tail, or iii) promote degradation of the nascent peptide, or iv) repress the assembly of ribosomal complex for translation initiation, or v) reduce the speed of the elongation process. independently of their mechanisms of action, they play a role in gene regulation by negatively affecting mrna expression and translation.

some mirnas are ubiquitous, such as let-7b and mir- <dig>  <cit> , while others are highly tissue specific. mir-1a is heart-specific and mir-124a is exclusively found in nervous tissues such as brain and spinal cord  <cit> . mir-122a is abundant in liver, where it contributes with 70% of the total pool of hepatic mirna. studies have shown that mir-122a is a regulator of hepatic lipid metabolism, since inhibition of this mirna lowers the serum cholesterol levels in normal mice and mice with diet-induced obesity. at the cellular level, mir-122a increases hepatic fatty acid oxidation and decreases lipogenesis  <cit> . although the molecular mechanisms behind these effects are still unclear, these findings have paved the way for a new concept within the field of metabolic research.

the liver is a major metabolic organ, handling the metabolism of exogenous and endogenous compounds. we and others have shown that male and female rat livers differ regarding gene expression and metabolism  <cit> . we have previously shown that genes involved in hepatic lipid metabolism are regulated by sex and hormones  <cit>  as well as nutrient availability  <cit> . based on microarray-generated hepatic transcript profiles, approximately 30% of the sex-differentiated hepatic gene products were shown to be under the control of growth hormone   <cit> , and others have shown that the sex-different secretory pattern of gh in rats are mediating at least some of these effects  <cit> . nothing is known about sex-differences in mirna levels or if they vary depending on hormonal or nutritional status. in this study, we tested the possibility that mir-122a or other mirnas from rat liver are expressed differently between males and females and if they are regulated by gh or starvation.

RESULTS
sex-differences in hepatic mirna profiles
initially, we screened for mirnas with a sex-different expression using microarray analysis. we generated hepatic mirna profiles from normal male and female rats. out of  <dig> unique probes on the array,  <dig>  were expressed in the liver and eight  of those were found to be different between the sexes . among the sex-different mirnas listed in the table, only mir- <dig>  mir-29b and mir-122a have been shown to be expressed in liver before  <cit> , implying that the other five might be "new" hepatic mirnas. however, mir- <dig>  mir-148a and mir- <dig> have recently been detected in liver by a high-throughput sequencing approach .

the table was generated from a comparison of mirna expression in livers from male and female rats, using microarrays . mirnas showing at least  <dig>  fold sex-differences in expression levels, with a q-value  less than 10%, were considered to be significantly sex-different. the data is presented as the ratio between female and male expression levels. a p-value is included comparing the overall ratio to a value of  <dig> , using student's t-test.

to validate our findings, mirnas from table  <dig> were validated using quantitative real-time pcr . mir-526c were not examined since there was no appropriate validation assay available. furthermore, the most commonly used reference mirna, u6b, is not well characterized in rat. using assays designed for human u6b quantification, we failed to detect it in our rat samples. 5s rrna was instead used as reference rna, since it is of similar size as mirnas. similar levels of 5s rrna were observed in male and female liver . based on qrt-pcr analysis, the expression of mir- <dig>  mir-148a, mir- <dig>  mir- <dig> and mir-193a were not different between the sexes and therefore contrasted the microarray results. high individual differences in mir-122a levels were observed in both males and females, and although the level of mir-122a seemed to be higher in females, this difference did not reach significance . however, mir-29b levels were significantly higher  in females as compared to males.

hormonal and nutritional regulation of hepatic mirna
gh is one of the hormones that has been shown to regulate many male or female-predominant gene products in rat liver  <cit>  and, due to its sex-different secretory pattern, to mediate sex-different activation of transcription factors of importance for this. to address the question whether the sex-different hepatic mirnas could be regulated by gh, we determined their expression levels in male rats treated for one week with continuous infusion of gh through osmotic minipumps. this treatment has previously been shown to partly "feminize" hepatic gene expression  <cit> . mir- <dig> was significantly down-regulated  by gh , whereas mir-122a expression was unaffected by this treatment . high individual differences in mir-122a were again observed within the groups. interestingly, mir-29b was drastically down-regulated by gh  , gh-treatment did not affect the levels of 5s rrna level , suggesting a specific inhibitory effect of gh on mir- <dig> and mir-29b and putative roles for these mirnas in the regulation of gh-dependent gene products.

we have previously compared gene expression levels from rat livers during mild starvation  and the postabsorptive state   <cit> . the notion that sex-dependent and gh-regulated transcripts were differentially expressed between these metabolic states, we next addressed the question whether mirna levels would also be affected. as illustrated in figure  <dig>  the level of mir- <dig> was significantly up-regulated in males  and females  after mild starvation, without any sex-differences . females had a significantly higher level  of mir-122a expression in the postabsorptive state, whereas mild starvation up-regulated mir-122a in both sexes and diminished this sex-difference  . similar results were obtained for mir-29b, with increased levels in both males  and females  . the level of 5s rrna was also increased by mild starvation, but without statistical significance . we conclude that mild starvation up-regulated the levels of mir- <dig>  mir-122a and mir-29b significantly in both sexes, when compared to the postabsorptive state.

discussion
in this study, a mirna screening was performed to identify sex-dependent mirnas in rat liver. among eight putative sex-different mirnas, at least one female-predominant mirna  could be confirmed using qrt-pcr. in contrast, the candidates for male-predominant mirna could not be confirmed. in order not to miss any putative sex-dependent mirna, a relatively high false discovery rate  and low cut-off  regarding differences between male and female expression levels were used. moreover, the chemistry for detection by microarray and qrt-pcr are different. these might explain the inconsistent results between microarray and qrt-pcr, and stresses the importance of validating results obtained in this type of screening experiments.

mir-122a might be another female-predominant mirna in rat liver, since significantly higher  levels were observed in females than in males in the postabsorptive state. we observed smaller individual differences in mir-122a levels in these animals compared to animals with free access to food, which could be related to smaller individual differences in their metabolic states. this together with reports on multiple transcript variants of mir- <dig>  <cit>  might explain the variation in mir-122a levels in livers from rats without food restriction. sequence differences between these variants might be too small for qrt-pcr to discern.

the female-predominant expression of mir-29b and mir-122a observed in this study might be of importance for metabolic control, since these mirnas were shown to be increased during mild starvation, a condition when the liver switches from anabolic to catabolic pathways. in an as yet unpublished study, we have observed that these mildly starved rats have lower hepatic glycogen content and higher rates of lipid turnover, as compared to the postabsorptive rats. responses to mild starvation were also observed at the level of hepatic gene expression . however, since most transcript levels were independent of food deprivation, we do not believe that the data presented in figure  <dig> is a general effect of starvation on gene expression. increased levels of e.g. mir-29b and mir-122a during starvation might reduce the translatability of key proteins for anabolic processes within the liver.

among the mirnas subjected to qrt-pcr, mir-29b was shown to be female-predominant and down-regulated in males given gh treatment. continuous infusion of gh to male rats has previously been shown to mimic the female-specific endogenous secretion of gh and to partly "feminize" hepatic gene expression in rodents  <cit> . obviously, mir-29b is not a transcript that is female-predominant due to the female-specific pattern of gh. interestingly, there are also examples of male-predominant gene products that are induced in male livers upon gh treatment. those transcripts include spot <dig>  fatty acid synthase and stearoyl-coa desaturase  <dig>  <cit> , which are all involved in de novo lipid synthesis. this is in line with the observation that gh-treated male rats have higher hepatic triglyceride content  <cit> .

to address the question of a putative biological significance of sex-different hepatic mirnas, we searched for mirna targets using the online databases pictar  <cit>  and targetscan  <cit> . we found that the number of potential targets for different mirnas differed greatly depending on the database . mir- <dig> had only one predicted target in common between the databases, whereas mir-148a, mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> had  <dig> to  <dig> putative target genes. comparing these lists of putative mirna targets for mir29b or mir-122a towards transcript profiles generated in our lab comparing gene expression in male and female rat livers, no transcripts were in common. based on a mirna silencing study of mir- <dig> in mice, the inconsistency between in silico prediction analysis and in vivo data on mirna targets is large  <cit> . this discrepancy between database-generated results and those obtained in biological experiments might be explained by the prediction algorithms used. the algorithms of the two selected databases are based on sequence similarities, so-called seed complementary. hofacker argues that a thermodynamics-based prediction is a more reliable method than seed complementary to predict mirna targets  <cit> . nevertheless, in vivo studies should always be performed to validate any predicted functions and actions of mirna.

combining in silico and in vivo studies, he et al identified a potential mir- <dig> target, insulin-induced gene  <dig>   <cit> . insig <dig> is an endoreticulum-bound protein which inhibits the binding of srebp to srebp cleavage-activating protein . in the absence of sterols, scap binds to srebps and mediates their transport from the endoreticulum  to golgi, where srebps are cleaved into their nuclear active form to induce lipid biosynthesis. insig <dig> binds to the sterol sensing domain of scap thus inhibiting its binding to srebps  <cit> . we have previously noticed that insig <dig> mrna  <cit> , insig <dig> protein, as well as srebp- <dig> activation  is highly up-regulated by continuous gh-treatment in male rat livers. since the main mechanism whereby mirnas affect protein translatability is to inactivate/degrade the target mrna, a lower level of mir-29b in response to gh might increase the amount of active/complete insig <dig> mrna. further experiments are required to address this.

CONCLUSIONS
we have previously shown that hepatic transcript profiles are different between males and females; that some of these differences are under the regulation of gh; and that mild starvation diminishes some of the differences. in this study, we show that hepatic mirnas are regulated in a similar manner.

