BACKGROUND
crop yield, which generally is the main objective of breeding programs, has been improved essentially by phenotypic selection, owing to inability of marker development to ensure sufficient genome coverage for this complex trait. this holds true also for alfalfa , which is the most grown perennial forage legume globally  <cit>  with potential interest also as a dual-purpose crop for bioenergy and protein feed  <cit> . yield breeding progress for this crop has been particularly slow compared with other major field crops, owing to low breeding investment, long selection cycles, high material evaluation cost, impossibility to capitalize on harvest index, low narrow-sense heritability  partly due to a large component of non-additive genetic variance, outbreeding mating system associated with severe inbreeding depression, and high genotype-environment interaction  <cit> . published estimates of hn <dig> for alfalfa biomass yield ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , including the value of  <dig>  observed for one set of italian alfalfa genotypes that was also used for the current study  <cit> . such low hn <dig> values, and the long and expensive selection cycles, emphasize the practical importance of exploring selection procedures for higher biomass yield that use marker information as a partial substitute for field-based selection  <cit> .

early research work aimed to identify molecular markers strongly linked to quantitative trait loci  for alfalfa forage yield could rely on about 150– <dig> rflp, aflp, ssr or rapd markers . of necessity with so few markers, qtl discovery focused on a limited genetic base represented by f <dig> progenies of a bi-parental population, which, along with the expected absence of individual markers with high yield effect, limited the practicality of a marker-assisted selection program. the availability of large numbers of snp which could be turned into markers  <cit>  has enhanced the opportunities for marker-assisted selection, allowing for exploring wider genetic bases through association mapping  <cit> . the development of an alfalfa illumina infinium snp array containing about  <dig>  snp markers has provided a high-throughput platform  <cit> . such high marker number may also allow for sufficient genome saturation for genomic selection, by which phenotyping and genotyping data of a genotype sample representing a target genetic base  are combined into a model that estimates breeding values for future plant selection  <cit> . simulation and empirical studies proved that genomic selection is superior to conventional marker-assisted selection based on limited marker numbers in prediction of breeding values for complex polygenic traits, such as crop yield  <cit> .

the recent development of methods to genotype directly from sequence data, such as genotyping-by-sequencing   <cit> , can decrease the cost of marker-based selection for production traits compared to snp array platforms. a gbs-based high-density linkage map for tetraploid alfalfa including over  <dig> snp markers has been constructed  <cit> . however, gbs commonly generates large amounts of missing data that must be imputed before fitting a genomic prediction model. imputation method  <cit>  and the genomic selection model  <cit>  may influence prediction accuracy, i.e., the correlation between predicted and true breeding values.

genomic prediction accuracy and narrow-sense heritability of the yield trait are crucial genetic parameters for the comparison of selection strategies in terms of expected yield gain, for the popular scheme of parent selection based on half-sib progeny responses  <cit> . genomic selection models with accuracies as high as  <dig>  for cross-validation within a given location and cycle and  <dig>  for predicting genotype yields in a following cycle were obtained for parent material phenotyped and selected as individual cloned plant  <cit> . however, the ideal phenotypic data on which to base a genomic selection model for perennial forage crops would be sward plot yield of half-sib progenies rather than cloned space-planted parents, to closely represent actual production environments and to focus on additive genetic variance, the relevant variance for synthetic variety breeding  <cit> . thus, successful application of genomic prediction models to a half-sib breeding program would provide better evidence that gs could accelerate yield gain in alfalfa. also, understanding how well genomic selection models can predict yield in germplasm/reference populations other than those for which they were defined would help clarify the cost of incorporating gs models into a breeding program  <cit> .

this study provides an unprecedented, thorough assessment of the potential value of genomic selection for assessing alfalfa parent breeding values for biomass yield based on gbs data. results are provided for two reference populations that represent quite distinct genetic bases, namely, one assembled from elite landrace and variety germplasm adapted to the sub-continental climate conditions of northern italy  <cit> , and the other constituted by repeated intercrossing of genotypes from three populations that were top-performing across mediterranean-climate environments of the western mediterranean basin  <cit> . these populations differed also for conditions of biomass yield phenotyping. genomic selection models for parent selection were constructed from phenotypic data of their dense-planted half-sib progenies, assessing their selection accuracy for different snp calling procedures, strategies and algorithms for missing data imputation, and prediction models. in addition, we performed a genome-wide association analysis for a subset of m. truncatula-aligned snp markers, and verified the cross-population accuracy of the genomic selection models.

RESULTS
phenotypic variation
half-sib progenies differed for total dry matter  yield in both populations . best linear unbiased predictors  values ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  t/ha for the  <dig> progenies of parent genotypes from the reference population pv originated in the po valley, and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  t/ha for the  <dig> progenies of parent material from the population me adapted to mediterranean-climate environments. the difference in yield levels between populations reflected the different duration of their respective phenotyping experiments . in both populations, the distribution of parent breeding values  visually approached the expected normal distribution .

gbs data
the total number of polymorphic snps without regard to the amount of missing data after applying read-depth filtering amounted to  <dig>  for pv and  <dig>  for me. obviously, increasingly stricter thresholds for the number of genotypes with missing data resulted in progressively fewer snps available for genomic selection . snp number, however, remained relatively high even at a fairly stringent missing data thresholds, e.g., over  <dig>  for the population me and  <dig> for pv at the  <dig>  threshold. in general, marker counts for population pv were lower than those for me, probably reflecting the more selective adapter used for gbs library construction of this population. marker counts for each population were very similar between separate and joint snp calling, with just a slight advantage in marker number for separate snp calling in the me population .fig.  <dig> number of snp markers for different genotype missing data thresholds and snp calling strategies. results for  <dig> genotypes of the po valley population  and  <dig> genotypes of the mediterranean population  subjected to separate snp calling , or joint snp calling with subsequent application of missing data thresholds to separate populations  or joint populations 



population structure
in both populations, the substantially flat response of the log likelihood values of posterior probability for increasing numbers of possible sub-populations indicated the absence of population structure . this result was confirmed by results of evanno’s criterion, as well as by the lack of genotype groups with consistently greater genetic similarity in the kinship matrix analysis . these findings supported the omission of a parameter for population structure in genomic selection models of both populations.fig.  <dig> structure analysis of sub-populations. log likelihood values of posterior probability as a function of the number of sub-populations, separately for the po valley  and the mediterranean  populations



snp calling procedures and imputation method in genomic selection models
snp calling for pv and me was envisaged either separately , or jointly followed by application of missing data thresholds to separate populations . snp calling procedures were assessed with reference to support vector regression with linear kernel  and ridge regression blup, since these models displayed higher predictive accuracies than other genomic selection models in following analyses. prediction accuracy values were obtained for the two data sets and a combination of four imputation methods, namely, mean imputation , singular value decomposition imputation , random forest imputation  and localized haplotype clustering imputation . the results highlighted the merit of rfi for both data sets, both using svr-lin  and ridge regression blup . this method performed slightly better than, or comparably to, any other method, with the exception of the data set pv_sep for the missing data thresholds  <dig>  and  <dig>  . as expected, the differences in accuracy between imputation algorithms increased with relaxed thresholds for missing genotype data  .fig.  <dig> prediction accuracy for different genotype missing data imputation methods, snp calling strategies and missing data thresholds. results for four imputation methods  applied to po valley  and mediterranean  data sets subjected to separate snp calling  or joint snp calling , using support vector regression with linear kernel



results in fig.  <dig> also revealed the trend towards greater accuracy of data sets of the two populations that underwent joint snp calling , compared with data sets subjected to separate snp calling . averaged across the six missing data thresholds and rfi, the accuracy gain obtained by joint snp calling was  <dig>  and  <dig>  % for pv and me populations, respectively.

in general, the prediction accuracy of parent breeding values was higher for me germplasm than pv material. with reference to the preferable configuration of joint snp calling and rfi using the svr-lin model, the accuracy response as a function of genotype missing data thresholds was roughly flat for the me population , while showing a peak of  <dig>  accuracy at  <dig>  missing data for pv germplasm . such top-performing genomic selection models included at least  <dig>  snp markers . the list of detected snps and their identifying flanking sequences are provided in  and .

comparison of genomic selection models
support vector regression using linear and gaussian kernel, ridge regression blup, random forest regression and three bayesian models, namely, bayes a, bayes b and bayesian lasso, were compared in terms of predictive accuracy for the preferable configuration of joint snp calling and rfi. we found only limited differences between methods on me germplasm , where only random forest regression stood out as the worst-performing candidate. on pv germplasm, however, support vector models outperformed all other models, with a constant advantage of about  <dig> – <dig>  on the third best-performing model. in general, the two support vector kernels performed comparably and with no clear discernible trend in accuracy. however, svr-lin resulted in shorter computation times.fig.  <dig> prediction accuracy of four genomic selection models at different genotype missing data thresholds. results for support vector regression with linear  and gaussian  kernel, random forest regression , ridge regression blup , bayes a, bayes b and bayesian lasso models applied to po valley  and mediterranean  data sets subjected to joint snp 



among bayesian methods, bayesian lasso tended towards greater accuracy than bayes a and b for pv material, whereas the three methods performed comparably for me germplasm . on average, ridge regression blup slightly outperformed bayesian methods, a trend confirmed also in data sets that underwent separate snp calling  .

genomic selection: cross-population predictions
this assessment was carried out using the common data set, which included only the snps that satisfied filtering criteria simultaneously for pv_joint and me_joint data sets. this data set exhibited relatively small snp numbers , which averaged 37 % of those featuring the smaller of the joint data sets  across genotype missing data thresholds.

the accuracies of cross-population predictions by svr-lin and ridge regression blup models were compared with intra-population predictions by the same models, using same markers . fig.  <dig> also includes, as a reference, intra-population prediction accuracies based on all available markers . the advantage of using the complete marker data set was high for pv germplasm and only marginal for the me one, especially considering the much higher number of snps available.fig.  <dig> accuracy of genomic selection for intra-population and cross-population prediction strategies at different genotype missing data thresholds. intra-population prediction using all markers subjected to joint snp calling  or only markers satisfying the common filtering criteria , and cross-population predictions using the common data set, for po valley  and mediterranean  populations, using support vector regression with linear kernel or ridge regression blup 



in both populations, cross-population prediction accuracies were definitely lower than intra-population ones based on same markers . however, the relative disadvantage of cross-population prediction decreased for more relaxed thresholds of genotype missing data and reached a minimum at 50 % missing data, where the relative loss of accuracy was comparable for both models. this loss amounted to about  <dig> and 25 % for pv and me germplasm, respectively, using svr-lin, and  <dig> and 25 % for pv and me germplasm, respectively, using ridge regression blup.

genome-wide association analysis
we selected for m. truncatula alignment the snp markers of pv_joint and me_joint data sets that tended to maximize intra-population prediction accuracy, namely, those of 50 % missing data threshold for pv and 30 % threshold for me . non-aligned markers  were  <dig>  % for pv and  <dig>  % for me populations. the aligned markers were  <dig> for pv and  <dig> for me populations, resulting in an average physical distance between snps of  <dig> kbp for pv and  <dig>  kbp for me.

as expected for a complex traits such as crop yield, we found a high number of snps that tended towards a modest association with the trait . the simultaneous inspection of the manhattan plots for the two populations suggested some consistency of genome areas hosting putative qtls, such as those around the end of the chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  or an area in the last third of chromosome  <dig> .fig.  <dig> association  of m. truncatula-aligned snp markers with total dry matter yield. results for po valley  and mediterranean  populations



discussion
the phenotyping of pv material, which extended over 3 years, was consistent with the actual alfalfa cycle duration in northern italy. parent breeding values based on 3-year dm yield were the result of intrinsic yielding ability as expressed by short-term dm yield, and persistence. the latter trait may depend on the plant’s ability to accumulate assimilates in the root for further regrowth under moisture-favorable conditions and to survive across stress periods by various physiological mechanisms under unfavorable conditions  <cit> . both components of persistence were likely to be relevant under the moderate-drought stress phenotyping conditions that featured pv material. hence, pv parent breeding value was based on a more complex and partly different dm yield trait relative to me parent breeding value, which reflected only intrinsic yielding ability as revealed in the short term. the somewhat lower prediction accuracy observed for biomass yield of pv material relative to me germplasm  can be the result of greater complexity of its yield trait , smaller genotype sample or lower number of snps that were available for this population.

snp marker number made available by gbs in these data sets was in the range of 7000- <dig>  for reasonably low rates of missing data. these values compare favorably with an earlier assessment of gbs in alfalfa  <cit> , while approaching the snp numbers obtainable by illumina infinium snp array  <cit> . compared with gbs, infinium array has a higher cost per data point but also necessarily expensive genotyping experiments, owing to its need for large numbers of samples to be analyzed simultaneously. our gbs-generated marker numbers might roughly suffice for genome exploration of broadly-based alfalfa populations, considering that at least  <dig> snp markers were estimated as necessary for a narrow-based population  <cit> . however, suboptimal snp numbers might occur when attempting cross-population predictions, as we observed with the common data set.

on average, the original gbs protocol by  <cit>  as applied to me material resulted in greater snp number than the modified protocol applied to pv germplasm. without ruling out the effect of genetic differences between populations, this result suggests that greater amplification of fewer target sites was not a useful strategy to limit the amount of missing data resulting from insufficient read depth. in contrast, this strategy showed some merit for soybean  <cit> . the consistent use of the same restriction enzyme limited the occurrence of distinct snp markers for the two data sets. indeed, the joint snp calling in the two sets produced a sizable increase of genomic prediction accuracy, suggesting some advantage of the pooled information from the two data sets to improve the snp calling quality for each data set. joint snp calling is operationally necessary to ensure the same snp naming across different data sets in alfalfa and other crops that lack a stable reference genome and a public repository of unique snp identifiers. the different gbs protocol, and genetic differences between populations, may account for the fact that the common data set contained only a minority of the total snp markers from me_joint and pv_joint data sets, instead of approaching the snp number of the more restrictive pv_joint set.

prediction accuracy was also affected by missing data imputation method, for which rfi emerged as a solid choice for the current unordered snp data, as well as by the adopted statistical model for genomic selection. the effect of allowed missing data thresholds on prediction accuracy, which mostly displayed an accuracy peak in the range of 30–50 %, was consistent with the expected trade-off between increased information  and increased noise  arising from increasing thresholds.

the good performance of svr models in this study agrees with the theoretical expectation of high accuracy for these methods when applied to traits that involve many qtls with small individual effects  <cit> . this was particularly true for pv germplasm, where genome-enabled predictions were more difficult than for me because of various factors , possibly because of the recognized value of svr in high-noise conditions  <cit> . svr and ridge regression blup performed were similarly for me germplasm. the good performance of the latter method agrees with theoretical expectations  <cit> .

the complexity of the alfalfa biomass yield trait was confirmed by the high number of putative qtls that emerged for both data sets from genome-wide association analysis. we believe that mapping individual qtls for yield holds lower practical interest than genomic selection, for yield improvement programs of alfalfa and probably other crops.

the observed lack of sub-population structure facilitates the application of genomic selection by allowing for the adoption of simple genomic selection models. lack of structure was purposefully searched for in the development of the me, through repeated intercrossing of progenies generated by intercrossing genotypes from different populations. for population pv, whose genotype sample derived from several landraces and varieties from northern italy, lack of sub-population structure was not quite expected. a reason for this finding could be much higher intra-population variation relative to inter-population variation, which emerged for pv material from the study of several morphophysiological traits  <cit>  and recent studies of ssr- and snp-based genetic diversity . the population used by  <cit>  in their prediction experiment was a strain cross of three cultivars subsequently intercrossed for two generations. it likewise had no sub-population structure. the pattern of these three very different populations suggests that application of marker prediction methods will not be limited within breeding programs by population structure.

the current predictions of parent breeding values proved much less accurate than predictions of alfalfa yield responses of cloned parents in an earlier study  <cit> , likely because of the large extent of non-additive genetic variation reported consistently for this trait in various genetic studies  <cit>  including one for the population pv  <cit> . hence, focusing on parent breeding values  is of paramount importance for a realistic assessment of genomic selection in alfalfa and other crops with a similar mating system. it should be noted, however, that even a genomic prediction accuracy of breeding values  around  <dig>   can be promising for genomic selection. considering the estimated narrow-sense heritability  of  <dig>  reported for the same set of pv parent plants  <cit> , selection cycles of 1 year for genomic selection  and 5 years for conventional parent selection based on half-sib progeny test  and same selection intensity for both selection strategies, the comparison of genomic vs. conventional selection in terms of predicted yield gain per unit time reduces, according to formulae in  <cit> , to ra vs. . this would indicate over three-fold greater efficiency for genomic selection , assuming no degradation in the predictive power of the model across a few selection cycles . in addition, genomic selection is likely to allow for higher numbers of evaluated candidate parents  than conventional selection, for same evaluation costs. ge interaction effects are bound to decrease genomic prediction accuracies  <cit>  and yield gains over a target region, but this is applies as well to conventional selection, depending in all cases on the consistency of phenotyping or selection conditions with those prevailing in cropping environments  <cit> . models developed across two locations actually had slightly higher accuracies for predicting yield of individual genotypes in a subsequent generation than models from either location independently  <cit> , demonstrating that if extreme ge interactions are not present, broader inference across locations is desirable. for pv germplasm, the moderate summer drought stress conditions adopted for phenotyping and assessment of ra and hn parameters were suitable for minimizing ge interactions across northern italy  <cit> . since a model’s prediction accuracy evaluated by cross-validations within the training population  may overestimate the model accuracy for selection within other genotypes of the same reference populations, future research work will compare genomic vs. phenotypic selection on the basis of actual yield gains obtained from selection within an independent genotype sample of the pv population. other work will assess the potential of genomic selection for predicting breeding values of me germplasm across a range of target environments, including some with severe drought or salinity stress.

that we observed only moderate loss of accuracy for cross-population predictions relative to within-population predictions is fairly surprising, especially considering the contrasting origin and the different duration and environmental conditions for biomass yield assessment of the two populations. quite poor cross-population predictions were reported for wheat  <cit> , in the presence of partly related populations evaluated under the same phenotyping conditions. the current result was probably favored by the high rate of within-population genetic variation that is typical of alfalfa, to which the development of broadly-based reference populations further contributed. it provides further support for the introduction of genomic selection in alfalfa breeding programs, whose selection is frequently carried out simultaneously on different germplasm pools.

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that genomic selection for alfalfa biomass yield is promising, based on its moderate prediction accuracy, moderate value of cross-population predictions, and lack of sub-population genetic structure. genome-wide association results confirmed the complexity of the yield trait and the limited scope for searching individual qtls with overwhelming effect on it. some of our results concerning gbs procedures, snp calling strategies, missing data imputation methods and statistical models for genomic selection can contribute to better design of genomic selection experiments for alfalfa and other crops with similar mating systems and commercial cultivar targets.

