BACKGROUND
the bacterial 70s ribosome is formed by a small 30s- and a large 50s subunit. while the small subunit consists of one 16s ribosomal rna  and  <dig> ribosomal proteins , the large subunit contains two rrnas  and  <dig> r-proteins  <cit> . reconstitution of intact ribosomal subunits in the test tube is possible using components derived from purified ribosomes, but requires non-physiological conditions, such as high mg2+ concentration and incubation temperatures of up to 50°c  <cit> . in vivo, this process critically depends on biogenesis factors, which are proteins that process, modify and chaperone rrna or r-proteins  <cit> . ribosome assembly is characterized by a highly coordinated sequence of events consisting of rrna synthesis and r-protein uptake. since assembly takes place co-transcriptionally  there is a hierarchical order of binding events with early- and late assembly r-proteins  <cit> . each r-protein gene is present in a single copy per genome, whereas rrnas are encoded by multiple rrn operons . one 16s, 23s and 5s rrna  are contained in one primary transcript that is processed by site specific rnases  <cit> . due to this genetic organization ribosomal subunits are consequently produced in equal stoichiometric amounts. furthermore, synthesis of rrna and r-proteins are synchronized  <cit>  with the consequence that free cytosolic pools of r-proteins are close to zero under optimal conditions  <cit> . in addition, ribosome assembly is a fast process taking place within a couple of minutes at 37°c  <cit> . it follows that r-proteins upon synthesis are rapidly taken up by nascent ribosomal subunits. if selected r-proteins were fluorescence labeled, it further follows that the fluorescences signal would represent subunit precursors and whole subunits rather than free cytosolic pools of r-proteins.

treatment of cells with chemical agents or occurrence of mutations  can lead to ribosome assembly defects  <cit> . one possible fate of defective assembly intermediates is a selective clearance by rnase based control mechanisms  <cit> . alternatively, assembly intermediates can accumulate and possibly mature into intact subunits, as soon as the source of defect is eliminated  <cit> .

analyses of protein and rna content of ribosomal assembly intermediates are possible using quantitative mass spectrometry approaches and cryo-electron microscopy  <cit> . analyses of sucrose gradient fractions by agarose and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis with subsequent quantitation of rrna and r-proteins are established methods but time-consuming and insensitive to small differences in quantity and quality.

therefore, we set out to establish a convenient fluorescence-based method to assess amounts and assembly-states of ribosomal particles.

in our previous approach  <cit>  late assembly r-proteins were labeled with fluorescent proteins  to monitor and compare the intact portions of both ribosomal subunits. in this study intact ribosomal subunits and assembly intermediates of all maturation states are detectable by labeling early assembly r-proteins. a reporter strain harboring the fusion proteins l1-mazami green  and s15-mcherry was constructed and exhibited normal growth, indicating an intact translation apparatus. we used synthetic gene knock out of rplc  and rpsq , respectively, or ribosome directed antibiotics to induce subunit assembly defects. a <dig> and fluorescence analysis of sucrose gradient centrifugates allowed in vitro analysis of ribosomal subunits and all of their assembly intermediates in unprecedented resolution.

RESULTS
rationale
in order to generate a reporter strain suitable for monitoring ribosome assembly landscapes, we selected ribosomal protein candidates from each subunit according to the following criteria  <cit> : the candidates should be i) distant from functional sites, ii) accessible to c-terminal tagging with fluorescent proteins, iii) early assembly proteins  <cit>  and iv) subject of feedback regulation. the ribosomal proteins s <dig> and l <dig> fulfill all these criteria: their surface exposed c-termini  allow convenient tagging . although these proteins are not essential  <cit>  deletion strains have exaggerated generation times at 37°c. in addition, absence of s <dig> results in severe cold sensitivity  <cit>  and ribosomes lacking l <dig> show 50% reduced translation activity in vitro  <cit> . therefore, growth would be severely hampered if the fusion proteins do not fully complement the wild type protein’s function. according to in vivo ribosome assembly maps , both are early assembly proteins and consequently present in ribosomal particles of each state of maturation. finally, feedback regulation by autogenous control  <cit>  ensures that they are not produced in excess.

phenotypic and biochemical characterization of the engineered strains
to generate e. coli strains harboring modified genes coding for s15-mcherry  and l1-mazami  fusion proteins , we used the technique of lambda red recombineering  <cit> . the final reporter strain mcrg* producing both s15-mcherry and l1-mazami fusion proteins was constructed, using p <dig> phage transduction.

to exclude that tagging of r-proteins with fps interferes with regular cell functions and growth, we analyzed reporter strains in more detail. spot tests revealed that growth of the genetically engineered strains did not differ from that of the wild type strain at various temperatures . to analyze possible growth differences more precisely, all strains were grown to stationary phase at different temperatures and their growth rates were calculated . it turned out that the growth rate of mcrg* at 37°c was 5-10% less than the wild type strain.figure  <dig> 
physiological and biochemical characterization.  growth comparison on solid medium: cells of the indicated strains were spotted onto lb agar in a serial dilution and incubated at the given temperatures.  cells as indicated were grown at  <dig>   <dig> and 42°c to stationary phase. growth rates were calculated and normalized values are given for each strain at each incubation temperature. data were obtained from three independent experiments. ribosomes from the indicated strains were isolated by sucrose cushion centrifugation and subjected to sds-page  and western blot analysis . for immunodetection, s <dig> and l <dig> specific antisera were used. note that s <dig> wild type protein was not resolved by sds-page and immunoblotting. asterisks denote unspecific protein bands.



next, the protein content of mcr*, mcg* and mcrg*-derived ribosomes was analyzed by sds-page and immunoblotting . while mcr* and mcg* ribosomes contained one fusion protein , two fusion proteins were observed in mcrg* ribosomes.

collectively, the data indicate that growth behavior and functional competence of the ribosomes of mcrg* are similar to those of the parental strain.

generation of ribosome subunit specific assembly defects and in vitro analysis
to induce assembly defects in the small or the large ribosomal subunit, conditional gene knock outs of rpsq  and rplc , respectively, were generated in the reporter strain background . it has been shown previously that defects in each of these genes caused ribosome assembly defects that were supposed to be subunit specific  <cit> .

the resulting strains  carried plasmids containing wild type copies of the genes deleted from the chromosome under control of an iptg inducible promoter. the withdrawal of iptg in liquid cultures should result in impaired growth and in subunit specific assembly defects  <cit>  as soon as the number of intact ribosomes becomes limiting.

to this end, we grew mcrg*, mcrg*Δsq and -Δlc cells in the absence of iptg to mid-logarithmic phase and examined the ribosomes by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation and polysome profile analysis . mcrg* ribosomes showed the expected pattern consisting of 30s-, 50s-, 70s-, and polysome peaks , whereas depletion of rpsq  led to dramatically reduced amounts of 70s ribosomes and polysomes, increased amounts of 50s subunits and a broad peak of particles in the region of the 30s subunits. likewise, depletion of rplc reduced the amount of 70s ribosomes and led to a defined peak of 30s subunits and a large and broad peak of particles migrating between mature 50s and 30s subunits . this was expected because both absence of rpsq and rplc should result in defective small and large ribosomal subunits, respectively. consequently, the reduced number of functional subunits limited the amount of monosomes and polysomes.figure  <dig> 
polysome analysis and fluorescence detection of sucrose fractions. cells were grown in m <dig> medium at 37°c to od600 =  <dig>  and harvested. lysates were subjected to sucrose gradient centrifugation. centrifugates were analyzed by a <dig> detection and fractionated. polysome profiles derived from:  mcrg*,  mcrg*Δsq,  mcrg*Δlc. sucrose gradient fractions of samples a-c were analyzed for mazami- and mcherry specific fluorescence and normalized results are given in bar charts for:  mcrg*  mcrg*Δsq  mcrg*Δlc. superposition of a <dig> profiles and corresponding fluorescence bar charts:  mcrg*,  mcrg*Δsq,  mcrg*Δlc. the inserts show fluorescence analysis of all available fractions from each sucrose gradient run. red bars: normalized mcherry fluorescence; green bars: normalized mazami fluorescence. fluorescence was normalized to the first polysome peak  where subunits are supposed to be present in 1: <dig> ratio. experiments were done in duplicates, representative profiles are shown.



fluorometric analysis of the sucrose fractions provided fluorescence profiles of mcrg*, mcrg*Δsq and -Δlc derived ribosomes . comparing a <dig> and fluorescence profiles of mcrg* ribosomes  revealed reasonable coincidence of the individual peaks. for completeness the entire profile, also including early low molecular weight fractions, is depicted as insert .

when analyzing a <dig> and fluorescence profiles of mcrg*∆sq ribosomes by overlay  several aspects attracted attention: the largest peak of red fluorescence -representing the small subunit- was decreased in intensity relative to largest peak of green fluorescence -representing the large subunit- . moreover, the red fluorescence peak was in addition left shifted due to absence of rpsq. the largest peak of green fluorescence was slightly left shifted and showed a shoulder at the lower left side overlapping with the red peak, indicating defective large ribosomal subunits. this indicates that a selective assembly defect of the small subunit is also associated with an accumulation of 50s assembly intermediates. finally, as shown in the insert there was no increased fluorescence in the low molecular weight fractions, indicating proper autogenous control of s15-mcherry and l1-mazami.

combined analysis of a <dig> and fluorescence profiles of mcrg*∆lc ribosomes  revealed a decrease in the green fluorescence peak relative to the red fluorescence peak, in comparison with figure 2h. in addition, the green fluorescence peak was clearly left shifted, due to assembly defects in the absence of rplc. in the a <dig> profile the peak of the large subunit appeared higher than the peak of the small subunit. this is presumably the case because peaks of both subunits are overlapping each other , thereby producing a dominant broad peak in the region of the large subunit. investigation of the low molecular weight fractions in the insert showed strict feedback regulation of s15-mcherry and l1-mazami.

in summary, assembly defects of the small and large ribosomal subunit could be provoked and were readily detectable by fluorescence analysis of sucrose gradient centrifugates.

in vivo analysis of subunit specific assembly defects
next, we asked whether subunit assembly defects could be detected by fluorescence readout in vivo using mcrg*? fluorescent labeling of the early assembly r-proteins l <dig> and s <dig> results in fluorescent subunits of all stages of maturation. since both subunits are systemically produced in equal amounts, any shift in the fluorescence ratios is expected to be a consequence of subunit specific turnover . increased turnover of the large subunit should reduce the amount of green fluorescence and consequently lower the normalized fluorescence emission ratio of mazami/mcherry, while increased turnover of the small subunit in turn should increase the ratio.

mcrg*, mcrg*Δsq and mcrg*Δlc cells were transferred to 384-well plates and incubated at 37°c for 10 hours in m <dig> medium. fully automated sample handling was possible, using a robotic platform equipped with incubator, microplate reader and robotic arm. both a <dig> values and fluorescence intensities were measured  in one-hour intervals. from the latter, normalized fluorescence ratios were calculated. while mcrg* grew unperturbed, mcrg*Δsq and mcrg*Δlc cells showed impaired growth and reached lower cell densities after 10 hours . the background corrected and normalized fluorescence ratios of mcrg*Δlc reached a minimum of  <dig>  after 6 hours, revealing a defect of the 50s assembly, whereas the ratios of mcrg*Δsq increased instead reaching a maximum of  <dig>  after 9 hours indicating a defect in the 30s assembly .figure  <dig> 
growth in 384-well pates and fully automated fluorescence analysis of reporter strains. aliquots of mcrg*, mcrg*Δsq and mcrg*Δlc cultures were transferred into 384- well plates in quadruplicates. cells were grown in m <dig> medium at 37°c for 10 hours. measurements were made in one-hour intervals.  a <dig> values were determined and  mazami and mcherry fluorescence emission were detected and ratios were calculated for mcrg*, mcrg*Δsq and mcrg*Δlc. fluorescence ratios of mcrg* were normalized to  <dig>  data points given in the growth curves and fluorescence ratios are mean values from four independent experiments; error bars show standard deviation.



we conclude that depletion of rplc and rpsq, respectively, causes severe assembly defects of ribosomal subunits. moreover, the changes in fluorescence ratios suggest that there is turnover of defective subunits.

probing mcrg* with ribosome-targeting antibiotics
it has been shown that translation inhibitors such as chloramphenicol  <cit> , erythromycin  <cit>  and neomycin  <cit>  cause directly or indirectly assembly defects of both ribosomal subunits. the mechanistic interpretation of the antibiotic mediated effects is controversial  <cit> . we tested all of the before mentioned antibiotics and included a fourth one  that, to our knowledge, was not investigated so far for its potential to cause ribosome assembly defects. using mcrg*, we set out to clarify, whether treatment of cells with ribosome targeting antibiotics results in assembly defects of one or both of the ribosomal subunits. the fact that early assembly proteins are fluorescently labeled should allow detailed analysis of the assembly landscapes upon antibiotic treatment. in addition, cell based assays were used to elicit whether there are indications for subunit specific turnover.

mcrg* cells were grown in m <dig> medium for seven hours in the absence or presence of chloramphenicol , erythromycin , kanamycin  or neomycin . while each antibiotic led to impaired cell growth , chloramphenicol caused strongest growth defects. erythromycin, kanamycin and neomycin treatment did not show a significant change in fluorescence ratios . treatment with chloramphenicol, by contrast, led to an increased fluorescence ratio, with a maximum of about  <dig>  after 7 hours. this suggests that treatment of cells with chloramphenicol might decrease the relative amounts of the small subunit.figure  <dig> 
testing mcrg* with inhibitors of translation. cell-based assay: mcrg* cells were cultured in erlenmeyer flasks at 25°c in m <dig> medium for 7 hours in the absence and presence of antibiotics, as indicated. samples were taken every hour.  od <dig> values were determined and  mazami and mcherry fluorescence emission were detected and ratios were calculated. fluorescence ratios of mcrg* were normalized to  <dig>  exemplary growth curves are given and fluorescence ratios are means from three independent experiments; error bars show standard deviation. analyses of isolated ribosomal particles: sucrose density gradient  centrifugation profiles from  control cells with no antibiotic ,  chloramphenicol ,  erythromycin ,  kanamycin  and  neomycin  treated cells. sucrose gradient fractions from  to  were analyzed for fluorescence by a microplate reader. a <dig> profiles and fluorescence bar charts were superimposed for  control cells with no antibiotic ,  chloramphenicol ,  erythromycin ,  kanamycin  and  neomycin  treated cells. cells in presence and absence of antibiotics were cultured in lb medium at 25°c for 3 hours before subsequent polysome analysis. left shifted peaks of the large subunit are indicated by horizontal arrows, abnormal portions of the small subunit by vertical arrows. red bars: normalized mcherry fluorescence; green bars: normalized mazami fluorescence. fluorescence was normalized to the first polysome peak  where subunits are present in 1: <dig> ratio. experiments were done in duplicates, representative profiles are shown.



this hypothesis was tested by analyzing ribosome profiles obtained from mcrg* cells that grew in the presence of the antibiotics or without .

figure 4c shows the a <dig> profile of ribosomes derived from non-treated cells. the 70s peak and the polysomes  were reduced in intensity since no chloramphenicol was added prior to harvesting. in our previous study, it turned out that addition of chloramphenicol  to antibiotic-treated cells caused extremely broadened 70s peaks. ribosomes derived from chloramphenicol  or erythromycin  treated cells showed reduced and left shifted 50s peaks. shifted peaks of the large subunit are indicated with horizontal arrows, additional peaks and shoulders left-lateral of the 30s peak are marked with vertical arrows. chloramphenicol treatment caused an additional peak , while after erythromycin treatment the 30s peak had a shoulder on the left. treatment with kanamycin had no apparent influence on the 50s peak but provoked an additional peak left-lateral of the 30s peak . neomycin treatment caused a slight reduction and left shift of the 50s peak and an additional peak on the left of the 30s peak .

overlay diagrams   show that ribosome profiles from non-treated cells are congruent . profiles from chloramphenicol and in particular erythromycin treated cells revealed an extra portion of green fluorescence within the region of the 30s peak . ribosome profiles derived from kanamycin and neomycin treated cells possessed additional green fluorescent peaks of very weak intensity but at similar positions within the profile . the particles within the green peaks migrating slower than that of the 50s subunits presumably represent defective assembly intermediates of the large subunit that are caused by all the antibiotics used in this study, but to different extent. for a more detailed analysis the green fluorescence profiles were aligned and the one derived from non-treated cells was compared with all the others obtained from antibiotic treated cells , illustrating the presence of assembly intermediates of the large subunit. comparison of the red fluorescent peaks  indicates that treatment with all antibiotics produced a more or less pronounced shoulder on the left side. to analyze potential defects of the small subunit in more detail, the red fluorescence profiles derived from antibiotic treated cells were compared with the one obtained from non-treated cells . it turned out that treatment with all four antibiotics caused distinct left-sided shoulders of the red fluorescence peak, indicating small subunit assembly defects. this is either due to accumulation of the 21s precursor of the 30s subunit, or assembly dead-ends of this subunit. a more thorough analysis, which includes quantitation of the 16s and 23s rrna within the sucrose fractions is given in the supplementary material , confirms all hypothesized assembly intermediates. taken together, the administration of a representative collection of ribosome-targeting antibiotics caused assembly defects of both subunits in each case, but to different extents.

in summary, our analyses demonstrated that ribosome assembly defects are detectable by fluorometric analysis of fractions collected after sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation of ribosomal preparations. assembly defects caused by gene depletions  or by treatment of reporter cells with four different ribosome-targeting antibiotics revealed the presence of defective assembly intermediates of both ribosomal subunits.

discussion
here, we report construction and characterization of the strain mcrg* harboring large and small ribosomal subunits labeled with mazami and mcherry proteins, respectively. this strain has growth properties similar to the parental strain. we have provided evidence that the reporter strain reveals assembly defects of ribosomal subunits by fluorescence-based readouts of sucrose density centrifugates and should report differences in subunit specific turnover when subjected to fluorescence-based in vivo analysis.

in our previous study, we labeled the late assembly r-proteins l <dig> and s <dig> with fps to identify and compare the portion of intact ribosomal subunits. a detailed characterization of physiological and biochemical properties of the reporter strain demonstrated that there were no substantial limitations of the translation apparatus resulting from labeling of two ribosomal proteins with two different fps. when ribosome assembly had been perturbed genetically or chemically fluorescence-based read out allowed identification of these assembly defects  <cit> .

in the current study, we labeled the early assembly r-proteins l <dig> and s <dig> with fps. again, we made sure that tagging of the r-proteins with fps did not compromise cell physiology and ribosome composition, as confirmed by growth assays and sds-page analysis of purified ribosomes . in addition, we provided evidence that mcrg* allows for in vitro analysis of isolated ribosomes to monitor fully matured ribosomal subunits and their assembly intermediates . moreover, mcrg* is a strong tool for cell-based assays. it allows fluorometric in vivo determination of the ratio between the two ribosomal subunits, including all assembly states. in untreated reporter cells this ratio is expected to be one, due to equal production of ribosomal subunits. a change in the fluorescence ratio is therefore interpreted as consequence of unequal turnover of ribosomal subunits.

generation of subunit specific assembly defects by gene depletion
subunit specific ribosome assembly defects were induced by depletion of r-protein genes encoding the early assembly proteins s <dig> and l <dig>  respectively . depletion of rpsq  caused an assembly defect of the small subunit  and increased the fluorescence ratio by 30% , indicating increased turnover of the small subunit. depletion of rplc  caused an assembly defect of the large subunit  and decreased the fluorescence ratio by 20% , indicating increased turnover of the large subunit. it seems that assembly defects on one subunit disturb assembly of the other subunit. it is possible that assembly defects reduce the pool of active 70s ribosomes, thereby reducing levels of translation, which in turn induces in assembly defects of both subunits .

treatment of mcrg* with ribosome targeting antibiotics
chloramphenicol and erythromycin target the large ribosomal subunit, while kanamycin and neomycin interact predominantly with the small ribosomal subunit. chloramphenicol binds to the peptidyl transferase center  and inhibits fixation of the cca-aminoacyl end of an aminoacyl trna at the a-site region of the ptc  <cit> , while the macrolide erythromycin binds in the upper region of the ribosomal exit tunnel and hinders protein synthesis by blocking a full occupation of the exit tunnel  <cit> . kanamycin and neomycin belong to the aminoglycoside and 2-deoxystreptamine aminoglycoside families of antibiotics, respectively. they both target the 30s subunit and interact with the internal loop  <dig> of the decoding center  <cit> . for neomycin an additional binding site within helix  <dig> of the 23s rrna was reported  <cit> . both antibiotics cause translational misreading by stabilizing and binding of near cognate trnas to the mrna  <cit> .

antibiotics used in this study induce assembly defects in both ribosomal subunits . this raises the question, whether a perturbation of the translation apparatus always results in mutual assembly defects? according to previous studies, inhibition of translation by ribosome targeting antibiotics reduces protein biosynthesis and provokes overproduction of rrna  <cit> . consequently, there is a stoichiometric imbalance between rrna and r-proteins, which promotes accumulation of defective precursor particles of both ribosomal subunits  <cit> . siibak et al. provided evidence that the presence of sublethal concentrations of chloramphenicol or erythromycin resulted in reduced and unbalanced protein biosynthesis  <cit> . in particular ribosomal proteins were produced in amounts that correlated with their presence in assembly intermediates  <cit> . in that sense assembly defects reflect an indirect consequence of impaired translation.

in our study defective subunits were monitored by fluorescence-based in vitro analyses in great detail. notably, the defects observed in subunit assembly upon treatment with antibiotics were most reveling . ribosome profiles clearly differed both in a <dig> and in fluorescence analysis. detailed analyses of 30s subunit formation in vitro  <cit>  and evidence from in vivo experiments  <cit>  suggest that there are parallel routes for ribosomal subunit formation. therefore, assembly intermediates described here  may reflect a heterogeneous collection of similar sizes and shapes  <cit> . this could indicate that the used antibiotics have intrinsic properties that cause specific assembly defects with particles slightly differing in size and composition. champney and coworkers have provided evidence, using different bacterial species and dozens of different antibiotics, that certain ribosome targeting drugs bind to ribosomal precursor particles and thereby presumably hinder further maturation to intact subunits  <cit> .

even though mechanistic concepts and causative explanations for ribosome assembly defects caused by current translation inhibitors differ, attempts to identify primary inhibitors of ribosome assembly are important and worthwhile for several reasons:the availability of small molecules that selectively inhibit the assembly process of one subunit at a defined stage would clearly be highly appreciated by researchers in the ribosome field to obtain a more detailed understanding of subunit specific assembly in vivo.

such compounds could be the basis for the development of drugs with a defined target leading to subunit specific assembly breakdown. molecules can be envisioned that exclusively target either assembly of the large or the small ribosomal subunit.

if the latter was possible, these compounds could be combined in one preparation to achieve defined and sustained assembly defects of both ribosomal subunits simultaneously.



CONCLUSIONS
the described here fluorescence-based assays allow for monitoring of ribosome assembly landscapes in hitherto unmatched resolution. assembly intermediates can be precisely detected and unambiguously allocated to either the large or small ribosomal subunit. rather than replacing quantitative mass spectrometry approaches, it is supposed to be a valuable method to select the optimal fractions for subsequent mass spectrometric or structural analyses. therefore, we believe that mcrg* significantly enriches the tool kit for a more thorough investigation of ribosome assembly and characterization of new classes of antimicrobials. the methodology described here might also be applied to eukaryotic systems from yeast up to mammalian cells, using crispr cas  <dig> based knock-in techniques  <cit>  to screen for small molecule inhibitors of eukaryotic ribosome assembly. the high metabolic activity of tumor cells goes along with high rates of protein production, which is expected to make them more susceptible towards inhibition of the translation apparatus than normal cells  <cit> . therefore, molecules found in such screenings could be the basis for the development of new anti-cancer drugs.

