BACKGROUND
polyploidy is prevalent in nature and is particularly common in the angiosperms, where it is both an ancient and active evolutionary process  <cit> . in the past decade expressed sequence tag  and genome sequencing projects revealed numerous rounds of ancient polyploidy scattered throughout the angiosperms  <cit> , confirming and expanding upon more than a century of comparative cytogenetic work  <cit> , which demonstrated that polyploidy is common and ongoing in hundreds of genera. in plants, polyploidy often is associated with novel and presumably advantageous ecological attributes, such as range expansion  <cit> , novel secondary chemistry and morphology  <cit> , and increased pathogen resistance  <cit> , although the underlying genetic basis for these novel adaptations remains obscure. the reunion of two diverged genomes in a common nucleus during allopolyploid speciation entails a suite of genomic accommodations  <cit> , including non-additivity of gene expression  <cit> , and expression partitioning among tissues and organs  <cit> . of particular interest are the mechanisms by which doubled regulatory networks interact to generate a viable genetic system capable of regulating growth, development and responses to the environment.

to better understand the earliest stages of allopolyploid evolution, we monitored gene expression in two sets of diploid parents and their colchicine-doubled allopolyploid derivatives from the genus gossypium , which has become a useful model for polyploid evolution  <cit> . our goal was to determine the effects of genomic merger and doubling on global gene expression architecture. to our surprise, we discovered in both crosses a striking pattern of 'expression dominance', where gene expression for thousands of genes closely mirrored that of only one of the two parents, both for up-regulated and down-regulated genes. in addition, we also detected a diverse spectrum of transgressive gene expression types and levels. collectively, these results provide a novel perspective on allopolyploid gene regulation and hint at the underlying genetic basis of allopolyploid adaptation.

RESULTS
to monitor gene expression in nascent allopolyploids we grew two sets of diploid parents and their colchicine-doubled allopolyploid derivatives in a randomized complete block design in three separate growth chambers. we hybridized labeled leaf cdnas to custom micro-arrays, assaying  <dig>  genes for their relative expression levels, and determined for each gene the level of expression variation between the parents, between each parent and the allopolyploid, and between the in silico mid-parent expression value and the allopolyploid. here, we take mid-parent to mean the average of the empirically determined parental values, across all replicates . the general levels of differential expression in these experiments are illustrated in figures  <dig> and  <dig> 

we first evaluated differential expression between the two diploid parents involved in each cross  and g. bickii ; g. arboreum  and g. thurberi ), postulating that the degree of parental divergence would be correlated with the amount of non-additivity in their respective synthetic allopolyploid  and 2). as all plants were grown under common controlled conditions, we expected only modest expression differentiation among diploids, but high levels of expression divergence were observed;  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the  <dig>  unigenes were differentially expressed between g. arboreum  and g. bickii , and g. arboreum and g. thurberi , respectively . the larger difference in the latter comparison is consistent with data showing that the a and g genomes are more similar in size and are phylogenetically closer to each other than either is to the d genome  <cit> . all three species are shrubs native to arid regions but are from three different continents , having diverged from a common ancestor approximately  <dig> to  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . their extraordinary gene expression divergence was unexpected given an average coding sequence divergence of about 3%  <cit> , and represents the greatest divergence reported to date among congeneric plant species  <cit> . among the differentially expressed genes, equivalent proportions are up-regulated in each parent  versus  <dig> %  and  <dig> %  versus  <dig> % ; p >  <dig>  in χ-square tests).

to assess the impact of combining two diverged regulatory networks on gene expression in allopolyploids, we contrasted each parent with the allopolyploid, and the allopolyploid with an in silico mid-parent value, generated using an average of the parental values and a composite variance. a high fraction of genes were differentially expressed between the allopolyploids and the parental diploids  and  <dig>  respectively). also, and perhaps as expected, most genes in the allotetraploid were expressed at values equivalent to the mid-parent, namely,  <dig> % and  <dig> % in  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.

this observation of largely mid-parent expression masks an important underlying phenomenon, which we model in figure  <dig>  specifically, for genes that differ in expression between the two parents, expression levels in the allopolyploid may be statistically equivalent both to one parent and the mid-parent, while these latter two values are statistically unequal themselves . moreover, and importantly, all three of the foregoing values statistically differ from that of the other parent. the critical observation is that the dominant parent is recurrent for thousands of genes. thus, allopolyploids display a strong expression bias, where expression is statistically equivalent to one of the two parents. this is true for both up-regulated and down-regulated genes. hence, we term this phenomenon 'expression dominance'.

to explore and categorize the expression alterations accompanying polyploid formation, we binned genes into the  <dig> possible patterns of differential expression for an allopolyploid and two parents   <cit> . for genes differentially expressed between the parents, the most common result in both allopolyploids was the expression dominance of one parental expression phenotype, as described above, where expression dominance is operationally diagnosed as statistical equivalence of expression between the allopolyploid and its respective parent. specifically, dominance of the paternal g. thurberi genome in the  <dig> allopolyploid included nearly  <dig> , or almost half, of all differentially expressed genes, with  <dig> % being up-regulated to the paternal expression level and  <dig> % down-regulated to the paternal expression level . similarly, an expression dominance of a single parent exists in  <dig>  where about  <dig> genes adopted the expression state of one parent, in this case g. arboreum, and again with approximately equal proportions  of up- and down-regulation .

an additional dimension of this phenomenon is that expression dominance in the allopolyploid nucleus was reversed in the two systems; in  <dig>  the bulk of gene expression divergence was unequal to that from the maternal g. arboreum parent , while this same parent displayed expression dominance in  <dig>  the magnitude of expression dominance was unequal in the two allopolyploids and was most extreme in the  <dig> allopolyploid, where only  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in leaves between the allopolyploid and the paternal parent, but eight times as many genes , representing fully a third of the genes on the chip, were differentially expressed in leaves between the allopolyploid and the maternal parent. these data constitute evidence for bidirectional, genome-wide expression dominance in allopolyploids, the direction of which may vary with the specific genomic combination involved.

the scope of expression dominance reported here is unprecedented, and suggests that the observation of mid-parent expression in allopolyploids   <cit> , while statistically correct, fails to capture the underlying dynamics of regulatory interactions that lead to genome-wide preferential expression of the phenotype contributed by one of the two genomes in an allopolyploid nucleus. in this light it seems likely that the statistical and analytical techniques used here would reveal that genomic dominance is more widespread than reported in arabidopsis, where gene expression was studied in f <dig> hybrids between two allopolyploids  <cit> . similar to our results for polyploid gossypium, in arabidopsis hybrids a relatively small percentage  of genes were differentially expressed in comparison to the mid-parent value. of these, the general pattern observed was global repression  in the hybrid, with greater repression of genes that were up-regulated in a. thaliana  than the reverse. thus, for this small fraction of the total genes in the dataset that were studied , there was differential expression repression in the hybrid with respect to the two parents. they did not explore the phenomenon of expression dominance for the greater than 95% of genes that were not differentially expressed from the mid-parent, an exploration that requires a categorically partitioned analysis of the full set of genes . thus, a newly discovered phenomenon associated with allopolyploidy is revealed in the present study, namely, global phenotypic expression dominance for both up- and down-regulated genes.

although bidirectional expression dominance comprises the most common category of gene expression, all other expression possibilities were observed  in both allopolyploid systems studied, that is,  <dig> and  <dig>  this includes transgressive up- and down-regulation in the allopolyploid, both for genes equivalently  or differentially  expressed between the parents. interestingly, although comparable numbers of genes exhibited statistically transgressive expression in the two allopolyploids  and  <dig>  respectively), six times as many genes were up-regulated as down-regulated in  <dig> , whereas in  <dig> the opposite trend was observed . in addition, genes with novel down-regulation tended to have lower than average standardized expression, whereas, the converse is not true for genes with novel up-regulation .

it is tempting to speculate that genome-wide expression dominance and transgressive expression are connected to novel plant phenotypes and physiologies in allopolyploids. to explore this, we utilized gene ontology  classifications for molecular and cellular function, coupled with fisher's exact test, to identify processes over-represented in differentially expressed genes  <cit> . between the genome-dominant parent and the allopolyploid, no significant terms emerge in either allopolyploid , although we note that the non-genome-dominant parent largely shares the same differences from the allopolyploid as it does from the genome-dominant parent. interestingly, genes transgressively transcribed in the allopolyploid are enriched for go terms pertaining to cofactor binding, coenzyme binding, electron transport, oxioreductase activity, lyase activity, and the generation of precursor metabolites and energy, giving credence to the molecular underpinnings of the ecologically advantageous traits often seen in allopolyploids.

CONCLUSIONS
here we have shown that polyploidy in cotton is characterized by bidirectional genome-wide expression dominance, depending on the specific species combination and independent of the magnitude of gene expression. we also report massive expression divergence among diploid congeners in a common environment and the manner in which these differences become reconciled in a nascent polyploid. our study illustrates the panoply of expression outcomes that duplicate genetic loci experience when divergent genomes become newly merged in a unified regulatory cellular milieu. at present the mechanistic underpinnings of expression dominance of a single genome in an allopolyploid remain elusive. among the possibilities are asymmetries in the genomic distribution of methylation and other epigenetic marks, as suggested by recent work with met <dig> rnai knockdowns in synthetic arabidopsis polyploids, where expression differences in the allopolyploid were shown to be related to de novo changes in methylation  <cit> . unlike arabidopsis, methylation changes do not appear to accompany polyploidy in cotton  <cit> , suggesting that the global expression dominance in this system is due to another mechanism, or likely, a suite of epigenetic mechanisms  <cit> .

notwithstanding our ignorance of the mechanism responsible for expression dominance, this phenomenon, and indications of transgressive expression, provide clues into the enigma of the evolutionary success of allopolyploids. future insights will derive from integrating shifts in gene expression into functional analyses in an ecologically relevant context, as well as from increased understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which they occur  <cit> .

