BACKGROUND
alcohol use disorders  are a major public health problem and impose a substantial socioeconomic burden. in the us alone, there is a one in seven lifetime prevalence of aud  <cit> . structural brain damage and the widespread alteration of neuronal function that accompanies it represent two of the most adverse effects of auds . however, despite well-documented effects on the cns, there are no definitive molecular signatures of aud-induced brain damage. this limits the selection of rational interventions and hampers the ability to gauge therapeutic effects. thus, developing biomarkers that indicate early cns damage may prove useful in deterring the emergence of auds.

we recently completed an extensive messenger rna  expression-based study of human subjects with auds as well as adolescent and adult rats engaged in excessive alcohol consumption and mouse neural stem cells  exposed to ethanol in vitro  <cit> . in that study, we sought to identify mrna biomarkers in peripheral blood leukocytes  that could predict cns dysfunction related to excessive alcohol consumption across different species and models. based on pre-existing data, we chose to test only a specific set of mrnas with functions related to cell cycle regulation, dna damage and repair, as well as p <dig> signaling. we found that a subset of the tested mrnas was consistently changed in human aud subjects, ethanol-consuming rats, and ethanol-exposed nscs. moreover, several of the affected mrnas showed robust correlations with different biological variables, including neuroimaging volumes, neuropsychological performance scores, as well as indices of ethanol consumption.

despite promising leads from our focused mrna study, there were a number of limitations on its overall potential utility. first, because we examined expression of mrna from the pbls of our aud subjects, we could only speculate about potential transcript changes in other tissues, such as the brain. second, many subjects in that study had long histories of aud, and therefore did not represent an optimal subject set for discovering markers of early aud-induced alterations, which could potentially be reversible. third, the analysis we performed was focused exclusively on a limited set of a few hundred mrnas that had been identified through previous screens  <cit>  rather than the entire transcriptome. finally, the alterations in brain volumes we observed in the previous study were not controlled for overall brain shrinkage, which is well-characterized in auds as well as advanced aging.

because of the limitations just described, in the present study, we sought to expand upon our previous work by examining whether we could identify even more robust biomarkers using:  a younger subset of aud subjects with shorter histories of alcohol consumption who were completely age-matched to controls;  neuroimaging measures that were normalized to whole-brain volumes; and  measurements of extracellular micrornas  rather than leukocyte mrna for detection of early stage cns damage.

our current focus on mirnas builds upon considerable recent interest in their potential use as biomarkers in other diseases and conditions. micrornas are short, hairpin-derived rnas that repress protein expression of a large fraction of the genome in a vast array of species. in mammals, approximately half of all mrnas maintain selective pairing with mirnas  <cit> . thus, mirnas have emerged as a class of master regulatory molecules that control the level of post-transcriptional gene expression. in neurons, mirnas not only regulate mrna levels, but they also compartmentalize specific mrna expression within subcellular regions such as axons and dendrites  <cit> .

dysregulation of brain mirnas have also been recently associated with alcohol exposure. in human post-mortem brain samples, robust changes in mirna expression have been reported in the prefrontal cortex of subjects with a history of chronic alcohol abuse compared to controls  <cit> . robust changes in mirna levels have also been reported in the brains of rats following alcohol intoxication  <cit> . these findings are further supported by in vitro studies of the effects of ethanol effects on mirna levels in neurosphere cultures  <cit> .

in addition to their intracellular roles, mirnas are released by normal and damaged cells into the bloodstream and can serve as conduits for the spread of genetic and pathological information to distant cells and tissues. in this manner, mirnas have been shown to mediate the spread of cell and tissue damage or alter the microenvironment  <cit> . in fact, brain-specific mirnas have been identified in the blood and other bodily fluids and it has been suggested that they may provide the opportunity to evaluate ongoing changes in the cns upon the initiation of neurodegeneration  <cit> . for example, in alzheimer’s disease, mirnas that are associated with neuropathological changes in post-mortem brain tissue have been detected in blood sera of subjects meeting ante-mortem criteria for the disease, albeit at lower basal levels  <cit> . the potential importance of such findings gains further support from a recent study that demonstrated serum mrna levels could be directly regulated by brain-specific administration of rnai  <cit> .

in this study, we compared mirna expression levels in the serum of human subjects diagnosed with auds to those in healthy control subjects in order to identify potential biomarkers of cns alterations. further, we explored the potential relationship of candidate biomarkers with various medical, neuropsychological and normalized neuroimaging data. cross-species validation through mirna profiling of various in vivo and in vitro ethanol exposure paradigms helped confirm key mirna molecules affected by ethanol and their mrna targets. taken together, our data provide striking new insight into the potential epigenetic regulation of cns gene expression alterations brought about by auds.

RESULTS
in this study, we determined the feasibility of using serum mirnas to predict the extent of structural and functional cns impairments associated with alcohol use disorders. the subjects recruited for this study were selected to reflect the same average age and an equal number of males and females in each group . compared to our previous study that explored the use of mrna profiles from peripheral blood leukocytes  <cit> , the current study focused on a younger group of individuals, allowing exploration of potentially more sensitive biomarkers of early cns alterations. such early detection could promote development of therapeutic and preventative interventions that might halt or potentially reverse the cns effects.table  <dig> human subject characteristics

aud and control subject demographics. both groups reflect the same average age. subjects with alcohol use disorders were diagnosed using the dsm-iv alcohol abuse and dependence diagnostic criteria. a heavy drinking day was defined as  <dig> standard drinks for women and  <dig> for men



on average our aud subjects had been drinking an average of 12 years, starting around age  <dig>  they drank alcohol an average of 15 days during the month prior to recruitment, and consumed approximately five drinks per drinking day. as a group, the aud subjects had an average of one heavy drinking day  during the week prior to recruitment.

aud subjects show changes in specific brain regions, and a subset of clinical, medical and neuropsychological measures
comprehensive demographic, medical, neuropsychological and neuroimaging data were collected from each of the subjects. prior to hypothesis testing, variables were examined for equality of variance in aud subjects and controls using a fisher’s f test. variables that passed the f test  were examined for differences between aud subjects and controls using a student’s t-test, while those with unequal variance were tested using a welch’s t-test. unless otherwise stated, we did not correct for multiple testing due to the relatively small sample size and the desire to identify as many potential biomarkers as possible in our initial parametric screen. these were subsequently examined for quantitative associations with the other variables of interest.

aud subjects show elevations in ggt
our statistical screen identified a relatively small set of variables that differed between aud subjects and controls . among the standard medical laboratory blood tests , only the gamma-glutamyl transferase  assay differed between aud and control subjects, with an average increase of 85 %. notably, the average level in aud subjects was  <dig>  iu/l, which is above the normal range for males and females of the same age as our subjects. these elevated levels suggest at least some amount of early liver damage may be occurring in our subjects, since ggt elevations are commonly seen in patients with alcoholic liver disease, a well-documented effect of chronic alcohol consumption.table  <dig> medical, neuropsychological, and neuroimaging variables with significant changes in aud subjects

 gamma-glutamyl transferasea
 letter fluency scorea
comparison of various clinical and imaging parameters between aud and control subjects. neuroimaging measurements were normalized to whole brain size to correct for overall brain shrinkage before calculating  % changes relative to values from controls


aindicates variables determined to have unequal variances using the fisher’s f test that were examined for differences between groups using the welch’s t-test. all other variables were evaluated using the student’s t-test



aud subjects show reductions in verbal fluency
despite the large number of neuropsychological tests administered, aud subjects only showed significant differences compared to controls in the letter fluency test of the delis-kaplan executive function system   <cit> . this test examines the ability to rapidly generate non-redundant words that begin with specific letters in a short time interval. the aud subjects scored 22 % worse on average than controls in their scaled scores, indicating a relative impairment of a specific language function. this observation is consistent with significant verbal fluency abnormalities that have been reported in patients with much longer histories of alcohol use disorders, including those with korsakoff syndrome, a severe neurologic complication of aud  <cit> .

the subtlety and specificity of our neuropsychological findings may reflect the younger average age of our subjects, where alcohol-related brain damage phenotypes are more difficult to detect. comparisons of our results are most appropriately made to neuropsychological studies of adolescent and young adult drinkers. letter fluency tests on university age  subjects have not found differences in performance when binge drinkers were compared to non-binge drinkers  <cit> . however, longer-term studies on adolescent alcohol abusers  have displayed significantly impaired language skills  <cit> . this suggests that the language impairment we observed manifests itself later in young adulthood since our aud subjects typically started drinking during adolescence . indeed, our aud subjects showed a significant correlation between letter fluency test score and the number of years drinking . although the number of years drinking was confounded with age in our aud subjects, we did not observe a significant association between age and letter fluency test score in our controls.

aud subjects exhibit overall loss of gray matter and increased sulcal size
screening for possible structural brain changes in aud subjects versus controls was initially performed using a combination of two different autothresholding methods on skull-stripped 3d reconstructions of mri data . the moments method  <cit>  created a binary image which excluded the sulci while the triangle method  <cit>  created a binary image that included sulci and thus encompassed the entire visible external brain surface. the difference between these two images indicated the percentage of visible surface area occupied by cortical sulci . a student’s t-test performed on these measurements indicated significantly larger sulcal size  in aud subjects .fig.  <dig> subjects with alcohol use disorders have increased sulcal size. a skull-stripped brain reconstructions show increased sulcal size in subjects with auds when compared to age- and gender-matched controls. b sulcal size was measured in each reconstruction and expressed as a percentage of the brain’s area. c plot of mean sulcal size in aud and control subjects . group differences in % sulci between subjects with auds and controls were determined using a student’s t-test. y years of age



aud subjects exhibit volumetric changes in multiple brain regions
having observed an increased sulcal size even in this relatively young cohort of aud subjects, we further examined possible differences in regional brain volumes using a comprehensive unbiased approach to measure more than  <dig> pre-defined brain regions with the freesurfer software suite . moreover, in contrast to our previous volumetric analysis of older aud subjects and controls  <cit> , we normalized all of these measurements to total brain volume in order to control for overall brain shrinkage that occurs with aud or aging. in this manner, we hoped to find changes indicative of enhanced vulnerability to aud in some brain regions in a younger cohort. the subsequent comparisons between aud and control subjects yielded  <dig> individual regions with volumes that differed between groups . notably, because of our normalization method, the magnitude of changes in these  <dig> regions can be considered greater than that of the entire brain.

consistent with our initial sulcal measurements, the freesurfer-based volumetric analysis supported widening of the left central sulcus as well as ventricular enlargement in the 3rd and 4th ventricles and an increase in total csf volume. four out of the seven regions representing ventricular and csf spaces as well as sulci were larger in our aud subjects. these findings support previous research showing greater than normal ventricular enlargement and sulcal widening in relation to increasing age  <cit>  as well as csf size  <cit> .

most of the remaining regional volumes showed a decrease in aud subjects, consistent with their enhanced shrinkage relative to overall brain volume reduction. indeed, alcohol-related brain damage  has been well documented and does demonstrate some regional specificity, although some of these changes may be reversible by abstinence . examples of such regions include the anterior corpus callosum, which we observed to be almost 15 % smaller in our aud subjects, consistent with a previous study of male  <cit>  and female alcoholics  <cit> . notably, however, the average ages of participants in the studies from that group , were a decade older than our subjects , suggesting that corpus callosum volume shrinkage is occurring earlier than previously thought.

global, high-throughput human mirna expression screening and verification
to ensure optimal sampling, we employed a conservative strategy to identify and verify potential mirna biomarkers quantification of mirnas were based primarily on next-generation small rna-sequencing , which has emerged as a highly accurate method of mirna quantification owing to its sensitivity and considerable dynamic range  <cit> .

to validate our rna-seq findings, and help reduce the type i  error rate, we used affymetrix mirna genechips as a complementary analysis. the combined application of these two technologies improved our capacity to discover aud-relevant mirnas that would have been overlooked had a single quantification method been employed. indeed, we have recently used and discussed the merits of this combined approach in our studies of mirna changes in adolescent rat brain following fetal alcohol exposures  <cit> .

most mirnas in serum are present in fully mature -5p or -3p forms
initial serum mirna quantification was performed by aligning the illumina rna-seq data to the hg <dig> human reference genome. this was performed because most mirnas are encoded in intergenic regions, within non-coding rna genes or the introns of protein-coding genes. these primary mirna transcripts  are transcribed and processed in the nucleus before being exported out of the nucleus in their precursor hairpin forms . further processing in the cytoplasm via the protein dicer creates mature single-stranded mirnas of approximately  <dig> nucleotides. these mature mirnas then assemble into an rna-induced silencing complex  that interacts with complementary messenger rnas, and either target them for degradation or interfere with translation efficiency .

after whole genome alignment, we quantified reads using the refseq transcript annotation database and mirbase, an established, high-confidence database of micrornas  <cit> . the latter quantified both precursor and mature mirna regions. inspection of our aligned reads against mature and precursor mirna gene regions demonstrated that most reads were highly concentrated in one of two regions, corresponding to the mature -5p or -3p regions of individual mirnas, with very few reads mapping to the flanking or internal sequence regions that would be derived from immature pre-mirna or pri-mirna alignments . indeed, a probe trend plot of all  <dig> primary mirna transcripts available in mirbase  <dig> showed a striking bimodal distribution , and strongly suggested that the majority of mirnas we quantified in serum were present in a mature  form. moreover, while the absolute levels of some mirnas did appear to differ between subject groups, the overall pattern of preference for -5p or -3p mature forms was highly similar.fig.  <dig> micrornas in serum are in mature form. a representative image showing rna-seq reads aligned to region on chromosome  <dig>  reads are concentrated on mature mirna chromosome coordinates as defined by the mirbase  <dig> database. b trend plots mapping reads across all precursor mirnas in the human genome show that reads are concentrated in regions that roughly correspond to mature mirnas . we point out that the data shown are merely illustrative of the alignments produced during analysis of the rna-seq reads. note that mature mirnas are derived from the same strand as the full-length precursor, and appear in the location specified by the -5p box or -3p box. also note that while the absolute levels of some mature mirnas appeared to differ between aud and control subjects, the pattern of -5p or -3p usage appeared to be highly similar, which is best appreciated for the entire set of data in the lower plot




a tier system for classifying between-group differences across platforms
after alignment, we used the same statistical testing method described for the medical, demographic and neuroimaging variables to compare the mirna levels between subject groups for both the rna-seq and microarray data sets. individual mirnas with were then assigned to two different classification tiers depending on the strength of evidence for concordant changes in gene expression across the two quantification platforms . because of the greater sensitivity and dynamic range of rna-seq, the values produced using this method formed the primary basis for comparison of the subject groups, with differences detected through the microarrays serving as a means of cross-platform validation. tier a molecules represented stringent, nominally significant  mirnas generated from rna-seq quantification that also showed a strong trend  and directionally consistent changes in the microarray experiments. tier b molecules represented nominally significant  mirnas as determined by rna-seq that showed similar directional changes in the array data regardless of the p value. when possible, the mature forms of the mirnas were listed within each tier . notably, for mirnas in tiers a and b, the overall correlation in the percent changes seen in aud subjects with microarrays and rna-seq was  <dig>  .table  <dig> most consistently changed mirnas in aud

rna-sequencing of human serum samples determined mirnas with nominally significant alterations and trends in patients with auds. comparison with microarray data subsequently identified changes that were consistent across platforms. micrornas were classified into two tiers based on concurrence of both analyses. where available, microrna families for each mirna are also listed. note that these are nominal  p values


rpm normalized reads per million



most changed mirnas are increased in aud serum
examination of the mirnas that were most robustly changed in our aud subjects indicated that most were increased in expression . this observation is consistent with mirna findings in post-mortem brains of human alcoholics  <cit> . thus, the increased mirna we detected in aud subjects suggests a possible compensatory mechanism for neuronal injury, or potentially even enhanced transport of mirnas from the brain to the periphery as a result of cell damage. similar findings for other neurodegenerative conditions such as traumatic brain injury have also been reported  <cit> . a total of  <dig> mirnas in tier a and  <dig> in tier b were identified . interestingly, several of these mirnas have been previously found to be present at abnormal levels in studies of post-mortem human alcoholic brain tissue and animal models of ethanol exposure. for example, we found evidence of decreased mir-92b and increased mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  and mir- <dig> in our aud subjects, consistent with studies of primary cortical neurons  <cit> , mouse frontal cortex  <cit>  and rat ventral striatum  <cit> . moreover, some of the mirnas that we observed to change in the serum of aud subjects were also shown to change in the same direction in studies of hepatocytes from mice with alcoholic liver damage  or whole zebrafish embryos exposed to alcohol .

on the other hand, we also observed some changes in the serum of aud subjects that were opposite those reported in other studies. for example, we observed decreased expression of mir- <dig> , while other studies have shown increased levels in various brain regions after alcohol exposure. this includes our own findings in the amygdala  <cit>  of prenatally-exposed rats, as well as the prefrontal cortex  <cit>  of postnatally-exposed mice, and the frontal cortex from post-mortem brains of human alcoholics  <cit> . such discrepancies could merely reflect the variability of different tissues being analyzed, but it is also possible that the levels reported in those studies are greatly influenced by intracellular mirna processing, whereas the present data are derived from more stable extracellular serum mirnas.

one mirna finding of particular interest is mir-30a, which we observed to be increased 94 % in aud subjects . although mir- <dig> was found to be decreased in whole embryos after ethanol exposure  <cit> , it has been consistently shown to be increased in the brain of various models of ethanol exposure including whole brain  <cit> , nucleus accumbens  <cit>  and frontal cortex  <cit> . moreover, through its regulation of bdnf expression, mir-30a overexpression in the frontal cortex has also been shown to promote excessive alcohol intake which can then be reversed by inhibition of mirna activity  <cit> .

association of serum mirna levels with neuropsychological, demographic and neuroimaging variables identifies a third tier of mirnas
we integrated our clinical and mirna expression datasets to identify potentially relevant associations which could be further explored as indicators of aud. this was examined using a pearson correlation analysis to compare mirna expression levels and nominally significant neuropsychological, medical and neuroimaging measurements. these comparisons specifically did not include correlations between brain regions or between mirna levels, which would be very strong, but not particularly informative for this purpose. notably, indices of alcohol consumption were only included in the association testing of aud subjects  in an effort to identify direct biomarkers of alcohol consumption. pearson correlations were used to calculate t-scores and corresponding p-values. variables that were changed in our parametric analyses  were not corrected for multiple testing when evaluating their correlations. the results of this association testing are shown in table  <dig>  we also performed an exploratory screen of all expressed mirnas against all other variables in order to detect associations in the aud subjects that may have eluded detection in the parametric two group comparison. these correlations were not guided by any predictions about possible directional differences and thus were corrected for multiple testing using the benjamini-hochberg false discovery rate  algorithm. variables with an fdr < <dig>  in the aud subjects were defined as tier c mirnas and displayed along with the r, p, and fdr values observed in the control subjects and combined subject groups .table  <dig> variables correlated with tiers a or b mirnas in aud subjects 

pearson correlation analysis of mirna expression levels in aud subjects reveal significant relationships between specific mirna expression levels and other medical, drinking and neuroimaging variables that were significantly different in aud subjects


r pearson correlation coefficient, n number of pairs used in the calculation

table  <dig> tier c variables significantly correlated with any mirna in aud subjects 

pearson correlation analysis of mirna expression levels in aud subjects reveal significant relationships between specific mirna expression levels and other medical, drinking and neuroimaging variables that were significantly different in aud subjects


r pearson correlation coefficient, p-value uncorrected p value for correlation, bh fdr benjamini-hochberg false discovery rate corrected p value, n number of pairs used in the calculation



mirnas are associated with inferior frontal lobe, neuropsychological performance, drinking parameters and blood pressure
many significant correlations found with mirnas in tiers a, b and c were observed with distinct regions of the brain, including those that have already been identified as primarily decreased in alcoholics, such as the left inferior frontal triangular gyrus  and a similar region in the right inferior frontal lobe along the pars opercularis . notably, these two regions of the inferior frontal lobe are both involved in language function, and communicate with each other via the anterior corpus callosum, which we observed to be decreased in these same aud subjects . none of these particular mirnas showed significant correlations with letter fluency score. however, one mirna  did exhibit significant correlations with letter fluency score and a region of the anterior inferior temporal lobe , although the functions of this cortical area are unclear at this time. the exploratory correlation analysis also identified some notable associations between mirna levels and some of the drinking parameters , blood pressure , and brain areas involved in higher order visual, sensory, and limbic processing .

in addition to the correlational analyses of individual mirnas and variables, we also used mev <dig> software  <cit>  to perform a hierarchical cluster analysis and identify patterns of correlations between sets of variables across subjects . the pearson clustering algorithm with average linkage distances was employed for this because it most effectively distinguished aud and control subjects .fig.  <dig> variables and mirnas delineate auds from controls. hierarchical clustering of nominally significant clinical, neuropsychological and neuroimaging data combined with mirnas belonging to tiers a and b. clusters reveal relationships between specific serum mirnas and brain volumes. log normalized median scaled values are shown. l left, r right



the clusters derived from this analysis, composed of mixed variable and mirna components, provide additional insight into possible roles mirnas play in the phenotypic changes we observe in aud. for example, one cluster whose associations were not evident in the initial pearson correlation analysis contained tier a molecule mir-92b and several brain regions . notably, this cluster was located adjacent to another cluster containing letter fluency score, as well as mir-660-5p . mir-92b has been shown to be abundant in the developing cortex and to regulate the development of intermediate cortical progenitor cells  <cit> . while our aud subjects were adults and thus not undergoing large scale cortical neurogenesis, these data nevertheless support a possible role for mir-92b in mediating brain damage resulting from aud that will need further exploration because of the functional implications of the aforementioned brain areas regarding speech and language processing.

gene expression signatures related to brain-specific expression profiles
although a peripheral biomarker can be useful from a purely diagnostic or correlative perspective, we also sought to obtain additional insight into the potential relevance of our serum-based mirna data for providing information about brain mirna levels. to begin to address this, we determined possible tissue origins for mirnas of interest by performing comprehensive mirna profiling on  <dig> distinct tissues and serum derived from three normal adolescent  male rats. tissue-specific profiles were generated on mirnas from tiers a, b and c. these data were normalized to the total mirna levels in each tissue and compared to brain hemisphere levels in these same animals by hierarchical cluster analysis to discern meaningful patterns across tissues . the levels of expression in the serum were also displayed for the same mirnas.fig.  <dig> comparison with tissue mirna profiles suggests origins for specific serum mirnas. pooled mirnas purified from tissues of  <dig> male p <dig> normal rats were compared to expression levels measured in whole brain hemispheres. rattus norgvegicus expression levels for specific mirnas belonging to tiers a, b and c were clustered to determine micrornas which are enriched in the brain compared to  <dig> other tissues. for relative comparisons, the levels of these mirnas in the serum are also shown, and the number of base differences between the rat and human mirna sequences are shown for both the fully mature and stem-loop forms



using this method, we found that most of the mirnas of interest were present in the whole brain at moderate to high levels . moreover, at least  <dig> of the mirnas were grouped together following this analysis and appeared to be brain-enriched . notably, however, several of these were also enriched in muscle, spleen, skin, stomach, or testes, though in different combinations. interestingly, mir-92b showed particular enrichment in brain and lung, which was not a common pattern among any other mirnas. most of the mirnas in fig.  <dig> were also highly expressed in the serum of normal adolescent rats, with the exception of mir- <dig>  mir-96-5p, and mir-150-3p. also of note was the fact that all of the mirnas were completely conserved in their mature forms between rat and humans, although some nucleotide differences were present in the immature stem-loop sequences . thus, based on the cross-tissue analysis in rat, we are confident that at least some of the mirnas in the human serum could be derived from the brain, although we cannot rule out other contributing sources without additional studies.

systems level cross-paradigm analysis reveals a common theme: mirnas and targets that regulate cellular development, cell growth and proliferation, and cell death and survival are the most consistently affected in aud subjects and drinking models
in addition to the human serum mirna profiling, we also utilized two other ethanol exposure paradigms in an attempt to corroborate ethanol-induced effects found in human serum. we first performed serum mirna profiling using an in vivo rat drinking model wherein adult rats were subjected to a  <dig>  % ethanol  diet for 3 weeks. exposures were either performed daily or 3 days per week. serum mirna levels were measured and compared to those from pair-fed controls who received an isocaloric non-alcoholic liquid diet during the same binge periods. to these data we then added additional mirna profiling data obtained from an in vitro ns <dig> neural stem cell ethanol exposure model   <cit> . because mirnas have the capacity to modulate multiple gene targets and show cell context-dependent effects, we elected to perform a systems-level analysis rather than a screen for individual targets identified in our human studies. thus, common molecular functions and biological networks were ascertained and compared across paradigms rather than individual mirnas. the cross-paradigm systems level analysis was accomplished using qiagen ingenuity® ipa analysis using all nominally significant mirnas  from both the in vitro and in vivo ethanol exposure paradigms and human serum mirnas from tiers a and b . surprisingly, we found that  <dig> of the top  <dig> molecular functions represented in the altered mirnas overlapped across these very different data sets:  cellular development,  cell growth and proliferation, and  cell death and survival. these results provide strong evidence that that alcohol induces global mirna expression changes affecting these functions in the mature brain, and potentially in developing brain cells as well. all of these changes are detectable in serum.table  <dig> in vivo and in vitro exposure paradigms converge with human data on same cellular functions

cellular developmenta
cell death and survivala
cellular growth and proliferationa
ingenuity ipa analysis of significantly changed mirnas found using rna-sequencing  show top functional groups affected by ethanol in each experiment. different ethanol exposure paradigms, both in vitro  and in vivo , show complete convergence for  <dig> of the top  <dig> functional groups  identified by ipa as affected by ethanol



we further extended our systems-level analysis beyond the mirnas themselves, to explore possible functional predictions in experimentally-confirmed or highly-predicted genes that are targeted by the mirna molecules identified from human serum . inspection of the networks and nodes formed by the secondary  and tertiary  relationships revealed a few key hub molecules at the intersection of the common gene targets and networks affected by the mirnas. the most striking of these hub molecules were p <dig> and tumor necrosis factor , which are critical mediators of cell cycle progression, dna repair and apoptosis. thus, these molecules may exert key influences over the mirna-induced changes resulting from alcohol exposure.fig.  <dig> p <dig> is highly involved in aud-related mirna changes. ingenuity ipa analysis of ethanol up-  or down-  regulated mirnas in tiers a & b show enrichment of molecules implicated in p53-related pathways. molecular activity prediction shows a general inhibition of this pathway as a result of mirna expression changes. adamts <dig> adam metallopeptidase with thrombospondin  <dig>  cep <dig> centrosomal protein  <dig>  cg choriogonadotropin, chsy <dig> chondroitin sulfate synthase  <dig>  gulo gulonolactone l-oxidase, mrps <dig> mitochondrial ribosomal protein s <dig>  npepl <dig> aminopeptidase-like  <dig>  pak <dig> p- <dig> protein-activated kinase  <dig>  pnpla <dig> patatin-like phospholipase domain-containing protein  <dig>  prosc proline synthetase, scyl <dig> scy1-like  <dig>  slc2a <dig> and 10a <dig>  solute carriers 2a <dig> and 10a <dig>  tmem <dig> transmembrane protein  <dig>  tnf tumor necrosis factor, xkr <dig> xk, kell blood group complex subunit-related family 8



CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we examined the potential for serum mirnas to serve as biomarkers of alcohol-related structural and functional cns damage in human subjects. this diverse and largely uncharacterized class of genomic regulators has the capacity to enact change on a global scale. harnessing several lines of inquiry, our work integrated medical, neuropsychological, neuroimaging and alcohol consumption measures with mirna expression levels to probe for informative markers of arbd.

because we focused on younger individuals with auds, our work also adds to a small, but growing body of literature surrounding arbd in young adults. although we found significant group differences in our aud subjects’ letter fluency test scores, we note that overall, aud subjects did not show signs of cognitive impairment. this supports the notion that administering such tests on younger individuals may not prove to be as informative as they are for older chronic alcoholics with more pronounced deficits.

on the other hand, we observed more robust differences between aud subjects and controls when we examined specific brain volumes. furthermore, although many of our observations were similar to those reported previously in older alcoholic subjects, we observed these effects on younger subjects, with a significantly shorter history of heavy drinking. the importance of assessing alcohol-related brain damage in younger aud subjects, even in the absence of obvious functional deficits, is only recently being explored  and clearly merits further investigation. regardless, however, such an approach is not feasible on a broad scale for monitoring due to its prohibitive costs.

in contrast, our results have identified potential mirna biomarkers in the serum which ultimately could serve as practical, sensitive and reliable indicators of neurocognitive decline and arbd. at this point at least, in the case of tiers a and b micrornas, we also found that the mirna changes were observable using two complementary high-throughput quantification technologies. to be ideal, however, it would be helpful to know the time course over which such biomarker profiles develop, and whether such profiles were reversible or not as a result of abstinence from alcohol.

there are some limitations worth noting in the present study. first, the systems-level approach that we used to evaluate cellular functions takes into account the inherently pleiotropic nature of mirnas. these mirnas have the capacity to regulate hundreds of genes within any given cell. thus, determining precise mechanisms of action clearly requires additional investigation. further, interpretation of mirna-mediated changes in gene expression also requires a combinatorial approach wherein they are analyzed in the context of accessible messenger rna targets and the presence of other mirna molecules that can synergize more drastic changes in gene expression.

in spite of these limitations, we have shown that alcohol acts on similar cellular functions: cell death and survival, cellular development and cell growth and proliferation across different ethanol exposure paradigms. our analysis has revealed perturbation of biologically plausible pathways that have previously been shown to be altered in response to ethanol exposure in both prenatal and postnatal settings. thus, although our results are by no means definitive, they highlight the tremendous potential of mirnas as non-invasive arbd biomarkers.

