BACKGROUND
telomeres consist of n repeats and associated proteins at the end of chromosomes in mammalian cells and function in the maintenance of genomic stability to protect the chromosomes from degradation and end-to-end fusion  <cit> . telomere sequence is conserved among mammals  <cit> . normal human cells, including the stem cells of renewal tissues, show progressive telomere shortening with cell division until a subset of telomeres reach a critically short length, inducing dna-damage response and replicative senescence or cell aging  <cit> .

mouse cells may have telomere damage signaling pathways different from those of humans  <cit> . the observed senescence of mouse cells in culture may not be related to telomere shortening, but rather to changing culture condition, such as excessive oxidative stress  <cit> . it was proposed that the mouse may not be the best animal model for study of human telomere biology, as fundamental differences exist between human and mouse telomere biology  <cit> . other mammals, including dogs, primates, and sheep, have also been compared for telomere biology and function  <cit> . pigs have been considered as an ideal organ provider for xeno-transplantation and also as appropriate large animal models for preclinical tests and study of human diseases, including cardiovascular disease, diabetes, infectious disease, and cancer, and stem cell therapy  <cit> , owing to the similarities in anatomy and physiology between pigs and humans  <cit> . also, primary porcine cells have been genetically engineered to induce tumors in size similar to those observed clinically, and may provide a robust cancer model for preclinical studies  <cit> .

pig telomeres share the conserved ttaggg sequence of mouse and human telomeres  <cit> . the terminal restriction fragments  from pig cells  are longer than those of human cells  but shorter than those of laboratory mice   <cit> . the major quantitative methods available for telomere measurement include length distribution of trfs by southern blot, quantitative fluorescence in situ hybridization  that shows individual telomere lengths of metaphase spreads  <cit> , mean telomere length by quantitative pcr   <cit> , and pcr of single telomere lengths   <cit> . pig telomeres have been revealed by fluorescence in situ hybridization using human telomere repeat probe n  <cit>  and primed in situ dna synthesis   <cit> , but telomere measurement by either method was not quantitative.

trf measurement by southern blot was employed to examine telomere lengths in cloned pigs  <cit> . trfs show distribution of telomeres in smear gels by southern blots, and only average telomere length is estimated by this approach. however, it is not the average telomere length but rather the shortest telomere that constitutes telomere dysfunction and that becomes a major determinant of the onset of senescence  <cit> . consistently, chromosome arms carrying the shortest telomeres are the first to be unstable  <cit> . telomeres were recently found to resemble fragile sites  <cit> . the shortest telomeres, or fragile telomeres, may reflect dna-damage response signals in senescent human cells  <cit> . thus far, quantitative measurement of telomeres at the level of individual chromosomes has not been performed in porcine cells. moreover, the precise characteristics of pig telomeres and their roles in cellular senescence and immortalization remain elusive. we sought to measure pig telomeres by comparing three methods, southern blot, q-fish, and qpcr, and to characterize pig telomeres in relevance to cellular senescence during subculture of pig primary cells.

RESULTS
telomere lengths shown as trfs decrease during subculture of pig primary cells
fibroblasts and mesenchymal cells derived from the bone marrow of fetal  and newborn  pigs, as well as fibroblasts from adult pigs , during their early passages, did not show significantly different telomere lengths  by southern blot analysis. telomere lengths of newborn fibroblasts were slightly shorter than those of fetal fibroblasts during their early passages. adult pig fibroblasts had telomere lengths similar to those of newborn fibroblasts. telomere lengths of pig cells, regardless of the age of the animals, were longer than those of human fibroblasts . the telomere lengths also were compared for fetal mesenchymal, newborn mesenchymal, and adult fibroblast cells during subcultures. telomere lengths of these cells, shown as trfs, shortened significantly  from early to late passages  . the hinfi/rsai restriction enzyme mixture was used for genome digestion, and telomeres were digested in the subtelomeric region , such that trfs contained lengths of various subtelomeric regions in the samples . therefore, measurements of telomeres by southern blot analysis could show telomere trf distribution, but the precise status of individual telomeres was not discernible.

telomere doublets and signal-free ends increase during subculture of pig cells identified by q-fish
to further confirm the trf results obtained by southern blot analysis and to analyze individual telomeres, we measured telomere lengths of the pig cell types described above by metaphase telomere q-fish using fitc-labeled  pna probe. telomeres, at both terminal and interstitial sites, were found in various pig cell types . notably, telomere doublets were typically found at high frequencies at the chromosome ends of all cell types examined . in contrast, only fewer doublets  were observed in mouse embryonic fibroblasts . consistent with the trf data, the average relative telomere lengths estimated by q-fish did not differ among pig cell types . not all telomere doublets were clearly separated by the fluorescence signal, so the mean telomere length measured by q-fish also contained the signal of the doublets. fluorescence of one doublet often exhibited a lower signal intensity than the other of the sister doublets. pig cells during early passages showed a low frequency of telomere signal-free ends , indicative of telomere loss . compared to mouse embryonic fibroblasts , pig cells showed shorter telomeres and higher frequency of telomere doublets. moreover, pig cells, after more passages  during subculture, exhibited telomere shortening, compared to their primary cells  during the early  passages . interestingly, telomeres shortened less at later passages in these cells . telomeres are maintained primarily by active telomerase  <cit> . we determined telomerase activity in various cell types using te elisa kit. telomerase activity of pig mesenchymal cells and fibroblast cells were detectable . the telomerase activity of fetal and newborn pig mesenchymal cells did not show noticeable decrease during passages, whereas the activity in adult pig fibroblasts declined during passages. reduced telomerase activity coincided with evident telomere shortening and loss in adult fibroblasts during passages . yet, the telomerase activity seemed not to correlate with telomere shortening and loss in newborn mesenchymal cells, and the reason is unclear presently.

during subculture of various pig cell types, frequencies of telomere signal-free ends and doublets increased, accompanied by telomere shortening . high frequency of telomere signal-free ends seemed to coincide with higher incidence of telomere doublets in pig cells.

telomere length measurement by quantitative real-time pcr
an additional method was required to further confirm the data obtained by q-fish. we showed that both qpcr and q-fish methods complement each other for telomere measurement in mouse cells  <cit> . initial experiments were designed to determine whether human and/or mouse telomere primers could efficiently amplify pig telomeres by qpcr . pig 36b <dig> was used as an internal control. samples for both mouse and human telomeres and 36b <dig> amplification were run under the same conditions. we found that primers for mouse telomeres  were suitable for pig telomere amplification, based on amplification efficiency and melting curves , whereas pig telomere amplification efficiency using human telomere primers was only  <dig> % . in addition,  <dig> ng of dna was suitable for amplification of both pig telomeres and 36b <dig> .

by qpcr analysis, telomeres from five cell types showed similar lengths, with relatively shorter telomeres in adult fibroblasts , consistent with the results obtained by southern and q-fish methods. further, telomeres shortented in pig fetal mesenchymal cells, newborn mesenchymal cells, and adult fibroblasts from early to late passages  . regression analysis indicated that the average telomere lengths measured by southern, q-fish, and qpcr were highly  correlated with each other, showing high r <dig> between q-fish and southern, qpcr and southern, and q-fish and qpcr as  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively .

increased telomere dysfunction with accumulation of senescent cells
we speculated that telomere shortening and dysfunction are associated with cell senescence in pig cells during passaging. cellular senescence was evaluated by standard β-galactosidase  assay . indeed, the incidence of β-gal-positive cells increased remarkably with increasing passages, regardless of the cell types . senescence can be triggered by up-regulation of p <dig> and p <dig> <cit> , and p53-dependent senescence responds to dysfunctional telomeres  <cit> . consistently, expression levels of p <dig> and p <dig> increased during subculture of pig cells , in association with telomere shortening. changes in p <dig> protein levels were verified by western blot . γ-h2ax foci colocalized with telomeres, as indicative of telomere dysfunction-induced foci   <cit> , were analyzed for various cell types. the percentage of tifs by if-fish and of cells with dna damage increased significantly at later passages .

discussion
we compared three methods for telomere measurement in pig cells. using telomere q-fish method  <cit> , interestingly, we found that pig cells show high incidence of telomere doublets. pig lymphocytes at metaphase were analyzed by fish with telomeric dna probes to identify telomeres at both terminal and interstitial sites, but the method was not sensitive enough to reveal telomere doublets  <cit> . telomeres in interphase nuclei of pig ovarian follicles were also measured by fish with telomeric dna probes  <cit> , but the overlapping of telomere signals in interphase nuclei might overestimate the telomere signals. we show here that the q-fish method using telomeric pna probe is very useful in determining both the lengths and the status of pig telomeres.

telomere qpcr yields t/s ratio and is a time-saving method for relative quantitative measurement of telomeres. in addition, the method only requires a small amount of sample  <cit> . we slightly modified the telomere amplification conditions by amplification of both telomere and 36b <dig> primers in one set of reaction. we found a high correlation of t/s ratio measured by qpcr with telomere length measured by q-fish in mouse stem cells  <cit> . the t/s ratio determined by qpcr contained lengths of both terminal and interstitial telomere sequences. interestingly, telomeric primers for mouse, but not human telomeres, are suitable for pig telomere measurement by qpcr. the reason is unclear, but might relate to higher amplification efficiency for longer telomeres of pig cells. together, telomere lengths measured by three methods showed strong correlation, proving effective measurement of relative telomere lengths by each method. telomere structure, loss, and doublets, however, can only be revealed by q-fish method.

telomere lengths of pig skin fibroblasts at early passages show no appreciable differences among individuals. yet, telomeres shorten significantly during subculture of various pig cell types. also, human fibroblasts undergo replicative senescence, accompanied by accumulation of short telomeres and loss of telomeric sequences  <cit> , and the accumulated telomeric loss accelerates senescence  <cit> . up-regulation of p <dig> and p53-induced gene, p <dig>  is associated with cell senescence  <cit> . likewise, porcine cells show increased expression levels of p <dig> and p <dig>  along with telomere shorting and cell senescence. telomere dysfunction, accompanied by cell senescence, has been shown to appear early in human cells  <cit> . it appears that pig cells undergo senescence in a manner similar to human cells.

notably, pig cells exhibit telomere doublets at a high incidence. primary pig cell lines showed approximately 5% doublets, similar to human cells  <cit> . telomere doublets often refer to more than one telomeric signal at a single chromatid end  <cit> . telomere doublets may indicate fragile telomeres, following damages to telomeres  <cit> . telomere doublets are indicative of genome instability. telomere doublets are found in both normal and mutant human cells  <cit> , and also associated with fragile telomeres and cellular senescence  <cit> . increased frequency of telomere doublets during subculture of pig cells also coincides with telomere loss and dysfunction, in association with cellular senescence. both telomere doublets and telomere loss represent telomere instability, and telomere doublets may lead to telomere shortening and loss under stress conditions. telomere doublets may provide a marker for cell senescence.

CONCLUSIONS
porcine cells exhibit high frequency of telomere doublets and are susceptible to telomere damage and replicative senescence. telomere biology of pigs appears to be similar to that of humans. investigation of telomere dysfunction and senescence using pig cells may complement studies of human biology and medicine.

