BACKGROUND
determining the ecological conditions that shape group formation and social structures is a prerequisite for understanding social evolution  <cit> . studies in numerous group-living species that follow individuals longitudinally over multiple years find that relationships among individuals change both quantitatively and qualitatively over time  <cit> . this is especially true of societies structured by fission-fusion processes, in which associations among individuals may change over time scales ranging from hours to months  <cit> . patterns in these dynamics may shed light on the underlying ecological conditions that drive the behavior of individuals  <cit> . in this paper, we examine social dynamics in a population of asian elephants.

the longevity and cognitive sophistication of elephants make them potentially capable of maintaining complex social relationships  <cit> . the asian elephant , african savannah elephant  and african forest elephant,  are the only living members of the proboscidean clade  <cit> . among adult african and asian elephants, females and calves form the basis of social units. in african savannah elephants, relatives associate most closely, but multiple social units associate periodically to form hierarchically stratified 'multi-tiered' societies with fission-fusion dynamics  <cit> . relatedness decreases at higher order 'tiers'  <cit> . much less is known about the social organization of african forest elephants, but it appears they generally tend to form smaller social groups than savannah elephants  <cit> .

surprisingly little is known of the social behavior of asian elephants in the wild, despite their long history of co-habitation with people. while it has been commonly assumed that asian and african elephants behave similarly  <cit> , independent field studies in india and sri lanka suggest that adult females associate only with maternal relatives  <cit>  and also tend to form smaller groups than african savannah elephants  <cit> . early studies report that asian elephants form 'loose' associations with one another, implying unstable social affiliations  <cit> . a more recent study of asian elephants at uda walawe and yala national parks in southern sri lanka found that matrilineal kin in fact associated together only 18-20% of time, based on observation and telemetry data, leading to the conclusion that individuals from different matrilines are unlikely to associate at all, and that inter-group transfer of females most likely does not occur  <cit> . it was proposed that family groups fission into daughter groups which then become largely independent of one another  <cit> .

in this paper we investigate how local ecological conditions influence the social dynamics of adult female asian elephants by tracking associations within a single wild population that inhabits a highly seasonal environment in sri lanka. there are at least three distinct temporal patterns of associations that we could potentially observe: random, cyclic, or stable. in the light of previous findings  <cit> , we expect to be able to reject the null hypothesis of random associations. we expect to observe cyclicity in associations if seasonal resource abundance governs the degree to which individuals associate. alternately, individuals may form stable associations that are independent of environmental conditions. we take cross-sectional and longitudinal views to determine which patterns emerge at different levels of organization within the society. first, we characterize how the strength of the relationship between pairs of individuals changes over time. we then quantify how close companions of individuals, their putative 'ego-networks,' change over time. finally, we take a bird's eye view of the population to examine whether this asian elephant society has a tier structure akin to that of african elephants.

RESULTS
we identified  <dig> adult females from september  <dig> to december  <dig>  key terms used throughout the paper are given in table  <dig>  the number of sightings per identified individual ranged between  <dig> and  <dig>  with a median of  <dig>  the number of identified adult females seen per month tended to peak at the end of dry seasons in  <dig> and  <dig> , just prior to the onset of the long monsoon, and the rest of the year remained above  <dig> individuals per month. on average we identified 64% of all adult females encountered. the identification rate was higher  for groups where at least one adult female was previously identified, which is comparable to other similar studies  <cit> . group sizes, in terms of the number of adult females encountered in a group, ranged widely but the median was between  <dig> and  <dig> in all seasons.

1group size here refers to the number of adult females in a group after data aggregation . 3clusters are obtained using the girvan-newman algorithm with the sri threshold equal to zero . distributions of group sizes and cluster sizes are shown in figure  <dig> 

structure at the level of dyads
we measure associations between pairs of individuals using the simple ratio index or sri  <cit> , which is in essence a proportion of time two individuals spend together . summary data are given in table  <dig>  the sri matrices and a measure of uncertainty of the sri values are shown in the supplementary material . we find that associations among adult females within all five seasons are significantly nonrandom . the sri matrices are also significantly correlated across seasons . thus, pairs of individuals that associate in one season are likely to associate in other seasons and pairs that do not associate in any one season rarely associate in any other season. however, sri matrices from corresponding seasons across years are not correlated any more or less than matrices from adjacent seasons.

r denotes the pearson correlation coefficient. n denotes the number of individuals common to both seasons. all r values are highly significant .

a simple correlation analysis captures only very coarse features of data and misses more subtle patterns. we therefore examine the social dynamics of the uda walawe population in more detail using other methods. in order to maximize the signal to noise ratio in the data, we restrict the subsequent analyses to  <dig> core individuals, i.e., those that were present in all seasons and were seen at least  <dig> times during the study period. we plot the sri values for each pair of individuals as a function of time to determine whether such temporal sri trajectories follow any of the three natural patterns that we expect a priori : stable, which are signified by a flat trajectory , temporary, signified by a single-peak trajectory , or cyclic, signified by a trajectory with multiple peaks . we find that out of the  <dig> dyads that associated in at least one season,  <dig> dyads  formed by  <dig>  individuals maintain bonds with strength at or above  <dig>  in all seasons . thus, approximately 18% of the females engage in at least one relationship that is relatively strong compared to the majority of ties. although these relationships still fluctuate over time, we consider them to be instances of type a trajectories. using k-means clustering, we find that the remaining  <dig> dyads have one of six distinct sri trajectories, .  <dig>  of dyadic relationships  have sri trajectories of type b, with a single peak in one of the five seasons. all of  <dig> examined individuals participate in such relationships. moreover, for  <dig> dyads , the sri peaks in either the transitional or dry seasons. finally,  <dig>  of dyadic relationships formed by  <dig>  individuals have the sri trajectories of type c with peaks in the two dry seasons. this suggests cyclicity in associations among some individuals that a statistical test of correlation across seasons does not pick up. interestingly, even though single peaks  occur in wet seasons, we do not detect a typical trajectory with peaks in both wet seasons.

the total number of potential dyads is  <dig>  of which  <dig>  had a nonzero sri value in at least one season. 'trajectory type' denotes the k-means curve type that best describes the sri trajectory of the dyad , with corresponding plots shown in figure  <dig>  'peak season' refers to the time period in which association strength is greatest. 'number of dyads' shows the number of dyads whose sri trajectory has the respective type . 'number of individuals' indicates the number of individuals forming the respective dyads .

so far we have been concerned with how the strength of association among dyads changes over time. yet an individual may uniformly increase or decrease the absolute amount of time she spends with others without changing the rank order of her preferred companions. we now ask whether the identities of her preferred companions change over time, irrespectively of the tie strength . we find that a typical individual partitions her time approximately equally among her long-term companions, i.e., those that are present in her top-five for five seasons , and her short-term companions, i.e., those that are present in her top-five for one season . this is different from an expectation under the null hypothesis that individuals randomly reshuffle their companions every season . the observed fraction of long-term companions is significantly higher than the fraction expected under this null hypothesis . interestingly, individuals have a significantly smaller fraction of medium-term companions, i.e., those that are present in top-five for four seasons, than either short-term companions  or long-term companions , resulting in a u-shaped distribution of companionship preferences .

we also observe individual variation in social behavior at the level of dyads.  <dig> females  maintained  <dig> to  <dig> of their top-five companions for all five seasons, while  <dig> females  completely changed their top-five companions over the course of the study . moreover, individuals vary by as much as factor of  <dig> in the number individuals they associate with on average within a season and in the average strength of their ties . we also observe that those individuals who associate with many individuals  typically have weak ties to their associates , whereas those who maintain few associates have strong ties to them . since the association index reflects the amount of time two individuals spend together, this negative correlation suggests a trade-off between the number of associates that an individual can maintain and the amount of time she can spend with each of those associates.

ego-network structure
we now expand our view beyond dyads to look at multiple direct associates of an individual simultaneously in a larger sample of  <dig> residents, i.e., individuals that were observed in every season . we represent sri matrices as weighted social network graphs  <cit> , where nodes correspond to individuals, edges connect those who have been associated within a season, and edge weights correspond to the sri values . an ego-network is then a social network that consists only of the subject, or 'ego,' and the nodes to which she is directly connected, i.e. individuals with whom she was associated at least once . for each resident, we compute five ego-network measures, defined in table  <dig>  average values of ego-network measures over all residents are called ego-network statistics.

1bm is the mean of the bootstrap distribution

'size' is the number of the subject's  direct companions, i.e., those individuals seen in a group with her at least once. 'ties' is the number of ties between a subject's direct companions. 'pairs' is the number of potential ties in the ego-network, i.e., the number of ties that would exist if all of subject's direct companions were also each other's direct companions. 'density' is the ratio of actual to potential connections in the ego-network , indicating how well-connected companions are to each other. '2-step reach' is the number of individuals within two degrees of separation from the subject, i.e., the number of friends and friends of friends. for each season, the first column shows the ego-network statistic, i.e., the mean of the distribution of ego-network measures across  <dig> residents; the second column shows the standard deviation of this distribution, and the third column shows the expected value of the ego-network statistic derived from  <dig> bootstrap samples. bootstrap distributions were generated as described in methods. the bootstrap distributions for the size, ties, pairs and 2-step reach statistics are shifted towards lower values with respect to the actual values in all seasons, and the bootstrap distribution of the density statistic is shifted towards higher values in all seasons. all bootstrap distributions are significantly different from each other across seasons .

all ego-network statistics except 'density' tend to have lower values in wet seasons than in dry seasons , indicating that ego-networks are larger in dry seasons than in wet seasons. the measure 'density' is marginally lower in dry seasons, implying that the ego-networks are less interconnected in dry seasons than in wet seasons. because ego-network measures for different individuals are non-independent, we cannot directly test for differences between the distributions of ego-network measures in different seasons. instead, we test for differences in the bootstrap distributions of ego-network statistics  <cit> . the bootstrap means of ego-network statistics are reported in table  <dig>  bootstrap distributions for all ego-network statistics differ significantly between seasons. we note however that these distributions for all statistics in all seasons are systematically shifted with respect to the observed values . this suggests that the bootstrap method we used produces biased distributions of ego-network statistics, but we are not aware of a better method for statistical comparison. we therefore must be cautious with the interpretation of table  <dig> 

the ego-network measures are sensitive to the number and arrangement of companions but ignore their identities. however, visualizations of ego-networks demonstrate that while a subject's direct companions do change over time, she has a few that are almost always present; even those that are not present continuously may have been companions in previous seasons . thus, individuals maintain long-term relationships with others even though they may be apart for one or several seasons and have low sri values.

population-level structure
we now step out further and examine global relationships among the entire study population within each season using the girvan-newman method for finding community structure, as described in the methods. to avoid confusion with sociological definitions of communities, here we refer to the subnetworks found by this algorithm simply as 'clusters.' these clusters represent one or more social units, i.e. sets of individuals that have more ties to one another than to those outside of the set . results are presented in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 

first, we note that the social network formed by individuals in this population is extensive and well-connected . moreover, in all seasons, a typical cluster detected by the girvan-newman algorithm is  <dig> to  <dig> times larger than a typical group encountered by observers in the field . these findings are unexpected in the light of previous studies which have suggested that asian elephants do not display extensive social affiliations  <cit> .

next, we examine how the structure of the social network changes over time. for each season, we plot the network structure curves , which show how ties of various strengths are distributed in a manner that is easier to digest than the social network diagrams depicted in figure  <dig> . a network generated from randomized data shows no distinct clusters . as a result, the corresponding network structure curve remains flat until the sri threshold reaches the mean tie strength in the network, at which point the curve rapidly declines to zero . in contrast, the network structure curves for real data have a distinct peak. this is probably a consequence of the fact that both extremely weak ties and extremely strong ties can be influenced by sampling effects, but intermediate values clearly distinguish core social units. although all seasons have 10- <dig> well-defined clusters at the sri threshold of zero, network structure curves for each season behave differently at subsequent sri threshold values. in particular, the slope of the curve changes only once  in seasons d <dig>  d <dig> and w <dig>  but changes twice  in seasons t <dig> and w <dig> . this suggests that the network structures in each season are different . although the network structure curves are different across seasons, there appear to be no patterns characteristic of dry or wet seasons per se. visual inspection of networks shows that, while many clusters maintain their integrity across seasons, some individuals transfer between clusters, and the connections among clusters change .

discussion
we have presented the first detailed quantitative characterization of social organization in an asian elephant population, at multiple levels of organization and across ecological timescales. we asked whether associations are random, stable, or cyclic. we find that the answer depends on the timescale and level of organization. most ties are weak  compared those of african savannah elephants where typical association rates are above  <dig>   <cit> . despite the overall weakness of ties, most individuals have a few strong ties  as well as a few consistent ties  with some of their associates. individuals do not mix randomly within the population, nor are they always with the same companions, but rather they shuffle amongst a subset of preferred companions. all individuals engage in temporary associations, especially during dry seasons. some also associate to a greater degree in dry seasons, forming cyclic associations. this cyclicity is evident at the level of dyadic associations , but not at the ego-network or population levels.

our results suggest a view of asian elephant social structure that is different from what has been described in the literature before. earlier studies reported small group sizes typically consisting of less than five adult females  <cit> , a number comparable to the group sizes observed in this study. the number of individuals with the same mitochondrial haplotype ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  <cit> , which could be taken as matrilineal family sizes. however, families and observer-defined groups are only relevant structural units insofar as they relate to actual social units, expressed through the animals' behavior. the latter are revealed by a quantitative analysis of long-term association data rather than genetics  <cit> . it took up to two years to obtain repeated observations of all members of some social units in this study . in this paper, we used the girvan-newman procedure to detect such social units and found that they are in fact much larger than either the group or family sizes reported in previous studies . such units are more stable across years than individuals' immediate companions. informal photographic records suggest that some of the individuals in this study have associated since at least  <dig> , which supports the existence of long-term stable associations. since asian elephants are capable of communicating both chemically  <cit>  and acoustically  <cit>  at distances humans find difficult to observe, they may be aware of the their associates' locations even when the latter are beyond the visual range of human observers. indeed, vision is not the preferred mode of perception for elephants, as we see individuals track precise paths taken by others using scent even when both parties are plainly visible to humans. moreover, outside protected areas, elephants are largely nocturnal . 'groups' of asian elephants are not unlike those formed by african elephants  <cit> . as with other animal societies that exhibit fission-fusion dynamics, such as that of chimpanzees  <cit> , the social organization of a highly mobile species like asian elephants is not fully evident without systematic and prolonged observations, particularly in areas where visibility is restricted. long-term observations of other asian elephant populations would be extremely useful to corroborate this finding.

previous authors also concluded that associations among different families were highly unlikely as associations even among family members appeared infrequent  <cit> . however, these conclusions were drawn from extremely small sample sizes . our results suggest otherwise. while the association rate of 18-20% reported in a previous study  <cit>  is roughly analogous to the median sri value of found in our study , we do find reliable sri values that range as high as  <dig> . moreover, there is at least some transfer of individuals between social units across seasons . however, the population-level social network structure does not appear to exhibit any clear seasonal patterns . it is not clear whether individuals form hierarchical social 'tiers', such as those observed in african savannah elephants, which form higher-order associations among multiple families in wet seasons  <cit> . among savannah elephants, relatedness decreases at higher-order tiers of association, where associations are weaker than  <dig>   <cit> , and are mediated by intra- and inter-group dominance interactions  <cit> . the network structure curve for asian elephants peaks near an sri threshold of  <dig>  . although there is no consistent social stratification in this asian elephant population, it is possible that the clusters prior to the peak have a lower degree of relatedness than the clusters that follow it. a detailed genetic study of this population examining the hypothesis above, with larger sample sizes than previously obtained, would also be illuminating and is planned in the future.

there is much variation in individuals' long-term fidelity to companions . for instance, kamala  and kanthi  were two mature females who appeared close to the same age and were nearly always together . the so-called 'k' unit  almost always contained every member whenever it was seen although they also interacted with others to form a larger cluster. on the other hand, individuals like ' <dig> ' also part of a large cluster, had few stable companions . the social placement of a few other females remained unresolved despite numerous repeat observations. the fitness consequences of these different social strategies remain to be seen. moreover, while it is widely assumed that asian elephants, like african elephants, form strongly bonded family groups centered around matriarchs  <cit> , the apparent variation and fluidity in social preferences shown in this study would seem to question such a characterization.

it is intriguing that social dynamics differ depending on the level of analysis - the bottom-most  and top-most  levels of organization exhibit a greater degree of instability than the intermediate level . uncovering the ecological basis for observed patterns would require separate investigations and hypotheses at each level. preferences for one another shown by some pairs of individuals might depend on reproductive state , while social units may differ in their strategies depending on whether they are seasonal inhabitants of the park or residents. for instance, killer whales of the same species exhibit different social strategies depending on whether they are resident or transient, in accordance with the associated feeding ecology  <cit> .

our analyses are based on association index data, calculated from observations of individuals in the field. there are at least two sources of uncertainty associated with this type of data. first, we expect that some variation comes from the fact that we observe different sets of individuals in different seasons. our observation area is largely constrained by the road network inside uda walawe national park. while we expect to have a reliable observation record for individuals whose range strongly overlaps with this area, we also observe individuals that presumably move into this area only periodically  <cit> . such individuals, being farther away from the centers of their home ranges, might exhibit different behavioral and social patterns than individuals residing more centrally, thus introducing additional noise in our data. the second source of variation stems simply from relatively low counts of events in some seasons for some individuals. to minimize the first type of noise, we have constrained most of our analyses to the so-called resident individuals, i.e. those that we have consistently observed every season. to minimize the second type of noise, we have constrained some of the analyses even further, to individuals that have been seen at least  <dig> times. nevertheless, we can extrapolate the conclusions drawn from these analyses to less sampled individuals in the population, since such individuals are not ostensibly different from those sampled thoroughly. one does however need to keep in mind that we describe the behavior of individuals that are close to the center of their home range.

one of our surprising findings is that the elephants at uwnp tend to form a greater proportion of strong ties in dry seasons than in wet seasons. this suggests that aggregation may be more advantageous in the former, perhaps for accessing and protecting scarce resources. this hypothesis remains to be tested with additional seasons of data and behavioral studies. while direct behavioral evidence of resource defense among adult females is rare, we have observed competition over water and mud, dominance interactions when unfamiliar individuals or social units meet, as well as the vocal and physical displacement of one social unit by another  <cit> . resource monopolization may more often take the form of competitive exclusion rather than confrontation, in which acoustic and chemical signals facilitate social cohesion as well as avoidance despite the seeming fluidity of associations. herbivores must balance intraspecific resource competition against potential anti-predator benefits  <cit> . among artiodactyles, gregariousness is an anti-predator adaptation seen in species inhabiting open environments  <cit> . african savannah elephants likewise may be more gregarious than asian elephants because they typically inhabit more open environments, and also encounter predators other than humans  <cit> . interestingly, in drier regions of sri lanka just a few kilometers east of the study site, elephants are reported to aggregate in wet seasons rather than dry seasons  <cit> , a similarity to african savannah elephants that could be ecologically driven. similar longitudinal studies in other asian elephant populations, especially those in india, where there is likely to be greater variation in habitat quality and home range sizes  <cit>  would be of great interest. more data are also needed on african elephants occupying various habitats including desert and forest environments, the latter being more similar to those of many asian populations. it is possible that societies in general and elephant societies in particular are more flexible and responsive to environmental pressures than generally conceded.

CONCLUSIONS
associations among female asian elephants can be characterized as fission-fusion. patterns of association differ across levels of organization and ecological timescales. individuals are found by observers in small groups whose composition changes on the timescale of days. however, most individuals belong to relatively large social units which can be revealed by quantitative analysis of longitudinal data. such units generally maintain their cohesiveness over longer timescales, although there is some transfer of individuals between units. social units may fission or fuse without discernible seasonal patterns or clear hierarchical stratification into social 'tiers' at the level of the population. individuals vary highly in the number of stable companions they maintain over time, and some repeatedly associate in dry seasons. their companions tend to form a pool of long-term associates. interesting future directions include examining the relatedness among social units, the ecological basis of observed dynamics at each level of organization, and the fitness consequences of the seemingly different social strategies employed by individuals.

