BACKGROUND
the fungal kingdom contains an underexplored diversity of organisms occurring in almost all terrestrial, marine and freshwater ecosystems  <cit> . because fungi constitute an important food source for animals or act as serious competitors of them  <cit>  they are assumed to have evolved defense strategies employing toxic or deterrent secondary chemicals  <cit> . animals, in turn, may be selected for counter-adaptations that render fungal toxins less detrimental  <cit> , thus placing a higher selective pressure on fungi, and possibly fueling a co-evolutionary process.

in terrestrial decomposer communities the larval stages of many saprophagous insect species seem to be engaged in competition with filamentous fungi for dead organic material. for instance, while some microbes, such as bacteria and yeast fungi, are essential food sources for insect larvae foraging on dead organic material  <cit>  there are negative relationships between the occurrence of filamentous fungi in the larval habitat and insect development, e.g. in sciarid fly larvae  <cit> , necrophorusbeetle larvae  <cit> , house fly larvae  <cit>  and drosophila fly larvae  <cit> . this type of insect-fungus interaction is, however, not unidirectional but involves complex reciprocal consequences as insect larvae can seriously hamper fungal development. in saprophagous drosophilid flies breeding on rotting plant tissue, particularly, reciprocal impairment in larval-fungus interactions is wide-spread  <cit> . these reciprocal fitness consequences strongly suggest a process of interspecific competition between insect and filamentous fungi. in line with the definition of interspecific competition high larval density negatively influences fungal growth and benefits the drosophila larvae  <cit> . moreover, if the fungi establish before the larvae they appear to become competitively superior over the insects . when this occurs colony growth and reproduction are less negatively affected by the insects and drosophila larvae suffer significantly higher mortality rates than when fungi and flies establish at the same time  <cit> .

the mechanism underlying the reduction of insect fitness in the presence of competing fungi may involve the secretion of toxic fungal secondary metabolites  into the larval feeding substrate, a fungal trait that has been shown to be under tight genetic regulation  <cit> . this mechanism could function because mycotoxins are effective against drosophila larvae in pharmaceutical tests  <cit> . moreover, deleting a gene encoding a regulatory protein involved in positively influencing secondary metabolite expression in various filamentous fungi competing with drosophila larvae was beneficial to the insects and detrimental to the fungi  <cit> . thus, filamentous fungi may be considered as allelopathic organisms that build a chemical shield against saprophagous insect larvae. drosophila populations harbor heritable variation in their ability to withstand the proposed fungal chemical shield because, more than  <dig> years ago, melone and chinnici  <cit>  were able to select larval d. melanogaster populations for reduced sensitivity to the mycotoxins, such as aflatoxin b <dig>  that filamentous fungi secrete into the surrounding environment. recently, we found heritable variation in the ability of drosophila larvae to develop successfully in the presence of a competing filamentous fungus  <cit> . from the results of these studies we derived the key hypothesis of this paper: heritable variation in the competitive ability of saprophagous d. melanogaster populations against filamentous fungi is due to variation in their ability to cope with toxic fungal metabolites. we would therefore expect a positive correlation between larval survival in the presence of the competing mold and survival in substrates contaminated with fungus mycotoxins. if insect adaptation to fungal competitors involves a counter-adaptation to the fungal chemical shield proposed, we would also expect that larvae with such adaptations would impair mold development more than unadapted larvae. such an increase in insect competitive ability or resistance may place a greater selective pressure on fungi and thus has the potential to fuel co-evolutionary dynamics in antagonistic animal-fungus interactions, i.e. arms races or red queen dynamics  <cit> . alternatively, insect larvae may be selected for increased tolerance, that is, the ability to limit the negative effects of competition. compared to resistance , evolution of increased tolerance  is assumed not to correlate with enhanced negative effects on the fungus  <cit> . thus, evolution of insect tolerance mechanisms is not expected to directly favor fungal counter-measures, e.g. more toxic secondary chemicals.

we use the drosophila-aspergillus system  <cit>  as an ecological model to explore the relationship between variation in protection against fungal competitors and sensitivity to secondary metabolites by means of an experimental evolution approach. we therefore generated fungal selected  and unselected control  insect lines. the fs lines were created by forcing drosophila to compete with toxin-producing fungus aspergillus nidulans and so subjecting them to selective pressure. after  <dig> generations we stopped the selection and investigated first whether selection pressure imposed by the fungus had resulted in the evolution of enhanced drosophila developmental success under moldy conditions. we secondly tested whether protection evolved against a. nidulans was due to mechanisms that give cross-protection against other filamentous fungi  or whether it only confers the ability to compete against a. nidulans. in a third experiment, we tested whether fs larvae were less susceptible than uc larvae to sterigmatocystin, the most prominent mycotoxin secreted by a. nidulans. moreover, we tested for cross-protection against other polyketide mycotoxins, aflatoxin b <dig> and ochratoxin a. in our fourth experiment we studied the effect of fs and uc lines on fungal growth to test for correlated responses in the ability of larvae to control the spread of the fungus.

RESULTS
protection against a. nidulans and cross-protection to other aspergilli
we found a significant effect of the selection regime on the survival of larval drosophila when the feeding substrate was infested with proliferating colonies of a. nidulans. fs drosophila larvae had a significantly higher probability of surviving to the adult stage than uc larvae . although there was large variation between generations, the differences between survival rates of larvae from the fs and the uc lines remained fairly constant  . moreover, the effects of selection history persisted after the last selection cycle at generation  <dig>  there were no differences in larval survival between fs and uc populations under mold-free conditions .

generalized linear mixed model analysis of the factors affecting larval survival of drosophila melanogaster dependent on the selection regime and insect generation in the presence of aspergillus nidulans and under mold-free conditions.

fs: fungal selected drosophila lines, uc: unselected control lines.

larvae from the fs lines reared in the presence of the model fungal competitor, a. fumigatus had no higher survival than larvae from uc lines . this was also true for fs larvae with a. flavus .

sensitivity to sterigmatocystin and other mycotoxins
the fs populations were less susceptible to sterigmatocystin than the uc populations . moreover, as indicated by a significant statistical interaction between 'selection regime' and'sterigmatocystin concentration', larval survival dropped more rapidly in uc lines than in fs lines . we repeated the toxin confrontation experiment with sterigmatocystin in generation  <dig> and additionally tested sensitivity to aflatoxin b <dig> and ochratoxin a. these are two cytotoxic and carcinogenic mycotoxins that are not synthesized by a. nidulans, but sterigmatocystin is the penultimate precursor of aflatoxin b <dig> in a. flavus and thus of similar chemical structure  <cit> . drosophila larvae showed mycotoxin specific survival patterns that depended significantly on the selection regime . however, post hoc analyses of larval survival for each mycotoxin revealed a significant effect of selection only for sterigmatocystin  or ochratoxin a .

generalized linear mixed model analysis of the factors affecting larval survival of drosophila melanogaster dependent on the selection regime and mycotoxin identity  and mycotoxin concentration .

fs: fungal selected drosophila populations, uc: unselected control populations.

effects on fungal performance
drosophila larvae cause serious damage to aspergillus colonies in this insect-fungus competition. the magnitude of this damage indicates the insect's competitive ability. we hypothesized that fly populations harboring a higher proportion of better protected variants  should hamper fungal colonies to a higher degree than more vulnerable populations . in contrast to our expectation of evolved resistance  there was no such effect on the fungal competitor . fungal colony development, the increase in substrate area occupied, is strongly hampered during the early stage of this interference competition , followed by a period of recovery . the recovery may be due to alterations in larval foraging behavior when larvae switch from "surface feeding" to "digging", which may release fungal colonies from insect attack at the substrate surface. during the early phase it appears as if uc larvae had a more negative effect on fungal growth than those from the fs populations , however, the overall model results  do not support our expectation of an evolved resistance against the fungal competitor in the fs populations. also, after removing the non-significant "selection regime × time" interaction term no grand effect of selection emerged . given that there are only three populations for each selection treatment and the apparently lesser influence on fungal development of fs larvae compared to uc larvae , we performed a post hoc power analysis on the grand effect of the selection regime using gpower  <dig>   <cit> . power analysis measures the probability that the statistical test will reject the null hypothesis, that the selection regime has no effect on fungal development, when it is false and the alternative hypothesis is correct. a test with a power greater than  <dig>   is conventionally considered statistically powerful  <cit> . the power obtained, 1-β =  <dig>   indicates that the power of this test is low. we should thus be skeptical with regard to not rejecting the null hypothesis.

mixed model analysis for repeated measurement of aspergillus nidulans colony cover as affected by drosophila melanogaster larvae from the two different selection regimes and time.

fs: fungal selected drosophila populations, uc: unselected control populations.

discussion
the vast majority of studies investigating genetic variation and adaptive evolution in antagonistic species interactions focused on host-parasite interrelationships, where natural enemies exploit host organisms for growth, reproduction and dispersal and where hosts evolve counter-adaptations  to fend-off parasites or mitigate their negative effects on host fitness, e.g.  <cit> . thus, the evolutionary response in our experiment is comparable to other studies that looked for heritable variation in protection against natural enemies, mainly macro-parasites and pathogens, in d. melanogaster  <cit> . however, it is comparatively new to consider non-parasitic microbes as potentially important competing antagonists of insects and other arthropods  <cit> . this consideration adds a novel level of selective pressure affecting life-history evolution.

our first major finding is that selection pressure by a. nidulans resulted in drosophila populations showing a higher probability of larvae surviving competition with this fungus. this result had been predicted by an earlier study and adds further evidence that there is heritable variation in the mechanisms underlying protection against competing filamentous fungi  <cit> . thus, the genetic and hence the phenotypic structure of drosophila populations may be subject to selection pressure through non-parasitic filamentous fungi. it is interesting that survival was not different in fs and uc drosophila larvae when they were forced to develop in the presence of a. flavus and a. fumigatus. thus, cross-protection against other fungi is not a consequence of selection pressure from a. nidulans, nor does protection evolved against a. nidulans lead to reduced ability to survive competition with a. fumigatus or a. flavus. this may indicate that the evolutionary costs of the improved performance of the fs insects are not traded off against reduced protection from other fungi the insects may interact with. susceptibility to climatic stress  and food shortage seem, rather, to be genetically correlated with protection evolved against fungal competitors  <cit> . these costs may provide a means of maintaining the genetic variation in protection against competing fungi that is required for the evolution of adaptation to fungal competitors.

we found a higher survival probability in fs larvae than in uc larvae when larvae were confronted with sterigmatocystin, the most toxic compound formed by a. nidulans. sterigmatocystin is a highly toxic polyketide metabolite that attaches to dna strands, possibly the major reason for the strong cytotoxic and mutagenic effects of this compound  <cit> . the genes involved in sterigmatocystin biosynthesis are organized in a gene cluster which is controlled by several regulatory switches. these switches may link the formation of secondary metabolites with other fungal life-history traits such as vegetative growth and reproduction  <cit> . the tight regulation of secondary metabolite gene expression may allow the fungus to adjust its chemical arsenal to variation in ecological conditions, e.g. competition with saprophagous insects. thus, increased protection from a. nidulans in the fs lines correlates positively with reduced sensitivity to one of the most likely chemical weapons of the fungus. it is interesting that fs larvae were not better protected against aflatoxin b <dig> or ochratoxin than were uc larvae. this lack of cross-protection to other mycotoxins suggests that the positive correlation between protection against a. nidulans and its secondary metabolite sterigmatocystin is a specific adaptation to the toxic secretion of this mold fungus. protection from the toxic effects of sterigmatocystin may arise through detoxification  of this compound or reduction of the damage it causes to the animals .

evolved external defense against competing microbes, like defenses against parasites, can be divided into two conceptually different strategies  <cit> . first, selection may favor resistance, namely the ability to reduce competitor burden. this has a negative effect on the competing microbe because resistance aims at reducing or eliminating the fungal antagonist . as a consequence, fs larvae may impose direct costs on the fungus which in turn select for fungal counter-adaptations. second, animals may evolve tolerance, the ability to reduce the damage inflicted by a given fungal competitor. evolution of tolerance implies no changes in the negative consequences for the competing fungus and should therefore not result in antagonistic co-evolution  <cit> .

resistance or competitive ability may be associated with a behavioral defense. however, positive density-dependence in larval survival in the presence of competing mold  <cit>  does not seem to be a mere by-product of gregarious egg-laying behavior by flies  <cit>  and hence higher larval densities. in contrast, mold suppression is achieved by clumping of larvae in the active growth zone of fungi where they attack young exploitative hyphae  <cit> . thus, in addition to the proposed physiological adaptation to the fungal toxins , protection against mold may be mediated by the intensity of attack against a. nidulans increasing the insects' competitive ability. increased survival of fs larvae on sterigmatocystin contaminated substrate may point to the evolution of a compensatory mechanism rendering the fungal chemical defense less harmful to the insects. however, enhanced competitive ability may provide an additional benefit to the larvae or may even be the consequence of better protection against mycotoxins. however, larvae from the fs populations did not evolve increased resistance as fungal growth was not affected differently by larvae from the two selection regimes . the low power of the test statistics means, however, we cannot exclude that fs larvae had an even weaker negative effect on a. nidulans. this interesting correlated response to selection deserves further experiments. thus, we suggest that improved larval development in the fs strains is due to increased tolerance of the fungal competitor possibly mediated by mechanisms reducing the toxic effect of fungal secondary metabolites.

the trend towards a less pronounced suppressing effect of fs than of uc larvae on aspergillus colonies  might support the idea of a negative genetic correlation between resistance and tolerance  <cit>  in drosophila external defense against noxious microbes. whether the evolution of tolerance of fungal competitors in saprophagousdrosophila larvae really exerts no selection pressure on the fungi remains to be investigated. such investigations would require more detailed recording of fungal fitness consequences such as the effects of insects on fungal reproduction.

CONCLUSIONS
this study on insect-fungus competition adds to our understanding of animal responses to antagonistic but non-pathogenic microbes, and hence provides further, albeit indirect, evidence of a critical role of toxic fungal secondary metabolites as a chemical shield against natural enemies  <cit> . further experiments testing the effect of insect competition on the evolution of fungal life-history traits and secondary metabolites biosynthesis may help resolve this problem. nonetheless, our experimental results support the notion that noxious filamentous fungi inhabiting drosophila breeding sites have the potential to impose selection pressure that may explain the heritable variation in protection against competing fungi in field populations. moreover, our study presents the first experimental evidence that the evolution of insect defense strategies against a toxic fungus involves developing mechanisms rendering less effective the chemical weaponry of fungi. however, instead of selection increasing resistance against fungi, it appears to have increased larval toleration of the fungal competitor. therefore, adaptive changes in the insect populations in response to noxious mold do not increase selection pressure on the fungus to overcome this type of defense and hence should not fuel antagonistic co-evolution.

the evolutionary response we observed in our experimental study appears to be due to a specific adaptation of the insects to the fungus a. nidulans alone rather than selection for a more general response to fungal competitors. thus, although a substrate generalist d. melanogaster may well be a specialist for interactions with competing fungi and their secondary metabolites. if this holds true for similar insect-microbe interactions and is successful in the face of the high diversity of noxious mold species the insects encounter under field conditions remains to be the subject to future studies.

