BACKGROUND
previous microarray gene expression studies have examined within-platform reproducibility among different generations of the affymetrix genechip  <cit>  and among cdna-based array platforms  <cit> . subsequently, several cross-platform reproducibility studies have been reported, many of which examined either the consistency of intensities or the consistency with which different platforms identify genes significantly differently expressed  <cit> . results from another large cross-platform study, the microarray quality control  project, led by the us food and drug administration with  <dig> participating universities and major biotechnology companies, have also been reported  <cit> . some of these early studies demonstrated poor cross-platform correlations. for example, among  <dig> genes commonly declared present in a cdna-based microarray and the affymetrix hg-u95av <dig> genechip platform, the spearman correlation was only  <dig> . other cross-platform studies also reported low cross-platform correlations  <cit> . in addition, in a study examining three microarray platforms in ten laboratories, correlations between affymetrix and two-channel arrays ranged from  <dig>  –  <dig>   <cit> . more recent research has demonstrated that poor correlations may be observed when at least one platform under examination suffers from low intra-platform reproducibility or when a poor data analytic method is applied  <cit> .

most of these studies estimated pearson's correlation as a means of assessing cross-platform reproducibility. that is, we consider x and y to be microarray gene expression values from two different platforms, and ρxy is estimated. however, for microarray data, both random variables x and y are subject to measurement error. it is well known that the flourescent intensities from the scanned microarray images are proxies for the true underlying gene expression values  <cit> . therefore, microarray gene expression values are measured with error. when examining cross-platform correlation, inconsistencies in measured intensities can be due to systematic platform biases as well as random intra-platform variability. statistical methods that account for measurement error , such as regression calibration, have been applied in a variety of scenarios to correct for the known bias caused by me in parameter estimation  <cit> . in a recent review, the authors stated that within the next  <dig> years, "calibration methods will be introduced to systematically correct ratio underestimation by microarray technology"  <cit> . we have undertaken such an effort to account for the random intra-platform variability by developing a "disattenuated" correlation estimate  <cit>  which accounts for random intra-platform variation in both x and y, and demonstrate its use in measuring cross-platform correlation.

microarray hybridizations were performed using three different technologies, each in a different laboratory. the affymetrix  hg-u133a genechip was utilized in the virginia commonwealth university's  division of molecular diagnostics laboratory. a custom-designed oligonucleotide microarray designed specifically to interrogate genes more commonly expressed in brain tissue was used in vcu's school of engineering's center for bioelectronics, biosensors and biochips . the c3b microarray platform comprises  <dig>  genes represented by 3' fifty-mer oligonucleotides  that were spotted in duplicate. finally, a cdna microarray spotted with full and partial length pcr probes  was used in george mason university's  center for biomedical genomics and informatics.

each laboratory designed a small experiment to assess intra-platform quality control. each laboratory used the same lot of reference rna, the stratagene total human rna, for hybridizing a set of technical replicates for a process variability study. these 'self-self' hybridizations permit meaningful assessments of reproducibility since, under ideal circumstances such as that the same experimental conditions exist among platforms and that there are no probe-binding affinity effects, each gene across the set of chips should exhibit linearly related gene expression intensities across platforms. although the rna hybridized was from the same lot, the study designs and protocols differed from lab to lab. a description of of each experiment can be found in the methods section of this paper.

RESULTS
within-platform comparisons
prior to estimating cross-platform correlations, we performed a thorough examination of intra-platform reproducibility, as recommended  <cit> . since the stratagene total human rna was used as both the experimental and reference sample, the expected log <dig> ratio for all genes is  <dig>  so that no correlation is expected when comparing two arrays in terms of the log <dig> ratio. therefore for two channel arrays, we restricted attention to intensities from one channel as well as to the post-normalized intensities from that same channel. for the affymetrix genechip, intensities were highly correlated across the set of three technical replicates for all expression summary methods . the gmu arrays were strongly correlated, though the c3b arrays were not highly correlated .

the weighted kappa statistics indicated that the affymetrix platform had the highest agreement among ranked intensities , followed by the gmu array which also exhibited good agreement among the technical replicates when considering the ranked gene intensities. the weighted kappa statistics for c3b platform suggested the ranked intensities from the three technical replicates were not in agreement, yielding an insignificant p-value for two of the array comparisons. a similar conclusion, that the affymetrix platform followed by the gmu array demonstrated the highest reproducibility, with low reproducibility among the c3b arrays, was noted upon examination of the proportion of invariant features . although intra-platform reproducibility varied among the three platforms studied, all platforms yield gene expression intensities that are subject to some degree of measurement error.

cross-platform comparisons
for the gmu array the  <dig>  spots correspond to  <dig>  distinct clones, with the feature name of each spot denoted by unigene id. there were  <dig>  affy probe sets that matched a gmu unigene id. among these,  <dig> unigene ids were interrogated by more than one probe set. after restricting attention to unique clones and probes sets there were  <dig>  unique probe sets/clones in common to gmu and the affy platforms. for the c3b arrays, since its design is essentially two identical subarrays laid out in duplicate with the feature name of each spot denoted by refseqid, the average expression for each refseqid was calculated prior to merging the spots with the affymetrix probe sets. that is, the  <dig>  long oligos correspond to  <dig>  distinct genes. for the c3b array, there were  <dig>  distinct refseqids were interrogated by at least one affymetrix probe set meeting our criteria. once the data from the two different 2-channel arrays were merged to the affymetrix genechip data , these two resulting datasets were then merged by affymetrix probe set id, resulting in  <dig>  common probe sets/spots among the three platforms.

not accounting for measurement error, the average pearson correlations  of the log transformed affymetrix genechip expression and c3b array expression are reported in table  <dig> for mas  <dig> , rma, and gc-rma expression summaries as 'naïve' estimates of correlation. in addition, the disattenuated correlations , obtained when considering that the c3b and affy gene intensities are subject to measurement error, are also reported. noting that the attenuation for the c3b arrays is  <dig> , that is, over half of the variability is attributed to measurement error, the disattentuated correlations estimated using measurement error models are substantially higher, irrespective of the affymetrix expression summary method used. this suggests that previous use of pearson's correlation under-estimated true underlying cross-platform correlations. that is, the effect of the presence of random intra-platform variation is degraded performance on the apparent cross-platform correlation. therefore, by removing random intra-platform variation through measurement error methodology, the cross-platform correlation will go up.

the average pearson correlations  of the log transformed affymetrix genechip expression and gmu array expression are also reported in table  <dig> for mas  <dig> , rma, and gc-rma expression summaries, as well as the disattenuated correlations . the attenuation for the gmu arrays is  <dig> , therefore the disattenuated correlations estimated using measurement error models are larger than their corresponding naïve estimates, though not as markedly in comparison to the c3b arrays. this is due to the higher reliability among the gmu expression intensities.

discussion
in this paper, both intra- and cross-platform reproducibility was examined for the affymetrix and two dual channel microarrays . we applied various methods for examining within-platform reproducibility including pearson's correlation, the weighted kappa, and percent of invariant genes. we also examine cross-platform reproducibility using pearson's correlation. we previously demonstrated the effectiveness of applying a correlation correction factor via a small simulation study and demonstrated its application in estimating gene-specific correlations. in this paper we demonstrated its use in estimating cross-platform reproducibility. we note that correcting for measurement error by estimating the "disattenuated" correlation removes the bias or attenuation inherent in cross-platform correlation estimates. specifically, to the extent that random intra-platform variation is present, the effect is degraded performance on the apparent cross-platform correlation. therefore, by removing random intra-platform variation through measurement error methodology, the cross-platform correlation will go up.

due to the increased public availability of gene expression microarray data through gene expression omnibus  <cit>  and arrayexpress  <cit> , researchers are increasingly interested in methods that integrate the results from various microarray studies performed on similar types of samples  <cit> . a careful understanding of variability due to platform-specific bias and random intra-platform variability will help investigators select methods for integrating cross-platform results. specifically, the amount of attenuation for a specific platform could be used as a platform-specific quality measure and incorporated into a meta-analytic framework  <cit> . moreover, gene-specific attenuation factors could be used to adjust for quality in a gene-wise fashion in such models.

a major application of dna microarray technology is differential gene expression profiling, or the detection of the differences in expression levels of genes between two different types of samples. some have argued that the consistency of the differences via fold-change or ratio is a more relevant metric for assessing cross-platform comparability than intensities from a single channel. however, to estimate the correlation between fold-changes from two platforms, two different samples are needed. we therefore plan to use data from the maqc project to examine cross-platform fold-change correlations. in addition, it has been suggested that a more relevant metric is not agreement in the identification of individual differentially expressed genes, but rather whether consistent and accurate predictions of sample class is obtained from the platforms being compared  <cit> . this metric should be included is such cross-platform studies as well.

previous researchers demonstrated that single and two channel microarrays yield consistent results, and concluded that the selection of which technology to use is not necessarily a critical factor in the design of a microarray study  <cit> . here we demonstrate the critical need to thoroughly evaluate intra-platform reproducibility, a finding which has been been noted by others  <cit> . in this study, we examined two dual channel platforms and the affymetrix platform. while the c3b and gmu platforms are not widely used by the microarray research community, they do represent a class of microarrays that are commonly used, two channel custom spotted/home brewed arrays. thus, we believe these results are of general interest to those who use both commercial and custom designed arrays. while the c3b two channel platform had poor reproducibility, the gmu two channel and affymetrix platforms had good reproducibility. we repeated the intra-platform analysis using the following three sets of randomly selected affymetrix genechips , , and  and the intra-platform affymetrix results were consistently reproducible with what is presented in this paper. this high reproducibility of the affymetrix genechip data has also been reported by other investigators  <cit> . these data have proven useful in selecting a platform for studying biological specimens being collected by our tissue bank. we recommend that prior to performing expensive microarray hybridizations using irreplacable biological specimens procured from clinical studies, a thorough assessment of intra-platform reproducibility be conducted.

one limitation of this study is that platform is completely confounded with laboratory technician and protocol, that is, the platform-specific sequence of reactions, scanner, procedures and events involved in the production of microarray data. it was previously noted that there is a high positive correlation between technician experience and intra-platform correlation  <cit> . this is consistent with our findings, whereby a first year graduate student performed the c3b hybridizations , while the gmu and affy hybridizations were performed by ph.d. faculty members . future studies that control for external factors that may influence intra-platform reliability are warranted.

in calculating cross-platform correlation, we assumed that the correlation estimated using the using the  <dig> matching probes across the three platforms are representative of expected correlation of genes in the human genome that could be represented on the plaforms. examination of absolute tag counts for the stratagene total human rna obtained using serial analysis of gene expression data  revealed that the intensity distribution of the  <dig>  genes in common among the three platforms is not representative of the range of expected values . thus the commonly invoked procedure of estimating cross-platform consistency using only probes in common to all platforms is demonstrated to suffer from bias related to genomic coverage and probe annotation. future studies comparing commercially available and custom designed arrays need to take this into consideration.

CONCLUSIONS
when estimating cross-platform correlation, it is essential to thoroughly evaluate intra-platform reproducibility as a first step. we also note that the commonly invoked procedure of estimating cross-platform consistency using only probes in common to all platforms is demonstrated to suffer from bias related to genomic coverage and probe annotation. future studies comparing commercially available and custom designed arrays need to take this into consideration. moreover, to the extent that random intra-platform variation is present, the effect is degraded performace on the apparent cross-platform correlation. therefore, by removing random intra-platform variation through measurement error methodology, the cross-platform correlation will go up. methods to correct for attenuation, such as that presented, are thus useful in decreasing such a bias in cross-platform correlation estimates. platform-specific attenuation estimates may subsequently be used as a platform-specific quality measure and incorporated into a meta-analytic framework.

