BACKGROUND
the global burden of plasmodium vivax is being increasingly reevaluated as more fatal cases are identified and drug resistant strains are discovered  <cit> . despite the fact that  <dig>  billion people live in p. vivax endemic areas, there is a substantial lack of knowledge surrounding the mechanisms of biological features unique to p. vivax, constraining the ability to design appropriate control strategies.

the fact that p. vivax exclusively invades reticulocytes impairs the development of a reliable, long-term in vitro culture method, a technique that has been available for the study of p. falciparum for over 30 years  <cit> . while some progress has been made in establishing p. vivax culture in the laboratory, the lack of a reproducible in vitro culture method prevents basic laboratory manipulations, such as genetic crosses, and has limited the types of questions that can be answered about p. vivax biology.

the advent of low-cost whole genome technologies allows direct analysis of p. vivax field populations, without the need for in vitro culture. with the completion of the p. vivax reference genome as well as the publication of the first p. vivax resequencing project  <cit> , single nucleotide variants  are now being identified that can be used to track parasite populations and investigate parasite population structure on both the regional and global levels. in addition, new whole genome sequencing technologies allow for sequencing hundreds of samples from different geographic locations and thus take advantage of the thousands of natural genetic crosses that occur over time and in the context of parasite movements among regions under different epidemiological contexts . using signatures in the genome left by these natural crosses, investigators will be able to identify regions of the genome under selection and, potentially, the genes involved in p. vivax virulence, drug resistance, and immune evasion.

a critical barrier to the whole genome analysis of p. vivax is the ability to obtain sufficient quantities of high quality parasite genomic dna free of human nucleic acid contamination. current protocols for obtaining parasite dna for whole genome studies from p. falciparum field isolates consist of culture adapting the isolated parasites and passaging them for 3–4 weeks. this intermediate step achieves two things: one, it expands the parasite population allowing for isolation of a larger quantity of dna and, two, it removes human leukocytes containing contaminating dna. since there is no reliable culture method to propagate p. vivax in vitro, alternative methods have to be designed to work with nucleic acids from p. vivax field samples.

to address the two issues of low quantities of parasite dna and human dna contamination, the standard method adopted by the p. vivax research community is leukocyte filtration using ion-exchange columns followed by whole genome amplification   <cit> . this current method of obtaining p. vivax dna from field samples is only feasible when the patient blood samples are collected in close proximity to a field laboratory because of the need to filter out the leukocytes before they lyse. this logistical issue precludes the collection of field samples from remote areas where p. vivax is endemic and thus limits our understanding of the population genetics of p. vivax. in addition, there are many samples that were collected before leukocyte depletion became a standard technique. as of now these samples cannot be analyzed via whole genome sequencing prohibiting the use of these samples to study ofhow p. vivax has evolved over time.

here we demonstrate the feasibility of analyzing p. vivax field samples without on-site leukocyte filtration using an in-solution hybridization capture method  <cit> . by modifying the whole genome capture protocol designed for p. falciparum by melnikov et al. <cit> , we show that sal <dig> reference genomic dna can be used to create whole genome baits, which can then be used to extract p. vivax genomic dna from the contaminating human dna in both frozen samples and mock blood spots. after the whole genome extraction of p. vivax dna and subsequent whole genome sequencing, greater than 90% of the p. vivax assembled genome  can be confidently assigned a genotype, or “called.” our whole genome sequencing results are equivalent to previous results published using the leukocyte filtration protocol, and we, therefore, propose that because of its much easier application in the field, whole genome capture is a superior method of analyzing large numbers of p. vivax field samples from diverse geographic areas.

RESULTS
synthesis of whole genome baits
we created whole genome baits  using in vitro transcription with sal <dig> genomic dna as the template. briefly, sal <dig> genomic dna was fragmented to an average of 200 bp and a t <dig> promoter sequence was ligated onto the fragment ends. in vitro transcription was then conducted in the presence of biotinylated dutp, creating biotinylated rna baits. the wgb were initially tested on two mock sal <dig> infections: one created by combining 1% sal <dig> dna with 99% human dna and a second created by combining  <dig> % sal <dig> dna and  <dig> % human dna. the baits were able to enrich these mock samples from 1% p. vivax dna to 86% p. vivax dna and from  <dig> % p. vivax dna to 44% p. vivax dna . additional wgb can be created through subsequent in vitro transcription reactions.

whole genome capture and sequencing ofp. vivaxfield samples

we performed a whole genome capture protocol  on five field samples  collected in iquitos, peru during the  <dig> transmission season using the wgb derived from sal <dig> genomic dna. patient blood samples were centrifuged after collection with the serum and buffy coat subsequently removed. erythrocytes were then frozen at −80 °c and shipped back to the united states for further analysis. for three samples , dna was isolated from the frozen red blood cell pellet. the parasitemias for these three samples were within the expected range for p. vivax infection, which is substantially lower than p. falciparum infection . in order to assess the proportion of p. vivax dna in our starting material we analyzed the bulk genomic dna using qpcr. the percent of p. vivax dna present after enrichment with whole genome capture was determined by whole genome sequencing  . for the remaining two samples ,  <dig> ul of erythrocytes were placed on whatman fta nucleic acid filter paper, stored for 2 weeks at room temperature to create mock blood spots, and then dna was isolated using a standard extraction protocol.

abbreviations: rbcs, red blood cells; wgc, whole-genome capture; na, not available.

apositive control - leukocyte filtered, bnegative control.

genomic dna recovered after whole genome capture was sequenced using the illumina hiseq  <dig> platform and  <dig>  -  <dig>  billion bases of data were obtained per sample. the sequencing reads were then aligned to the sal <dig> reference using bwa  <cit> , and sequencing and alignment characteristics were generated using picard and the genome analysis toolkit   <cit> . we compared the sequencing statistics from the whole genome captured samples to the genome sequence of iq <dig>  this strain from iquitos, peru was collected in the  <dig> transmission season and had previously been prepared by leukocyte filtration and sequenced by our lab  <cit> . since iq <dig> is the only published sequencing data for a p. vivax sample taken directly from a patient, we considered the sequencing analysis of the iq <dig> strain as our positive control. we also obtained sequencing data for acre <dig>  a p. vivax strain collected in acre, brazil, which had been neither leukocyte filtered nor enriched using whole genome capture. acre <dig> served as our negative control.

after aligning the sequencing reads, pcr duplicates, which arise during the final pcr amplification step of both library preparation methods, were marked to reduce false coverage. we identified pcr duplicates by finding those sequencing pairs that aligned to the exact same location in the genome and had the same insert size. the percentage of pcr duplicates ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> % and was higher than the percentage of pcr duplicates identified in iq <dig>  or acre <dig>  . the percentage of pcr duplicates was in line with the percentage of pcr duplicates seen in exome capture studies  <cit> . after identifying pcr duplicates, sequencing reads from each sample were locally realigned around indels and areas of high entropy, and all base quality scores were then recalibrated based on empiric sample-reference mismatch data.

apositive control - leukocyte filtered, bnegative control, cwhole-genome capture.

following clean up of the aligned reads, we compared the percent of reads that aligned to the p. vivax reference from the whole genome capture samples to the controls. of the  <dig>  million sequencing reads obtained for iq <dig>  42% of the reads aligned to the sal <dig> reference . for acre <dig>  the negative control, only  <dig> % of the  <dig>  million sequencing reads aligned to the sal <dig> reference. in contrast to the p. vivax field samples analyzed here, >90% of reads obtained from sequencing laboratory reared p. falciparum  align to the p. falciparum reference.

for the whole genome captured samples the percentage of reads that mapped to the sal <dig> reference ranged from 20% to 80% with  <dig> out of  <dig> samples analyzed having a higher percentage of p. vivax dna than in iq <dig> and all samples showing a much higher percentage of p. vivax dna than acre <dig> . in addition, the percentage of reads that aligned to the sal <dig> reference was directly related to the parasites per ul present in the original patient sample and thus the variance in the whole genome capture result for both frozen samples and mock blood spots is a function of the starting parasite gdna load . future studies using the whole genome capture protocol would benefit from prioritizing samples for sequencing based upon the patients parasitemia at time of sample collection to limit non-specific binding during the capture protocol.

whole genome and chromosome coverage analysis of whole genome captured samples
after identifying all the reads that mapped to the p. vivax reference genome, we filtered out low quality reads  < 29) and low quality bases  < 20) from those reads that aligned. both mq and baseq are phred scaled scores indicating, respectively, the accuracy of the alignment as given by bwa and the accuracy of the base call as determined by the empiric sample-reference mismatch rate taking into account known variants. these filtration steps are necessary to ensure that machine errors and alignment errors do not bias the conclusions drawn from the data and the resulting set of high quality bases was used for all subsequent downstream analysis discussed below.

first, genome wide sequencing coverage was computed from the set of high quality aligned bases for all whole genome captured samples and was compared with the iq <dig> positive control and the acre <dig> negative control. iq <dig> was sequenced to a genome wide depth of  <dig> x. genome wide coverage by high quality bases for the captured samples ranged from  <dig> x to  <dig> x and was positively correlated to the percent of the reads that mapped to the p. vivax reference . in addition, the percentage of the genome covered by different sequencing depths  was directly correlated to the genome wide coverage achieved and is presented for all whole genome captured samples along with the positive  and negative  controls .

next we evaluated the number of bases that were “callable,” i.e. able to have a confident genotype assigned to them. we defined “callable” for this haploid organism as being covered by five or more bases all of which have a baseq of  <dig> or above . using this cutoff we predict one incorrectly called genotype in  <dig> billion genotype calls or one incorrect genotype call in approximately  <dig> malaria genomes analyzed by sequencing. in the iq <dig> strain  <dig> % of the entire genome was callable and in the acre <dig> negative control only  <dig> % of bases were callable. of the five genome captured samples, greater than 90% of all bases were able to be called in four of the samples with the worst performing fifth sample, sa- <dig>  still having  <dig> % of the genome callable.

while genome wide the percentage of callable bases was high, we next looked at the percentage of callable bases on the individual chromosome level in order to identify gross biases in the capture technique . again we used sequencing data from iq <dig> as the standard. all samples prepared by whole genome capture exhibited the same trend of percentage of callable bases per chromosome as iq <dig>  but a slight overall bias to certain areas of the genome was identified requiring more sequencing to analyze these regions.

%gc content accounts for the sequencing bias between the two techniques
we next examined those regions of the genome that performed poorly in the whole genome capture technique as compared to the leukocyte filtration protocol. the bias identified is correlated directly with %gc. the mean %gc of p. vivax is 45% and both the leukocyte filtration method and the whole genome capture protocol are able to efficiently sequence regions of mean %gc content ). in addition, both sequence preparation methods are poor at sequencing areas of substantially lower %gc .

where the two methods diverge is sequencing regions of higher %gc . the capture method is only approximately half as efficient at sequencing these regions as the leukocyte filtration method ). this effect is seen across all  <dig> chromosomes and the differential bias is seen most prominently around the centromere on account of these regions containing a higher %gc on average than the whole genome.

aside from %gc, the bias seen in the capture samples does not correlate with any other genomic feature including snvs, chromosomal location , particular gene families, or gene rich/poor regions.

quantity of sequencing data required for p. vivax resequencing projects
we next investigated the amount of sequencing data from either the traditional library preparation or the whole genome capture protocol needed to call a certain percentage of the genome. using the data from sa- <dig>  for which we had initially obtained 150x genome wide coverage, we randomly downsampled the original data set to obtain downsampled data sets from 5x to 50x genome wide coverage at 5x intervals. only properly mapped read pairs were included in this analysis and the reads from a pair were either both chosen or both excluded. the same downsampling strategy was used on iq <dig> to obtain downsampled data sets from 5x to 30x coverage at 5x intervals. we also analyzed the full 34x iq <dig> dataset.

at 20x genome wide coverage,  <dig> % of the sa- <dig> genome is covered by five or more reads and therefore callable . at the same genome wide coverage,  <dig> % of the iq <dig> genome is callable. this difference in callable genome percentage at the same level of genome wide coverage indicates that certain areas of the genome are more efficiently captured than others leading to uneven coverage across the genome. as explained above the regions that are underrepresented in sequencing libraries prepared using whole genome capture are those areas with high %gc. this effect is slight but reproducible with all of our whole genome captured samples. as the genome wide coverage increases the discrepancy in callable bases between the two library preparation methods decreases. at 30x genome wide coverage,  <dig> % of the sa- <dig> genome is callable compared to  <dig> % of the iq <dig> genome.

while regions of higher %gc are underrepresented in sequencing libraries created using the whole genome capture method, they are not absent. therefore sequencing those samples prepared by whole genome capture to a higher genome wide coverage than is necessary for samples prepared by leukocyte depletion will overcome this bias and allow genotyping of the vast majority of the genome. we therefore recommend for whole genome deep sequencing of p. vivax, enough data, taking into account residual contaminating human dna, should be obtained to achieve 30x-35x coverage of the parasite genome for samples prepared by leukocyte filtration and 50x coverage for samples prepared using the whole genome capture method. for low-pass snp discovery sequencing, 10x-15x coverage will allow genotyping of a minimum of 65% of the parasite genome using either the standard library preparation method or the whole genome capture protocol .

snvs identified in whole genome captured samples
to further evaluate the quality of data that was produced from the whole genome capture method, we next called snvs from the five whole genome capture samples and compared them to the snvs previously identified in iq <dig> . snvs identified here will be validated and explored in more depth in a future follow-on paper and the validated snvs will of course be a proportion of those called here using a purely algorithmic approach. we show snv data here to demonstrate that the whole genome capture method does not produce data with a substantially different number of high confidence algorithmically identified snvs than the iq <dig> suggesting that the sequencing data obtained is of high quality.

abbreviations: snv, single nucleotide variant; syn, synonymous; non-syn, non-synonymous; na, not available.

apositive control - leukocyte filtered, bnegative control.

the total number of snvs identified in each of the whole genome capture samples  was in concordance with the  <dig>  snvs identified in iq <dig>  the whole genome capture method performed either on frozen whole blood or mock blood spots did not produce an abnormally high or low number of snvs indicating that the data was of high quality in line with the data produced by the leukocyte filtration protocol. in total  <dig>  snvs were identified across all five genome capture samples including 98% of the snvs identified in iq <dig> 

next, we analyzed where in the p.vivax genome the high confidence snvs were located. p. vivax contains a number of highly variable gene families including the merozoite surface protein  family and the serine-rich antigen  family. these gene families are known from p. falciparum to be highly variable and initial p. vivax resequencing studies have demonstrated a high mutation rate in p. vivax as well  <cit> . in agreement with our previous studies, we find that those gene families predicted to be highly variable do in fact contain high numbers of snvs per gene in our whole genome captured samples . in contrast, annotated metabolic genes have a very low snv per gene rate, as would be expected of these housekeeping genes.

in addition to being more or less variable, the magnitude of the rate of variability of the gene families analyzed was consistent across all five genome capture samples and the iq <dig> positive control. the rate of both synonymous and non-synonymous mutations per gene in the msp, sera, and metabolic gene families was found to be a function of the inherent genes in the family and was not affected by the method of sequencing. this result further suggests that the whole genome capture method is unbiased and produces high quality sequencing data that can be used for downstream analysis.

discussion
overall the whole genome capture method provides sufficient data with minimal bias to assign a genotype to greater than 90% of the p. vivax genome. also, the total number of snvs as well as the snv rates of gene families was consistent across all five genome capture samples and was in agreement with previous data from iq <dig>  using these metrics the whole genome capture technique is as efficient as the current leukocyte filtration method in removing contaminating human genomic dna and allowing whole genome analysis of thep. vivax field samples without introducing any bias into the data.

the critical contribution of this method is to be able to carry out comprehensive whole genome sequencing on p. vivax samples where human leukocyte removal has not been or cannot feasibly be done . in addition, the whole genome capture protocol can be performed on starting bulk gdna quantities as low as  <dig> ug. such analysis will provide new approaches to investigate p. vivax population biology with direct applicability to vaccine and drug development.

the cost of sequencing a leukocyte depleted sample and a whole genome captured sample are approximately the same as both methods lead to a mean p. vivax dna percentage of 40%, but the whole genome capture technique increases the cost of library preparation by  <dig> usd as compared to the leukocyte filtration process. whole genome capture, though, drastically reduces the time, cost, and effort in the field needed to collect samples because leukocyte filtration requires getting materials and experienced scientists into the field to actually perform the procedure thereby limiting the collection of samples to only certain geographic areas.

both preparation methods are far superior relative to sequencing extraneous human dna from a non-leukocyte filtered, non-captured sample. in order to sequence p. vivax directly from patient whole blood, 80–100 gb of raw sequencing data would be needed to achieve the desired depth for confident analysis. while sequencing costs continue to come down, at this time it is inefficient to sequence p. vivax without using either whole genome capture or leukocyte filtration.

here we have also estimated, for the first time, the depth of p. vivax sequencing that is necessary for resequencing projects. our data suggest that analyses aimed predominantly at p. vivax strain genotyping should collect 30-35x genome-wide coverage, after taking into account contaminating human dna, for samples prepared by leukocyte filtration and 50x genome-wide coverage for samples prepared by whole genome capture. the marginal benefit of deeper sequencing weighted against cost and throughput efficiency does not support additional sequencing beyond these coverage depths for resequencing studies.

the whole genome capture method is much more amenable to the collection of parasite samples in the field since it can be performed on frozen blood samples or blood spots without the need for complicated laboratory manipulations at the site of collection. whole genome capture is therefore ideal for analyzing samples collected in resource poor areas such as remote health clinics. analyzing samples from these areas will greatly expand the knowledge of p. vivax population genetics at the local level as well as allow for the tracking of parasite populations.

in addition, whole genome capture is the only way to analyze archival samples that were not previously leukocyte filtered before being frozen. many samples exist around the world that have unique phenotypes but up to this point have only been analyzed using sparse microsatellite markers. the technique presented here allows for more thorough analysis of these samples that to this point would have been cost prohibitive.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, the amount of high quality data  and the expanded range of the whole genome capture technique make this new technique the preferred method for resequencing p. vivax field isolates. in addition, studies are on going to expand this technique to whole blood stored on filter paper, which will completely remove the need for a field laboratory thus reducing the technical challenges of collecting p. vivax field samples even further.

