BACKGROUND
planarians are re-emerging as a choice animal model for studying regeneration, with the recent development of genomic resources and molecular tools in a few species, including schmidtea mediterranea and dugesia japonica <cit> . after captivating scientists with their remarkable regenerative capacity for over a century  <cit> , significant progress is being made in understanding how planarians reestablish axial polarity following injury  <cit> , how their stem cells regulate choices between self-renewal and differentiation  <cit> , and how their organ systems, including the central nervous system  <cit> , intestine  <cit> , excretory  <cit> , and reproductive system  <cit> , regenerate following injury.

whole-mount in situ hybridization  and whole-mount fluorescent in situ hybridization  are critical techniques for determining gene expression patterns. planarians present several challenges for ish: first, planarians secrete a layer of mucous that needs to be removed prior to fixation; second, some planarian tissues are “sticky”, resulting in non-specific binding or trapping of antibodies used for detection; third, planarian tissue autofluoresces across a broad range of wavelengths leading to a poor signal-to-noise ratio for low-abundance genes by fish; and fourth, regenerating tissue is fragile during early stages of regeneration, necessitating a fine balance during permeabilization to allow even probe penetration of mature tissues while preserving morphology of regenerating tissue.

early wish protocols in planarians utilized treatment with hydrochloric acid and alcohol-based fixation to overcome issues with planarian mucous  <cit> . more recently a formaldehyde-based wish protocol, which utilizes n-acetyl-cysteine for mucous removal, was developed, providing vastly better sensitivity and maintenance of morphology for wish of planarians  <cit> . this protocol has been widely utilized and has been a critical advancement in the field. however, as with other model organisms, elucidation of the expression patterns for low-abundance transcripts remains challenging. in some cases the expression patterns for genes with known functions remain unclear or elusive  <cit> .

fluorescent detection of transcripts provides superior spatial resolution and enables visualization of overlapping expression patterns compared to development with chromogenic substrates. while the recently developed formaldehyde-based wish protocol does provide improved signal sensitivity for fish, we further improved signal sensitivity by systematically optimizing several key steps, including the bleaching, blocking, and washing steps. furthermore, multicolor fish using tyramide signal amplification  requires sequential rounds of amplification using peroxidase-conjugated reagents. therefore, to prevent residual peroxidase activity from generating false signal during subsequent rounds of detection it is critical to efficiently quench peroxidase activity between tsa reactions. we directly compared several methods for quenching peroxidase activity and find that incubation with azide is the most effective at quenching peroxidase activity and the least detrimental toward detection of gene expression in subsequent rounds of tsa. these modifications represent a significant improvement for fish in planarians, and we have utilized these advancements to clarify ambiguous or elusive gene expression patterns. additionally, many of the modifications we present here can be applied directly to fish protocols for other model organisms.

RESULTS
formamide bleaching increases signal intensity
achieving maximal signal intensity in wish requires balancing preservation of target mrna with permeabilization of tissue to allow probe hybridization. using the planarian wish protocol established in  <cit>  as a starting point, we began systematically testing modifications to improve signal sensitivity with the goal of improving detection of problematic transcripts by fish. because the tsa reaction used for fluorescent detection of transcripts rapidly proceeds to completion, we began by using alkaline phosphatase-based detection to directly compare the rate of development of various probes while varying conditions including fixation, bleaching, permeabilization, hybridization buffer, and hybridization temperature. we first tested the effects of these variations using readily detected transcripts, including the neoblast marker smedwi- <dig> <cit> ; moderately detected transcripts, including a vacuolar atpase b subunit we have identified as being upregulated in the intestine , and the midline marker smed-slit- <dig> <cit> ; and with weakly detected transcripts including the hunchback-like transcription factor, smed-hb, reported to be broadly expressed  <cit> .

most of the variations we tested had minimal impact on signal intensity. however, we found that replacing the overnight peroxide bleach in methanol with a short peroxide bleaching step in formamide dramatically reduced development time for all probes tested, indicating improved signal sensitivity . for fish, the increased signal intensity resulting from the short formamide bleach also improved the signal-to-noise ratio . additionally, planarians bleached in formamide showed more consistent labeling of the prepharyngeal region, a densely packed area with typically reduced probe penetration, compared to methanol-bleached planarians, suggesting that tissue permeability was improved. we examined whether a reduction step  <cit> , which was added to improve permeability of the prepharyngeal region, was required in formamide-bleached planarians. surprisingly, we found that the reduction step slightly diminished signal intensity . if peroxide bleaching in formamide functions to improve tissue permeability, signal intensity should gradually increase with longer bleaching times and eventually reach a maximum level of signal. consistent with this, we noticed signal intensity improved dramatically after bleaching for 30 minutes, reaching a maximum between  <dig> to 2 hours incubation in formamide bleaching solution . interestingly, the improved signal intensity resulting from bleaching in formamide is lost when animals are first bleached overnight in methanol . one possibility for this could be damage of target mrnas during the long methanol bleaching step. however, when we compared unbleached animals to animals bleached overnight in methanol we observed similar signal intensity . additionally, while planarians bleached overnight in formamide had slightly more diffuse signal, signal intensity was similar to animals bleached for two hours in formamide . these results suggest mrna is relatively stable during an overnight peroxide bleach, and that pre-bleaching in methanol must mask the benefit of bleaching in formamide through some other mechanism. interestingly, signal intensity for wish increases slightly in zebrafish following peroxide bleaching in methanol  <cit> . our finding of enhanced signal intensity with formamide-bleaching could be directly and broadly beneficial in improving wish signal in other organisms, whether they are pigmented or not.

modified blocking and wash buffers dramatically improve signal specificity
one of the challenges in achieving high signal sensitivity for fish is that the tsa reaction proceeds rapidly to completion and cannot be monitored and stopped when an optimal signal-to-noise ratio has been reached. therefore, eliminating weak background staining is vital for optimal signal sensitivity when using the tsa reaction for fish.

to further improve signal sensitivity we next examined different blocking and wash solutions. a variety of different blocking and wash solutions have been employed for fish in other systems  <cit> . we began by comparing the effect of adding various reagents to the blocking buffer. since different antibodies can respond differently to changes in blocking solution, we tested modified blocking solutions with anti-digoxigenin- , anti-dinitrophenol- , and anti-fluorescein-  antibodies conjugated to peroxidase. we found that addition of either casein or perkinelmer blocking reagent  improved the signal-to-noise ratio for most of the antibodies tested, but also led to slightly reduced signal intensity . impressively, addition of roche western blocking reagent  dramatically reduced background, particularly for the anti-dig and anti-fam antibodies, without significantly affecting signal intensity .

blocking and wash solutions for whole-mount fish in a variety of animals differ in the use of maleic acid, phosphate, or tris as the buffering component, but typically contain tween  <dig> as a detergent  <cit> . we did not observe significant differences between the use of different buffering reagents, simplifying the protocol by reducing the number of stock solutions to prepare and allowing for the use of solutions that are more convenient to make or are already at hand. significantly, we did find that altering the detergents present in the blocking and wash solutions further improved signal specificity. addition of, or substitution with,  <dig> % triton x- <dig> resulted in a slight but noticeable improvement in signal . the benefit was especially pronounced with the anti-dig and anti-fam antibodies. there are relatively few peroxidase-conjugated anti-hapten  antibodies available that are suitable for tsa, and the reagents described here are widely used for fish in other model systems. while every model system presents its own unique requirements, the modified blocking solution we present here should have wide utility for the use of these anti-hapten antibodies in other organisms. chromogenic wish using alkaline phosphatase-based reagents has minimal background staining compared to fish, and not surprisingly we observed little difference when rwbr or triton x- <dig> was used for chromogenic detection .

quenching endogenous autofluorescence with copper sulfate
planarians exhibit autofluorescence over a broad range of wavelengths, and this feature has been used to distinguish newly regenerated tissues from more mature tissues  <cit> . when we compared the intensity of autofluorescence at various wavelengths between planarians incubated overnight in hybridization buffer at room temperature  or at 56°c  we noticed an increase in autofluorescence at several wavelength ranges in animals incubated at 56°c. as higher levels of autofluorescence reduce the signal-to-noise ratio, it can be difficult to distinguish real fish signal from background autofluorescence, especially for low-abundance transcripts. one approach for improving the signal-to-noise ratio for fish experiments is to use longer wavelength fluorophores for weakly detected transcripts, as autofluorescence tends to be stronger in the blue-to-green range of the spectrum.

an additional approach for improving signal sensitivity is to reduce or eliminate autofluorescence. while there are a variety of causes for autofluorescence, the broad range of autofluorescence in planarians, its increase following incubation at high temperatures, and its resistance to photobleaching  is similar to lipofuscin-based fluorescence observed in tissues of other animals  <cit> . incubation in copper sulfate solution has been reported to quench lipofuscin-based autofluorescence  <cit> . to test the ability of copper sulfate to reduce background signal in planarians, we incubated heat-treated animals for 1 hour in copper sulfate solution  and imaged using identical settings to the unheated and heat-treated samples. the copper sulfate treatment dramatically reduced autofluorescence at all wavelength ranges examined .

the nearly complete elimination of autofluorescence we observed was very encouraging. however, treatment with copper sulfate has been reported to quench some fluorophores  <cit> . to test whether the benefits of copper sulfate outweigh its potential harm to signal, we analyzed expression of smed-egfr- <dig> , which is detected at moderate levels in protonephridia  <cit> , using tamra-conjugated tyramide before and after copper sulfate treatment. prior to quenching, detection of egfr- <dig> in protonephridia was discernible, but autofluorescence in the secretory cells, which have a similar tubular pattern, complicated visualization of signal . when we imaged the same animal after treatment with copper sulfate we had to increase the gain to achieve a similar level of brightness. however, the signal-to-noise ratio was dramatically improved, greatly facilitating visualization of egfr- <dig> . the significantly enhanced signal-to-noise ratio we observed for egfr- <dig> highlights the utility of copper sulfate treatment for analyzing the expression pattern of transcripts with weak-to-moderate signals. copper sulfate treatment should also be useful for multicolor fluorescence experiments, as we have noticed only minor quenching of dylight 405-, fam-, cy3-, and dylight 633-tyramides as well as alexa488-conjugated secondary antibodies following copper sulfate treatment .

balancing signal sensitivity while preserving tissue morphology in regenerates
fish analysis of planarians within the first few days following amputation presents a challenge, as the blastema tissue is particularly fragile and can be easily damaged by the aggressive treatments required to permeabilize mature tissues sufficiently. therefore, it is important to achieve a balance during the permeabilization steps that allows for relatively even penetration of probe into mature tissues without excessively damaging blastema tissue. one strategy for accomplishing this is to adjust proteinase k concentration and incubation time until a satisfactory result is obtained. additionally, while experimenting with alternative methods for permeabilizing planarians, we noticed that heat-induced antigen retrieval  resulted in slightly weaker signal in intact planarians, but allowed for consistent and even labeling throughout the animal while causing less damage to superficial layers compared to proteinase k treatment .

we decided to see whether hiar would achieve the desired balance between permeabilization and preservation of tissue morphology in regenerates. for this purpose we performed fish on planarians fixed three days after amputation using the neoblast marker smedwi- <dig> <cit>  and a differentiation marker, smed-agat- <dig>   <cit> , which is expressed in superficial cells just basal to the epidermis. planarians were processed in parallel and were either permeabilized with proteinase k treatment followed by post-fixation, or were boiled in sodium citrate buffer for 10 minutes and then incubated in phosphate buffered saline  <cit>  containing  <dig> % triton x- <dig> and 1% sds for 20 minutes at room temperature. single confocal sections of central focal planes reveal strong and even labeling of neoblasts with smedwi- <dig> in intact tissues for both treatments . however, blastema morphology was better preserved in planarians treated by hiar, as the epidermis and superficial layer of agat-1-expressing cells are retained, and density of nuclei is higher. we also observed less damage to blastema tissue in planarians treated by hiar in chromogenic wish . in addition to the benefit of hiar for fish of regenerating planarians, this method may also be useful for immunostaining following fish as proteinase k treatment can destroy epitopes for some antibodies.

enhancing signal intensity through iterative tsa
for particularly low-abundance transcripts, gene expression patterns can be especially difficult to determine due to low signal intensity. while new and more sensitive imaging systems are vastly improving the ability to image weak signals, it can still be difficult to rapidly screen expression patterns in multiple samples by epifluorescence to identify animals or regions on which to focus imaging efforts. for example, smed-nog <dig>  is weakly to moderately detected in portions of the central nervous system, around the body margins, at the base of the pharynx, and at the mouth  <cit> . nog- <dig> fish signal following a conventional single tsa is challenging to discern when viewed by eye under epifluorescence, but yet is capable of being detected by confocal microscopy . in an attempt to boost signal intensity for nog <dig> we performed tsa first with dnp-conjugated tyramide, then incubated with peroxidase-conjugated anti-dnp antibody followed by a second, iterative, tsa with fluorophore-conjugated tyramide. in the first reaction signal is amplified by covalently depositing multiple dnp-tyramide molecules near the site of antibody binding. the signal is then further amplified by localizing additional peroxidase-conjugated antibody to the sites of dnp deposition and then performing an additional amplification with fluorophore-conjugated tyramide, which can then be visualized. when we performed iterative tsa for nog <dig> we noticed a dramatic increase in signal intensity that greatly facilitated observation . at higher magnification it is easy to identify nog1-positive cells near the cephalic ganglia in animals processed with iterative tsa , whereas with single tsa, signal is detected just above background . nog <dig> detection is stronger in the ventral nerve cords, and easily observed following either single or iterative tsa . the weak expression in cells around the body margin is almost undetectable following single tsa , but after iterative tsa, nog1-expressing cells are easily identified . the improved specificity from the optimized blocking and wash buffers has been particularly beneficial to iterative tsa, as minor background from non-specific antibody binding is greatly amplified with this method. while the extensive washing following tsa with dnp-conjugated tyramide appears critical, we have had success deploying this technique in multicolor fish experiments without greatly extending the length of the experiment .

azide effectively quenches peroxidase activity without inhibiting subsequent gene detection in multicolor fish
besides providing excellent spatial resolution of gene expression, fish has particular utility in determining the expression of genes relative to one another. for multicolor fish to be effective, peroxidase activity of the first antibody used must be quenched effectively prior to subsequent detection rounds without leading to progressive degradation of sample. a number of methods have been described for inactivating peroxidase activity in multicolor fish experiments, including incubation with hydrogen peroxide  <cit> , fixation with formaldehyde  <cit> , incubation in low ph buffer  <cit> , and treatment with azide  <cit> . while incubation with hydrogen peroxide is more widely used, there does not seem to be a consensus on which method is the most effective. therefore, we decided to compare directly several methods to determine which was the most effective at inactivating peroxidase activity and least detrimental to detection of subsequent gene expression patterns in planarians. for this we performed multicolor fish for two non-overlapping genes; smed-cavii- <dig> , which is detected at high levels in the protonephridial system  <cit> , and a homolog of polycystin  <dig>  smed-pkd <dig> , which is detected at moderate levels in a subset of neurons in the anterior margin and in the sub-epidermal nervous plexus . we detected cavii- <dig> expression first, then incubated in either 2% hydrogen peroxide , 4% formaldehyde , 100 mm glycine ph  <dig>  , or 100 mm sodium azide  for 45 minutes to quench peroxidase activity, before finally detecting pkd <dig> expression. peroxidase quenching using hydrogen peroxide has been widely used in planarians  <cit> . however, we find that while hydrogen peroxide does effectively quench peroxidase activity it also led to an increase in background fluorescence for pkd <dig> . more recently formaldehyde fixation has been used in planarian multicolor fish experiments  <cit> , but while signal sensitivity for pkd <dig> was unaffected, there was clearly residual peroxidase activity from detection of cavii- <dig> . inactivation of peroxidase activity using low ph has been described in other systems  <cit> , and was effective at eliminating residual peroxidase activity from detection of cavii- <dig> . however, it also greatly reduced signal intensity for pkd <dig>  we found that incubation in 100 mm azide was effective at inactivating peroxidase activity without reducing signal sensitivity , particularly when determining coexpression of low abundance transcripts . while the utility of azide in quenching peroxidase activity has been examined  <cit> , it has not been widely used for multicolor fish or immunohistochemistry using tsa. one possibility for this is that it has typically been used at lower concentrations where it may be less effective compared to other methods. our results suggest that use of high concentrations of azide to inactivate peroxidase activity could prove useful for multicolor fish experiments as well as for immunostaining experiments using tsa in other model organisms.

application of the in situ hybridization modifications to detect difficult transcripts
with the improved signal sensitivity we were able to achieve with our modifications to the planarian fish protocol, we sought to resolve the expression patterns of a few genes with unclear expression. the transcription factor smed-hb  is required for normal maintenance and regeneration of protonephridia  <cit> . however, based on the published expression pattern it is unclear whether hb is expressed in protonephridia. therefore, whether it acts autonomously in protonephridia or non-autonomously remains unresolved. we used hb as a representative problematic transcript for optimization of our fish protocol, and found dramatically improved signal sensitivity particularly following formamide bleaching . while we did observe broad expression of hb following chromogenic detection, we noticed staining of tubular structures consistent with protonephridial expression as well as stronger, punctate expression throughout the animal. to determine whether the tubular expression coincides with protonephridia, we performed fish for hb and immunostained with anti-acetylated α-tubulin antibody, which labels cilia in the lumen of protonephridial tubules  <cit> . we observed clear signal for hb surrounding ciliated protonephridia, consistent with hb function being required autonomously in protonephridial cells . scimone et al.  have described a population of protonephridial progenitor cells defined by overlapping expression of protonephridial transcription factors  <cit> . to examine whether the punctate staining we observed for hb might represent protonephridial progenitor cells, we performed double fish experiments with hb and several protonephridial transcription factors, including smed-pou2/ <dig>  and found that a few of the hb-positive cells also expressed pou2/ <dig> . while we did observe expression of hb outside of the protonephridia, these results support the possibility that hb function may be required in protonephridial progenitor cells and mature cell types.

the planarian gene smed-chd <dig> , is a homolog of the chromatin remodeling gene chd4/mi- <dig>  and is required for the normal differentiation of neoblasts  <cit> . chd <dig> has been reported to be broadly expressed and enriched in the central nervous system  <cit> . consistent with chd <dig> expression in neoblasts, mesenchymal expression is reduced following lethal irradiation, and chd <dig> in situ hybridization of sorted cells results in labeling of a significant fraction of neoblast subtypes  <cit> . while these data provide compelling evidence that neoblasts express chd <dig>  we wanted to see if we could verify coexpression of chd <dig> with other neoblast markers in intact animals. for this we performed multicolor fish for chd <dig> and smedwi- <dig>  while we noticed broad expression of chd <dig> throughout the animal, there was clear punctate expression of chd <dig> in the cytoplasm of neoblasts . the punctate, cytoplasmic localization of chd <dig> rna in neoblasts is reminiscent of transcripts present in ribonucleoprotein complexes called chromatoid bodies that are believed to be important sites of post-transcriptional regulation  <cit> . to examine the possibility that chd <dig> mrna localizes to chromatoid bodies we immunostained with the monoclonal antibody y <dig>  <cit> , which recognizes symmetrical dimethylarginine in proteins associated with chromatoid bodies  <cit> . while we occasionally observed chd <dig> puncta  near chromatoid bodies  , we rarely observed overlap between y <dig> immunostaining  and chd <dig> fish signals. this observation suggests that the punctate signals observed represent subcellular localization of transcripts to cytoplasmic regions other than chromatoid bodies.

the expression patterns for several members of the noggin gene family in planarians have been described  <cit> . smed-nog <dig>  is one of a few noggin gene family members whose mrna distribution remained elusive despite confirmation of expression by reverse transcription-quantitative pcr. while knockdown of either nog <dig> or nog <dig> alone yields no phenotype, nog1; nog <dig> double knockdown leads to a dorsalization phenotype  <cit> , further bolstering the likelihood that nog <dig> is expressed. in single fish experiments we were able to detect nog <dig> expression , and observed a pattern similar to that of nog <dig>  we were curious to determine whether nog <dig> and nog <dig> are coexpressed, or whether different cells contribute either nog1or nog <dig> to regulate dorsoventral polarity. to examine this we performed double fish for nog <dig> and nog <dig>  signal for nog <dig> was clear but significantly weaker than for nog <dig>  we found only a small percentage of nog1-positive cells that also expressed nog <dig> in the body margin . the more limited expression pattern for nog <dig> compared to nog <dig> could be real, or may indicate that expression of nog <dig> in some cells is below the limit of detection. despite the latter possibility, our ability to at least partially detect gene expression for a gene that has been refractory to analysis highlights the utility of the modifications we have established for this protocol.

CONCLUSIONS
the fish protocol we present here represents a significant improvement in signal sensitivity for the rapidly growing planarian field. additionally, the modifications we have developed may be beneficial for fish in other model systems. the short formamide bleaching step seems to improve tissue permeabilization properties, and therefore may be a useful addition to wish protocols in other organisms where removal of pigment may or may not be a necessary step. tissue autofluorescence is not unique to planarians, and while there are multiple causes of autofluorescence, treatment with copper sulfate may provide similar benefits for fish in other organisms. the peroxidase-conjugated antibodies used here are commonly employed for fish in numerous model systems, therefore the modified blocking and wash buffers described here will no doubt improve fish sensitivity in other organisms, and the azide treatment will be directly applicable in other multicolor fish experiments.

for large/complex organisms it can be difficult to rapidly identify cells or tissues expressing low-abundance transcripts. to improve initial screening we have developed methods for iterative tsa, which significantly improve signal intensity, facilitating identification of expression domains. finally, while hiar methods have been extensively used for tissue permeabilization in immunofluorescence protocols  <cit> , we show that this method can also be applied for fish, enabling sufficient permeabilization with improved morphology of fragile tissues. additionally, this method may be widely useful in allowing for the use of some antibodies that are sensitive to proteinase k treatment following fish. together, the enhanced signal specificity resulting from the modifications presented here will no doubt be useful for shedding light on how planarians achieve their remarkable regenerative capacity.

