BACKGROUND
the mammalian target of rapamycin  signalling pathway has a key role in cellular regulation and is involved in multiple diseases. mtor is a central regulator of cell growth, aging, ribosome biogenesis, protein synthesis, actin-cytoskeletal organization, autophagy and metabolism. it also plays a vital role in coupling cell growth via signalling pathways, according to the availability of nutrients and cellular energy supplies and oxygen  <cit> . mtor forms two distinct heteromeric complexes, mtorc <dig> and mtorc <dig>  mtorc <dig> contains mtor, raptor , mlst <dig> and pras <dig>  <cit> , whilst mtorc <dig> contains mtor, rictor , mlst <dig>  msin <dig> and protor  <cit> , raptor and rictor being specific components of mtorc <dig> and mtorc <dig> respectively.

rheb  is a small gtp-binding protein that has been shown to promote cell growth and control cell size in mammalian cells and also in drosophila melangaster  <cit> , is a key protein that relays upstream signals to regulate mtorc <dig>  the involvement of rheb in these important complexes is still unclear. however, rheb is reported to bind directly to the amino terminal lobe of the mtor catalytic domain and to activate mtor kinase in a gtp/gdp-dependent manner  <cit>  in cell lysate studies, although a direct interaction is difficult to prove using this approach. furthermore, evidence using the pull-down assay approach suggests rheb associates with mlst <dig> and with raptor  <cit> . both mtorc <dig> and mtorc <dig> complexes play key roles in several pathways that are involved in human cancers and in other important diseases, making the development of inhibitors of these pathways a high priority for the pharmaceutical/biotechnology industries.

it has been reported that rheb–tsc <dig> gap activity may stimulate mtor phosphorylation and while rheb is considered a “component” of the mtor signalling complex, as yet there is no convincing evidence of a direct interaction reported between rheb and mtor. it is also possible that rheb may bind to and activate mtor-interacting proteins such as rictor, raptor or mlst <dig> rather than interacting with and activating mtor directly  <cit> .

raptor interacts with mtor to form a nutrient-sensitive complex that signals to the cell growth machinery  <cit> . it has also been reported that the stability of the mtor-raptor complex increased when cells were starved of amino acids or energy generating materials  <cit> . however, other studies  <cit>  obtained no evidence for changes in mtor-raptor complex stability when cells were treated with nutrient-rich and nutrient-poor conditions. the reason for the discrepancy in the observations between these two studies  <cit>  is unclear since the former report  <cit>  failed to demonstrate an impact of the nutrient status on the stability of the mtor–raptor complex in mammalian cells using similar experimental conditions  <cit> . furthermore there is some evidence that raptor functions as a mtor scaffolding protein, the binding to the tor signalling  motif of mtor substrates being thought to be necessary for their effective mtor-catalyzed phosphorylation in vivo <cit> . hence the dynamic aspects of the interaction between mtor, rheb and raptor in living cells requires new approaches for the detection of interaction, such as provided by the fluorescence resonance energy transfer – fluorescence lifetime imaging  technique for observation of appropriately labelled materials in an active environment  <cit> .

several proteins involved in the mtor signalling pathway, including phosphoinositide 3-kinase   <cit> , pdk <dig>  <cit> , akt  <cit> , phosphatase and tensin homolog   <cit> , tuberin  <cit> , and p70s6k and its substrate s <dig>  <cit>  have been found to localize in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus. in addition, mtor, but not raptor, has been reported to shuttle between the cytoplasm and nucleus  <cit> . by contrast, a nuclear localization of rheb has not been reported.

fluorescence lifetime imaging utilizing confocal single and multiphoton excited state emission microscopy together with time-correlated single photon counting  provides an unambiguous determination of the location of fluorophores. with the discovery of green fluorescent protein  technology, significant new information on the inner workings of the living cell has been made possible through imaging approaches. the interaction of proteins in cells can be followed by utilizing steady state fret between protein pairs tagged with appropriate gfp-fluorophores, such as enhanced gfp  and monomeric red fluorescent protein . with steady state fret the donor fluorophore, in this case gfp, is excited and would fluoresce but instead the excited state energy is re-absorbed by an acceptor fluorophore, in this case dsred, which itself then fluoresces at a longer wavelength, provided the two fluorophores, and by inference the proteins to which they are attached, are close . monitoring steady state fret intensities is notoriously difficult and requires difficult corrections etc. a better method is to monitor the decreased donor lifetime which is independent of the problems associated with steady state intensity measurements and is evidence for a direct physical interaction. we have previously shown that a reduction of as little as ~ <dig> ps in the excited state lifetime of the gfp labelled protein represents quenching through a protein-protein interaction  <cit> . in addition two-photon-excitation fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy  analysis as used here  <cit> , provides several advantages over the standard single photon method, including reduced cellular cytotoxicity of the excitation light and reduced photobleaching of the fluorophore. greater sensitivity of the set-up is achieved through reduced sensitivity of the excitation light  by the photomultiplier tube as a detector. using the sensitive advanced imaging technique of time-correlated single photon counting coupled with fluorescence lifetime imaging and molecular gfp fusion technology, it was possible for the first time to probe directly the nature of the interaction between rheb, mtor and raptor as well as raptor and mtor whilst providing new insights into their sub-cellular localization.

while the gfp-expression approach is excellent for providing evidence of potential interaction of proteins in living cells, since it is an over-expression, one cannot exclude the possibility that the labelled proteins may not interact at their lower natural endogenous levels. thus there will always be some uncertainty in the approach. however, alternative methods for assessing interactions are more limiting as they all involve pull-down assays after solubilisation of the whole cell or cell fractionation which destroys localization information and itself introduces interaction artefacts as it mixes organelle contents. for these reasons the gfp approach is widely used and is the best method available for assessing potential interactions of cell components as long as one is aware of its limitations.

in this study, we report on the significant nuclear localization of rheb together with high levels of a constant pool of mtor  in hek <dig>  cho and hela cells using advanced real-time microscopy. interestingly, raptor was absent from the cell nucleus under all conditions investigated. a constant and direct interaction was observed between rheb-mtor and raptor-mtor, but not between rheb and raptor in the cell cytoplasm.

RESULTS
rheb localizes to both cytoplasmic and nuclear regions in mammalian cells
the functionality of egfp-rheb was first examined by western blots using an antibody to the phosphorylated form of s6-k <dig> as induced by mtorc <dig> signalling . s6-k1-phosphorylation  was increased due to egfp-rheb expression, which was therefore functional. the data indicate that it is rheb that largely controls the level of s6-k phosphorylation. if either of the mtor or raptor had been non-functional they would have reduced the level of s6-k phosphorylation, in fact it was increased by a small but significant amount by egfp-mtor and dsred-raptor expression. therefore egfp-mtor and dsred-raptor were likely also functional.

egfp and dsred tagged proteins were observed to be efficiently expressed in several mammalian cell lines under investigation. figure  <dig> shows confocal images of the transiently expressed fluorescent proteins fused with rheb protein in hek <dig> and hela cells. the transfection expression levels for the cell lines used in this study differed somewhat, in that hek <dig> cells showed more than 80% transfection efficiency, compared to cho and hela cells at ~60% , likely due to differences in the optimal conditions for transfection for the three cell lines. fluorescently tagged rheb, raptor and mtor were confirmed by sds-page and gel electrophoresis in that the correct fluorescent protein was tagged to mtor, rheb and raptor and that they were constructed and expressed correctly . the main localization of rheb and mtor appeared to be the perinuclear regions in the golgi and er.

to determine if egfp-rheb was present within the cell nucleus, we obtained a 3d-multiphoton tcspc image z-stack of hek <dig> cells expressing the fluorescent protein . using this technique, it was possible to observe the presence of egfp-rheb protein throughout the cell with significant expression levels within both cytoplasmic and nuclear regions. taking into account the average fluorescence intensity of egfp-rheb within the cytoplasmic/golgi regions , compared to that within the nuclear region , we can estimate rheb expression levels of ~40% within the cell nucleus and ~60% within the cytoplasm, the golgi apparatus and er together. in hek <dig> cells expressing egfp-rheb a cytoplasmic and nuclear localization was found . in addition we performed immunohistofluorescent staining using an anti-rheb antibody , although, as is well known, rheb antibodies are of somewhat low quality, perinuclear and nuclear staining is apparent. co-localization studies using a golgi fluorescent probe  and a probe for the endoplasmic reticulum  revealed that egfp-rheb localized to golgi and er .

mtor shows some nuclear but mainly er and golgi localization in mammalian cells
the localization of mtor in hek <dig>  hela and cho cells was studied by transient transfection with egfp-tagged at either end of mtor. cells were examined for expression following 24h and 48h of transfection. hek <dig> and hela cells showed mtor expression mainly in the cytoplasm with some detectable but weak presence within the cell nucleus as shown in figure  <dig> 

using the tcspc technique, we observed the average percentage count in three independent experiments to be ~20% egfp-mtor in the nucleus and ~80% within cytoplasmic regions of hek <dig> cells   . the maximum nuclear expression of egfp-mtor observed in populations of hela cell was ~32%  while in cho cells the number was ~26%  .

raptor expression is observed only in the cytoplasm
the localization of raptor was studied by transiently transfecting hek <dig>  hela and cho cells with a vector for dsred-raptor. figures 8a, b show that in hek <dig> cells dsred-raptor was predominantly within the cytoplasm, at 24h and 48h after transfection in punctate structures. transient transfection of dsred-raptor in hela  and cho cells  showed a similar pattern of expression.

egfp-mtor shows a direct interaction with dsred-rheb that is unaffected by rapamycin
to investigate mtor binding-partner interactions, transiently expressing egfp-mtor in hek <dig> and hela cells were first obtained and analyzed using flim, to obtain the control excited state lifetime  48h after transfection . a lifetime image of hek <dig> cells transfected with egfp-mtor for 48h is shown in figure  <dig>  with the corresponding flim image. in three independent experiments the lifetime of egfp-mtor averaged for all of the cells was found to be  <dig> ±  <dig> ps. egfp-mtor located within the nucleus showed a similar lifetime to that in the cytoplasm.

hek <dig> cells co-expressing egfp-mtor with dsred-rheb over a 48h of transfection is shown in figure 10a. the average excited state lifetime of the egfp-mtor in the presence of dsred-rheb was determined to be  <dig> ±  <dig> ps in three independent experiments, the reduced level due to a direct interaction between rheb and mtor, due to energy transfer from egfp to dsred. in hela cells, a similar quenching in the lifetime of egfp-mtor  was observed in co-transfected cells again showing a direct interaction and evidence for a direct mtor/rheb interaction in hek <dig> cells was observable whether the egfp was at the n- or c- termini of mtor .

analysis of the average lifetime of the egfp-mtor from the nuclear regions in hek <dig> cells was determined to be ~ <dig> ±  <dig> ps in three independent experiments. hela cells showed similar expression in the nuclear regions of egfp-mtor and dsred-rheb co-transfected cells . quenching in the lifetime of the donor  from  <dig> ±  <dig> ps to  <dig> ±  <dig> ps in the nuclear regions indicates that egfp-mtor and dsred-rheb interact  differently  in the cell nucleus than in the cytoplasm, likely brought about by a different conformation of the mtor/rheb complex. importantly, in this study egfp-mtor and dsred-rheb were consistently observed to be expressed at similar levels in hek <dig> cells , whilst these levels were different when expressed alone .

the effect of rapamycin on the direct interaction of egfp-mtor and dsred-rheb expressed in hek <dig> cells was determined by a  <dig> h treatment . the egfp lifetime  was unaffected by the treatment showing rapamycin had no impact on the interaction .

although the interaction of rheb with mtor has been widely inferred by indirect approaches this is the first live cell imaging work showing the interaction occurs and does so in specific regions of the cell. although it suffers from the disadvantage that we are looking at over-expression it enables us to examine the mechanisms and consequences of the interaction in a living cell.

raptor interacts directly with mtor but not with rheb and the mtor-raptor interaction is unaffected by rapamycin
egfp was tagged to either end of mtor and dsred was tagged to the n-terminal of raptor and lifetimes measurements of gfp observed. the excited state lifetime of the donor egfp-mtor was determined in hek <dig> cells co-expressing dsred-raptor. the average lifetime of the whole area of the image was  <dig> ±  <dig> ps . the corresponding confocal images of the co-expressed cells excited separately at  <dig> nm for egfp-mtor and  <dig> nm for dsred-raptor, respectively, as shown in figure 11a, shows high expression levels  of both proteins. the quenched lifetime of the donor fluorophore in co-transfected cells suggests that the egfp-mtor and dsred-raptor directly interact under normal growth conditions within the perinuclear regions, as indicated by golgi and er confocal co-localization data. similar results were also observed in hela and cho cells . analysis of cells co-expressing egfp-rheb  and dsred-raptor  in hek <dig> and hela cells gave an unquenched excited state average lifetime of the donor of  <dig> ±  <dig> ps indicating a lack of a direct interaction between rheb and raptor .

hek <dig> cells were co-transfected with egfp-mtor and dsred-raptor, and 24h later were treated with rapamycin at 2h or 24h. there was no effect on the egfp-mtor  excited state lifetime  indicating that the interaction was not affected by rapamycin treatment . although there may be marginal unquenched egfp , however, because the mtor-raptor interaction is not as close as rheb-mtor  it is difficult to be certain if this indicates marginal effects of rapamycin.

amino acid starvation modifies the localization and the nature of the direct interaction of mtor with rheb
under conditions of amino acid starvation, punctate structures or granules were observed for egfp-mtor . when amino acids were added back the punctuate structures gradually diminished and had disappeared by ~ <dig> mins , or much more rapidly after addition of serum  alone . also amino acid starvation and re-stimulation in hek <dig> cells led to a distinct region of interaction, indicated by different levels of egfp-lifetime quenching, to ~ <dig> ps in the perinuclear region and to ~ <dig> ps in the punctuate structures. again the results indicate that rheb and mtor may interact differently in the two regions. it is important to note that the egfp-rheb subcellular localization and distribution is unaffected by this treatment

amino acid starvation does not affect the localization or the direct interaction of mtor with raptor
the mtor-raptor interaction was also observed in small punctate-like structures in the cytoplasm as for rheb in the perinuclear region, under amino acid starvation conditions . under conditions of amino acid starvation and subsequent re-addition showed no significant change in the egfp-mtor lifetime   and therefore we conclude the interaction between egfp-mtor and dsred-raptor remains unchanged. also the localization and distribution of dsred-raptor is unaffected by the amino acid starvation treatment.

discussion
this study is the first to show a direct interaction between rheb and mtor in specific regions of living cells. although previous studies have suggested an interaction using pull-down approaches  <cit> , the ability to be able to study localization and interaction on a  cell-by-cell basis is important when studying a signalling complex which may play differing roles simultaneously in different parts of the cell, as appears to be the case with the mtorc <dig> complex. the fret-flim approach offered two other advantages. it was able to show a direct interaction of both rheb and raptor with mtor, also different conformations of the interacting components could be distinguished by this technique, such information being unavailable using a pull-down assay approach.

both egfp- and dsred-tagged rheb appeared to locate in perinuclear regions in the golgi and er, with no difference in the expression levels in transfected cells. previous studies of gfp-tagged rheb have also shown such perinuclear accumulation  <cit> . the insensitive nature of confocal image acquisition  can make it difficult to set the threshold of standard confocal photomultiplier tubes without losing weaker signals. consequently, gain and background levels can lead to either signal loss or oversampling. the use of highly sensitive time-correlated single photon counting, such as tcspc, allows fluorescence photons to be detected above any background level as well as the ability to quantify the number of photons detected. thus, in this current study using tcspc, we report persistent and observable egfp-rheb presence within both cytoplasmic and also the sub-cellular nuclear regions, although the signal from the nucleus is somewhat weak and it may possibly be due to the fact that it is over-expressed. however, regarding a nuclear rheb presence it is important to note  it has been suggested that mtor shuttles between the nuclear region and cytoplasm  <cit> , and  that mtorc <dig> plays a key role in ribosome biogenesis, a process which occurs in the nucleolus  <cit> . the presence of rheb within the cellular nucleus suggests it might interact with mtor in that compartment. although the role for rheb within the cell nucleus is unclear and whether it simply resides there or can indeed shuttle in and out is not known, however, it is likely to have a role in directing mtor localization and therefore downstream signalling within the nucleus. the interaction between rheb and mtor observed is unlikely to be due to mis-localization since randomly distributed protein molecules will be sufficiently far apart  to limit direct stable interaction.

it has also been reported by using timed imaging of live cells that, following brief association with er, egfp-rheb localizes to highly-ordered distinct structures within the cytoplasm that display the characteristics of golgi membranes  <cit> . rheb was also reported to be localized with mitochondria  <cit> , along with fkbp <dig> and mtor  <cit> . it has also been shown that gfp-tagged rheb co-localizes with rab <dig>  a marker for endosomal and lysosomal structures  <cit> . our studies did not reveal a co-localization of egfp-rheb with mitotracker  in keeping with observations that ectopically expressed rheb does not localize to mitochondria  <cit> . previously it has been reported that egfp-tagged rheb showed a granule-like fluorescence pattern in the cytoplasm, while not being found at the plasma membrane or in the nucleus, and that it has mainly an endomembrane localization  <cit> . however, several upstream regulators of mtor have been reported to be expressed in the nucleus as well as in the cytoplasm and mtor plays an important role in the regulation of translation. evidence for a nuclear localization of mtor has also been provided previously based on data from immunofluorescence in conjunction with cell fractionation and western blot analysis  <cit> .

other components of the pathway such as tuberin, rheb and p70s6k also localize to the cytoplasm . indeed, tuberin, an upstream regulator of rheb has been reported to localize in the cytoplasm and nucleus  <cit> , similar to p70s6k, one of the major substrates of mtorc <dig>  <cit> . in addition, mtor was also found to shuttle between the cytoplasm and the nucleus, this being required to regulate the mitogenic stimulation of p70s6k activation and 4e-bp <dig> phosphorylation  <cit> . this study provides supporting evidence for the nuclear localization of rheb for the first time as well as mtor in live cells. the nuclear localization of mtor is likely an evolutionarily conserved phenomenon and may play an essential role in mtor signalling and functioning as previously suggested  <cit> . with regard to raptor, previous studies using immunofluorescence have shown that raptor is localized within cytoplasm  <cit> . the live cell confocal imaging here also showed a cytoplasmic localization and absence from the nucleus. furthermore lifetime data revealed that raptor interacts with mtor both in the cytoplasm and also within the amino-acid starvation-induced punctate structures within the cytoplasm .

the involvement of rheb in the mtorc <dig> complex has remained an important point of interest since it was shown to interact with mtor due to the potential of its ability to control activity of the complex through its gdp/gtp bound state  <cit> . rheb is reported to bind directly to the amino terminal lobe of the mtor catalytic domain and to activate mtor kinase in a gtp/gdp-dependent manner in cell lysate studies. furthermore, using a pull-down assay, rheb has also been shown to associate with mlst <dig> and with raptor  <cit> .

one of the key goals of this study was to investigate whether rheb and mtor directly interact in living cells and whether this interaction is affected by conditions where mtorc <dig> signalling is impaired . the immunoprecipitation/cell lysate methods previously used are susceptible to artifacts due to the lysis conditions used and do not distinguish between direct and indirect interactions. here, we were able to demonstrate a direct interaction of dsred-rheb with egfp-mtor , consistent with them not interacting directly, however, considering the large size of mtor  compared to those of rheb  and raptor , it is possible that their positions on the mtor are further apart than the distance for efficient fret . therefore the results are consistent with a model where the signal must pass from rheb via mtor to raptor and on to downstream kinases. from the recent cryo-electron microscopy structure the n-terminus of mtor would appear to interact with the flat face of a single raptor molecule forming one interface  <cit> , while c-terminal of mtor interacts with the side of a second raptor molecule forming a second interface. the interaction data from the present live cell study are consistent with the proposed model of this structural study where there may be more than one raptor molecule binding to mtor.

there was evidence from different levels of egfp-mtor lifetime quenching in the cytoplasm and the nucleus by dsred-rheb that the nature of the direct interaction in these two regions may differ, furthermore, the finding of significant rheb in the nucleus is a new finding and suggests an increased levels of mtor also within the cell nucleus. the mechanism for the increased nuclear concentration and details of the nature of the interaction remain to be investigated. from these studies, a revised rheb binding to mtor is proposed to include rheb nuclear localization . it is clear the rheb localization in the nucleus has important implications for mtor signalling.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, rheb, mtor and raptor mainly reside on golgi/er like structures, where mtor directly interacts with both rheb and raptor, shown here for the first time in living cells using fret-flim methodology. a clear localization of rheb within the mammalian nucleus was also shown . rapamycin did not affect the elevated levels of mtor-rheb or mtor-raptor interactions, implying that rapamycin does not inhibit mtorc <dig> signalling by disrupting this complex. amino acid starvation resulted in formation of complexes  that appear as punctuate structures which dissipate after re-addition of amino acids or serum. the interaction of raptor-mtor was not affected by the lack of amino acids whilst the rheb-mtor association was 'loosened' within the granules but not in the perinuclear regions. although gfp-technology is very widely used, one needs to be aware of the disadvantage in that the method uses over-expression of the tagged protein which may impact on the interactions and downstream target activities. for this reason caution is required in interpretations and minimally effects on these downstream activities needs to be checked to confirm functionality, as we have done here using s6-kinase activities. overall we demonstrate that the advanced time-resolved fret-flim technology provides a powerful protocol to investigate signalling pathways and it highlights the physical capabilities of the technique to provide much needed information for developing and testing drugs designed to target specific pathways in real-time in living cells.

