BACKGROUND
reef-building corals form obligate mutualistic symbiosis with unicellular photosynthetic dinoflagellates , which is based on the exchange of inorganic and photosynthetic compounds between the host and endosymbiotic algae . elevated sea surface temperatures  have been recognized as the most important environmental variable leading to coral bleaching  <cit> , where ssts of merely 1°c above the long-term summer maxima can result in mass bleaching events  <cit> . the future trajectory according to the intergovernmental panel on climate change , based on continuing increase in co <dig> emission, unfortunately predicts a further increase in temperature during the 21st century  <cit> .

another important anthropogenic stress factor is pollution of coastal waters. reef corals can be negatively affected by nutrient enrichment such as dissolved nitrogen  that may result in increased incidence of coral bleaching, leading to a further reduction in the abundance and distribution of reef-building corals . in other cases, elevated amounts of n have been reported to positively impact coral growth and symbiont density  <cit>  and have been found to increase the percentage of algae released from host  <cit> .

a number of studies have explored the effects of environmental stress on the physiological performance of the coral host, its associated microorganisms and the effect on changes in the gene expression levels . novel genomic tools such as microarray analyses have brought an overview on the instant changes in the expression levels of hundreds, thousands or even more genes and at the same time, providing more information about the organism’s response to changes in the environment . next generation sequencing technologies provide a more comprehensive picture of changes in rna expression profiles under different experimental conditions  <cit> . only a few studies have applied the rna-seq approach to explore the effect of ocean acidification on coral calcification  <cit> , the effect of heat and settlement inducers on the gene expression profiles of aposymbiotic larvae  <cit>  and the molecular pathways involved in coral resilience to thermal stress  <cit> . most recently, rna-seq revealed molecular pathways involved in heat-induced stress response of the coral porites astreoides from thermally distinct reef habitats  <cit> .

here, we address the existing knowledge gap regarding the detection of early molecular changes after exposure to environmental stress at the level of the coral holobiont, which includes both coral and associated endosymbionts. on the global scale, thermal-driven stress and nutrient enrichment can negatively affect the well-being of corals, although the impacts may vary depending on stress level and coral species examined  <cit> . it is, therefore, important to describe the mechanisms and early warning signs at the molecular level before physiological changes leading to coral bleaching and potentially coral mortality are irreversible. in the present study, we exposed the reef-building coral acropora aspera to 3-day thermal and nutrient  stress regimes and applied the rna-seq method  to identify changes in the gene expression patterns between control and stress conditions. as part of the study, we identified genes/pathways in the coral holobiont involved in the response to short-term thermal and nutrient stress. our results provide new insights into the transcriptional profiles of the coral holobiont and transcriptional regulation prior to bleaching. in addition, we identified a range of potential gene stress biomarkers that could be used for the detection of sub-lethal stress in reef-building corals.

RESULTS
physiological performance
photosynthetic efficiency of symbiodinium in a. aspera, from pulse amplitude modulated fluorometry , revealed an overall increase in the maximum quantum yield  of photosystem ii  at midday across all treatments . specifically, fv/fm at midday showed fluctuation as a consequence of both treatment  and also day , where the long thermal stress resulted in higher values of fv/fm compared to control  and nutrient treatments . at sunset fv/fm varied with experimental treatment , with ~15% higher value in the long-term temperature stress treatment than in the control and nutrient treatments, and did not vary among days .figure  <dig> 
chl
a
fluorescence measurements. chl a fluorescence measurements of a. aspera at heron island, southern great barrier reef  exposed to different ambient treatments; control , short term temperature stress , long term temperature stress  and nutrient stress ,  maximum quantum yield  at midday,  maximum quantum yield  at sunset and  maximum pressure over photosystem ii at noon  . error bars represent the standard error of the mean.



maximum excitation pressure over psii  varied with experimental treatment  and day , and showed overall decreased with time . corals exposed to nutrient treatment had a  <dig> -fold higher qm than the long-term temperature stress treatment on day  <dig>  35% and a  <dig> -fold higher qm than control and long term temperature stress on day  <dig> and a 2-fold higher qm than the long term temperature stress treatment on day  <dig>  coral branches in the short-term temperature stress treatment did not change their photosynthetic activity compared to control branches at midday  and sunset  and there was no change in qm  .

we monitored population density of symbiodinium and the concentration of chlorophyll a under thermal and nutrient stress conditions as indicators of stress and coral bleaching. there was no difference in the algal cell density between treatment and control . also, chlorophyll a concentration  did not differ between corals exposed to elevated temperatures and nutrient enrichment conditions .

analyses of differentially expressed genes
we compared gene expression profiles between control and treatment conditions that included thermal and nutrient stress using rna-seq technology. illumina massively-parallel sequencing produced between 14– <dig> million reads  per treatment. the analysis was performed using the differential kmer analysis pipeline  method which progressively analyse the sequence data from k-mer to read and finally to gene level. the pipeline identified over a million differentially expressed reads  per treatment. comparison of these ders with the high quality annotated and non-redundant protein database, swiss-prot, resulted in successfully annotating around 10% of ders . after the standard diffkap analysis, two extra filtering steps on the results were applied for ensuring that other species in these complex metetranscriptome samples were not introducing false positive degs. the extra filtering was performed using the diffkap gene-centric summary file, which contains all annotated genes with their corresponding number of up- and down-regulated ders in different columns. annotated genes with fewer supporting ders are possibly from other species within the coral holobiont, which are less abundant than coral and symbiodinium. using only annotated genes that contained  <dig> or more ders as a cut-off value to obtain confident differentially expressed genes  - corresponded to ~ <dig> - <dig> % of all annotated genes - we identified:  <dig> degs in short thermal stress exposure  vs. control ;  <dig> degs for long thermal stress exposure  vs. ctrl; and  <dig> degs in nutrient stress  vs. ctrl. inconsistent expression profiles in particular genes may be due to various reasons, such as different expression levels of isoforms of a gene and less confident blast hits of short sequences. to prevent false positive degs we did additional filtering for degs with consistent expression profiles . this reduced the list of degs by ~50%:  <dig> degs in ste vs. ctrl;  <dig> degs for lte vs. ctrl; and  <dig> degs in n vs. ctrl. the overall ratios of up- and down-regulated degs between treatments are presented in figure  <dig> and include the numbers of degs unique to specific treatments and also degs shared between treatments. a complete list of  <dig> up- and  <dig> down-regulated degs commonly expressed in all stress regimes is provided in additional file 5: table s <dig> and additional file 6: table s <dig>  while some of the major degs shared between treatments are presented in table  <dig>  overall, increased transcript abundance was noticed for some ribosomal proteins , cytochrome c oxidase, cytochrome b, nadh-ubiquinone oxidoreductase, actin proteins, fas apoptotic inhibitory molecule and programmed cell death protein of coral origin. up-regulated algal degs included a number of photosynthetic genes of photosystem  i and psii, atp synthase and cytochrome genes. coral down-regulated degs contained different ribosomal proteins of 40s  and 60s , tubulin alpha and beta chains, gfp-like fluorescent chromoprotein and sodium/potassium-transporting atpase subunit alpha of coral origin. algal down-regulated degs included 60s ribosomal proteins  and algal cytochrome c oxidase.figure  <dig> 
degs with up and down-regulation. venn diagrams presenting the overlaps between degs with up-  and down-regulation  profiles in response to short  thermal stress , long  thermal stress  and nutrient stress .


up and down-regulated genes from rna-seq data


up- and down-regulated genes expressed in common across all stress regimes that might be explored further for potential use as stress biomarkers.

a number of degs were involved in the oxidative stress response and genes encoding antioxidant enzymes discovered in this study are listed in table  <dig>  the ste condition resulted in up-regulation of expression for superoxide dismutase, catalase, peroxidase, peroxiredoxin, glutathione s-transferase and thioredoxin, which are involved in the reduction of oxidative stress and capturing ros. however, after the 3-day exposure to thermal stress , there was a down-regulation or lack of differential expression for the majority of antioxidant genes, whilst nutrient stress resulted mainly in the up-regulation of genes involved in suppressing the effects of oxidative stress.table  <dig> 
antioxidant degs up- and down-regulated


a list of antioxidant degs up- and down-regulated by ste, lte and n treatments including their gene accession numbers in the reef building coral a. aspera. only degs containing  <dig> or more ders are included.



validation of the diffkap method by quantitative pcr
we validated the diffkap method by real-time quantitative pcr  and compared transcript abundance of nine randomly selected degs, characterized by different levels of expression . genebank accession numbers of the targeted genes are provided in table  <dig>  changes in expression of the nine coral and algal genes after a 3-day period of heat and nutrient stress were monitored by qpcr and presented in additional file  <dig>  results revealed the positive correlation in gene expression changes  identified by both methods, qpcr and rna-seq, and verified the appropriateness of the k-mer approach as implemented in the diffkap method.

in order to explore potential stress biomarkers, we also evaluated the level of transcript abundance in several candidates proposed by the diffkap analyses  and from previous studies  <cit> . coral and dinoflagellate molecular chaperones, heat shock proteins , showed increased levels of expression, but significant change was observed only for algal hsp <dig> in ste and n, but not lte . up-regulation of symbiodinium hsp <dig> was significant after 1 day of exposure to elevated temperatures  and ammonium enrichment conditions . significant down-regulation was observed for coral green fluorescent protein -like fluorescent chromoprotein under nutrient stress conditions . during 1-day thermal stress increased expression was noted for algal cytochrome c oxidase subunit  <dig>  and nadh-ubiquinone oxidoreductase . the changes in targeted algal genes were significant under nutrient enriched conditions showing up-regulation for ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase for a  <dig> -fold increase  and caroteno-chlorophyll a-c-binding protein for a  <dig> -fold rise .table  <dig> 
qpcr analyses of degs



hsp <dig> 

gfp 

nadh 

tyr 

cyt_c 

rubisco 

peridinin 

car_chl 
genbank accession number, the best blastx  and functions of selected highly abundant degs based on k-mer analyses used for qpcr analyses.
relative gene expression. the relative expression of targeted genes in the ste, lte and n regimens for selected coral  and dinoflagellate  genes by qpcr. relative quantities were normalized to two most stable reference genes with pairwise variations  for minimum of  <dig> or  <dig> reference genes  below  <dig> . the mean expression level was obtained as ratio of treatment vs. control  for five biological replicates. the statistical difference between means is indicated as *p <  <dig>  or **p <  <dig> .



functional profile and gene ontology  enrichment analyses
in coral samples exposed to thermal and nutrient stress conditions a number of significantly enriched molecular pathways were detected . examples of enriched pathways after 1-day thermal stress included: ribosome, proteasome, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, calcium signalling pathway, citrate cycle also known as tca  or krebs cycle; whilst thermal stress lasting for a 3-day period resulted in the enrichment of the following pathways : ribosome, valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation, insulin signalling pathway, ubiquitin mediated proteolysis and spliceosome. nutrient stress resulted in the enrichment of ten pathways, with two pathways, ribosome and ubiquitin mediated proteolysis, commonly enhanced by all stress regimens.table  <dig> 
gene enrichment analyses



ribosome
ste

proteasome

ubiquitin mediated proteolysis

calcium signaling pathway

citrate cycle 

ribosome
lte

valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation

insulin signaling pathway

ubiquitin mediated proteolysis

spliceosome

ribosome
n

citrate cycle 

ubiquitin mediated proteolysis

valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation

focal adhesion

endocytosis

spliceosome

lysosome

insulin signaling pathway

oocyte meiosis
gene enrichment analyses for coral samples exposed to thermal and nutrient stress. significant pathways involved in short , long-thermal  and nutrient  stress response had corrected p-value by benjamini p <  <dig> .



examples of enriched go categories after 1-day thermal stress conditions  included  <dig> biological process  categories,  <dig> molecular function  and  <dig> cellular component  categories. the 3-day thermal stress caused the enrichment of  <dig> bp categories,  <dig> mf and  <dig> cc categories. after exposure to a nutrient stress regime, we observed enrichment in  <dig> bp categories,  <dig> mf and  <dig> cc categories. bp-enriched categories included: photosynthesis, metabolic processes, cell cycle and development, transport , protein degradation, and cell death  as presented in figure  <dig>  top  <dig> enriched bp, mf and cc categories based on the fold enrichment are presented in additional file 8: table s6; additional file 9: table s7; additional file 10: table s <dig> figure  <dig> 
biological processes enriched by stress. biological processes enriched in the coral host a. aspera exposed to heat and nutrient stress.



taxonomic analyses
taxonomic composition of the coral holobiont samples was obtained after aligning millions of short sequence reads to publicly available sequence databases and the symbiodinium de novo transcriptome assemblies generated by our group  <cit> . the total number and percentage of reads aligning to the various databases used in this study are provided in the additional file 11: table s <dig> and additional file 12: table s <dig>  the taxonomic analyses revealed dominant presence of coral transcripts  under both control and stress conditions . the second most dominant group with attribution, comprising ~10-12% of transcripts, corresponded to the symbiodinium databases and 1-2% of transcripts had hits to sequences belonging to environmental samples and various organisms such as bacteria, viruses, fungi, plants and algae, invertebrates, and even humans. the remaining 15% to 22% of short reads lacked a significant match in the databases . exposure to stress resulted in overall increased abundance of bacterial and viral transcripts up to ~10-fold compared to control conditions, despite our sequencing being limited to poly-a-containing mrna molecules .figure  <dig> 
taxonomic composition. taxonomic composition within the coral holobiont obtained by aligning the millions of short reads to publicly available sequence databases, after 24-h  and 72-h  period in treatments  and control .



discussion
molecular and physiological responses represent the first line of defense in reducing potentially harmful effects of unfavorable conditions in the environment. our understanding of the underlying mechanisms of the coral holobiont stress response, however, is still limited. gene expression studies offer a powerful approach for better understanding the complexity of how organisms respond to changes in their environment. coral communities are facing increasing thermal stress, with mass coral bleaching often triggered by relatively small temperature increases over long-term summer maxima  <cit> . on the great barrier reef, natural bleaching conditions were described after a 5-day period of temperatures between 31°c and 32°c  <cit> , although coral susceptibility to thermal induced bleaching may vary among reefs with different historical thermal backgrounds . studies have shown that both coral host and symbiodinium types play important roles in coral susceptibility to bleaching . in the present study, we applied the sub-lethal level of thermal stress of 30°c  that was just below the bleaching threshold, as well as ammonium enriched conditions. these conditions allowed corals to maintain healthy photosynthetic fitness based on elevated dark-adapted fv/fm, pigment concentration and symbiont cell density . as we terminated the heating experiment after  <dig> and 3-day periods, we cannot know with the certainty that the reduction of fv/fm or decrease in the number of dinoflagellates as indication of coral bleaching would occur with prolonged exposure to heat. however, it has been shown that heat stress for a 3– <dig> day period often results in symbiont cell density reductions  <cit> . similarly to our results, fisher et al. reported lack of significant changes in the psii activity for the reef-building coral a. aspera from gbr after 3 days of heat stress, followed by a drop in the psii activity after a 4-day period of prolonged heat stress  <cit> .

rna-seq has been shown to be a reliable tool for the quantification of the gene expression levels and comparable to qpcr levels  <cit> , whilst in this challenging metatransciptome environment containing coral, dinoflagellates and other associated organisms the identification of degs was a difficult task. we applied a novel approach for analyzing metatranscriptomes called diffkap. this innovative bioinformatics method uses a pairwise comparison between illumina read k-mers from control and treatment samples to estimate the changes in the level of gene expression. from degs revealed here, hundreds of up- and down-regulated genes of the coral holobiont have been recognized for potential use as stress biomarkers . these genes, differentially expressed during short-term exposure to +6°c-elevated temperatures and ammonium-enriched conditions, are involved in biological processes related to photosynthesis, respiration, transport and protein degradation, including genes from psi and psii . during coral exposure to elevated temperatures, the photosynthetic machinery of endosymbotic dinoflagellates is susceptible to heat impairment  <cit> , especially the d <dig> protein  <cit> , resulting in a decline in psii functionality  <cit> . under sub-lethal levels of heat and nutrient stress, we induced transcription of a number of photosynthetic genes from psi and psii including expression of psii d <dig> protein, confirming their sensitivity to heat-induced changes and role in the stress response . photosynthetic genes have been shown to play a role in minimizing photoinhibition of psii and scavenging ros during light-induced stress in plants  <cit> . in symbiodinium cultures an initial increase in expression of photosynthetic genes  during exposure to sub-lethal heat stress of 29°c and 31°c was followed by decline after reaching the upper-thermal threshold at 32°c  <cit> . however, transcripts of organelle genes like photosynthetic genes of the dinoflagellate lingulodinium, often have a polyuridylylated 3′ residue  <cit> , which may affect the accuracy of gene expression profiles when targeting poly-a-containing mrna molecules using standard rna extraction kits. the presence of a polya tail in the transcripts of some chloroplast-encoded genes is found to be a signal of rna degradation  <cit>  and therefore, increase in their expression may suggest transcript degradation and destabilization  <cit> .

we detected a trend in up-regulation of coral genes hsp <dig> and hsp <dig>  although without significant changes  and an ~2-fold increase in abundance of algal hsp transcripts, which is similar to changes in symbiodinium gene expression reported by others . heat shock proteins  are molecular chaperones sensitive to temperature changes and in the coral-algal symbiosis their expression may vary depending on time and the stress regimes  <cit> . previous studies have reported up-regulation of coral hsps transcripts after short-term heat stress  <cit> , but also a lack of change in expression levels of hsps  <cit> , especially after prolonged stress  <cit> . in other studies, down-regulation of algal hsp <dig> expression was observed after more gradual increase in temperatures  during a 5-day period  <cit> . here, initial up-regulation of algal hsp <dig> after 1-day and lack of significant changes after a 3-day period may actually suggest a way of acclimatization to prolonged heat stress. also in other dinoflagellates, a majority of analyzed genes showed an even transcript abundance, with a small number of genes having increased expression levels, suggesting that gene regulation was occurring at the translational or post-translational levels  <cit> .

down-regulation of green fluorescent protein -like homologues was observed after the 3-day thermal and nutrient stress regimes . the decrease in expression of gfp-like homologues under thermal stress has been previously reported . similarly, roth and dehain  confirmed a decrease in gfp concentration and fluorescence in the branching coral acropora yongei, as an indicator of coral health decline before any bleaching signs could be observed  <cit> . consequently, these gfp proteins should be further explored for their potential use in the development of bioluminescence chips for the evaluation of coral health.

gene pathway enrichment analyses revealed a number of pathways involved in the coral holobiont response to changes in thermal and nutrient environmental conditions. ribosome, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis and valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation pathways, associated with the processes of protein synthesis and protein degradation were enriched during both thermal and nutrient stress regimes. this indicates protein perturbations and de novo protein synthesis, and overall changes in protein networks affecting the processes related to the cell cycle, immune responses, signal transduction, development and differentiation . protein degradation via the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway targets many short-lived regulatory proteins, such as cell cycle regulatory proteins, allowing the quick transitions between cell cycle stages  <cit> . we also observed a number of differentially expressed ribosomal genes of coral and microbial origin indicating shifts in the ribosomal activities . in coral larval transcriptomes, decreased expression of ribosomal genes was observed after a 2-day  <cit>  and a 5-day exposure to heat stress  <cit> . our finding of calcium-signaling pathway enrichment in ste is supported by a previous study, in which intracellular calcium accumulation was induced by heat  <cit> . the importance of calcium signaling for dinoflagellate-cnidarian symbiosis has been recently proposed with the discovery of conserved calcium-dependent protein kinase genes in various symbiotic dinoflagellates  <cit> .

after a 3-day period of both thermal and nutrient stress, our analyses detected enrichment of the spliceosome pathway, which demonstrates the activation of transcriptional machinery and the processes of splicing. energy demand was also increased, which involved pathways such as the tricarboxylic acid  cycle, an essential aerobic pathway important in an organism’s defence mechanism, as well as reactive oxygen species  detoxification and metabolism  <cit> . others have also reported up-regulation in gene expression of tca cycle enzymes by heat stress  <cit> . insulin signaling pathways were also enriched, suggesting the role of metabolic processes such as glucose and lipid metabolism in the stress response. the insulin protein family is evolutionarily ancient  <cit>  and insulin-related proteins have been found playing a role in signaling and growth in cnidarians  <cit> .

during nutrient stress exposure, our results revealed the enrichment of the pathway related to ocyte meosis and the endocytosis pathway that is involved in molecule uptake. oocyte meiosis pathway enrichment indicates gamete production was stimulated in corals. oocyte formation was also increased by nutrient enrichment in the brooding coral stylophora pistillata, although the final number of live planulae was reduced  <cit> . ourresults show that catabolic processes are boosted by nutrient stress, as are ion transport and enzyme activities . ammonium enrichment at the same concentration as was used in this study  resulted in increased mortality of coral larvae  <cit> . here, the impact of a short period  of elevated ammonium concentrations  was not as detrimental, although apoptotic biological processes were enriched by nutrient stress, suggesting that the tipping point leading to apoptosis had been reached . this is possibly due to ammonium uptake by the host and largely by symbiotic dinoflagellates  <cit>  and also natural variation in n concentration, as corals are exposed to pulses of elevated amounts of n released by residential fishes  <cit> . the up-regulation in expression of the algal genes ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase and caroteno-chlorophyll a-c-binding protein under nutrient enriched conditions  suggests the strengthening photosynthetic capacity of coral symbionts. similarly, feeding of the reef-building corals had a positive effect on symbiont photosynthetic capacity during thermal stress, due to boosted food provision from the coral host to algal symbionts  <cit> .

although physiological performance was stable , the signs of oxidative stress were developing at the molecular level as rna-seq data showed enrichment of bp related to oxidative stress and cell death . dysfunction of the coral-algal symbiosis, leading to a breakdown of the symbiotic partnership often starts with the production of ros and oxidative stress  <cit> . in corals, it has been proposed that antioxidants scavenge ros produced during heat stress, improve photosynthetic activity and decrease bleaching events  <cit> . interestingly, higher numbers of antioxidative genes have been discovered in symbiodinium compared to related, but non-symbiotic organisms  <cit> , indicating the enhanced capacity to endure oxidative stress. our results show an up-regulation in expression of antioxidant genes under ste and nutrient stress conditions , indicating oxidative stress response, in line with the findings of desalvo et al.
 <cit> . several forms of superoxide dismutase and catalase were enriched, which is consistent with their role as the first line of defense against oxidative stress and the protection of coral-algal symbiosis from ros  <cit> . during the lte treatment, however, expression of superoxide dismutase and catalase was not affected, whilst peroxiredoxin and thioredoxin genes were down-regulated, suggesting possible acclimatization to elevated temperature by prolonged heat stress. barshis et al.
 <cit>  also noticed reduced expression of antioxidant cu-zn superoxide dismutase in thermo-tolerant corals compared to thermo-sensitive types. in addition, our results show that after a 3-day exposure to thermal stress, corals in fact increased fv/fm and consequently their photosynthetic capacity , further pointing to possible photo-acclimation.

multicellular organisms like corals can be regarded as metaorganisms comprised of the host and associated prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms  <cit> . in the case of the coral holobiont, this entity is presented as the partnership between corals, symbiotic dinoflagellates and other organisms including microbiota, viruses and fungi  <cit> . our taxonomic analyses of the reef-building coral a. aspera revealed dominance of transcripts with coral  and symbiodinium origin  including sequences of unknown origin  with no significant matches to the sequence databases . this is possibly due to a large portion of sequences lacking hits to known genes and also the short sequencing reads produced by next-generation sequencing  <cit> . here, additionally, we identified the presence of 1-2% of transcripts from other organisms including bacteria, archaea, fungi, viruses and even human. these results can be explained by database bias due to a high proportion of characterized sequences from some model organisms, possible gene orthologs and also the existence of poly a bacterial and viral transcripts.

exposure to stress has been demonstrated to lead to changes in the microbiota composition and susceptibility to coral diseases  <cit> , where heat stress can lead to shifts in microbial communities between healthy and bleached corals  <cit> . here, stress resulted in an overall increased abundance of poly a bacterial and viral transcripts up to ~10-fold compared to control conditions. a recent proteomics study revealed a 100-fold increase in a viral replication protein in the coral stylophora pistillata after heat stress treatment  <cit> . it is difficult, however, to distinguish the exact changes in the transcript abundance of specific groups of organisms due to the high proportion of unknown sequences. this will remain a recurring issue until sequencing projects, which will cover all species existing in the coral holobiont are completed.

CONCLUSIONS
elevated sea temperatures, ocean acidification and eutrophication are recognized as major factors in destabilizing the cnidarian–dinoflagellates symbiosis and consequently coral reef ecosystems globally  <cit> . this novel study uses illumina rna-seq technology to investigate the coral holobiont transcriptomic response to short-term heat and nutrient stress. we provide the comprehensive coral transcriptomic profile of the early changes happening at the molecular level before physiological and phenotypic changes can be observed. these results provide insights into the biological processes and pathways enriched by heat and ammonium augmentation such as ribosome and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis pathways, resulting in a range of modifications in the protein networks. our transciptomics data include the first pool of potential stress biomarkers comprised of coral and algal genes for detecting the early signs of stress in the coral holobiont. in the future, additional studies should apply “clinical trial” procedures, using different coral species and stress regimes to evaluate the biomarkers’ sensitivity and potential for technological application, including the development of environmental monitoring tools such as “molecular stress kits” for corals. to conclude, this study provides new insights critical for future prediction and protection of coral reefs from global climate change.

