BACKGROUND
environmental and socio-economical changes have lead to an increase of interactions between wild and domestic species worldwide, a phenomenon that has received a growing attention during the past decade. it is now largely recognized that wildlife can play important roles in the epidemiology of infectious diseases shared between wild and domestic species
 <cit> . in particular, the potential of wild animals as pathogen reservoirs and sources of infection for domestic livestock has been of increasing concern
 <cit> . thus, when an eradication program was implemented for bovine viral diarrhea  in domestic livestock in switzerland, the question was raised whether free-ranging wild ruminants - roe deer , red deer , alpine chamois  and alpine ibex  - may represent a threat to the success of the program.

bovine viral diarrhea  is responsible for massive economic losses
 <cit>  in livestock farming. it is caused by the bvd virus , an rna-virus that belongs to the genus pestivirus of the family flaviviridae. this virus family also comprises the pathogens causing classical swine fever and border disease. bvdv is transmitted mainly horizontally from animal to animal via oral and nasopharyngeal secretions, or iatrogenically 
 <cit> . an acute infection usually remains inapparent or causes only mild disease and establishes a robust immunity. the importance of bvdv is due to the occurrence of persistently infected  animals, resulting from infections of pregnant cows or heifers during gestation prior to the development of the fetus’ immune system. in such a case, the virus is recognized as “self”, and an animal born alive will spread bvdv lifelong. persistently infected cattle may develop the fatal mucosal disease
 <cit> . the isolation of bvdv and the occurrence of pi animals have been documented in various free-ranging and captive species
 <cit>  but the possible role of wild ruminants as reservoir remains unclear.

previously to the national bvd eradication program, started in  <dig> with the aim of eliminating all pi animals
 <cit> , bvd was endemic in the swiss cattle population with a seroprevalence of  <dig> %
 <cit> . subsequently, the prevalence of pi cattle dropped from  <dig> % to  <dig> % in the first phase of the program
 <cit> . several studies on pestivirus infections in red deer, chamois and ibex, either antibody or antigen surveys, have been conducted in switzerland in the past; however all of them were limited in some way, considering only one animal species and/or a single specific geographical region
 <cit> .

interactions between wild and domestic ruminants are not rare in switzerland
 <cit>  and it is likely that their occurrence increased during the second half of the past century because of the rise of indigenous swiss wild ruminants during this period and of the implementation of an agricultural production based on high productivity. the latter has lead to new and highly productive pasturing surfaces from which the wild populations have benefited
 <cit> . the occurrence of interactions between wild and domestic species has also been documented in other countries
 <cit>  and more attention has been directed toward the potential role of wildlife in the epidemiology of diseases that may be shared between wild and domestic species
 <cit> . however, while the occurrence of such interactions is often reported in scientific articles, the information remains vague or not properly documented and there is a need for more systematically collected data.

the aims of the present study were to assess the potential role of free-ranging wild ruminant populations as a source of infection with bvdv for domestic livestock, and to quantify and characterize interactions among domestic and free-ranging ruminant species. therefore, 1) we carried out a cross-sectional study to determine the current apparent prevalence of bvdv infections in the four species of free-ranging indigenous wild ruminants in switzerland in parallel to the bvd eradication program in livestock, and compared our results with previous studies; and 2) we performed a questionnaire survey to document the occurrence and type of interactions between domestic and wild ruminant species in an alpine environment.

RESULTS
bovine viral diarrhea virus
serum samples from 1’ <dig> wild ruminants  were screened by elisa for bvdv antibodies. in this first screening,  <dig> samples showed a positive or indeterminate reaction. in the subsequent serum neutralization test ,  <dig> of the  <dig> samples  showed antibody titers ranging from 1: <dig> to 1: <dig>  overall, apparent seroprevalence was  <dig> %  . the seropositive animals originated from sub-alpine or alpine regions  and significantly more seropositive red deer , chamois  and ibex  than roe deer were found. there were no statistically significant differences between sampling units, age classes, genders, and sampling years.
1b refer to communities in which at least one domestic animal was found positive for bovine viral diarrhea virus .

viral rna was detected by real-time rt-pcr in one seropositive chamois kid , and results were not interpretable for eight further seropositive animals . all other samples  were pcr-negative. thus, the estimated viral prevalence was  <dig> % . the rna sequence from the chamois kid sample could be assigned to the previously described bvdv <dig> sub genotype h
 <cit>  . 
 <cit> . only bootstrap values over  <dig> are shown. branch lengths are proportional to genetic distances, and the bar shown indicates  <dig>  substitutions per site.

comparing our results with the situation in domestic livestock , almost all positive wild ruminants were sampled within or at the periphery of a community with at least one pi cattle detected during the summer pasturing season in the frame of the eradication program . however, no wild animals from the jura were positive despite the presence of pi cattle. seroprevalence in cattle prior to the eradication program  was significantly higher  than the  <dig> % that we report for wildlife. virus prevalence in swiss cattle born prior to  <dig> , i.e., before the start of the eradication program, was also significantly higher  than the  <dig> % obtained in wild ruminants in our study. the sequence obtained from the pcr product  was identical with sequences from cattle strains  detected from eight different cattle during the eradication program. three of these cattle were born within a radius of  <dig> km around the sampling location of the chamois.

interspecific interactions
the majority of the contacted game wardens participated to the questionnaire survey . roe deer, red deer, chamois and cattle were reported to be present in all sub-districts while ibex, goat and sheep occur in only part of them. the period of observation ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> years with a mean of  <dig> years. detailed data on the answers can be found in the additional files
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> and
 <dig>  hereafter, rare observations are not taken into account, i.e., statistical analyses focus on observations made more than once a year.

data on proximity between species are summarized in figure
 <dig>  considering wild species only, interspecific interactions are observed mainly within the same taxonomic family, i.e., among caprids  and among cervids , but more than half of the game wardens also reported encounters between chamois and cervids, including rare physical contacts between chamois and red deer. in contrast, interactions between ibex and cervids were reported by only one third of the game wardens and no physical contact was observed.

regarding wildlife and domestic livestock, encounters of <  <dig> m and non-simultaneous occupation of the same area were documented significantly more frequently between roe deer and cattle than with sheep or goat. for red deer, encounters of <  <dig> m , encounters of >  <dig> m and non-simultaneously occupation of the same area were observed most frequently with cattle, and 5% of the game wardens reported physical contact between the two species. for chamois, only non-simultaneous occupation of the same area was significantly more observed with sheep than with the other species. one game warden reported physical contact between chamois and goat. for ibex, encounters of <  <dig> m and >  <dig> m were observed more frequently with domestic small ruminants than with cattle, and physical contact was reported with both sheep and goat.

regarding the duration of encounters, the wild species most often observed in contact together for >  <dig> h were chamois and ibex. sixty-six percent of the game wardens regularly observed such encounters. nevertheless, 33% of the game wardens reported long-lasting encounters between chamois and red deer, 30% between roe deer and red deer, 18% between chamois and roe deer, and 6% between ibex and red deer.

the duration of encounters between wild and domestic species shows the same frequency pattern as for the proximity, i.e., interactions of >  <dig> h involving cervids were more often observed with cattle than with small ruminants , chamois were observed with all three domestic species , and ibex interacted for long intervals only with small ruminants .

all four types of situations were observed between chamois and ibex . the observations were less frequently reported between roe deer and red deer . chamois were observed more frequently sharing the same salt lick  and resting places  with red deer than with roe deer, and ibex were observed more frequently sharing the same natural feeding resource  and salt lick  with red deer than with roe deer.

interactions between roe deer and domestic ruminants such as the use of the same natural feeding resource and mixing of herds when grazing, were observed more frequently with cattle than with sheep and goats . all types of interactions involving red deer were more frequently observed with cattle than other domestic species but the difference was statistically significant only for the use of the same natural feeding resource . for chamois, there were no significant differences regarding the frequency of observations with domestic ruminants but all four situations were observed slightly more often with sheep than with goat and cattle. for ibex, three out of four types of interactions  were more often observed with sheep plus goat than with cattle .

anthropogenic food resources were reported to be frequently used by wild ruminants. a common use of the same wildlife feeding places was observed between roe deer and red deer  and rarely between red deer and chamois  or roe deer and chamois . food sources meant for domestic livestock are reported to be used in majority by roe deer and red deer  and in relationship with the three domestic housing facilities  but significantly more often in relationship with cattle housing  than with sheep or goat housing . interspecific interactions among cervids were observed at such places by 32% of the game wardens. cervid interactions driven by other food sources  on private ground are even more common .

general comments made by game wardens were particularly abundant on the topic of interactions related to anthropogenic food resources. all these interactions were observed exclusively during winter and early spring. intentional feeding apparently occurs mostly above the upper forest line, i.e., at 1’ <dig> to 2’ <dig> m above sea level  where cut grass of poor quality is made accessible for wild species in winter times. wild species were reported to use livestock food mostly at night, when livestock is not around. the most commonly used anthropogenic food source is silage  especially in relationship with outdoor housing of livestock , i.e., wild species tend to enter livestock enclosures. if unprotected, silage reserves are easily accessible and attract many wild animals . most farms known to be regularly visited by wild ruminants are located at the bottom of alpine valleys  and are therefore accessible mainly only for cervids. other food sources on private grounds  are found in nearly each community and have also an attractive effect on wildlife, especially in winter.

discussion
in this study, we assessed for the first time the prevalence of bvdv infections in all four indigenous wild ruminant species on the whole territory of switzerland. results provide a general picture of the current bvdv infection status of these species, which is necessary for the future planning and successful achievement of the implemented bvd eradication program in livestock. although the number of investigated animals was too low to provide strong data at local level, the total sample size  fulfilled criteria both for detection of “disease”  and prevalence estimation at country level.

this study also provides valuable information on the occurrence of interspecific interactions among wild ruminants and between wild and domestic ruminants in an alpine environment. these quantitative data are necessary to understand the epidemiology of infectious diseases in natural habitats used by different animal species and to perform risk assessments. data gathered by means of questionnaire surveys rely on observations of a number of voluntary participants and may be biased in various ways. furthermore, exact and detailed information is nearly impossible to collect because 1) participants have to rely on memorized events to answer the questions, and 2) the response rate is expected to be negatively influenced by extensive question lists. however, this method represents a relatively easy and efficient way to obtain general information on a large geographical area over a long period of time.

the bvdv screening test gave more positive results than the confirmation test: only 42% percent  of the samples that were found positive by elisa were confirmed as such by snt. two factors may account for this difference: first, it may be due to poor serum quality and cytotoxicity, which limits performance of the snt and hampers result interpretation. results that could not be validated by snt were classified as non-interpretable, which may have lead to an underestimation of the final seroprevalence. second, cross-reactions with other potential circulating pestivirus may have occurred in the elisa. because only one virus strain was used for the snt, it was not possible to assess the occurrence of such cross-reactions
 <cit> . other studies have indeed shown a high circulation of pestivirus in wild ungulates populations, e.g. the border disease virus  in ibex and chamois in the italian alps
 <cit>  or in chamois in france and spain
 <cit> , and it is likely that this virus also circulates in swiss wildlife. the presence of other pestivirus than bvdv could also explain the presence of seropositive wild animals in communities without documented pi cattle .

overall, we observed low seroprevalences in red deer, chamois and ibex and no antibodies were detected in roe deer. for red deer, the seroprevalence calculated in the present study  is higher than previously reported in switzerland  but the difference is not significant . our results are in line with a study from austria , a country that started an eradication program for bvdv in livestock at regional level in  <dig> and at national level in 2004
 <cit> . other european countries have reported low seroprevalences  in red deer populations
 <cit> .

similarly, the situation in swiss chamois is comparable to previous studies in europe, which documented bvdv seroprevalences ranging from  <dig> % to  <dig> %
 <cit> . in ibex, seroprevalence has significantly decreased
 <cit> , both at local level  and at national level . in the unit south-west, a non-significant decrease was also noted . if this decline was a consequence of the implementation of the bvd eradication program in  <dig>  the prevalence is expected to continue to decrease in wild populations.

concerning roe deer, previous reports have documented low seroprevalences in germany  and in france . however, in germany higher prevalences reaching up to  <dig> % have also been recorded, pointing at existing regional differences
 <cit> . a distinct bvdv-like strain was found in free-ranging roe deer in germany, indicating that specific bvdv strains might circulate in this species
 <cit> . in scandinavia, antibodies against bvdv were detected in  <dig> % of  <dig> norwegian roe deer and the authors also concluded that this situation might be due to the circulation of a wild bvdv-like strain
 <cit> .

we report here the detection of bovine-related viral rna in a seropositive chamois kid. given the fact that cattle harbouring the same strain were born in the region where this chamois was sampled, and according to the widespread circulation of virus in the cattle population prior to the eradication program, a cattle to chamois transmission is more likely than the contrary. to our knowledge, this is the first report of a detection of bvdv in a chamois and in an alpine ungulate. there are two possible explanations for the simultaneous presence of virus and antibodies in this chamois kid. on the one hand, it may have had circulating maternal antibodies like it has been described in cattle calves
 <cit> . however, the antibody titer in this chamois  was much higher than the maternal antibody titer predicted for  <dig> month-old calves 
 <cit> . the chamois was >  <dig> months old and we expect that transfer and persistence of maternal antibodies is comparable in wild and domestic ruminants. on the other hand, it may have undergone an acute infection but the simultaneous occurrence of detectable antibodies and virus in a transiently infected animal is unlikely
 <cit> . to distinguish between a pi animal and a transient infection, two consecutive analyses are necessary, a procedure that is not possible when examining hunted animals.

the facts that all bvdv seropositive animals were located within the alps, and that the only virus positive wild ruminant was infected with a cattle strain, suggest a role of interactions on alpine pastures as a risk factor for bvdv infection, as already described for cattle infections
 <cit> . domestic pi animals may have been the source of the infections detected in wildlife.

it is now widely recognized that the epidemiology of diseases is often characterized by multiple host systems
 <cit> , and interspecific interactions, especially between wild and domestic species, have received an increasing attention during the past decade. however, although the epidemiological significance of interactions at the wildlife-livestock interface is often incriminated or suspected , such interactions are poorly documented in the internationally available scientific literature. published studies on interactions between different animal species mostly focus on interferences or influences at the population level - such as mutualism, commensalism, competition and predation - while reports on behavioral and social interactions at the individual level, which are most relevant when talking about pathogen transmission, are scarce
 <cit> . furthermore, most studies on behavioral interactions between sympatric species focus on only few species, which is likely insufficient when addressing epidemiological questions in a natural environment.

our data on frequency of interactions originate from a retrospective questionnaire survey and do therefore not present the accuracy of a prospective field study carried out by ethologists. however, they arise from a particularly long observation period  that also reflects the experience level of the participating game wardens, two factors that are expected to positively influence result reliability. because the concerned wild species are most active at dawn or dusk
 <cit> , it is likely that only a small part of the occurring interactions were observed, i.e., their reported occurrence is probably underestimated.

compared to former questionnaire surveys and prospective observational studies on interactions between domestic sheep, ibex and chamois in the swiss alps
 <cit> , we report as many or more observations of 1) physical contacts and short distance encounters between chamois and ibex, and between wild caprids and sheep; 2) mixed herds of chamois and ibex; and 3) encounters at salt licks between chamois and ibex. this supports the expected reliability of our questionnaire data and also shows that rarely observed events like physical contacts are more likely to be recorded by questionnaires than by direct observations on selected study sites. reports on interactions between domestic goats and wild ruminants had not yet been documented, except for the occasional occurrence of hybrids between goats and ibex
 <cit> . we show here that these interactions are not rare, particularly between goat and ibex.

interactions among deer species  were reported to be frequent in an italian mediterranean national park
 <cit> . here we also report frequent encounters of <  <dig> m and other types of interactions between roe deer and red deer. interactions between red deer and ibex have already been observed before in the swiss alps
 <cit> . however, we report for the first time observations of physical contacts between cervids  and caprids . our data suggest that red deer interact more often with chamois than ibex, which can be explained by the larger overlap of deer and chamois habitat. similarly, direct interactions between red deer and cattle have already been documented in the alps
 <cit>  but we newly report physical contacts between these two species. also, we show that roe deer can get close to domestic species, especially cattle, with which almost all types of interactions were reported significantly more often than with small ruminant species. since the questions on proximity and type of observed interactions were not linked with each other in our questionnaire, it is difficult to conclude from the obtained data which circumstances more likely favor close interspecific contacts. however, additional comments of the participating game wardens and common sense suggest that the simultaneous use of common food sources bear the highest risk for close interactions including physical contacts.

wildlife feeding has never been performed by the hunting authorities in the canton of graubünden and was officially abolished  <dig> years ago by the cantonal hunters’ association . however, a number of game wardens reported that intentional feeding of wildlife in wintertime is still common practice, and that interspecific interactions occur at feeding sites, especially between roe deer and red deer. furthermore, both cervid species but especially red deer were observed near cattle farms - outside or inside livestock enclosures - during winter, profiting of livestock food resources like bale silage. in switzerland, wildlife management is largely defined at cantonal level and official restrictions regarding wildlife feeding in graubünden may not apply to other cantons. this means that active wildlife feeding may be even more common in other regions. an aggregation of animals of the same or different species either at intentional or non-intentional feeding places is a recognized risk factor for pathogen transmission
 <cit>  that needs to be taken into consideration in the frame of disease prevention or control programs.

the risk of pathogen transmission between sympatric species depends on the occurrence, frequency and intensity  of interactions. furthermore, two major transmission pathways have to be considered: 1) by direct contact, i.e., physical contact with an infected host or by contact with the latter’s infected discharges, including contaminated aerosols, feed, water or environment ; or 2) by indirect contact via a living or inanimate intermediate vehicle that transmits pathogens between infected and susceptible hosts, such as arthropod vectors 
 <cit> . for bvdv, both direct and indirect transmissions are possible
 <cit>  and we have shown that all kinds of interactions representing a risk for transmission, including physical contact, short distance encounters and use of the same food resources, are commonly observed between wild and domestic ruminants in the swiss alps. overall, we documented a regular occurrence of interspecific interactions allowing virus transmission.

we showed that bvdv infections are significantly less frequent in wildlife than in swiss cattle and that seropositive wild ruminants were mostly found in areas with pi cattle. furthermore, the virus positive chamois was infected with a cattle strain, and seroprevalence in wildlife is apparently decreasing now that the eradication program in livestock is ongoing. it has been previously suggested that conditions to maintain certain pathogens are indeed more favorable in domestic livestock than in wild ruminants
 <cit> : swiss wildlife populations are much smaller than cattle and sheep populations; furthermore, in livestock intraspecific contacts and mixing of herds  and movements throughout the country  are more frequent and intense than among wild populations, which is expected to favor pathogen maintenance.

all tested wild animals from the bioregion jura were negative despite the presence of infected domestic livestock on pastures. interactions between wild and domestic species are also known to occur in this region but may be less frequent than in the alps due to the lower number of domestic ruminants on summer grazing pastures. however, data from the alps suggest that spill-over is rare and our sample size does not allow excluding the infection of single individuals in the jura.

although interactions between cattle and roe deer are regularly observed, bvdv antibodies were not detected in this wild species. earlier studies have shown that roe deer are susceptible to bvdv infection
 <cit>  and that a distinct bvdv strain exists in roe deer populations from germany
 <cit> . however, due to the high variability of data obtained for this species across europe, it seems difficult to draw further conclusions on the susceptibility of roe deer to bvdv cattle strains. the frequent interactions between wild and domestic caprids, and the occurrence of bdv in sheep and goats in switzerland
 <cit> , further underline the need to consider the occurrence of infections with other pestiviruses than bvdv in wild ruminants.

CONCLUSIONS
our aim was to assess the role of wild ruminants in the epidemiology of bvdv infections in domestic livestock in switzerland. here we showed that despite regular occurrence of interspecific interactions, infections in wild ruminants seem to be only sporadic, and we found no indication that the virus circulates among wild populations. we therefore conclude that wildlife is currently an incidental spill-over and not a reservoir host for bvdv, and that it does not represent a threat to the eradication program in livestock. because data rather suggest that infections of wild animals depend on the situation in livestock, eradication in livestock may also improve the epidemiological situation in wildlife. however, records of bvdv seropositive wild animals in areas without documented pi cattle warrants caution in result interpretation. especially, it is known for other diseases that spill-over can lead to the slow establishment of wildlife reservoirs and subsequent spill-back
 <cit> . in view of these considerations, performing another country-wide cross-sectional study in a few years may contribute to test the hypothesis that domestic ruminants are the source of bvdv infection for wildlife, i.e., that this viral infection is not maintained in free-ranging wild populations.

