BACKGROUND
the translationally controlled tumour protein , discovered more than 20 years ago, is ubiquitously expressed throughout all eukaryotes. sequence analyses revealed a highly conserved protein without homologies to other known proteins . structure analyses of s. pombe tctp revealed similarities to the mss4/dss <dig> superfamily  <cit> . mss4/dss <dig> proteins are known to bind to a nucleotide-free  form of small gtpases, the so called rab proteins. up to now, many studies were carried out relating tctp to multiple cellular processes  including reports of several interacting proteins .

little is known about tctps of plants by now. a first study carried out in  <dig> associated tctp to root cap cell division of pisum sativum <cit> . other studies followed and revealed changes in plant tctp transcript or protein levels in response to different stress conditions like cold, light, salt, water deficit, aluminium, or agrobacterium mediated transformation  <cit> . furthermore, tctp levels were shown to decrease in response to pathogen infection  <cit> , and a possible involvement in long-distance movement of phloem proteins was assumed  <cit> . sequence comparisons of known tctps revealed homologous forms in many different plant species  <cit> . tctps of non-plant sequences are usually encoded by a single copy gene, whereas plants have several different tctp cdnas, pointing to more than one tctp encoding gene  <cit> . arabidopsis thaliana owns two tctp genes, at3g <dig> and at5g <dig>  the gene locus at5g <dig> was assumed to be a pseudogene without function, because of a lack of expression in various tissues. nonetheless, in other plants a possible specialization of different tctps was supposed  <cit> . a first functional characterization of a. thaliana tctp  was published in  <dig> and showed elevated expression levels in mitotically active tissues. tctp knockout plants revealed a male gametophytic phenotype with impaired pollen tube growth, that prevented creation of homozygous lines. attctp silencing resulted in reduced cell size, slower vegetative growth, and altered root development. besides, attctp was described to affect lateral root formation and auxin homeostasis. protein alignments showed that of all known protein-protein interaction sites, the gtpase binding site was the only region conserved in animals and plants  <cit> . an interaction of attctp with different members of small gtpases of plant rab family  was confirmed and a role as positive regulator of mitotic growth was claimed for attctp, presenting a shared function with animals  <cit> . another study showed that attctp over-expression is able to confer drought tolerance in arabidopsis by aba-mediated stomatal closure via tctp/microtubule interaction, which was enhanced in the presence of calcium. microtubule binding of tctp is another shared function of plant, animal and yeast tctps  <cit> .

in all organisms observed so far tctp is closely related to calcium. the ca2+-binding ability was originally detected in  <dig> by haghighat and ruben working on trypanosoma brucei <cit> . the expression of mammalian tctp was shown to be regulated at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level by calcium, suggesting a role of tctp in calcium homeostasis  <cit> . since then several groups worked on this topic using the radioactive 45ca2+ isotope in ca2+ overlay assays to further characterize different tctps  <cit> . mammalian tctp was assumed to act as a ca2+ sequester, preventing cytosolic ca2+ levels from exceeding apoptosis signalling thresholds, thereby protecting the cell against ca2+-dependent programmed cell death  <cit> .

in this study further information for plant tctp characterization is provided. we analyzed the ca2+-binding ability of arabidopsis thaliana tctp and showed the effect of this protein on programmed cell death inducing agents in vivo.

RESULTS
effect of attctp on bax-induced cell death
the effect of attctp on the pro-apoptotic effect of bax, a member of the bcl- <dig> family of mouse, was tested in tobacco leaves . transient expression in n. benthamiana was achieved through agrobacterium tumefaciens and relative ion leakage was measured for cell death quantification. expression of cytotoxic mouse bax was induced by floating transformed tobacco leaf discs on 2 μm dexamethasone. attctp was constitutively expressed by the camv 35s promoter. 28 hours after induction of bax expression an increase in ion leakage was observed, that progressively increased until the end of experiment at 69 hours post induction. co-expression of attctp strongly reduced bax mediated cell death. statistical analyses were carried out using analysis of variance  and are shown in figure 1a. expression of attctp over time was observed using western blot analyses. as shown in figure 1b, attctp amounts remain stable when expressed without bax, while bax co-expression resulted in a slow decrease of attctp over time. as shown in the left panel of figure 1c, bax expressing leaf discs revealed clear signs of chlorosis after 69 hours of incubation on 2 μm dex, whereas attctp over-expressing ones did not. co-expression of bax and attctp resulted in slightly chlorotic discs. trypan blue staining, used to visualize dead cells within leaf discs, provided comparable results . the highest amount of dead cells was found in bax over-expressing tissues, followed by bax and attctp co-expressing tissues, and attctp over-expressing leaf disc showed almost no dead cells. control experiments using leaf discs floating on 2 μm dexamethason and expressing either non-apoptotic Δc-bax , or strepii-tag without fusion protein, or a combination of Δc-bax and attctp are shown in figure 1d. in contrast to full length bax, the truncated form  lacks the c-terminal transmembrane region needed for mitochondrial targeting. therefore, Δc-bax is not able to cause cell death . no statistically significant differences were found between controls .

effect of attctp on tunicamycin-induced cell death
the effect of tunicamycin was probed on attctp over-expressing tobacco leaves. n. benthamiana leaf discs transiently expressing attctp were examined. cell death was quantified using relative ion leakage. tunicamycin is a well known tool for induction of unfolded protein response, which in turn is able to initiate programmed cell death. figure  <dig> shows the effect of plant tctp on tunicamycin induced cell death.

leaf discs floating on  <dig>  μg · ml- <dig> tunicamycin for 69 hours revealed steadily increasing relative ion leakage starting at 21 h after treatment. statistical analyses were carried out using analysis of variance  and confirmed the significant reduction of tunicamycin induced ion leakage by attctp protein . figure 2b shows tobacco leaf discs after 69 hours of tunicamycin incubation. attctp expressing discs showed no signs of chlorosis , whereas wildtype leaf discs revealed clear signs of chlorosis. trypan blue staining was used to visualize dead cells within leaf discs. the panel on the right side of figure 2b shows stained leaf discs floating on  <dig>  μg · ml- <dig> tunicamycin for 69 hours. attctp over-expression clearly decreased the amount of trypan blue stained cells when compared to wildtype. expression of attctp was observed by western blot analyses: attctp expression remained constant during the whole experiment as shown by western blot detection .

ca2+-binding of attctp
for detection of calcium binding properties recombinant strepii-tagged attctp was expressed and purified from tobacco , followed by a 45ca overlay assay. figure 3b and c show  <dig>  μg of each control protein spotted onto an activated pvdf membrane. aequorin, with its three ef-hands for ca2+-binding, was used as positive control. ribulose- <dig> -bisphosphat-carboxylase/-oxygenase  and bovine serum albumin  were used as negative controls for ca2+-binding proteins. two controls were used to visualise false positive ca2+-binding: on the one hand the ability of strepii-tag to bind to calcium was observed and on the other hand possible protein contamination occurring during purification process. control  <dig>  represents 10 μl eluate of purified crude tobacco extract without expression of strepii-tagged proteins. control  <dig>  indicates  <dig>  μg of a strepii-tagged, non ca2+-binding protein kinase of a. thaliana, demonstrating that strepii-tag is not binding to ca2+. as expected, none of those negative controls bind to radiolabelled calcium. however, as shown in figure 3b, attctp binds to 45ca2+. different amounts of attctp-strepii were tested:  <dig> ,  <dig> , and 1 μg protein were spotted onto pvdf membrane, in order to show increased ca2+-binding. following 45ca overlay assay, spotted proteins were stained using coomassie brilliant blue .

localization of attctp in arabidopsis thaliana
stably transformed, seven to eight days old a. thaliana seedlings expressing attctp::gfp under the control of a camv 35s promoter were used to investigate cellular localization of attctp. leaf epidermal cells showed cytosolic distribution of attctp-gfp . the functionality of attctp-gfp was tested in tunicamycin and bax experiments, revealing the same cytoprotective function as attctp . therefore attctp-gfp was assumed to be functional.

discussion
tctp is well conserved throughout all eukaryotes and described to be involved in many different cellular functions . although tctp is well characterized by now, mechanisms of action still need clarification . one of the functions of mammalian tctp is the protection against apoptosis, which was not described for plants so far. the effect of attctp on programmed cell death in plants was investigated in this study, using two well known inducers of cell death in plants: bax protein and upr inducing agent tunicamycin.

mammalian bax is a pro-apoptotic member of the bcl- <dig> family, involved in pcd initiation by oligomerization and direct association with the outer mitochondrial membrane, hence forming an ion-conducting channel and enabling the passage of macromolecules and other metabolites . furthermore, bax was shown to induce immediate depletion of endoplasmic reticulum ca2+ pools by integrating into er membranes, leading to ca2+ efflux, mitochondrial sensitization, and inducing apoptosis  <cit> . in animals the pro-apoptotic activity of bax is blocked by anti-apoptotic bcl- <dig> and bcl-x proteins  <cit> . although those proteins are key players in er- and mitochondrion-mediated pcd in animals, no homologous proteins were detectable in plants. nonetheless, over-expression of bax is a well-established tool for pcd induction in planta <cit> , and a functional bax suppressor protein was found in arabidopsis thaliana: atbi- <dig> . several other homologous proteins of atbi- <dig> were found in a. thaliana and categorized into a new gene family, called abr . all those studies point to the possibility of a bax-mediated pcd pathway similar in animals and plants.

as tctp was shown to act in an anti-apoptotic way in different organisms, we tested the effect of plant tctp on bax-induced cell death in tobacco. as shown in figure  <dig>  over-expression of attctp clearly suppressed the pro-apoptotic effect of bax indicated by reduced ion leakage levels, a reduced extent of chlorosis, and a diminished amount of dead cells. the decreasing amount of attctp in leaf discs co-expressing attctp and bax is most likely explained by the increasing amount of dead and dying cells that are not able to express attctp any more . a putative mode of action of bax and tctp was supposed in mammals: tctp was described to antagonize the pro-apoptotic effect of bax without direct interaction. homodimeric tctp was assumed to bind to mcl <dig> and bcl-xl, both anti-apoptotic members of the bcl- <dig> family. this complex anchors at the outer mitochondrial membrane and separates bax homodimers, thereby turning off its pro-apoptotic effect  <cit> . as our results point to an anti-apoptotic effect of attctp on mammalian bax-induced pcd in planta, and as plant proteins have been discovered to have comparable functions to mammalian bcl- <dig> family proteins, it could be assumed that attctp acts in a similar way as mammalian tctp. unfortunately, there are no homologous proteins of mcl <dig> and bcl-xl in plants, and functional homologues still remain to be elucidated.

in order to further investigate the effect of attctp in plant cell death, we probed another cytosolic ca2+ elevating and pcd-inducing agent, called tunicamycin. tunicamycin consists of a mixture of homologous nucleoside antibiotics and inhibits protein glycosylation in the er, leading to an accumulation of inaccurately folded proteins  <cit> . if this protein misfolding is excessive or persistent, it is able to induce the so called unfolded protein response , a cellular stress response conserved throughout all eukaryotes, which is destined to re-establish normal cellular functions. upr is thought to stop protein synthesis and activates signal pathways leading to an increase of polypeptide folding proteins , protein disulfide isomerase , calreticulin, and calnexin). if upr is not able to restore cellular functions within a certain period of time, pcd is initiated  <cit> . in mammals the interplay of tunicamycin and tctp was observed at mrna and protein levels using three different cytosolic ca2+ elevating agents: tunicamycin, thapsigargin, and ionophore a <dig>  tctp mrna levels were not influenced by tunicamycin, whereas thapsigargin and ionophore a <dig> induced an up-regulation. similar results were obtained for protein levels: generally tctp protein levels were down-regulated in response to cytosolic ca2+ elevation, but not in response to tunicamycin. furthermore, the cell death inducing effect of tunicamycin was inhibited by tctp over-expression in mammalian cell culture. according to these results it was assumed that direct ca2+ depletion – as provoked by thapsigargin and a <dig> – selectively activates signalling pathways other than upr  <cit> . as tunicamycin is neither altering mrna nor protein levels of tctp, the effect of tctp on tunicamycin induced stress can be assumed to mark the direct effect of existing tctp levels in the cell. in our study, tunicamycin increased cell death significantly in wildtype when compared to attctp over-expressing tobacco tissues, as shown in figure  <dig>  moreover, leaf discs over-expressing attctp showed no chlorosis and a smaller amount of dead cells by trypan blue staining after 69 hours floating on tunicamycin, visualizing the anti-apoptotic effect of attctp.

as both stressors used in this study  are known to elevate intracellular ca2+ levels, and tctp is described as a ca2+-binding protein in non-plant organisms , we tested the ability of plant tctp to bind to calcium. using a 45ca overlay assay, we showed that attctp is a ca2+-binding protein . the exact mode of action of tctp binding to calcium still remains to be elucidated. while aequorin, which was used as a positive control in this study, contains ef-hands as typical ca2+-binding motifs, tctp does not belong to any known family of ca2+-binding proteins  <cit> . even within the ca2+-binding region of human tctp, which consists of a stretch of  <dig> amino acids, only three out of  <dig> amino acid residues are conserved between human and plant tctps. if this  <dig> amino acid stretch of different tctp sequences is compared for human, yeast, drosophila melanogaster, and a. thaliana, only a single glutamic acid residue is conserved, which alone is unlikely to enable strong ca2+-binding. this suggests that different organisms have developed multiple ways to establish ca2+-binding of their tctps during evolution.

in order to investigate the cellular localization of attctp in vivo, we used stably transformed a. thaliana seedlings expressing attctp-gfp. as shown in figure  <dig>  attctp-gfp revealed cytosolic distribution. mammalian tctp was predominantly found in cytosol and nucleus in vivo, although it was described as a protein functioning in mitochondria  <cit> . in yeast, the mammalian tctp ortholog mmi1p was shown to translocate from cytosol to mitochondria in response to oxidative stress, but unlike other tctps mmi1p was described to exhibit pro-apoptotic effects  <cit> . as tctp is hydrophilic and contains no hydrophobic transmembrane domain or any other organelle localization signal, it is most likely that tctp exhibits its anti-apoptotic function either by quenching cytosolic ca2+, thereby inhibiting pcd signalling, or by interacting with other proteins located at/in the membrane of er and mitochondria.

CONCLUSIONS
this study showed programmed cell death inhibiting effects of a plant translationally controlled tumour protein for the first time. arabidopsis thaliana tctp significantly diminished cell death induced by tunicamycin and expression of bax protein, respectively. furthermore, we showed attctp to be a ca2+-binding protein located in the cytosol.

if a pcd signal is passed within a cell, ca2+ is released from internal stores . as attctp is a potent ca2+-binding protein and located within the cytosol, two modes of action can be assumed: on the one hand attctp could be thought to act as a cytosolic ca2+ sequester, preventing further pcd signalling by reducing cytosolic ca2+ levels. a similar mode of action was suggested for mammalian tctp  <cit> . the scavenger theory was partially supported by the work of bommer and colleagues, relating tctp to cytoprotective functions under ca2+-induced stress  <cit> . on the other hand tctp was described as direct or indirect interaction partner of different proteins of the anti-apoptotic machinery of animals: bax, bcl-xl, and mcl- <dig>  <cit> . in general, the same could be supposed for plants, but up to now no homologous forms of interacting proteins were detected in plants and functional homologues remain to be elucidated as well.

