BACKGROUND
conflict and cooperation between individuals within social groups have been subjects of intense study in the last few decades  <cit> . from these studies it has become clear that a key evolutionary innovation is the ability of individuals to discern self from non-self. one way such recognition can be used is to allow individuals to preferentially direct cooperative acts towards genetically related individuals  <cit> , thus permitting them to form kin groups. such behavior can promote social cooperation. in contrast, however, such recognition can also be used by selfish individuals to increase fitness, by ensuring that they only perform antagonistic acts towards unrelated individuals.

discrimination between interacting individuals requires a recognition system that is capable of distinguishing genotypes. such recognition systems have evolved in diverse contexts, including self-incompatibility mechanisms on flowering plants  <cit> , immune defense systems  <cit> , and in nest-mate cooperation in social insects  <cit> . understanding the molecular nature of kin recognition as well as subsequent cellular and behavioral consequences is thus a central issue in studies of conflict and the evolution of social cooperation

in the last few years, the social amoeba dictyostelium discoideum has emerged as one of the best model systems for the study of conflict and cooperation in social systems  <cit> . d. discoideum is a eukaryotic microbe that has been a model system for the study of cell-cell interactions, signaling and differentiation  <cit> . the amoeba generally exist as single-celled individuals, but upon starvation enter a multicellular phase  <cit> . up to  <dig> cells can aggregate, first forming a mound, then a motile slug and eventually developing into a fruiting body. the fruiting body consists of a viable sorus sitting on top of a stalk; the sorus harbors spores that await dispersal and germination when conditions are favorable for vegetative growth, while cells contributing to the stalk undergo cell death during the development of the fruiting body. the aggregation of individual cells to form multicellular fruiting bodies is a clear example of social cooperation  <cit> . moreover, the dramatic difference in cell fate during development also gives rise to social conflicts, since stalk cells are sacrificed to allow the survival of sorus cells at the top of the fruiting body.

there is now good evidence supporting the idea that dictyosteium cells can distinguish self from non-self. for example, genetically and geographically distant isolates can recognize and segregate from each other, thus increasing relatedness and reducing the potential for social conflict  <cit> . the molecular basis of this is now beginning to emerge and is thought to be dependent on polymorphic self-recognition molecules encoded by tgrb <dig> and tgrc1
 <cit> . chimerism during fruiting body development, however, frequently occurs. for example, d. discoideum strains that are found in close proximity in populations in north america will readily form chimeras with no measurable segregation  <cit> . moreover, these strains have been shown to exhibit a social dominance hierarchy in which some strains become overrepresented in the spore population of chimeric fruiting bodies.

buttery et al. have suggested that in these chimeras d. discoideum employs two strategies to increase their fitness in social conflicts  <cit> . first, strains exhibit fixed strategies, which are independent on the identity of the other genotype in the aggregate. second, facultative strategies have also been observed in which strains exhibit partner specific changes in behavior leading some to actively promote themselves to become spores or coerce the other genotype to form stalk in chimera  <cit> . little is known, however, about the genetic and molecular basis of self/non-self recognition during such chimeric development, including the downstream signaling cascades, gene regulatory interactions, cellular responses and behavioral changes in chimeras and how these affect the process of social evolution. given the possibility of kin discrimination and dominance in social interactions, a key hypothesis is that there should be differential expression of genes in d. discoideum individuals if they were interacting with clone mates vs. if they were in chimeras. such changes in gene expression may serve as the transcriptional response associated with self/non-self recognition and possibly lead to kin discrimination and social dominance.

in this study, we examined genome-wide gene expression during fruiting body development of natural d. discoideum strains, and identified differentially expressed genes in clones vs. chimeras. we studied natural strains that were isolated from north carolina, whose social phenotypes were well characterized and had been shown to form a dominance hierarchy when co-developing in chimeras  <cit> . the transcriptomic profiles of d. discoideum cells in clone vs. different chimeras at five different developmental stages were analyzed using a customized microarray we developed. we were able to study the effects of chimerism on global transcriptional variation, and identify developmental stage-dependent gene expression patterns that were characteristic of social interactions of d. discoideum cells in chimeric fruiting bodies.

RESULTS
gene expression differences in d. discoideum
a customized gene expression microarray was specifically designed for d. discoideum via the agilent platform, which contained  <dig>  oligonucleotide probes covering  <dig>  genes. these genes represents ~84% of total number of predicted genes in the genome of this species. test rna samples from multiple stages of nc <dig> -rfp clonal development were used to validate this d. discoideum microarray. technical replicates of test rna samples showed high correlation , and dye-swap experiments revealed minimal dye bias between cy <dig> and cy <dig> labeled samples . in addition, gene expression patterns from  <dig> developmentally-regulated genes detected on the d. discoideum microarray were confirmed by qrt-pcr . accumulated studies have suggested that the performance of this technology is consistent across multiple systems  <cit> . these evidences support that this customized microarray provides a reliable and efficient tool for high-throughput gene expression analysis in d. discoideum.

we examined the patterns of genome-wide gene expression in d. discoideum cells undergoing social interactions during development upon starvation. more specifically, we examined how global gene expression patterns differed in cells that were co-developing with other cells of identical genotypes  vs. other cells that were genotypically distinct . we examined four wild strains of d. discoideum that had been characterized in terms of social behavior in chimeras  <cit> . the strain nc <dig>  was shown to have the highest ability to promote itself in chimeric fruiting bodies to become spore and to coerce others to become stalk cells. nc <dig>  was lowest in the dominance hierarchy in social competition, while nc <dig>  and nc <dig>  ranked in the middle of the hierarchy. to make the comparison, mixing experiments were performed between cells of the focal strain, a wild d. discoideum isolate from north carolina, which had been transformed to allow for constitutive rfp expression . this focal strain was studied when it underwent fruiting body development either clonally with its non-rfp parental wild strain  or when mixed as a chimera with one of three other wild north carolina strains  in equal ratios. cells were collected and mechanically disassociated at five different developmental stages: the aggregate , mound , finger , slug , and culminant  stages . nc  <dig> -rfp cells were then separated from the co-developing non-rfp cells by fluorescence-activated cell sorting , and gene expression was assayed using the agilent microarray.

in all three sets of chimera experiments , gene expression showed good correlation between biological replicates . out of the  <dig>  genes present on the microarray, between ~ <dig>  and ~ <dig>  genes were detected across all three chimeric sets. the nc <dig> -rfp vs. nc <dig>  set had been conducted separately in time from the other two chimeric sets, and an analysis using pearson’s correlation coefficients between three control pairs at each time point  revealed that the gene expression in the control pair associated with the nc <dig>  experiment did not correlate well with the gene expression in the control pairs associated the other two chimeric set experiments. in contrast, control pairs of the nc <dig> -rfp vs. nc <dig>  set and the nc <dig> -rfp vs. nc <dig>  set showed good correlation in gene expression with each other at every time point . the nc <dig> -rfp vs. nc <dig>  set was therefore excluded from subsequent analyses to avoid the time block effect.

an anova model for gene expression was specified in which measured level of gene expression was determined by mixing status  , which specific strain was mixed with nc <dig> -rfp , and developmental stage of the sample . the results of the anova analyses are in table  <dig>  we find that  <dig>  genes were significantly different between chimera and clone,  <dig>  genes showed significant strain differences, and  <dig>  genes were developmentally regulated over time . based on the numbers of significant genes identified by each factor in the anova model, our analysis suggests that developmental stage is a major source of variation in gene expression, responsible for the differential expression of the largest number of genes.table  <dig> 
number of statistically significant genes identified in the anova analyses




to further investigate the proportion of variation in gene expression explained by each factor, a principal variance components analysis  was run on the same data set  <cit> . this approach first reduces data dimensionality with principal component analysis , and then fits a mixed linear model to each principal component with variance components analysis . the variance components are averaged across all of the principal components using the corresponding eigenvalues as weights, and the magnitude of each source of variation is presented as a proportion of total variance. principal component  <dig>  and pc <dig> explained  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the variation in global gene expression, respectively. the variance component t  was the major source of variation in pc <dig> and pc <dig>  and also explained a large proportion  of total transcriptional variance . this result confirmed the conclusion derived from the anova analysis that developmental regulation played a significant role in modulating global gene expression. the linear model of the principal components attributed a very small amount of the transcriptional variance to chimerism-related factors , which suggested that the overall transcriptional difference between chimera and clone was relatively small.figure  <dig> 
proportion of the transcriptional variance explained by each variance component. c: chimerism; m: mix; t: time.



one issue is whether gene expression in our experiments reflects patterns observed in situ in the developing fruiting body, even after we subject the cells to fluorescence-activated cell sorting. we compared our results to previous studies on the comparative developmental transcriptome in d. discoideum and d. purpureum using rna sequencing   <cit> . in our study, we find that  <dig>  genes in the d. discoideum genome were developmentally regulated over time , and together with the pvca analysis suggests that developmental stage is a major source of variation in gene expression and is responsible for the differential expression of a large number of genes. in the previous study, the abundance of almost every transcript was observed to change at least two-fold during development, similar to what we observed using our d. discoideum microarray. we compared three distinct developmental expression patterns in our data vs. the rna-seq study, and find good overlap between our study and the rna-seq study in up- and down-regulated genes .figure  <dig> 
developmental regulation of gene expression.  a transcriptional heatmap of standardized gene expression patterns of the  <dig>  developmentally regulated genes, ordered according to their regulatory patterns. the colors represent relative gene expression level . each row represents a gene and each large column represents a time point, with a figure of corresponding developmental stage on the top. within the large column, the four small columns represent data from clonal, chimeric, clonal, and chimeric pairs, respectively. the dark red lines divide the genes into three groups: down-regulated, other-regulated, and up-regulated genes. number of genes in each group is indicated in parenthesis.  venn diagrams compares the numbers of genes that fall into the specific regulatory patterns identified in our study and in a previous rna sequencing  transcriptome study . the pink circle represents genes identified by our customized agilent microarray, and the blue circle represents results from the rna-seq study. from top to bottom: down-regulated, other-regulated, and up-regulated genes.



gene ontology  enrichment analysis also showed that similar categories of genes were enriched in our microarray study in the up- and down-regulated gene clusters , as compared to the previous rna-seq study, which observed down-regulation of translation and cytoskeleton organization genes, as well as up-regulation of differentiation and spore development genes. in the down-regulated genes, ten go categories that belong to biological process ontology are overrepresented , which included genes associated with ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic processes, translation, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and mrna metabolism. these genes suggest a trend towards a metabolic decline during fruiting body development, consistent with the reaction of d. discoideum to starvation. among the up-regulated gene clusters,  <dig> go categories are overrepresented and include genes associated with cation transport, steroid metabolic process, protein phosphorylation, peptidyl-histidine phosphorylation, and genes involved in culmination during sorocarp development.

the overlap in genes identified in the previous rna-seq study and our microarray analysis is good but not perfectly congruent. this may be due to differences in time series sampling as well as specific strains used. nevertheless, the strong overlap in our experiments as well as the results of the go analysis suggests that the gene expression patterns we observe in our experiments reflect to a large extent the gene expression in the developing fruiting body, even after mechanical disaggregation and cell sorting.

effects of chimerism on gene expression in d. discoideum
chimera-associated differential genes, which show differential expression when a d. discoideum strain is interacting with a dissimilar genotype, were identified in the anova analysis both as a main effect of chimerism  and an interaction effect with developmental stage . we find that  <dig>  genes were differentially expressed under chimeric vs. clonal conditions, while  <dig>  genes showed a significant interaction effect . most of the genes that were significantly different in expression between chimera vs. clone were also significant in the interaction term, suggesting that stage-specific regulation was predominant during chimeric development . there are  <dig>  genes identified by either main effect or interaction effect, and  <dig> genes are specifically regulated under chimeric development, with a characteristic expression pattern that features continuous small differences between chimera vs. clone over development .figure  <dig> 
effects of chimerism on gene expression.  venn diagram compares significant genes identified in the anova model term chimerism × time and in the term chimerism. the pink circle represents chimerism × time , and the blue circle represents chimerism .  gene expression volcano plots show both statistical significance and magnitude of gene expression change obtained from each experiment set and developmental time point. each row represents a developmental stage and each column represents an experiment set. the x-axis represents the difference of m in chimera vs. in clone, where m = log <dig>  and y-axis represents the log <dig> from the anova model. the blue dots represent genes with statistically significant expression differences in clones vs. chimeras  with a small differences in expression , the red dots represent statistically significant genes  with a large change in expression , and black dots represent statistically non-significant genes .  plots show numbers of significant genes identified at different developmental stages under different criteria. left: number of genes that are statistically significant . right: number of genes that are statistically significant and with a large change in gene expression .



a previous genome-wide mutagenesis study identified  <dig> facultative cheater mutants that are overrepresented in the sorus during chimeric development while cooperating normally with other cells during clonal development  <cit> . one hundred and two of these genes also displayed expression in our d. discoideum microarray assay, and we asked how many of these facultative cheater genes were differentially expressed in chimera vs. clone. chimerism significantly affected the expression of  <dig> of these previously identified facultative cheater genes, which was ~60% of the total expressed number of facultative cheater genes .

cluster analysis revealed three distinct regulatory patterns among these  <dig> differentially expressed loci associated with facultative cheater mutants . genes in cluster  <dig> were constantly down-regulated in chimera and the magnitude of down-regulation was maximum at the  <dig> h aggregate stage and the  <dig> h slug stage. in cluster  <dig>  major transcriptional up-regulation in chimera was observed at the slug stage, while a peak in expression in the chimera was observed in the aggregate stage in cluster  <dig>  these patterns indicate that facultative cheater genes undergo different modes of regulation during chimeric development, and also reveals that cheating-related chimeric regulation occurs at several stages of development.

a substantial number of genes showed significant interaction effect in expression level between chimera/clone and developmental stage. indeed, the numbers of differentially regulated genes between chimera vs. clone vary significantly across time, with  <dig>  significant loci at  <dig> h,  <dig> at  <dig> h,  <dig> at  <dig> h,  <dig>  at  <dig> h, and  <dig> at  <dig> h . these results suggest that the  <dig> h aggregate stage represents not only the major developmental transition from single-cell to multicellular phase, but also where cells may potentially respond to genetic similarities/dissimilarities between each other and can differentially regulate a putative chimera recognition program. the relatively large number of genes identified at  <dig> h, the early onset of sporulation stage, suggests the other developmental stage that may be important for chimeric development. it must be noted, however, that most of the significant genes showed only a small change in absolute expression level, with most showing <2-fold expression differences between chimera vs. clone . these observations suggested that chimerism results in a complex, but possibly subtle, alteration in the developmental program involving multiple stages of differentiation and numerous genes with small effects.figure  <dig> 
comparison between chimera-associated differential genes and facultative cheater genes.  venn diagram compares the chimera-associated differential genes identified on the d. discoideum microarray and the facultative cheater mutants revealed by previous mutant screen studies  <cit> . the pink circle represents genes significant in the c and c × t terms of the anova model, and the blue circle represents previously-identified facultative cheater genes.  pam cluster analysis on the  <dig> genes that overlap between our study and previous mutant screen studies. expression of these genes cluster into three groups. x-axis represents time, and y-axis represents the difference of m in chimera vs. in clone, where m = log <dig>  grey lines in each panel represent trajectories of expression of every gene in the cluster, and dark red lines represent the median gene expression trajectory of the cluster. the numbers of genes in each cluster are listed in the upper left corner of each panel.



genes associated with chimeric development
cluster analysis also suggests the complexity and diversity of chimeric regulation in d. discoideum. the  <dig>  chimera-associated differential genes  identified in our analyses fall into  <dig> co-expressed gene clusters identified by pam. the co-expressed gene clusters identified by pam are associated with distinct expression patterns as well as over-representation of different functional go categories . for instance, genes involving small gtpase-mediated signal transduction in cluster  <dig> are up-regulated in chimeras at the aggregate stage, and are gradually down-regulated in chimeras at later stages of development. another example comes from the expression patterns of translation-related genes, which were enriched in cluster  <dig>  the expression of genes in this cluster was suppressed in chimeras from the very early stages of development, but is up-regulated in chimeras at the late  <dig> h culminant stage.figure  <dig> 
pam cluster analysis on the  <dig>  chimera-associated differential genes, which are clustered into  <dig> groups. x-axis represents time, and y-axis represents the difference of m in chimera vs. in clone, where m = log <dig>  grey lines in each panel represent expression trajectories of every gene in the cluster, and dark red lines represent the median expression trajectory of the cluster. the numbers of genes in each cluster are listed in the upper left corner of each panel. overrepresented gene ontology  categories for biological process are listed at the bottom of each panel.



since the early aggregate stage is critical for multicellular development and apparently for differential gene regulation during chimeric development, we examined how candidate genes important in this morphological transition are regulated in chimera vs. clone. the origin of multicellularity is closely associated with cell-cell adhesion molecules , and we analyzed the expression of this group of genes in detail  <cit> . there are four adhesion systems in d. discoideum, three of which are well-characterized  <cit> . edta-sensitive, ca2+-dependent adhesion sites are mediated by the protein ddcad- <dig>  which is encoded by the gene cada, while the two edta-insensitive systems include the gp <dig> protein, encoded by csaa, and gp <dig> encoded by tgrc1
. the importance of the latter two adhesion systems in social evolutionary analyses in d. discoideum has been widely recognized, as csaa is the first reported single green-beard gene, and tgrc <dig> is known to mediate kin discrimination in this social microbe  <cit> .

previous studies have shown that the temporal expression of these proteins are strictly controlled. ddcad- <dig> is expressed early at the onset of development, followed by the expression of gp <dig>  <cit> . low levels of gp <dig> are observed at mid-aggregation, and accumulation occurs during mound formation  <cit> . cams not only mediate cell-cell adhesion, but also regulate various biological processes across development, including aggregate size regulation, cell-type proportioning, and cell sorting .

the expression patterns of cada, csaa and tgrc <dig> in chimera and in clone revealed little difference. the transcription level of cada, however, was significantly up-regulated at the aggregate stage  . expression patterns of csba  and csbc , which encode components of the contact site that ddcad- <dig> mediates, as well as cad <dig>  and cad <dig> , which encode putative calcium-dependent cell adhesion molecules, also showed a significant up-regulation at the aggregate stage in chimeras . there were  <dig> other genes sharing a similar expression pattern over time with cada , a few of which were of unknown function . transcription levels of all these genes were also significantly up-regulated at  <dig> h in chimeras.figure  <dig> 
gene expression of cams and its impact on aggregate size.  the gene expression patterns of cell adhesion molecules  in chimera vs. in clone. each row represents a gene and each column represents an experiment set. the x-axis represents time, and y-axis represents m, where m = log <dig>  red and blue lines represent gene expression patterns in chimera and clone, respectively. asterisks represent significant differences identified by anova.  gene network that coordinately regulates aggregate size in d. discoideum development. positive regulators of aggregate size are listed in the left panel, and negative regulators are on the right. genes in orange showed up-regulation in expression level in chimera vs. in clone at the aggregate stage, while genes in green were down-regulated in expression. the expression of genes in white was not significantly different in chimera vs. clone, and the expression of genes in grey was not detected on the d. discoideum microarray.


genes sharing a similar expression pattern over time with
cada


alfa
cbp2
pefa
glta
pona
cad2
n.a, not applicable.

these findings suggest that there might be a common regulatory mechanism governing the expression of these genes, which results in an increased level of cell-cell adhesion after the initiation of development in chimeras. cams are known to regulate aggregate size at early developmental stages, and increased cell-cell adhesion leads to larger aggregates  <cit> . we examined if gene expression levels of other aggregate size regulators are coordinately altered in chimera and thus potentially affect aggregate size. ddcad- <dig> is regulated by a large secreted protein complex called counting factor , a negative regulator of aggregate size  <cit> . the gene cf45- <dig>  which encodes a component essential for cf function, is down-regulated  at the  <dig> h aggregate stage in chimeras. examination of the upstream regulators of cf revealed an interesting complementary pattern: smla, a negative regulator of cf, was transcriptionally up-regulated  at the aggregate stage in chimeras, while alra, a positive regulator of cf was down-regulated   <cit> . the patterns of expression in this aggregate size gene network thus predicts an increase in aggregate size in chimera vs. clone as a result of up-regulation of positive size regulators and down-regulation of negative size regulators .

discussion
when the development of multicellular structures in organisms such as d. discoideum can include cells with dissimilar genotypes, cells of the same genetic background employ different strategies to succeed in competition. in these circumstances, a basic requirement for cells is to distinguish genetically identical and dissimilar individuals, with associated levels of cooperation over the course of the social interaction. these raise several questions concerning chimeric development in d. discoideum. how is the assessment of genetic relatedness achieved, and how is the appropriate response coupled with the interaction between individuals? if a cell in a d. discoideum fruiting body can recognize self vs. non-self interactions , is there a chimera developmental program in social amoeba that differs from the clonal program? what are the genes that are triggered in this hypothetical chimera developmental program?

previous studies have focused on examining the functional effect of single genes on social interactions in d. discoideum, using mutant lines obtained from screening in laboratory strains  <cit> . the social cycle of d. discoideum, however, is a complex and interactive process, where the function of a single gene may represent only one node of a social gene network. it is likely that social interactions may lead to modifications of the developmental program, which in turn arise through changes in transcriptional gene regulation. our study dissected transcriptomic profiles of a natural strain of d. discoideum in clonal vs. chimeric multicellular structures during development, and found significant alteration of gene expression levels. we find, however, a relatively small proportion of over-all variation in gene expression is explained by differences between chimeric and clonal development, especially when compared to the large-scale changes in gene expression associated with the developmental process in this species. the relatively small modifications in gene expression associated with chimerism, however, is compatible with the high level of cooperation observed among different strains of d. discoideum; cells of distinct genetic backgrounds will co-aggregate indiscriminately and co-develop into fruiting bodies  <cit> . in contrast, different strains of a related dictyostelid species, d. purpureum, were found to cooperate poorly in the development of fruiting bodies due to severe kin discrimination  <cit> .

we identified the number and nature of genes involved in the putative chimera developmental program in d. discoideum. interestingly, we find almost half of the transcriptome shows significant differences in gene expression between chimera and clone, though again it should be noted that the changes in absolute expression levels are small. this suggests that chimeric development may involve re-programming of the transcriptome through small modifications of the developmental genetic network, which may also indicate that response to social interaction involves many genes with individually small transcriptional effect.

one may argue that the small change in gene expression levels  is due not to active recognition of non-self strains in chimeric fruiting bodies, but by a completely passive process  <cit> . it is difficult, however, to distinguish passive inherent response to chimeric development from active facultative response during social conflicts. moreover, it has been noted that both active and passive recognition and response are aspects of plausible evolutionary strategies that are likely to be employed by d. discoideum
 <cit> .

one possible consequence of these findings is that it suggests that there may be numerous opportunities for cheater genotypes to arise and invade a population, given the large number of genes that are differentially regulated during chimera development. these potential cheaters may arise both from mutations of several genes in the same regulatory network and from single mutations that result in large effects on global development. indeed, it has been demonstrated that cheater strains might not be rare in nature  <cit> , which is consistent with the possibility that more cheaters may be identified by intensive genetic screens  <cit> .

we also observe a strong temporal pattern in gene expression differences during chimeric development. among genes associated with chimeric development, nearly half were differentially expressed at specific developmental stages instead of across the entire developmental time course. specifically, almost 60% of the chimera-associated differential genes were differentially expressed at the  <dig> h aggregate stage, which corresponds to the initial transition of d. discoideum from solitary life to a multicellular phase. at this early developmental stage, direct cell contacts begin to form, which potentially could be the first steps in self-recognition as well as kin discrimination, and thus trigger other cellular responses at later stages.

specifically, we found that changes in gene expression at the  <dig> h aggregate stage in chimeras may be associated with larger aggregate size in d. discoideum. this finding is consistent with phenotypic observations that larger aggregates are favored under chimeric condition. previous studies have suggested that chimeric slugs may be larger than clonal slugs in nature because more swarming cells are available  <cit> . it has been pointed out that these larger chimeric slugs could be favored by natural selection, since several possible ecological benefits accrue from increased aggregate size  <cit> . larger slugs are able to travel further and increase the chance for chimeras to culminate at a location better suited for dispersal. moreover, larger fruiting bodies contain more spores, which increases the absolute number of cells that can be dispersed. finally, it has been suggested that chimeras tend to produce a shorter stalk compared to clones of the same size  <cit> , and larger fruiting bodies compensate for this by having longer stalks, which are considered to protect spores from hazards in the soil and to facilitate the dispersal of spores by lifting them above ground.

our findings provide the first overview on the effects of chimerism on global gene expression during the development of d. discoideum. the mechanism by which chimerism results in gene expression differences remains to be elucidated, and one can imagine two modes. one mode is an active recognition of dissimilar genotypes by interacting cells that results in modified developmental behavior. another mode is a more passive mechanism, by which the occurrence of specific cell-cell interactions  is genotype specific, but not necessarily part of an evolved recognition system. in a sense, both these alternate modes still represent responses to chimeric vs. clonal interactions, but can have different consequences for subsequent development. more work is necessary to examine more closely whether the response to chimerism is part of an active recognition system.

our study is further limited in examining changes in the genome-wide gene expression of only one strain interacting either with itself or two other wild strains. expanding the analysis to other strain combinations could reveal genotype-phenotype correlations, and further distinguish generalized chimera-associated transcriptional responses from other strain-specific changes in gene expression. it would also be of interest to examine the molecular changes that may occur in the wild, where the conditions of growth  are undoubtedly different. despite these limitations, our analyses revealed a list of putative chimera developmental genes amenable for functional analysis, such as genes that share a transcriptional regulatory pattern with the cell-cell adhesion gene cada. a large proportion of these genes are of unknown function, and detailed examination may reveal their role in mediating social interactions. indeed, through a combination of genomic and genetic studies, coupled with evolutionary and ecological approaches, we may identify the social gene network in d. discoideum, associated with these and other loci, and provide greater understanding of the biology of social cooperation and conflict.

CONCLUSIONS
our study is able to define the transcriptional changes associated with chimeric development of identical vs.non-identical genotypes of the social amoeba dictyostelium discodeum. we find that a relatively small proportion of transcriptional variation in gene expression is explained by differences between chimeric and clonal development. the relatively small modifications in gene expression associated with chimerism is compatible with the high level of cooperation observed among different strains of d. discoideum; cells of distinct genetic backgrounds will co-aggregate indiscriminately and co-develop into fruiting bodies. chimeric development may involve re-programming of the transcriptome through small modifications of the developmental genetic network, which may also indicate that response to social interaction involves many genes with individually small transcriptional effect.

