BACKGROUND
adverse environmental conditions result in substantial losses to agricultural food production worldwide. in particular, abiotic stresses, which include drought, heat and salinity, are amongst the biggest constraints on crop productivity  <cit> . these types of abiotic stress are, however, rarely presented individually and crops are often subjected to simultaneous adverse conditions, particularly in arid and semi-arid regions of the world  <cit> . such combined stress has been shown in sorghum, wheat and other grass crops to have an even greater detrimental impact on plant productivity than when each stress is imposed individually . land area affected by combined stress is likely to increase given the anticipated climate changes  <cit> . the co-incidence of heat and drought stress is therefore likely to become an increasingly common scenario in the future.

as a result of their sessile nature, when faced with adverse conditions, plants alter their biochemical and molecular machinery in order to adapt to the change in their environment. following the perception of the stress, a signal is relayed to the nucleus via complex cellular signalling networks involving second messengers such as reactive oxygen intermediates  and calcium, calcium-associated proteins and kinase cascades such as mitogen-activated protein  kinase cascades . this leads to the activation of transcriptional pathways which in turn may lead to changes in the flow of metabolites, induction of stress tolerance genes and physiological changes associated with protection from cellular damage . examples of stress tolerance genes include molecular chaperones such as late embryogenesis abundant  proteins and heat shock proteins  which act to protect proteins and membranes  <cit> . the changes in response to stress at the transcriptomic level must be modulated both rapidly and with specificity to the particular stress encountered and are of key importance for a plant response which is tailored to its environment.

an analysis of changes at the transcript level can be used to identify new signaling proteins and metabolic processes which are important for providing stress tolerance to plants. the transcriptional response to heat or drought stresses imposed on their own has been extensively studied in a number of plant species . these studies have identified particular processes required for stress tolerance. interestingly, it has been found that a combination of drought and heat stress in arabidopsis and tobacco results in a unique transcriptional response which cannot simply be extrapolated from the effect of each stress imposed individually . plants therefore have novel responses when presented with combined stress.

sorghum  is a grain crop which is grown in the arid and semi-arid regions of south africa, australia, india and america. it is grown primarily as a food source and is the dietary staple for more than  <dig> million people  <cit> . given that sorghum thrives under conditions of low water availability and high temperatures it is an excellent model for the study of transcriptomic changes induced to enable tolerance to drought and heat stress. a wealth of research has been performed on sorghum physiology in order to select for agriculturally beneficial traits, however, until recently molecular characterization has been relatively limited. this has been facilitated in recent years by the sequencing of the sorghum genome  <cit> . the transcriptomic response of sorghum to osmotic stress, induced by peg, has been reported  <cit>  however there are no published reports using bona fide drought-treated samples. no transcriptomic analyses of heat responses or combined heat and drought responses in sorghum have yet been reported.

given the previously observed unique transcriptional response to combined stress in arabidopsis and tobacco, we have investigated changes in gene expression which occur following a similar treatment in sorghum. the aim of this was to identify important processes/responses required for combined stress tolerance in this important crop particularly adapted to hot and arid environments, as it might offer insight not gained from other species. we have used custom-designed microarrays containing  <dig> gene probes based on the latest genome annotations at the time of printing. we have identified sets of genes which are differentially expressed in response to each treatment type, as well as demonstrating that there is specificity of gene expression; specific genes being up- and down-regulated only in response to combined  stress. analysis of these genes suggests that specific processes e.g. polyamine synthesis might be involved in tolerance to combined heat and drought stress in sorghum. this study will be useful for not only improving our understanding of basic stress tolerance mechanisms but also in the development of new stress tolerant sorghum cultivars.

RESULTS
transcriptomic analysis of sorghum subjected to drought, heat and combined drought and heat stress
to investigate the changes in gene expression which occur in sorghum subjected to heat and drought stresses either on their own, or in combination, we carried out transcriptomic analyses using dna microarrays  containing  <dig> unique gene probes. drought stress was administered to seedlings by withdrawing water from 14 days after sowing  whilst the remaining  plants were well-watered. heat shock was carried out by subjecting the seedlings to 50°c for 3 hours, compared to a control treatment of 28°c. the heat shock was conducted at the point at which fv/fm, which gives an indication of photosynthetic efficiency  <cit> , first started to significantly drop in the drought stressed plants, with respect to the well-watered controls. this was at around 3 days following water withdrawal . in this way we were able to ensure that the drought stressed plants were experiencing bona fide stress when the combined treatment was executed.

gene expression responses to drought
as shown in figure  <dig>  <dig> sorghum transcripts were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated by greater than 2-fold following drought stress only when compared to the untreated plants, equating to approximately 4% of the genes on the chip. amongst the most highly elevated transcripts are those encoding late embryogenesis abundant  proteins. other highly elevated genes include p5cs <dig>  which is involved in the metabolism of the compatible solute proline  <cit>  and hkt <dig>  a sodium ion transmembrane transporter involved in maintaining cellular na+ homeostasis  <cit>  . of the top  <dig> up and down regulated transcripts however,  <dig> encode proteins of unknown function . in order to further explore the biological processes and molecular functions which are enriched within this  gene set relative to the background genome, gene ontology  analysis was carried out . in total,  <dig> go categories exhibited significant enrichment in the drought up-regulated genes based upon a corrected p-value cut-off of  <dig>  . as would be expected, the analysis shows an enrichment of genes involved in response to stress and in particular response to water deprivation. genes associated with response to aba are also enriched within the data set which is not surprising given the central role of aba in the drought stress response  <cit> . other examples of enriched go categories include regulation of photosynthesis, fluid transport and amino acid metabolism . promoter motif analysis was carried out to identify promoter motifs which are enriched within the drought data set. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  the most highly represented promoter motif in the  <dig> drought up-regulated genes was similar to the abscisic acid response element : acgtgtc.figure  <dig> 
venn diagrams showing the number of transcripts up-regulated  or down-regulated  by either heat, drought or combined heat and drought treatments in sorghum leaf tissue . only transcripts with a change of > <dig> fold in all  <dig> replicates were included.


top  <dig> genes differentially expressed in response to drought  compared to control unstressed plants

pie charts showing summarised gene ontology  analysis of the total gene sets responding to either drought, heat or combined drought and heat stress.  shows biological process go terms and  shows molecular process go terms. only go terms enriched with a p value of < <dig>  were selected and summarized using revigo . detailed breakdowns of the ontologies are available in additional file 1: tables s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig> 
most significantly enriched sequences found in promoters of genes up-regulated in response to drought , heat  and combined heat and drought . figure shows top  <dig> statistically-significant consensus sequences generating using amadeus and enologos. probability values representing significance of enrichment  are shown for each motif.

three hundred and eighty transcripts were found to be up-regulated exclusively in response to drought stress i.e. were not also up-regulated in response to heat, or heat and drought in combination . this was validated by carrying out qpcr on selected genes and is exemplified by sb01g <dig> . these  <dig> genes include examples associated with lipid transport such as a number of lipid transfer proteins  and genes involved with the regulation of cell size such an expansin . interestingly,  <dig> lea genes were found to be up-regulated exclusively in response to drought, suggesting specific leas may have specific unique roles in response to different stress types.figure  <dig> 
relative transcript abundance of genes representative of the gene sets identified as being up-regulated preferentially by either drought stress , heat stress  or combined heat and drought stress . error bars represent rqmin and rqmax and constitute the acceptable error level for a 95% confidence level according to student’s t-test.



previous work carried out by dugas, et al.  <cit> , using next generation sequencing transcriptomic approaches, has identified differentially expressed transcripts in sorghum leaves following osmotic stress imposed by peg treatment. in order to determine whether there are differences in the sorghum response to different types of osmotic stress i.e. peg treatment compared to the gradual water loss imposed here, we compared the differentially expressed transcripts identified in both studies. approximately one third of our drought-induced transcripts were in common with those identified by dugas et al. . go analysis of these overlapping genes shows an enrichment of genes associated with response to water deprivation, regulation of photosynthesis and response to aba . however,  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts were unique to either the peg treatment or the water withdrawal treatment respectively. go analysis of the genes unique to the peg treatment shows an enrichment of genes associated with response to stress and response to reactive oxygen species . however, go analysis of the genes unique to the gradual water withdrawal, shows a strong enrichment of genes associated with wax biosynthesis . different processes therefore seem to be associated with the different stress types.figure  <dig> 
venn digaram showing the number of transcripts differentially expressed in response to the gradual drought stress imposed here and in response to the peg treatment imposed in dugas et. al  <cit> . only transcripts with a change of >  <dig> fold are included.


gene ontology  enriched  in both the differentially expressed genes following the drought treatment imposed here and also in the peg treatment imposed in the dugas et al.  <cit> 




gene expression responses to heat
following heat stress,  <dig> sorghum transcripts were up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated  . the most enriched promoter motif in the  <dig> heat up-regulated genes was found to be, cgcgcccg which, whilst showing some similarity to camta binding sites, was not identical to known promoter motifs. the second and fourth most enriched sequences, however, had consensuses containing the basic 5 bp heat shock element  motif, ngaan  and overlapping with the full triple repeat hse, ngaannttcnngaan . as expected, amongst the transcripts most highly up-regulated in response to heat were a large number of genes encoding heat shock proteins   and universal stress proteins  . some of these are unique to heat stress with  <dig> elevated only in response to this stress type . these hsp genes are accompanied by the unique up-regulation of  <dig> heat shock factors  which are known to regulate the expression of hsps . genes which are up-regulated only by heat stress are represented by sb02g <dig> . other highly induced genes are associated with protection from oxidative stress and include ascorbate peroxidase  <dig> . gene ontology analysis of the heat up-regulated genes shows an enrichment of the following categories: response to heat, response to high light, response to roi and protein folding . enriched pathways which are in common with the drought stress response include response to aba and lipid localization whilst other categories such as protein folding are only enriched in the heat gene set .table  <dig> 
top  <dig> genes differentially expressed in response to heat  compared to control unstressed plants




combined heat and drought control the expression of distinct group of genes
following the combined heat and drought stress  <dig> transcripts were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated  compared to the untreated control. the top  <dig> gene changes are shown in table  <dig> . out of this total of  <dig>  gene expression changes, a large proportion  were shared with the heat stress only response and 13% were shared with the response to drought . despite this greater overlap with heat, none of the top  <dig> promoter motifs enriched in genes upregulated by combined heat and drought contained the basic 5 bp hse. indeed the most enriched motif was most similar to the abre, acgtgtc . gene expression changes that were in common in the response to all  <dig> treatments totalled  <dig> . these particular genes are associated with the general plant stress response and include heat shock proteins, senescence-associated genes  and glutathione transferases . it is not surprising that many of the go categories enriched following combined stress are in common with those enriched following drought or heat alone . for example, lipid localization and fluid transport, regulation of photosynthesis and protein folding are all enriched in the combined stress gene set . however, some ontological processes appear unique to the combined stress up-regulated transcripts. these include genes associated with protein ubiquitination and aromatic compound metabolism .table  <dig> 
top  <dig> genes differentially expressed in response to combined heat and drought stress  compared to control unstressed plants




identification of genes responding only when drought and heat occur simultaneously
interestingly, a number of genes,  <dig> and  <dig>  were significantly up or down regulated, respectively, only in response to combined heat and drought stress . again, the most enriched promoter motif in the  <dig> up-regulated genes was an abre-like motif, and there was no evidence of hse-like motifs . genes uniquely elevated by combined stress, as exemplified by sb05g <dig>  include a number of ion transporters. for example, the potassium transporters akt <dig>  akt2/ <dig> and hak <dig> were all  and specifically up-regulated. as mentioned earlier there is also specificity in lea and hsp expression with, in this case,  <dig> hsp and  <dig> lea genes being uniquely up-regulated following combined stress. a number of genes encoding signalling proteins and transcription factors were up or down-regulated only by combined stress. these include ataf <dig>  myb <dig> and wox <dig> amongst others . genes uniquely down-regulated by combined stress include the transcription factors myb <dig> and bzip <dig>  in addition, there is specificity of calcium-binding proteins with the genes encoding ost <dig>  tch <dig>  cpk <dig> and cipk <dig> specifically being up-regulated following combined stress. genes encoding the map kinases mkk <dig> and mpk <dig> are also uniquely expressed. ontological analysis of the transcripts uniquely up-regulated by combined stress  showed an enrichment of genes involved in polyamine metabolism and in particular spermidine biosynthesis such as spermidine synthase  and s-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase . the transcriptomic response of sorghum to combined heat and drought stress therefore appears unique to that when each stress is imposed individually.figure  <dig> 
analysis of genes up-regulated only by combined heat and drought treatment.  most significantly enriched sequences found in promoters of genes uniquely upregulated in response to combined heat and drought. figure shows top  <dig> statistically significant consensus sequences generating using amadeus and enologos. probability values representing significance of enrichment  are shown for each motif.  ontological analysis showing enriched biological process  and molecular function  go terms p <  <dig> . ontological terms were summarized using the revigo tool. detailed breakdowns of the ontologies are available in additional file 1: table s <dig> 



discussion
transcriptomic analyses of plant responses to stress are an effective way in which genes, pathways and processes responsible for plant stress tolerance can be identified. here, we examined the effect of combined heat and drought stress on the sorghum transcriptome, using custom designed microarrays containing  <dig> individual gene probes. these probes correspond to the latest genome annotation at the time of printing therefore this is the largest microarray study carried out on sorghum to date.

in response to drought stress we found that expression of ~ <dig> % of the sorghum genome was changed by > 2-fold. the genes identified were mostly in known drought-tolerance pathways and there was enrichment of expected promoter motifs. the aba-responsive element  for example, is a known promoter in genes induced by dehydration, salinity and aba  <cit> . the number of gene changes identified here is similar to previous studies in which expression of ~4% of the sorghum genome was changed when subjected to osmotic stress by peg treatment  <cit> . out of our total  <dig> drought-induced gene changes 32% were shared with the peg induced gene changes identified by dugas et al. using a next generation sequencing transcriptomic approach. there is a significant overlap between the studies although it is clear that the slightly different treatments i.e. a sharp osmotic shock compared to the gradual loss of water have also resulted in the induction of some different response pathways and genes. for example, there is an enrichment of genes associated with response to reactive oxygen species in the transcripts only changed by the peg treatment whereas there is an enrichment of genes associated with wax biosynthesis in the transcripts only changed by the water withdrawal treatment imposed here. large quantities of reactive oxygen species  are generated as an early response to stress  <cit>  therefore reducing roi levels could be seen as a short term solution to drought. the induction of wax biosynthesis genes on the other hand could result in increased epiculticuar wax which would result in reduced water loss and therefore could be seen as a longer term strategy for survival.

heat shock resulted in >2-fold changes in expression of 15% of the sorghum genome. this relatively high level of gene expression changes is not surprising given the acute, severe nature of the heat shock and is comparable to studies in other species  <cit> . the differentially expressed genes were mostly associated with the heat shock response and again resulted in the expected promoter motifs including camta-like and heat shock elements   <cit> .

the combined stress response resulted in  <dig> gene changes of which a large proportion were in common with the heat-regulated gene set  and around 13% were shared with the response to drought . such overlap is understandable: whilst there will be unique challenges presented to the plant when stresses are combined, there is still the need to attend to fundamental issues arising from each stress individually. reactive oxygen intermediate  detoxification is required following a number of different stress types  <cit> . this is displayed here by the enrichment of the go category ‘response to reactive oxygen species’ in all of the stress types studied . many of the other go categories enriched by combined stress share elements of those enriched following the other stress types. for example, protein folding is enriched in both the heat and combined stress response and regulation of photosynthesis and water channel activity is also enriched in the drought stress response . it is understandable that similar stresses would require similar downstream processes. this induction of similar pathways can produce cross-tolerance whereby previous exposure to one stress type can provide protection from another  <cit> . the fact that more genes were found to be in common with the heat stress response is likely to be due the acute nature of the heat shock treatment which results in more synchronised induction of genes.

despite this large overlap however, there is obvious specificity of gene expression in that there are clear sets of genes which are only changed by the combined heat and drought treatment. these specific changes suggest that, similar to what has been found for arabidopsis and tobacco, sorghum has a unique transcriptional response to the combined heat and drought stress  <cit> . sorghum must therefore be able to perceive this combined stress as a unique environmental condition and reacts to it accordingly. drought is likely perceived by proteins at the plasma membrane. for example, hk <dig>  a transmembrane histidine kinase is thought to be the first component in relaying an osmotic stress signal to the nucleus  <cit> . heat stress is sensed by a complex network of sensors which include plasma membrane proteins and components of the unfolded protein response  <cit> . the sensing of combined heat and drought would require crosstalk between these sensor systems, or more unlikely, a totally separate sensor for this purpose.

specificity may also arise at the level of signal transduction. for example, mitogen-activated protein kinase  cascades are important signal transducers. these are known to be activated by a number of abiotic stresses and can introduce specificity into a system  <cit> . interestingly, there are a number of genes encoding map kinases, such as mpk <dig>  which are only elevated by combined stress. additionally, a number of genes encoding calcium-interacting proteins are specifically elevated such as cpk <dig>  calcium is an important second messenger and it is thought that unique calcium signatures can result in the expression of unique sets of genes  <cit> . calcium binding proteins control these responses and different isoforms have been found to be induced by different plant stresses  <cit> . it is therefore possible that the cdpk isoforms elevated here are involved specifically in transducing the combined stress signal.

once in the nucleus unique transcription factors may be responsible for switching on particular sets of genes. a number of transcription factors are only elevated by combined heat and drought . an example transcription factor is ataf <dig> which belongs to the nac family of transcription factors. this has been found to be induced by a number of stresses in arabidopsis including drought, salinity and wounding  <cit>  therefore it is possible that this has evolved an alternative role in the combined stress response in sorghum. the hsfc <dig> transcription factor which is known to induce hsps in arabidopsis is also elevated along with some unique hsps. other uniquely elevated chaperones include some leas which are hydrophilic proteins involved in stress protection. it is possible that these known chaperone molecules contain different motifs which allow recognition and binding of a specific set of molecular targets  and has similarly been shown to be the case in the combined stress response of arabidopsis  <cit> . it must be borne in mind however, that these experiments were carried out at one specific time point therefore a detailed time course is required to be able to draw more detailed conclusions.

amongst other downstream genes regulated by combined stress were those encoding enzymes which are involved in the biosynthesis of polyamines and in particular spermidine such as samdc and spds <dig>  polyamines have been implicated in tolerance to multiple stresses including high and low temperature, oxidative stress and salinity  <cit> . they have been suggested to play a role in roi scavenging and membrane protection  <cit> . perhaps the combined heat and drought treatment results in a higher levels of roi production than heat and drought treatment individually and therefore higher polyamine levels are required to counteract this. interestingly, one of the uniquely elevated transcription factors, wox <dig>  has been shown to physically interact with samdc suggesting a possible way in which the activity of this enzyme is regulated by combined stress  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
it is clear that there is a degree of plasticity in the sorghum response to abiotic stress, with evidence for both cross-talk and specificity. this is similar to previous findings in arabidopsis and tobacco suggesting conservation of mechanisms across species. there are however some elements of the combined stress response which appear unique to sorghum such as a potential role for polyamine biosynthesis and specific transcription factors and signalling molecules. a functional characterization of these identified genes and pathways is required as they could be used as possible targets for the enhancement of stress tolerance either by marker assisted selection or transgenics. given the predicted increase in prevalence of drought and heat stress on agricultural land there is a further need to analyse the effect of combined stress on crop species.

