BACKGROUND
dioxin-like contaminants , such as some polychlorinated biphenyls , are highly toxic aromatic hydrocarbon pollutants whose ubiquitous occurrence presents global ecological and human health risks. the early life stages of fish are particularly sensitive to these toxic dlcs, and the atlantic killifish, fundulus heteroclitus, is one of the more sensitive fish species  <cit> . despite this species’ relative sensitivity to dlc exposure, several wild killifish populations residing in heavily contaminated north american atlantic coast estuaries have recently and independently evolved dramatic, heritable, and adaptive tolerance to dlcs  <cit> , for which the mechanistic basis has yet to be fully explained. to address this issue, a targeted, candidate gene scan was performed to reveal genetic variation associated with tolerance in four wild dlc-adapted killifish populations.

considerable effort has been spent attempting to identify the genetic and biochemical mechanisms underlying inter- and intra-specific variation in dlc sensitivity in vertebrates. multiple lines of evidence support the crucial role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor  pathway in dlc toxicity in mammals. polymorphisms in the ligand binding domain of the ahr among mouse strains result in differences in ligand binding affinity, and low binding affinity appears to protect against all toxic responses to dlcs. in rats, dlc tolerance is associated with variation in the transactivation domain of the ahr, yet functional consequences of the variation are less predictable  <cit> . a candidate gene approach effectively identified two amino acid substitutions in the ahr among avian wildlife and a consistent relationship between the amino acid residues present and dlc sensitivity was observed at the species level  <cit> . in fish, the striking difference in dlc sensitivity among wild atlantic tomcod populations has been attributed to a six base pair deletion in the ahr <dig> gene that results in a five-fold decrease in ligand binding affinity and reduced ability to promote expression of detoxification enzymes targeted by the ahr pathway  <cit> .

within the killifish ahr pathway, several non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms  have been identified in two ah receptor genes , but patterns of genetic variation at these loci do not unequivocally reflect differences in dlc sensitivity among populations and no functional consequences  were associated with ahr <dig> variants  <cit> . as an alternative to the candidate gene approach, williams and oleksiak  <cit>  performed whole genome scans, whereby patterns of variation across hundreds of genetic loci were contrasted between killifish populations from polluted and reference sites in order to identify genes under selection with respect to dlc contamination. a handful of selectively important genetic markers were identified in each of three separate comparisons between populations residing in polluted habitats and their respective reference populations, and a single marker  was found to be selectively important in all comparisons.

both the single candidate gene approach and genome-wide scans  have led to great success in elucidating the genetic basis for many adaptive phenotypes  <cit> , but neither has offered a comprehensive link to the observed variation in dlc sensitivity among wild killifish populations. a ‘candidate gene scan’ approach, which targets a relatively large set of expressed genes with known physiological function, should increase the probability of isolating genes that are under selection and relevant with respect to traits of interest  <cit> . thus, this approach was adopted to maximize efficiency in the identification of genes associated with dlc tolerance, and complement previous and ongoing work investigating the mechanism involved in the repeated adaptation to dlcs in wild killifish populations.

in this study, patterns of genetic variation at snp markers distributed across genes that are components of, or whose expression is affected by the ahr and interacting pathways were examined among eight killifish populations that vary genetically in their responsiveness to dlcs. four relatively uncontaminated populations whose sensitivities to a prototypical dlc  range from 20–38 ng/l  were chosen as sensitive populations. each of these populations is located near one of four epa-designated urban/industrial estuarine superfund sites. killifish resident to these sites are dramatically tolerant to the effects of pcb <dig>  displaying lc <dig> values ranging from ~ <dig> to ~  <dig> times higher than those for the sensitive killifish . a companion study  <cit>  provides a fine-scaled examination of genetic variation in three ahr-related loci  among killifish populations residing in uncontaminated and polluted habitats of the north atlantic coast of the us, including some of the same populations examined in this study.

taken from nacci et al.  <dig>  lc <dig> values represent the concentration of pcb <dig> resulting in 20% lethality of killifish embryos.

the question of whether the genetic variants observed at the targeted snp markers in this study could explain the stark phenotypic differences between dlc-adapted  and -sensitive killifish populations was addressed in several ways. measures of genetic diversity were compared between dlc-sensitive and dlc- tolerant groups and patterns of genetic differentiation among populations were tested against expectations of isolation by distance. in addition, by contrasting the behavior of individual loci among dlc-sensitive and dlc-tolerant populations, specific loci under selection were identified.

methods
snp marker development and preliminary screening
an extensive literature search was conducted to identify genes and biochemical pathways with demonstrated and potential involvement in the toxic responses to dlcs. a list of over  <dig> genes was compiled, which included components of the ahr pathway, nuclear receptors known to ‘cross talk’ with the ahr pathway , cytochrome p450s, genes involved in cardiac development, cathepsins, and genes having oxidoreductase activity . the gene list was filtered at several stages of the marker development process. sequence information for many, but not all, of the genes listed in additional file  <dig> was retrieved from the f. heteroclitus unigene database in genbank . additional unpublished sequences were kindly provided by sibel karchner . putative snps were detected with the qualitysnp pipeline  <cit> . in qualitysnp, sequences with > 95% similarity were assembled into contiguous sequences  using the sequence assembly program cap <dig>  available contigs, those containing ≥  <dig> overlapping sequences, were then evaluated for polymorphisms. available contigs with snps were subjected to further scrutiny to assess the reliability of the putative snps identified. specifically, snps were considered ‘true’ if they were represented in ≥  <dig> ests, paralogous sequences within the cluster could be distinguished and haplotypes identified, and they were located in high quality sequence regions  <cit> . pcr primers and melting temperature -shift genotyping assays  <cit>  were then designed for the ‘true’ snps with suitable flanking sequence . a test panel of eight killifish from two populations  was genotyped at  <dig> of the loci deemed highly reliable by qualitysnp. a snp maker was considered valid if amplification product of the appropriate size was generated and polymorphism was observed among the eight individuals in the test panel. outcomes for each stage of the snp marker development process are detailed in additional file  <dig> 

fish collection
during the summer and fall months between  <dig> and  <dig>  adult fundulus heteroclitus were collected using baited minnow traps from eight estuarine sites spanning approximately 600 km of the atlantic coast of the usa . these specific killifish populations had already been characterized as either dlc-tolerant or dlc-sensitive, based on early life stage sensitivity to pcb <dig>  <cit> . to better assess genetic differences between tolerant and sensitive populations absent geographic influences, each dlc-tolerant population was paired with a nearby dlc-sensitive population. these pairs are located within the same or adjacent states but are separated by discontinuous shoreline and deep channels that limit fish migration and contaminant spread. latitudinal distances between killifish residence sites  were used to provide a consistent proxy to assess regional influences but were not intended to convey ‘as-the-fish-swims’ distances. sixty to  <dig> live or sacrificed/frozen fish from each population were transported to the us environmental protection agency  laboratory in narragansett, ri, usa. those that were transported live were sacrificed immediately upon return to the laboratory. whole fish were stored at either − <dig> or −80°c prior to dna extraction.
fundulus heteroclitus 
collection sites along the eastern u.s. coast.

sample preparation and population genotyping
genomic dna was extracted from approximately 20 mg of caudal fin tissue from  <dig> or  <dig> of the 60– <dig> archived individuals per population according to the qiagen dneasy protocol for animal tissue , quantified with the picogreen dsdna assay , and diluted to a standard concentration of 20 ng/μl. diluted dna extracts were submitted to the university of minnesota’s biomedical genomics center in a 96-well format for sample quality assessment and snp genotyping using the sequenom massarray® technology. three multiplex assays  were designed using massarray® designer software. sampled f. heteroclitus for which dna was extracted were genotyped with the first two plexes  following the iplex assay protocol. genotypes for each individual at each locus were called using the sequenom system typer analysis package.

data analysis
routine population genetics analyses were conducted using the freely available software package arlequin ver.  <dig>   <cit> . standard diversity indices, including the percentage of polymorphic loci , average observed and expected heterozygosities , and the within population fixation index , were determined for each sampled population. indices were based on data from loci with < 10% missing data. loci were also tested for departures from hardy-weinberg equilibrium  with  <dig>  permutations and the percentage of loci in hwe was calculated for each population. the ability of this suite of snp markers to detect genetic differentiation among populations was assessed by computing pairwise multi-locus fst estimates. to test whether the assumption of independence among loci would be violated by including multiple snps per gene in the analysis, data from a subset of snps  were also analyzed. results did not differ significantly between the complete and limited datasets; therefore, only results from the complete dataset are reported here.

genetic structure, where populations were assigned to groups defined by dlc sensitivity, was also included in the analysis and the pairwise multi-locus fst between the two groups was estimated with the ‘compute pairwise fst’ option in arlequin ver.  <dig> . an analysis of molecular variance  was performed to better understand how the observed genetic variance was partitioned within populations, among populations within each group, and between groups. in addition, as in  <cit> , student’s t-tests were used to detect significant differences in genetic diversity measures  among the two groups.

for species like f. heteroclitus that are non-migratory, genetic differences at neutral loci should accumulate over time and generate a pattern of isolation by distance , whereby differentiation among populations increases with geographic distance  <cit> . deviations from ibd patterns can be attributed to responses to local selection pressures  <cit> . mantel tests and reduced major axis  regression analyses were performed in isolation by distance web service   <cit>  with  <dig>  permutations to test for significant correlations between genetic distance  and latitudinal distance. mantel tests were also used to test for significant correlations between pairwise genetic differences and relative differences in sensitivity to pcb <dig> ; moreover, partial mantel tests were conducted to determine if there was a significant relationship between sensitivity to pcb <dig> and genetic divergence after taking latitudinal distance into account.

although most of the genes included in this analysis were chosen based on prior work suggesting they might be responsive to dlcs, whether any or all contribute to the adaptive phenotype remains largely unresolved. to identify selectively important snps among the genes surveyed, fst values were calculated at each locus separately for each sensitive/tolerant comparison with the amova function in arlequin ver.  <dig> . the statistical significance of each fst was determined through permutation testing with  <dig>  iterations. an fst modeling approach similar to that described in  <cit>  as implemented in arlequin ver.  <dig>  was also used to detect outliers. fst distributions conforming to a neutral model were simulated with  <dig>  iterations, heterozygosities computed from empirical data, and assuming  <dig> demes. snps with fst values exceeding the 95th percentile of the null distribution were considered to be strong candidates for natural selection. in addition, as in  <cit> , minor allele frequencies were calculated at each locus for each population with the expectation that loci associated with the adaptive phenotype would display shifts in allele frequency for each sensitive/tolerant pair. consistent shifts in the same direction across all four comparisons were considered further evidence for selection acting at the loci.

RESULTS
snp markers
killifish sequences representing  <dig> of the  <dig> candidate genes were mined from the genbank nucleotide and unigene databases. cap <dig> assembled those sequences into  <dig> contigs, of which  <dig> were available for further analysis . approximately  <dig> highly reliable putative snp loci distributed among  <dig> genes were identified with the qualitysnp pipeline. tm-shift genotyping assays were designed for  <dig> of the highly reliable putative snps and the validity of each locus was tested by genotyping eight killifish collected from two populations  . twenty-four of the  <dig> putative snps assayed  did not amplify or produced uninterpretable melting curves. an additional  <dig> of the snps tested  appeared to be monomorphic. ultimately,  <dig>  of the putative snps screened were polymorphic and  <dig>  were used in the population genetic analysis .

note: potential involvement of each gene in toxic dlc response was demonstrated in citations listed in ‘reference’ column.

n/a = not available.

standard diversity indices
substantial genetic variation was observed in each killifish population examined. the percentage of polymorphic loci  ranged from 51% to 73% across populations, with a greater percentage of monomorphic loci in nbh and the virginia populations. a similar pattern was detected when observed heterozygosity  was used to measure diversity; er, kc and nbh populations were the least heterozygous. according to the average within population fixation index , the loss of heterozygosity in nbh, er, kc, and sh was statistically significant .
f. heteroclitus 
populations

o
o
e
is
po = number of polymorphic loci/number of usable loci ; ho = sum of observed heterozygosity for each usable locus/number of usable loci; he = sum of expected heterozygosity for each usable locus/number of usable loci; % hwe = number of loci in hardy-weinberg equilibrium/number of polymorphic loci; fis = population specific fixation index; maf = average minor allele frequency, calculated for polymorphic loci only. *p ≤  <dig>  based on  <dig>  permutations.

a majority of the  <dig> snp loci assayed  were considered to be common snps, with minor allele frequencies greater than  <dig> , when data from all populations were pooled. for each population, the percentage of common snps ranged from 54% to 76% with bp and er at the two extremes. within each population the minor allele frequency, averaged across all polymorphic loci, varied between  <dig>  and  <dig> . the mean minor allele frequency was lowest in bp and bi fish and highest in er fish .

most of the snp loci in this study were found to be in hardy-weinberg equilibrium within each population. again, the population with the fewest loci conforming to hardy-weinberg expectations was er . in total,  <dig> loci deviated from hwe, but no single deviation was consistent across all eight populations or across the four tolerant populations.

genetic differentiation
mean pairwise fst values for all population comparisons were found to be statistically significant and suggest moderate to very high levels of genetic differentiation. overall, markedly higher genetic differentiation was detected between the two virginia populations and all others . a standard analysis of molecular variance  confirmed that a substantial proportion  of the observed molecular variation can be attributed to differences among populations.

no significant differentiation emerged when populations were grouped by dlc sensitivity. the expectation that, on average, dlc-adapted populations are less diverse  than dlc-sensitive populations, was not supported . the genetic differentiation between the two groups as measured by fst was  <dig> ; however, the hierarchical amova results suggest that the groups were not significantly different .

comparison of mean genetic diversity measures between dlc-sensitive and dlc-tolerant f. heteroclitus populations. standard deviations are in parentheses. po = average percentage of polymorphic loci within groups; ho = average observed heterozygosity within groups; he = average expected heterozygosity within groups; maf = average minor allele frequency within groups. results are based on genotype information gathered from 36/ <dig> individuals per population at  <dig> snp loci representing  <dig> genes.

isolation by distance
a regression of the genetic and latitudinal distance matrices when all populations were included in the analysis was statistically significant  reflecting a pattern of ibd . given that populations were sampled from three distinct geographic regions differentially impacted by the pleistocene glacial retreat, the observed relationship is most likely driven by long-term history and demography rather than contemporary forces  <cit> . not surprisingly, the pattern persisted when only sensitive populations were considered . a clear positive relationship was also apparent when only tolerant populations were included in the analysis , but the trend was not significant  . the lack of a significant ibd pattern among dlc-adapted populations could be indicative of local selection  counteracting the effects of history, demography, migration, and drift, but is more likely a consequence of small sample size. it was hypothesized that if selection is a major force shaping patterns of genetic variation among the sampled killifish populations, a strong correlation between pairwise genetic differences and relative differences in sensitivity to pcb <dig> should be evident. additional mantel tests found no such relationship .

loci under selection
the number of loci with significant fst values greater than  <dig> , suggesting they are greatly differentiated among populations  <cit> , varied among the four sensitive/tolerant population pairings. of the four comparisons, the largest number of highly differentiated loci was detected between bi and nbh . included among these loci were the aryl hydrocarbon receptors   <dig> and  <dig>  cathepsin z, the cytochrome p450s , and the nadh ubiquinone oxidoreductase mlrq subunit. only the cyp1a locus exhibited a consistently high fst value across all population pairs while both ahr genes were highly differentiated in all comparisons except for that between sh and nwk. while great differences were detected between paired populations at the cyp1a locus, a hierarchical amova did not confirm that those differences are associated with dlc sensitivity . in contrast, variation at the ahr <dig> locus could distinguish dlc-sensitive and tolerant groups .
st 
values demonstrating high differentiation among population pairs

fst values for highly differentiated loci across all four dlc-sensitive/-tolerant population pairs. fsts were calculated using the locus by locus amova function in arlequin v.  <dig> . values exceeding an fst threshold of  <dig>  are noted in bold and are significant at p <  <dig> . comparisons that were not made because the markers were monomorphic in some populations are noted as n/a. bi = block island, nbh = new bedford harbor, flax = flax pond, bp = bridgeport, sh = sandy hook, nwk = newark, kc = kings creek, and er = elizabeth river.

further exploration of associations between specific loci and dlc sensitivity using an fst modeling approach produced results similar to those derived from the locus-by-locus amova. again, the cyp1a locus was identified as a significant outlier with respect to the simulated fst null distribution in three out of the four pairwise comparisons between each sensitive population and its dlc-tolerant counterpart. moreover, when data for all sensitive populations were pooled and compared to the pooled data for all tolerant populations, the ahr <dig> locus emerged as a significant outlier . these findings lend support to the hypothesis that the cyp1a and ahr <dig> loci may be involved in the evolution of dlc tolerance.

evidence of selection can also be gleaned from subtle shifts in allele frequencies in response to environmental variables after controlling for population structure  <cit> . by reviewing differences in minor allele frequency between sensitive and dlc-adapted population pairs, a strong signal was apparent for two snps: ahr2_ <dig> and cyp1a_ <dig> . upon further examination, the shift in minor allele frequency for the ahr <dig> snp varied in magnitude but was consistently in the same direction for all four population comparisons, providing yet another line of evidence linking ahr <dig> with the dlc-tolerant phenotype. this was not the case at the cyp1a locus. although substantial differences in minor allele frequency were observed between each sensitive and tolerant pair, the frequency shift between kc and er was in the direction opposite of the other three pairings .
f. heteroclitus 
snp markers calculated for each population

zero values indicate populations where the snp marker was monomorphic. minor alleles in bold.

discussion
four independent dlc-adapted killifish populations were contrasted with neighboring sensitive counterparts in an attempt to reveal genetic loci associated with intra-specific dlc tolerance in the wild. the ahr pathway is known to mediate toxic responses to dlcs in all vertebrates and several studies involving killifish have implicated altered ahr pathway function in eliciting the tolerant phenotype  <cit> . therefore, a ‘candidate gene scan’ approach, focused on components and targets of the ahr and interacting pathways represented among available killifish genetic resources, was applied to gain a better understanding of the genetic basis for the observed phenotypic variation in dlc sensitivity among killifish populations.

genetic diversity and population structure of tolerant killifish populations were examined with the expectation that patterns of historical stress would be revealed. levels of genetic diversity and population structure in killifish have been evaluated in several studies; some with the specific aim of addressing the impacts of pollutant-driven selection  <cit> . results of the multi-locus analyses conducted here are in agreement with previous reports. comparably high levels of genetic variation were estimated for all populations, rendering the hypothesis that a genetic bottleneck facilitated the emergence of the dlc-adaptive phenotype highly unlikely. with respect to population structure, each population included in this study was moderately to highly different from all others and observed fst values were comparably higher than earlier measures for killifish populations spanning a similar geographic range . the difference in the extent of population structure detected among independent studies could be a consequence of the type of markers used ; however, the overall patterns are consistent: genetic differences appear to be driven by geographic distance  rather than dlc sensitivity. moreover, a hierarchical amova did not attribute any of the existing molecular variation to differences between dlc-sensitive and dlc-tolerant groups.

the failure to detect a significant relationship between multi-locus measures of genetic diversity/differentiation and increased tolerance to dlcs may be because a majority of the markers used in the current and previous analyses are selectively neutral. it has been suggested that neutral markers best reflect the effects of anthropogenically-mediated environmental change when populations are in decline and genetic exchange among populations is restricted  <cit> . there is no evidence that either sensitive or dlc-tolerant killifish populations have experienced a reduction in population size  <cit> . a more plausible explanation for the rapid adaptation to dlc contamination is that the trait in question is controlled by a small number of loci  <cit> . this explanation is consistent with theoretical models that predict single allelic differences of large effect dominate adaptive shifts when environmental change is sudden and selection is intense  <cit> . the prediction has been tested and verified in insect populations reacting to pesticides  <cit> , benthic marine invertebrates subject to heavy metal toxicity  <cit> , and fish exposed to dlcs  <cit> .

phenotypic similarities among tolerant populations exposed to a prototypical dlc   <cit>  supported an expectation of common loci under selection; however, genetic loci associated with tolerance might vary across populations due to differences in the selective agents present in their native habitats. the presumed selective agents include large classes of aromatic hydrocarbons whose toxic effects are mediated fully  or partly  through the ahr pathway. while urban contamination includes moderate levels of both pahs and pcbs, toxic levels of dlcs have been measured at nbh and nwk, pahs at er, and both at bp  <cit> . therefore, genetic analyses were conducted to identify common loci under selection in tolerant populations, and differences between sensitive/tolerant paired killifish populations.

since functional variation in ahr-ligand binding initiates the ahr pathway cascade , evidence for selection acting on ahr loci was of obvious interest in comparing tolerant versus sensitive killifish populations. as in other fish species, killifish possess at least two distinct ah receptor genes, ahr <dig> and ahr <dig>  and the expression of ahr <dig> predominates in most tissues  <cit> . strong signals of selection were detected for an ahr <dig>  and ahr <dig> snp  included in this analysis in three of the four pairwise comparisons  when locus-by-locus fst were considered. although these two snps are synonymous and do not result in amino acid changes, they are both located in the transactivation domain of their respective ahr genes and in close proximity to non-synonymous snps found to be under selection in reitzel et al.  <cit> . minor allele frequencies  of the ahr2_ <dig> snp were consistently higher in the dlc-tolerant populations for all four population pairs. although the fst modeling approach identified the ahr1_ <dig> snp as a significant outlier in only one of the comparisons , when genotype data from all dlc-sensitive populations were pooled and compared to that of all dlc-tolerant populations ahr2_ <dig> was the only locus found to deviate from neutral expectations. similar patterns of genetic variation in ahr <dig> and ahr <dig> loci is not surprising given that these two genes are arranged in tandem  within the killifish genome  <cit> . to determine whether variation in both loci, a single locus, or neither locus underlies the dlc-tolerant phenotype, population genetic data must be accompanied by functional assays. a focused examination of allelic variation in killifish ahr <dig> and ahr <dig> revealed snps under positive selection in both genes; however, ahr <dig> variants were not responsible for alterations in receptor function and ahr <dig> variations have yet to be tested  <cit> . studies investigating the genetic basis for dlc-tolerance in zebrafish and atlantic tomcod have isolated an ahr <dig> gene as a key player in mediating dlc sensitivity  <cit> ; while ahr <dig> and ahr <dig> seem to play functional roles in dioxin toxicity in red seabream  <cit> . taken together, these results suggest that ahr <dig> variation likely plays a strong role in dlc sensitivity and tolerance in killifish, but more complex interactions may be revealed as new ahr paralogs are being identified and characterized  <cit> .

consistent with the refractory induction patterns for cyp1a  observed among dlc-tolerant killifish populations in laboratory studies  <cit> , the cyp1a snp emerged as a strong candidate for selection in all tolerant populations. high fst values and large differences in minor allele frequencies were observed at the cyp1a locus in all four population comparisons and the fst modeling approach identified cyp1a as a significant outlier in three out of the four comparisons . however, the shift in allele frequency, although significant, was not in the same direction across all comparisons. a full genome scan analysis of three of the same tolerant killifish populations  and their sensitive counterparts also identified a snp marker in the cyp1a promoter region as the only locus  under selection in all three dlc-tolerant populations surveyed, but again, the direction of the allele frequency shift between dlc-sensitive and tolerant populations was not uniform  <cit> . in a follow-up study, williams and oleksiak  <cit>  found that cyp1a promoter variants derived from a dlc-tolerant population  resulted in elevated expression of cyp1a in vitro, contradicting the well-documented refractory response of cyp1a to dlc exposure among tolerant populations in vivo. these previously reported results, coupled with the knowledge that the cyp1a snp included in this analysis is located in the 3’ untranslated region of the gene  <cit>  make the exact functional role  of cyp1a snps in the dlc-tolerant phenotype unclear. it may be that additional, yet to be discovered factors associated with cyp1a regulation are also important.

the interpretation of cyp1a as a candidate for selection must also take into account that tolerance has evolved in response to different ahr ligands. specifically, the role of cyp1a in ahr-mediated toxicity varies by ligand class. classically described, ahr agonists induce the production of enzymes  that metabolize pahs, but not dlcs. unlike dlc toxicity, pah toxicity is self-limiting, due to ahr-enhanced pah elimination, and includes components that are not ahr-mediated. for example, cyp1a knockdown studies in zebrafish embryos have demonstrated the protective value of cyp1a during developmental pah exposures  <cit> . that tolerant killifish populations from varied selective environments  show similar, poorly-inducible cyp1a phenotypes warrants the consideration of the adaptive value of the cyp1a recalcitrant phenotype more broadly, e.g., as an energy conservation strategy associated with chronic pollution exposures. as in other species  <cit> , variation in the cyp1a sequence among killifish populations may be beneficial if associated with conditional fitness under transient, low level pah exposures. alternatively, variation in cyp1a may be related to its position ‘downstream’ in the ahr pathway, and secondary to changes in ‘upstream’ loci, causally associated with tolerance. regardless of mechanism, variation at the cyp1a locus differentiates tolerant from sensitive killifish.

among nearby sensitive/tolerant killifish population comparisons, the bi/nbh pairing was the most genetically differentiated based on multi-locus fst; many additional loci were identified as candidates for selection . in addition to the ahrs and cyp1a, these populations appear to be highly differentiated at cathepsin f, cathepsin z, cyp3a <dig>  and the nadh ubiquinone oxidoreductase mlrq subunit loci. cathepsins are a large group of proteolytic enzymes that have been implicated in cardiomyopathies and cardiovascular disease, ultimately resulting in impaired pump function  <cit> . given that the cardiovascular system is a main target of dlc toxicity in all vertebrates  <cit> , it is reasonable to propose that alterations in the cathepsin coding sequence could contribute to existing differences in dlc sensitivity. cyp3a <dig> is an abundant xenobiotic metabolizing enzyme in killifish livers responsible for the breakdown and clearance of a wide array of anthropogenically derived pollutants  <cit>  and has been identified as a target of the ahr pathway  <cit> . in killifish, expression of this gene was found to be significantly higher in field caught er females relative to those collected from kc  <cit> ; however, it was not differentially expressed in killifish embryos derived from the same dlc-tolerant and sensitive populations included in this study when exposed to pcb <dig> under controlled laboratory conditions  <cit> . mutations in the nadh ubiquinone oxidoreductase mlrq subunit are associated with metabolic diseases  <cit> . again, expression of this gene was found to be significantly higher in field caught er females relative to those collected from kc  <cit> . moreover, expression of another component of the nadh ubiquinone oxidoreductase enzyme, ndub <dig>  was found to be higher in the brains of nbh, nwk, and er adult fish  <cit> . the repeated association of nadh ubiquinone oxidoreductase with dlc-tolerance suggests that biochemical pathways other than the ahr could be involved in this chemically-induced stress response.

it is not known whether the identification of additional candidate loci for strong selection in the bi/nbh pair only suggests unique tolerance-related or biologically-relevant differences  or technical artifacts . while similar phenotypes among the four tolerant populations examined suggest a conserved biochemical basis for intra-specific dlc tolerance in killifish, whether that similarity is constrained to identical nucleotide changes remains to be seen. the genetic mechanisms of adaptation could vary among dlc-tolerant populations. alternatively, the differences detected may be a reflection of additional unique stressors encountered by each population pair.

CONCLUSIONS
the purpose of this study was to identify genetic polymorphisms associated with dlc sensitivity in atlantic killifish from a suite of candidate loci involved in the ahr and interacting pathways; whether the polymorphisms in and of themselves are responsible for the drastic differences in dlc sensitivity among populations was beyond the scope of this work. two loci, ahr <dig> and cyp1a, displayed patterns of variation consistent with selection in each of four pairwise comparisons. additional loci with specific alleles significantly overrepresented in some, but not all, dlc tolerant populations underscore the possibility that the genetic variation in each population may have been shaped by similar yet unique selection pressures. although the intention was to include all components of the ahr and interacting pathways in this population screen, the underrepresentation or absence of key genes ) in the f. heteroclitus unigene database resulted in an enriched but incomplete set of candidate genetic markers for dlc toxicity and  tolerance. genetic resources being made available through the fundulus genome consortium as well as a parallel, unbiased, quantitative trait locus  approach to the discovery of the genetic mechanism of dlc tolerance in killifish will greatly increase our understanding of this dramatic example of anthropogenically induced, rapid adaptation in the wild.

availability of supporting data
the sequences for the snps analyzed in this article are available through the dryad digital depository and can be accessed by searching for the data package title data from: targeted approach to identify genetic loci associated with evolved dioxin tolerance in atlantic killifish , doi: <dig> /dryad.2355t data files: proestou_etal_killifish_snp_sequences.

abbreviations
dlc: dioxin-like compound; ahr: aryl hydrocarbon receptor; pcb: polychlorinated biphenyl; pah: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon; bi: block island; nbh: new bedford harbor; bp: bridgeport; flax: flax pond; sh: sandy hook; nwk: newark; er: elizabeth river; kc: kings creek.

competing interests
the authors declare they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
dap, pf, dc, and dn contributed to study design, sample collection and processing. dp performed data analysis. dp and dn wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
list of all genes considered for snp analysis and their fate during the marker development process. sequences provided by sibel karchner were derived from either  <dig>  or  <dig> individuals  collected from scorton creek, ma. in some cases, qualitiy snp identified multiple available contigs from a single unigene entry. the number of snps genotyped does not equal the number of snps in the analysis because  <dig> of the markers failed to provide quality genotype information. n = no, y = yes, n/a = not available, u = unknown.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we owe many thanks to m. hahn, s. karchner, and d. franks for sharing unpublished sequence and snp data and for useful discussions. helpful discussions with eric waits, technical support from jason grear, john martinson, mike charpentier, ian kirby, ashley bertrand, and james heltshe, and the advice from reviewers of earlier drafts, mark hahn, sibel karchner, jeffrey markert, john martinson, anne kuhn, and  <dig> anonymous reviewers are also much appreciated. this is ord tracking number ord- <dig> of the u.s. environmental protection agency, office of research and development, national health and environmental effects research laboratory, atlantic ecology division. this manuscript has been reviewed and approved for publication by the u.s. epa. approval does not signify that the contents necessarily reflect the views and policies of the u.s epa. mention of trade names, products, or services does not convey, and should not be interpreted as conveying official u.s. epa approval, endorsement, or recommendation.
