BACKGROUND
terpene volatiles in grape berries are major contributors to the floral/fruity odors of wine and are responsible for the varietal flavor of aromatic wines  <cit> . terpenes in grapes are present in both free and glycosidically bound forms. in general, the glycosidically bound form exists much more abundant than the free form  <cit> . free-form terpenes directly contribute to aroma odor, whereas non-volatile and flavorless bound-form terpenes are potential contributors to wine aroma odors because they can be converted into free volatile compounds through acidic and enzymatic hydrolysis during wine making  <cit> . the profiles of volatiles in muscat-type grape varieties have been widely studied , which indicates that most terpene compounds accumulate as grapes ripen  <cit> . the typical muscat-like aromas are primarily attributed to a large amount of c <dig> terpenoids . the concentrations of terpene volatiles in a berry are affected by many factors, such as grape variety, maturity degree, vintage and vineyard management techniques . the same variety, when grown in different climates and regions, can have different aromatic profiles  <cit> , which results in a great difference in the aromatic quality of the wines produced  <cit> . however, limited attention has been paid to regional variation in terpene compounds in grapes; how and by what mechanism the climate or regional factors affect the expression of related genes and the production of terpenes have not been elucidated yet.

the terpene biosynthetic pathway and the genes involved are generally well known. terpenes are derived from two common inter-convertible five-carbon  precursors: isopentenyl diphosphate  and its isomer dimethylallyl diphosphate   <cit> . in plants, these c <dig> precursors are synthesized from two independent pathways: the plastidial 2-methyl-d-erythritol-4-phosphate phosphate  and the cytoplasmic mevalonic acid  pathways  <cit> . the mep pathway offers substrates for the synthesis of monoterpenes and diterpenes, whereas the mva pathway provides metabolic precursors for the synthesis of sesquiterpenes   <cit> . recently, an isotope labeling experiment demonstrated that a cross-flow of metabolites exists between the mva and mep pathways in some plants  <cit> . ipp and short prenyl diphosphates might connect the mva and mep pathways of isoprenoid metabolism upstream  <cit> . among the isoprenoid metabolites, monoterpenes are the greatest contributors to the aromas of white wines made from muscat and aromatic non-muscat varieties  <cit> . herein, our main concern regards the production of monoterpenes in grapes.

1-deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase  is an entrance enzyme to the mep pathway, catalyzing the condensation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and pyruvate into 1-deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate . dxp is further converted into geranyl pyrophosphate  through six enzymatic reactions. at least three rate-limiting enzymes exist in the mep pathway, including dxs, dxp reducto-isomerase , and1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2-butenyl 4-diphosphate  reductase  . dxs is a key rate-limiting enzyme in several plant species  <cit> . the over-expression of dxs results in an obvious increase in isoprenoid end products in arabidopsis  <cit> . additionally, the accumulation of vvidxs transcripts is positively correlated with the concentration of monoterpenes in grapes  <cit> . quantitative trait loci  analysis revealed that the expression of vvidxs strongly correlates with the muscat-flavor intensity of grape berries  <cit> . also, the expression of vvihdr was associated with the accumulation of monoterpenols at the veraison stage of grape berries  <cit> .

as the final enzymes of the terpene biosynthetic pathway, terpene synthases  are a large gene family that is responsible for the production of hemiterpenes , monoterpenes , sesquiterpenes  or diterpenes  from the substrates dmapp, gpp, fpp or ggpp, respectively  <cit> . primary monoterpene skeletons can be further modified by the actions of other classes of enzymes, such as cytochrome p <dig> hydroxylases, dehydrogenases , reductases, glycosyl-transferases and methyl-transferases  <cit> . the analysis of the v. vinifera 12-fold coverage genome sequence predicted  <dig> putatively functional vvitpss  <cit> . to date,  <dig> full-length vvitpss have been biochemically characterized, and their reaction products cover most of the monoterpene and sesquiterpene volatiles in grape berries . in aromatic ‘gewürztraminer’ grapes, an increase in gene transcripts of the terpene biosynthetic pathway upstream correlated with the onset of monoterpenol glycoside accumulation  <cit> . in other two aromatic grape varieties , the highest expression of vvitps genes belonging to the tps-a and tps-b subfamilies also well corresponded to the peak of free terpene concentrations. in the tps-g subfamily, only vvipnlinner <dig>  which codes for linalool synthase, was highly expressed in ripening berries, whereas the gene for geraniol synthase peaked in expression in green berries and at the beginning of ripening  <cit> . with regard to the conversion of free terpenes to their bound forms, three monoterpenol β-d-glucosyltransferases—vvigt <dig>  vvigt <dig> and vvigt15—were recently biochemically characterized  <cit> . vvigt <dig> was demonstrated to mainly convert geranyl and neryl into their bound forms during grape ripening  <cit> , whereas vvigt <dig> can glucosylate geraniol, r, s-citronellol, and nerol with similar efficiency, and vvigt <dig> prefers geraniol overnerol  <cit> . vvigt <dig>  another uridine diphosphate glycosyltransferase , was also found to glucosylate monoterpenols and some short-chained and aromatic alcohols with low efficiency  <cit> . ugts are responsible for the production of glycosyl-conjugated terpenes in grape berries. although some important genes of the terpene biosynthetic pathway have been functionally identified and their expression patterns studied during grape berry development, it has not been entirely clear which genes play dominant roles in the accumulation of free and glycosidically bound terpenes in grape berries or which genes are easily affected at the transcriptional or translational level by climate factors. answers to these questions will help to interpret the differences in terpene profiles in grape berries between regions and lay a basis for understanding the regulation of terpene biosynthesis.

most wine-producing regions in china feature a continental monsoon climate with hot-wet summers and dry-cold winters. however, in northwest china, summer remains dry, with an annual rainfall of only 80–150 mm that is accompanied by strong sunshine and a large temperature difference between day and night. relatively, east china has an annual rainfall of approximately 700 mm, concentrated in the summer-autumn seasons. these markedly different growing environments between the western and eastern regions of china cause differences in the qualities of mature grape berries and the flavors and sensory profiles of wines  <cit> . more recently, an investigation of the volatile profiles of cabernet sauvignon grapes grown in the northwest  and east  revealed that the variability of concentrations of c <dig> volatile compounds, 2- methoxy-3-isobutylpyrazine and damascenone strongly depended upon weather conditions during berry development  <cit> . transcriptome comparisons of this variety in the two regions have also been extensively conducted  <cit> . although the regional differences in flavor profiles of grapes and wines has always attracted chinese researchers’ interest, terpene compounds receive insufficient attention, possibly because previous studies used non-aromatic varieties, such as cabernet sauvignon and merlot, in which terpenes have fewer types and lower concentration.

the present study focused on muscat blanc à petit grains  berries, a muscat-type grape variety that is grown in two regions with distinct climates: gaotai  in gansu province in northwestern china and changli  in hebei province in eastern china. winemakers originally noticed that this varietal wine made in the two regions presented somewhat different aroma performances. however, the terpene profiles and the relevant biosynthetic metabolism in grape berries have not yet been extensively researched. in this work, the concentrations of terpene volatiles  and whole transcript-gene expression profiling were measured to identify the genes and potential transcript factors  that dominate or regulate the accumulation of terpenes in grape berries, and further to interpretate the differential accumulation of terpene volatiles observed between regions. the results from this work will promote our understanding of the complicated but important biosynthesis and regulation of terpenes, and offer some suggestions for local vineyard practices aimed to improve grape aromatic qualities.

RESULTS
comparison of free and glycosidically bound terpenes in the grapes between two regions
total soluble solid  and titratable acid presented similar change patterns in developing grape berries between the two regions across two consecutive years. nevertheless, the berries close to harvest  from gt contained significantly higher total soluble solid content and titratable acid compared with those from the cl region . the total terpene concentration increased approximately 3-fold  and  <dig>  ~ 2-fold , separately, along with ripening . statistically significant differences in the total concentrations of free and glycosidically bound terpenes were observed between cl and gt grapes, except for e-l  <dig> and e-l  <dig> in  <dig>  in particular, the difference in the concentration of the glycosidically bound form was much greater than the free form. three evolutionary trends in the two-year time-course series could be clearly observed for free volatiles from the hierarchical heatmap clustering . in the first trend, volatiles such as geraniol, nerol, linalool, myrcene, cis-rose oxide generally presented an increase in their concentrations along with berry ripening . moreover, most compounds with the first evolutionary trend in mature grape berries had higher concentrations in the grapes grown in the cl region compared with the gt region. the compounds with the second evolutionary trend, such as terpinenols and cis/trans-furan linalool oxides, reached their highest levels at the pea-size period  or veraison  stage and subsequently reduced their levels in post-veraison grapes. at harvest, this group of volatile compounds did not display significant differences between the grapes from the cl and gt regions. the remaining compounds were grouped into the third evolutionary trend, including hotrienol, citronella and pyran linalool oxide. their accumulation trends varied between regions and years. in the third group, hotrienol, a dehydrogenated form of linalool, displayed a downward trend as berry ripening processed, which was the opposite of the developmental accumulation of linalool. among the detected free-form terpenes, linalool and geraniol had the highest concentrations, followed by nerol, mycene, citronellol and cis-rose oxide. apart from citonellol, the other five terpenes presented higher concentration in mature grapes from the cl region than from the gt region . we must note that even in the same region, there was a great difference in the compound evolutionary trend between the two vintages. because of this difference, we analyzed annual data instead of the mean of the two-year data. the findings indicate that the accumulation of free-from volatiles is easily altered by vintage.fig.  <dig> sampling stages , titratable acidity , brix , in the grapes at four developmental stages in two regions. asterisk represents significant difference in brix and titratable acid concentrations between cl and gt region at the el <dig> stage 

fig.  <dig> change of total concentrations of free and glycosidically-bound volatiles. columns indicate mean concentration , and bars indicate standard error of the mean. pound sign and asterisk represent significant difference of free and glycosidically-bound data between cl and gt region, respectively . cl and gt is the abbreviation of changli and gaotai

fig.  <dig> profile of free volatiles in the grape berries in gt and cl regions. a a heatmap for the variation of free volatiles in the berries of two regions in  <dig> and  <dig>  each row represents an individual compound and each column represents an individual sample. the data was the mean of six values from each sample point. the data was normalized by rows used function “scale”. the topographycal colors are installed in deep red and deep blue, which depict relative concentration of terpenes from high to low. the color scale bar is shown at the right of the heat map. dendrograms indicate the correlation between groups of terpenes; b change in the concentration of main compounds in two regions in  <dig> and 2011



because most compounds accumulated from the veraison stage till ripe/harvest stage, glycosidically bound terpenes had high concentrations in mature berries . this developmental pattern was the same as those reported previously . compared with the gt region, the concentrations of most bound volatiles were dramatically higher in the grapes from cl in both years. for example, glycosidically bound geraniol and nerol in the cl-produced grapes were 2 ~ 3-fold higher than in the gt-produced grapes . the glycosidically bound geraniol, nerol and linalool represent the three most abundant terpenes in muscat blanc à petits grains berries. in the present study, the differential accumulation of the three compounds between regions resulted in a large difference in the total concentration of terpenes, as shown in fig.  <dig>  some other compounds, such as glycosidically bound forms of pyran linalool oxide , menthol and nerolidol, exhibited variable trends during berry development. however, these compounds all presented at low levels in grape berries. the proportion of free-form to glycosidically bound forms varied remarkably depending on the compounds themselves . we noticed that the linalool concentration was higher than the geraniol or nerol concentration in free-form terpenes, by contrast, the level of linaloyl glycoside was lower than geranyl and neryl glycoside, indicating that free-form linalool is less converted into the bound form. neryl glycosides were the most abundant glycosidically bound monoterpene in muscat blanc à petits grains berries. the concentration of free-form citronellol was higher in the grapes from the gt region compared with the cl region, whereas citronellyl glycoside exhibited the opposite trend. notably, some glycosidically bound terpenes presented significant differences in their concentrations between  <dig> and  <dig>  for example, rose oxide , furan linalool oxide , citronellol, citronellal and hotrienol can be easily modified by oxidation or dehydrogenation, and ocimene, myrcene, terpinolene and limonene are produced by tps-b subfamily enzymes. hence, the difference in the aroma odor of vintage wines may be related to the production of these volatile compounds.fig.  <dig> profile of glycosidically-bound volatiles in the grape berries in gt and cl regions. a a heatmap of free volatiles in the berries of two regions in  <dig> and  <dig>  each row represents an individual compound and each column represents an individual sample. the data was the mean of six values from each sample point. the data was normalized by rows used function “scale”. the topographycal colors are installed in deep red and deep blue, which depict relative concentration of terpenes from high to low. the color scale bar is shown at the right of the heat map. dendrograms indicate the correlation between groups of terpenes; b the concentration of main free-form compounds in the two regions in  <dig> and 2011



the concentrations of several aroma-related volatiles exceeded the sensorial threshold values in mature grapes, such as linalool, geraniol, myrcene and cis-rose oxide. this result indicates that these volatiles greatly contribute to the aromatic attributes of grape berries . in addition, some glycosides, such as nerol, linalool and geraniol, also reached their respective thresholds, potentially contributing to the aromatic profile of wine . the compounds that could have aroma contribution displayed different levels in the grapes from the cl and gt regions at the commercial mature stage , thus causing distinctive aromatic senses.

expression profiles of terpene synthesis-related genes in the grapes
we first investigated the biosynthetic pathways of terpene precursors. based on rna-seq data, we quantified the transcript abundances of the genes required for the mva and mep pathways and the genes encoding isoprenyl diphosphate synthases, geranyl diphosphatesynthase , farnesyl diphosphate synthase  and geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase . as shown in fig.  <dig>  the developmental expression patterns of these genes in the grapes were similar between  <dig> and  <dig> fig.  <dig> expression profile of the genes in terpenoid backbone pathway in the grape berries. a pathway of terpene biosynthesis in grape berries; the mep pathway is localized in plastids, while the mva pathway occurs in the cytosol. the following enzymes and metabolites are shown: g3p glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, dxs 1-deoxy-d-xylulose-5-phosphate synthase, dxr 1-deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate reductoisomerase, mep 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate, mct 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate cytidylyltransferase, cdp-me 4--2-c-methyl-d-erythritol, cmk 4--2-c-methyl-d-erythritol kinase, cdp-mep 2-phospho-4--2-c-methyl-d-erythritol, mds 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol  <dig> -cyclodiphosphate synthase, me-cpp 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol  <dig> -cyclodiphosphate, hds 4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-enyldiphosphate  synthase, hmb-pp -4-hydroxy-3-methyl-but-2-enyl pyrophosphate, hdr 1-hydroxy-2-methyl- 2--butenyl-4-diphosphate reductase, ipp isopentenyl pyrophosphate, dmapp dimethylallyl pyrophosphate, ippi ipp-isomerase, gpps geranyl pyrophosphate synthase, gpp geranylpyrophosphate; aact acetoacetyl-coa thiolase, hmgs 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl synthase, hmg-coa 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coa, hmgr 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coa reductase, mva mevalonate, mk mva kinase, mvp mevalonate-5-phosphate, pmk phospho-mva kinase, mvpp mevalonate-5-diphosphate, mpdc diphospho-mva decarboxylase, mvpp mevalonate-5-pyrophosphate, fpps farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase. b transcription profile of the genes in the mep and mva pathway. each row represents an individual gene and each column represents an individual sample. the data was normalized by rows used function “scale”. the topographycal colors are installed in deep red and deep blue, which depict relative expression abundances of genes from high to low. the color scale bar is shown at the right of the heat map. dendrograms indicate the correlation between groups of genes. c expression of two main genes in the mep pathway



the mep pathway provides the precursors  for the synthesis of both monoterpenes and downstream carotenoids. the mep pathway consists of seven chloroplast-localized enzymes  <cit> , of which six transcripts were expressed at four developmental stages in our experiment. most of the genes were highly expressed at the early developmental stage  and maintained a certain expression levels in the following process . both vvidxs and vvidxr presented downward trends during grape maturation. dxss are one of the main regulators of monoterpene biosynthesis in grapevine  <cit> , of which vvidxs  is the most important isoenzyme in grapes. in this study, vvidxs did not exhibit a statistically significant difference in transcript accumulation between the cl and gt-produced grapes. additionally, the expression of vvidxsl <dig>  was significantly up-regulated in the grapes from the gt region compared with cl region at e-l <dig> stage, which was not in parallel with the production of monoterpenes. therefore, vvidxs should not be a key gene responsible for the differential production of monoterpenes between the cl and gt regions. by contrast, vvihdr  could be a predominantly involved gene. as shown in fig. 5c, the expression of vvihdr increased as grape development proceeded, and the increment in the cl-produced grapes was much greater than that in the gt-produced grapes, which highly paralleled with the accumulation of monoterpenes observed in the two regions and two vintages. the expression of vvigpps  increased slightly as berry matured, but didn’t show statistical significance in the abundance between the two regions.

ipp and dmapp are also produced through the cytoplasmic mva pathway. this pathway consists of six enzymes, for which all transcripts were observed in each of the four developmental stages. except for the two transcripts encoding acetyl-coa acetyltransferases , the other four exhibited downward trends with berry maturation. for example, two of the three transcripts encoding isoforms of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme a reductase  and the transcript encoding fpp synthase generally decreased during berry development. hmgr is a rate-limiting enzyme in the mva pathway  <cit> . however, in this study, the three vvihmgrs in the berries of the gt region were expressed higher than those from the cl region at e-l <dig> , whereas only a few sesquiterpenes compounds were identified in the berries at that stage, suggesting that the expression of vvihmgrs did not entirely correlate with the production of sesquiterpenes in cytoplasm.

vvitpss are a large gene family responsible for the convertion of gpps into a variety of terpenes. at present, sixty-seven vvitps isogenes were identified from our rna-seq data. based on the sequence homology to the functionally characterized tpss in the ncbi nr database, these genes were grouped into the tps-a, tps-b and tps-g subfamilies. cluster analysis was applied to identify genes with similar expression patterns. sesquiterpenes are produced through the members of the tps-a subfamily from farnesyl pyrophosphate  that is formed via the mva pathway in the cytoplasm. we identified  <dig> transcripts encoding putative tps-a enzymes, some of which were annotated by ncbi as valencene synthases-like, germacrene synthases-like or -beta-caryophyllene synthases. in our analysis, however, ten of the  <dig> tps-a transcripts were detectable only at one or two developmental stages of grapes, so were not assigned to the heatmap cluster. the other  <dig> transcripts exhibited detectable levels across all four developmental stages . of these  <dig> transcripts, four were expressed primarily in young berries , xm_ <dig> , nm_ <dig>  and jf <dig> ), whereas the other six genes were expressed specifically in mature berries  . moreover, the expression of the gene  coding for germacrene d synthase presented an upward trend in the mature process of grapes. -valencene synthase  is a key enzyme of sesquiterpene biosynthesis and contributes greatly to the production of aromatic volatiles in both aromatic white and non-aromatic grapevine cultivars  <cit> . although vvivalcs had a high expression level in mature berries in this study, no detectable sesquiterpenes were present in the corresponding berries. in contrast, only a few sesquiterpenes, such as α-muurolene, α-calacorene and cedrol, were qualitatively identified in green berries . according to the inconsistence between transcript abundance and metabolite concentration, it is inferred that vvivalcs was not associated with the production of sesquiterpenes in this grape variety. the biochemical significance of high vvivalcs transcript level in mature berries will also be an issue of ongoing investigation in our future research.table  <dig> terpenoid pathway transcripts


nc expressed at a certain stage but not clustered in heatmap, nd, not included in the current ncbi refseq mrna database

fig.  <dig> expression profile of the genes coding for terpene synthases  detected in this study; a transcription expression profile of terpene synthases detected in this study. each row represents an individual gene and each column represents an individual sample. the data was normalized by rows used function “scale”. the topographycal colors are installed in deep red and deep blue, which depict relative expression abundances of genes from high to low. the color scale bar is shown at the right of the heat map. dendrograms indicate the correlation between groups of genes. b expression of the four terpene synthases in the two regions in  <dig> and 2011



monoterpenes are produced by the members of the tps-b and tps-g subfamily . of the  <dig> putative tps-b genes , seven genes were absent in the current ncbi refseq mrna database  and excluded in the following analyses. of the remaining  <dig> genes, eight were detected at only one or two stages in this investigation, whereas the other  <dig> exhibited detectable expression levels throughout grape development . eight of these  <dig> transcripts exhibited a downward trend during grape development , and one transcript encoding -beta-ocimene synthase  was expressed mostly in mature grapes. this gene expression was up-regulated in the berries of the gt region compared with the cl region at e-l  <dig> stage , which was not according with the accumulation of ocimenes. the present result was also consistent with another report  <cit> . accordingly, the expression of this transcript for -beta-ocimene synthase  likely affects the production of ocimenes in the two investigated regions to a large extent. another transcript encoding -beta-ocimene synthase  displayed different expression patterns in the grapes from the two regions in the two vintages. in detail, this gene expression in the gt grapes presented an upward trend in both of vintages. with regard to the cl grapes, its expression tended to rise from e-l  <dig> to e-l  <dig>  and afterwards dropped at e-l  <dig> in the  <dig> vintage, but the transcript was detected only at e-l  <dig> of the  <dig> vintage . so we infered that the expression of this gene was not closely associated with the production of ocimene in mature berries. based on the developmental expression pattern, two α-terpineol synthases, vviter <dig>  and vviter <dig> , were also considered not to be responsible for monoterpene accumulation in these muscat blanc a petits grains grapes because they displayed low expression levels that were only detected at a few stages. conversely, the two transcripts annotated as alpha-terpineol synthase  and myrcene synthases  exhibited high abundances . accordingly we deduced that these two myrcene synthases were involved in the high accumulation of monoterpenes in this grape variety.

twenty-one transcripts were grouped into the tps-g subfamily . among them, six had been removed from the current refseq mrna database . the tpss of this subfamily exclusively produce acyclic terpene alcohols.  <dig> tps-g genes had been biochemically characterized by martin et al.  <cit> . of these functionally known tps-g genes, five genes  presented downward trends in the transcript production as berry ripening progressed , which was inconsistent with the accumulation of free monoterpene alcohols in this variety. this result also verified the previous finding that the expression of most tpss did not entirely correlate with the production of terpene volatiles in grape berries  <cit> . there may be regulation at the translational level, such as protein amount, enzyme activity or post-translational modifications. notably, among the seven genes that have been demonstrated to be responsible for linalool synthesis in vitro  <cit> , only vvipnlinner <dig> expression presented an upward trend with berry development , which paralleled with the accumulation of linalool . in moscato bianco grapes , vvipnlinner <dig> also displayed a similar developmental expression pattern  <cit> . the expression trend of vvipnlinner <dig> was quite different in  <dig> gt-produced berries. with regard to the comparison between two regions, the expression of vvipnlinner <dig> at the e-l <dig> stage was up-regulated about  <dig> -fold in the gt grapes in comparison to the cl grapes , whereas the concentration of linalool in matue grapes of gt was significantly lower . evidently the differential accumulation of linalool between the grapes of both regions did not simply depend on the expression of this gene alone. vvicslinner  was highly expressed at the e-l <dig> stage and rapidly declined at subsequent stages . the transcript abundance of this gene in the cl grapes was nearly 4-fold higher than that in the gt grapes at e-l  <dig> stage  when the cl grapes had higher concentration of bound linalool . this implies that the expression of vvicslinner is likely region-dependent. zhu et al. also observed that vvicslinner was highly expressed in the early developmental stages of gewurztraminer grapes  <cit> . by contrast, martin et al. observed that vvicslinner had an expression peak at veraison in gewurztraminer grapes  <cit> . in our study, three genes encoding for geraniol synthase: vvicsger , vvigwger , and vvipnger  were also uniquely expressed at the green stage , indicating that the expression of these genes is developmentally specific.

in addition, five genes that are currently annotated by ncbi as nerolidol synthases , two transcripts  presented increasing expression levels along with the development of the grape berry, with one  expressed higher in the berries of the gt region than of the cl region. another transcript  had higher levels in the berries of the cl region compared with the gt region, suggesting that the accumulation of nerolidol in both regions should be dependent on the expression of this gene expression to a large degree.

genes corresponding to monoterpenol glucosyltransferases
monoterpenol β-d-glucosyltransferases  are responsible for the conversion of free terpenes into their glycosidically bound form. for wine grapes, this enzyme is particularly important because free-form monoterpenes in grapes can be easily sent out to the atmosphere once they are produced, and the level of glycosidically bound monoterpenes, a storage form of volatiles in grapes, actually reflects the potential aromatic quality of grapes and wines. gts are a large gene family that has not yet been clearly understood. recently, monoterpenol β-d-glucosyltransferases  have been isolated from different grape varieties and biochemically characterized; they demonstrate high activity to geraniol, nerol and citronellol and contribute to the production of their glucosides during grape ripening  <cit> . in this study, vviugt88a1l <dig>  showed similar expression trends in the two vintages with regard to the same region-produced grapes, so did vviugt85a2l <dig>  . as for the grapes of cl region, vviugt88a1l <dig>  was highly expressed at the pea-size stage , much higher than that in gt grapes, and there was a sharp declining from e-l  <dig> to e-l  <dig>  or e-l  <dig> stage , followed by an increase at the e-l <dig> stage. this expression pattern was consistent with that observed in other muscat grapes  <cit> . the cumulative expression of this gene was positively correlated with the concentrations of geranyl and neryl glucosides . moreover, the expression of vviugt88a1l <dig> at the e-l  <dig> stage was highly up-regulated in the cl region relative to the gt region. vviugt88a1l <dig> expression should partially contribute to the accumulation of geranyl and neryl glucosides during grape ripening. vviugt85a2l <dig>  expression in the berries of the cl region generally increased during e-l  <dig> to e-l  <dig> and decreased at the e-l  <dig> stage but increasingly increased in expression along with grape berry development in the gt region. this gene expression was significantly up-regulated in the cl-produced grapes relative to the gt-produced grapes. according to the data acquired in the grapes of two regions and two vintages, the expression of vviugt85a2l <dig> strongly positively correlated with the concentrations of geranyl, neryl and linayl glucosides in muscat blanc à petits grains berries . from the significant difference in vviugt85a2l <dig> transcript abundance between the berries of the two regions, it is inferred that vviugt85a2l <dig> could be environmentally induced, and differential accumulation of glycosidically bound geranyl and neryl between the regions should largely depend on the expression of this gene. the expression of vviugt88a1l <dig>  gradually decreased in developing berries, apart from the higher expression in 2011-vintage gt grapes at the e-l  <dig> stage than at the e-l  <dig> stage. moreover, this gene did not exhibit significant difference in the transcript abundance between the regions. therefore it is thought that vviugt88a1l <dig> is not associated with the differential accumulation of glycosidically-bound terpenes across the two regions. as for vviugt85a2l <dig> , its transcript was not detected in this study. bönisch and his colleagues also found that vviugt85a2l <dig> has little involvement in the glycosylation of these compounds in vitis vinifera grapes  <cit> .fig.  <dig> expression profile of three genes corresponding to monoterpenol glucosyltransferases



to identify additional candidate vviugts that act in the synthesis of glycosidically bound terpenes in grape berries, we adopted k means clustering analysis to cluster the expression patterns of  <dig> vviugts corresponding to udp-glycosyltransferases  in our rna-seq data . a total of  <dig> vviugts in clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> exhibited upward trends in expression parallel with the production of glycosidically bound terpenes . a phylogenetic tree was conducted based on the amino acid sequences of the  <dig> vviugts. these genes were divided into several groups . twenty-four sequences displayed high similarity with known terpene gts . combining the results of the k means analysis with the sequence similarity analysis; we speculated that these four transcripts should be putative monoterpenol glucosyltransferases. according to the grapevine gene naming system recommended by grimplet et al.  <cit> , they were named as vviugt88a1l <dig> , vviugt86a1l , vviugt85a1l <dig>  and vviugt85a1l <dig> . the four genes were all increasingly expressed as grapes ripen. the transcript accumulation of vviugt85a1l <dig> and vviugt88a1l <dig> was positively correlated with the production of geranyl, neryl and linaloyl glucosides in muscat blanc à petits grains berries . furthermore, vviugt85a1l <dig> was up-regulated at the e-l <dig> stage in the cl region relative to the gt region, which was consistent with the accumulation of geranyl, neryl and linayl glucosides in berries. as a result, the expression of vviugt85a1l <dig> was probably related to differential accumulation of these bound compounds across the two regions. further biochemical characterization is necessary to better understand the mechanisms of these putative glucosyltransferases.

in summary, based on the associations between the transcript accumulations and the production of final metabolites, we identified some genes that possibly dominate the differential accumulation of free-form and/or glucosidically bound monoterpenes in the cl and gt regions, such as vvihdr , vvicslinner , a nerolidol synthase gene , vvigt <dig>  and vviugt85a1l <dig> . regardless of the effect of vintage, these genes were all significantly differentially expressed between the regions. in addition, other regionally differentially expressed genes  were also identified, including vvidxs <dig> , three vvihmgr genes  and  <dig> vvitpss. however, the accumulation of their transcripts was not strongly positive correlated with the production of final terpene metabolites.

co-expression network analysis of transcription factors  and differentially expressed genes 
to identify potential transcription factors  that regulate these degs, we performed network analysis of the correlations between the expression levels of various tfs and the degs. based on the annotated grape genome, we first selected  <dig> transcription factors  of different classes in the present database. pearson correlation coefficients were calculated with respect to each pair of variables  across the profiles at various developmental stages. degs and tfs with high correlation coefficients  were connected by a line to construct a correlation network module. co-expression between degs and tfs was additionally visualized in fig. 8a.fig.  <dig> 
a co-expression network analysis for the differentially-expressed structural genes and candidate transcription factor  genes. the tfs listed in the plot have a high correlation coefficient  with structural genes in terms of transcript accumulation. structure genes are represented as circle nodes. different colors are used for the various gene categories: pink for genes in terpene precursory pathway, blue for terpene synthase genes, yellow for glucotransferase genes. tfs are represented as rectangle nodes, and tf gene id is shown in the tectangle. the annotation of all genes and tfs in this network is listed in additional file 1: table s <dig>  b co-expression network analysis for structural genes, candidate tf genes and ripening-associated genes. in this network, structural genes were vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig>  that potentially dominate differential accumulation of terpenes in the grapes between the gt and cl regions; tfs in plot b are those that positively  and negatively  co-expressed with both vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig> ; the ripening-associated genes listed in plot b have over  <dig>  of the correlation coefficient absolute value with tf genes in terms of transcript accumulation. pink oval indicates the genes related to aba biosynthesis and signal transduction, and green oval represents the genes related to ethylene biosynthesis and signal transduction. in plots a and b, lines connecting two nodes represent significant correlation: red means a positive correlation and blue means a negative correction



in recent years, some tfs of the myc, wrky, ap <dig>  ap2/erf and myb families have been reported to be involved in the transcriptional regulation of terpene synthesis genes in other plants, such as catharanthus roseus, arabidopsis and solanum lycopersicum trichomes . most of these identified tfs control the promoters of sesquiterpene synthase genes. in this study, some members of these tf families were also positively or negatively co-expressed with degs, including genes not only involved in the mep and mva pathways but also in the synthesis of free and glucosidically bound monoterpenes. for example, ap2/erf/b <dig>  strongly positively correlated with vvidxsl <dig> , vvihmgrs  and vvipnapin  transcript accumulation with coefficients of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , respectively ; hmgr is an enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway of sesquiterpenes . in artemisia annua, two ap2/erf family transcription factors  up-regulated the expression of the gene encoding amorpha- <dig> -diene synthase   <cit> . moreover, we observed that an ethylene-responsive tf , six ap2/erfs, forty-five erfs, four mycs, twenty wrkys and nine mybs highly co-expressed with several vvitpss, such as vvicslinner  and nerolidol synthase-like gene  , suggesting that these tfs could potentially activate the promoters of the above structural genes.

the transcriptional regulation of monoterpenol glycosyltransferases  recently identified in grapes is not yet understood. this co-expression network analysis revealed that many tfs strongly negative correlated with transcript accumulation of vviugt85a2l <dig>  and the other two glucosyltransferase genes, vviugt85a1l <dig>  and vviugt85a1l <dig>  . these potential tfs included the members of the bhlh, hd-zip, gata, nf-yc, nf-yb families that respond to light  <cit> . notably, vvierf3l , vvigata5l  and vvigt-2 l , positively co-expressed with vviugt85a2l <dig> . the trihelix tf  transcript increasingly accumulated with grape ripening and responded to the production of glycosidically bound monoterpenes. in the work of kaplan-levy and his colleagues, the trihelix family tfs were found to respond to light, stress and development  <cit> . based on our present finding, we suggest that the trihelix tf  could be involved in the regulation of glycosidically bound monoterpene biosynthesis. additionally, one myb tf , two werk tfs  and two erf tfs  also positively co-expressed with vvigt <dig>  with a correlation coefficient of approximately  <dig> .

based on this co-expression analysis, the functions of some tfs were predicted. for example, vvicamta4l  had a strong positive correlation with vvidxsl <dig> , vvihmgr <dig> , vvihmgr <dig> , and vvipnapin  in terms of transcript accumulation, but was highly negative correlated with vvihdr . camtas  link environmental cues with phytohormone-dependent growth responses. arabidopsis camtas are induced by both biotic and abiotic stresses and respond differentially and rapidly  to heat stress, cold stress, high salinity, drought, uv radiation, mechanical wounding, phytohormones  and signal elicitors, such as methyl jasmonate  and salicylic acid   <cit> . this study also revealed that vvicamta <dig> could respond to distinctive climates of the cl and gt regions at the transcriptional level and regulate the expression of monoterpene synthesis-related genes. additionally, heat shock transcription factors  have been shown to participate in the regulation of heat responses in berries  <cit> . in this study, five members of the hsf family also displayed high co-expression with vvipnlinner <dig> and vvicslinner, two nerolidol synthase-like genes . recently, pif <dig>  a basic helix-loop-helix  transcription factor, was found to regulate the transcription of mep pathway genes and function as an ipp-metabolism enhancer  <cit> . in the present prediction, both pif <dig>  and pif <dig>  exhibited strong co-expression with vvicslinner , vvinerl <dig>  and vvipnapin . therefore, pifs  are also probably involved in the regulation of terpene biosynthesis downstream pathway in grapes.

to further understand which tfs potentially contribute to regionally differential accumulation of terpenes, we identified the differentially-expressed tfs in grapes of the same developmental stage across two regions. the result showed that there were different candidate tfs at four developmental stages of grapes . at the e-l  <dig> and e-l  <dig> stages, except for the gene coding for a homeobox-leucine zipper protein hox3-like , the other candidate tfs all had significantly lower expression levels in the grapes of the gt region than in the cl grapes and most positively co-expressed with the degs . conversely, at the e-l  <dig> and el- <dig> stages, most of the candidate tfs were transcriptionally up-regulated in the cl-produced grapes relative to the gt grapes. notably, hd-zip  negatively correlated with both vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig>  levels with respect to transcript accumulation but was significantly up-regulated in the grapes of the gt region relative to the cl grapes at the e-l  <dig> stage. the hd-zip proteins have been considered important candidates to activate developmental responses to altering environmental conditions  <cit> . therefore, it is possible that hd-zip  controls the expression of vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig>  to profoundly affect differential production of terpenes in the gt and cl regions.

our gene co-expression network analysis provides a possibility for the prediction of potential transcription factors. however, further experiments should be conducted to verify whether these putative tfs can activate the promoters of structural genes in the terpene biosynthetic pathway in grapes. from the well-studied cases of transcriptional regulation in other plants, such as catharanthus roseus and arabidopsis, it has been clearly illustrated that transcriptional regulation usually involves a network of tfs. the present network analysis gives us some research ideas on the regulation of terpene biosynthesis in grape berries.

ripening hormone-associated genes and their co-expression network
both abscisic acid  and ethylene have been demonstrated to respond to grapevine growing environments and trigger grape berry ripening . chinese grape planters have noticed that grape berries generally have shorter duration at both the veraison and maturation stages in the gt region of western china compared with the grapes in the cl region of eastern china, as shown in table  <dig>  herein, we were concerned about the genes involved in the biosynthesis and signaling response of aba/ethylene. based on the rna-seq data in this study, we identified differentially expressed genes  at a certain phenological phase corresponding to the gt and cl regions . most of these genes were transcriptionally up-regulated at the e-l  <dig> and e-l  <dig> stages in the berries of the gt region relative to the cl region, indicating that grape ripening in the gt region starts earlier than in the cl region. for example, some genes associated with aba biosynthesis/response were differentially expressed between the two regions. phytoene synthase  and capsanthin/capsorubin synthase  are two key enzymes in aba biosynthesis. the expression of these two genes and two aba-response transcripts  was significantly up-regulated in the gt region at the beginning of veraison  . similarly, many of the genes that are required for ethylene biosynthesis/signal response were also expressed significantly higher in the berries of the gt region compared to the cl region at the e-l  <dig> stage. a previous report demonstrated that ethylene largely produces before veraison in ‘cabernet sauvignon’ berries  <cit> . another recent study also identified that ethylene is involved in triggering berry ripening, and an ethylene peak precedes the aba peak in muscat hamburg berries  <cit> . in the gt region of western china, shorter veraison and ripening periods of grape berries  can be interpreted by the difference in aba- and ethylene-related transcriptome observed between the gt and cl regions. additionally, aba is also a stress-stimulated signal, and this hormone rapidly accumulates in the berries in response to water deficit and low temperature  <cit> . compared with the cl region, the gt region had less rainfall, stronger sunshine and larger day-night temperature differences , which could promote the expression of ripening-related genes, such aba and ethylene-associated genes, thereby accelerating the process of berry maturity.table  <dig> the meteorological index and grape development in cl and gt



to explore the effect of grape maturation rate on the accumulation of terpenes, we constructed a co-expression network to visualize the correlations among the genes of three categories. the first category included vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig> . base on a highly positive correlation between gene transcript abundance and terpene concentration, it is proposed that vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig>  potentially dominate the regionally differential accumulation of terpenes in the grapes. the second one consisted of tf genes that have a high correlation coefficient  with both vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig> . and the third one was composed of aba/ethylene-related genes . seven tfs had a strongly negative correlation with both vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig> . these tfs coded for xm_ <dig>  , xm_ <dig>  ), xm_ <dig>  , xm_ <dig>  , xm_ <dig>  , xm_ <dig>   and xm_ <dig>  . the genes for xm_ <dig>   and xm_ <dig>   positively correlated with many aba/ethylene-related genes in terms of transcript accumulation. therefore, grape ripening acceleration probably causes the down-regulation of critical genes in the terpene biosynthetic pathway, ultimately resulting in decreased metabolite production. this suggestion was also supported by the following correlation. three tfs coding for xm_ <dig>  , xm_ <dig>   and xm_ <dig>   positively co-responded with vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig>  with correlation coefficients of over  <dig> . the transcript for xm_ <dig>   was negatively correlated with the accumulation of four transcripts related to aba biosynthesis/response and one transcript related to ethylene response . additionally, xm_ <dig>   was negatively correlated with an ethylene-responsive transcription factor 1b .

researchers have previously reported that the accumulation of free and glycosidically bound monoterpenes is closely associated with grape maturity  <cit> . additionally, the concentration of terpenes is greatly affected by growing conditions and climate  <cit> . as observed in this study, the concentration of terpenoids varied between the years of  <dig> and  <dig>  but both free and glycosidically bound terpene concentrations in the berries of the gt region were lower than those in the cl region over the two years. we thus infer that particular climate conditions  in the grape-growing season in the gt region accelerate the maturation process of grape berries through stimulating a series of ripening-related cues, such as the transcriptional activation of ripening-related genes, and the latter cascades regulatory factors and terpene biosynthesis-related genes and eventually limits the production of terpene volatiles.

quantitative real-time pcr
to validate the expression profiles obtained from rna-seq, we performed qrt-pcr, on nine important genes associated with terpene biosynthesis, including vviugt85a2l <dig> , vviugt88a1l <dig> , vvigpps, vvifpps, vvipnlngl <dig>  vvicslin/ner, vviplg <dig> vvinced <dig> and vvinced <dig>  three internal reference genes  were applied. a good correlation was observed between the expression levels of these genes based on rpkm values and those determined by qrt-pcr  . this result demonstrated the reliablity of rna-seq analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study demonstrated that both free and glycosidically bound terpene levels increased during the development of ‘muscat blanc a petits grains’ grapes. the genes which transcript accumulation patterns were consistent with the production of terpene volatiles were identified from the rna-seq data, such as vvihdr and vviugt85a2l <dig> . the concentrations of terpenes, particularly in their glycosidically bound form, in the berries of cl region were significantly higher than in the gt region. the differential accumulation of glycosidically bound monoterpenes in the berries between the two regions and between the two years was closely related to the expression of vviugt85a2l <dig> , which encodes a monoterpenol glucosyltransferase. putative tfs regulating the expression of vviugt85a2l <dig>  were identified through co-expression network analysis, and vvigt-2 l  was found to highly correlate with the expression of vvigt <dig>  at the initiation of veraison , many genes required for the biosynthesis and signal transduction of aba and ethylene were up-regulated at the transcriptional level in the berries of the gt region relative to the cl region. based on the gene co-expression network analysis, a cascade process was constructed to interpret the mechanism underlying differential accumulation of terpenes between the berries grown in the two regions, which involved the effects of regional climate, the production of ripening-related hormones, the acceleration of berry ripening and the expression of terpene biosynthesis-associated genes and potential transcription factors. although more evidences are required to validate this cascade link predicted herein, the present study proposed some key genes for differential terpene accumulation across two regions through the combined analysis of transcripts and metabolites. this work provides an entry point for further study about the regulation of terpene biosynthesis in muscat-type grape cultivars. these genes and transcription factors may prove useful as targets for grape aromatic improvement and/or biotechnology industry interests.

