BACKGROUND
genetic diversity is widely believed to influence the evolutionary and adaptive potential of populations and species  <cit> . analysis of patterns and levels of genetic variation at neutral markers, such as autosomal microsatellites and mitochondrial dna regions, has been widely used in the last decades to infer historical events   <cit>  and geographical features   <cit>  in natural populations. however, studying molecular polymorphism at loci under selection is the only direct way to understand the genetics of adaptive processes  <cit> . pathogens represent very powerful agents of selection that have the potential to drive rapid changes in the genetic composition of natural host populations. in the co-evolutionary host-pathogen interplay pathogens are particularly important for maintaining host genetic variation  <cit> . the role that genetic variation plays in buffering host populations from pathogens has been emphasized in several studies. these studies found associations between low levels of genetic diversity, increased pathogen susceptibility, and high pathogen loads  <cit> .

in vertebrates, the genes of the major histocompatibility complex  are among the most debated candidates in the co-evolutionary process of host-parasite interactions at the molecular level  <cit> . they have been studied extensively in model species under laboratory conditions, but, because of their functional importance in the immune system and mate choice, they have also become the focus of an increasing number of studies on natural populations  <cit> . mhc genes code for cell surface molecules that present self and nonself antigens to t-cells. this function enables them to play a vital role in the recognition of pathogens invading the body. the region of the molecule responsible for binding antigens, the so-called antigen-binding sites , show particularly high levels of variation, not only in the number of alleles, but also in the extent of sequence divergence between alleles. in particular, the abs sites display more non-synonymous than synonymous substitutions that change the amino acid sequence of the peptide and thus allow binding of a diverse array of antigens  <cit> . this indicates that selection processes maintain polymorphism in the functionally important regions of the mhc. importantly, genetic diversity in the abs facilitates binding of a diverse array of antigens to the molecule  <cit> .

the exceptionally high allelic polymorphism found in the mhc loci is believed to be maintained by pathogen-mediated selection, although the relative importance of a number of nonexclusive hypotheses explaining the potential selection mechanisms that enhance or maintain adaptive genetic variation is debated  <cit> . the heterozygote advantage hypothesis  <cit>  proposes that individuals heterozygous at mhc loci are able to respond to a greater range of pathogen peptides than homozygotes and, consequently, benefit from increased resistance to pathogens. heterozygotes are, therefore, more likely to have higher relative fitness and, as a result, more mhc alleles persist, on average, in the population. this hypothesis has been used to explain the persistence of highly divergent mhc alleles over millions of years  <cit> . support for heterozygote advantage hypothesis comes mainly from mate choice studies  <cit> ; however, researchers have rarely investigated the possible advantages of mhc heterozygosity in one individual in the context of infectious diseases, such as intestinal parasite infestations .

the second selection mechanism is described by the rare allele advantage hypothesis   <cit> . in this scenario, the selection pressure exerted by common parasites favors rare resistant host alleles. as those host alleles become more common, the host population exerts a reciprocal selection pressure on the parasite population, favoring other parasite genotypes to which the host has not yet adapted. with time, this could lead to continual cycling of host and parasite genotype frequencies within the population, which could maintain high levels of mhc variability  <cit> .

finally, the fluctuating selection hypothesis  <cit>  proposes that spatial and temporal heterogeneity in the type and abundance of pathogens may maintain diversity at the mhc. in short-term field studies, the detection of associations between specific mhc alleles and parasite load is usually presumed to be an indicator of this selection mechanism. however, host-parasite interactions are also shaped by environmental conditions, which play an important regulating role in the distribution, transmission, and developmental success of parasites and pathogens  <cit> . these conditions can influence parasite species richness, as well as the intensity of infestation in the host species. therefore, co-evolutionary selection processes should vary not only in time but also in space, and different specific mhc alleles should have an advantage in different environments  <cit> .

over the last decades, there have been ample findings of associations between mhc alleles and parasite load, even in studies on free-ranging species under constant challenge by a diverse range of pathogens  <cit> . however, under homogeneous parasite selection, these mechanisms alone do not explain the observed large allelic diversity at the metapopulation level. therefore, the idea of parasites exerting divergent selection on locally adapted mhc allele pools in heterogeneous environments has been put forth to suggest how this unparalleled genetic diversity is maintained. several recent field surveys investigating mhc variation on different geographical scales and in heterogeneous habitats have proposed that contrasting parasite communities may shape mhc composition .

brandt's vole  is the dominant rodent species of the typical steppe habitat extending from the central part of inner mongolia through the middle and east of dornod aimag in the republic of mongolia, to the southern borders of mongolia in transbaikalia, russia  <cit> . the distribution of this species is discontinuous in inner mongolia  <cit> . however, it is a widespread species living in a diverse environment, which presumably necessitates constant adaptation to environmental change, such as encountering new parasites, but also persistence to challenges from ancient pathogen  <cit> . there is significant variation in the density of these voles between years  <cit> . the presumably high parasite pressure in these habitats could lead to pronounced and therefore detectable signs of otherwise more subtle mechanisms of selection  <cit> .

in this study, we examined the role of parasite-mediated mhc polymorphism in six independent natural populations of brandt’s voles, from maodeng livestock farm  and east ujimqin  of the xilingol grassland area of inner mongolia, to understand the selective mechanisms that act on mhc in response to parasitism. our specific aims were to test for an association between:  individual parasite load and mhc heterozygosity  and  individual pathogen load and specific mhc alleles   <cit> .

RESULTS
parasite load
we detected eight distinct helminth egg morphotypes in  <dig> brandt’s voles’ fecal samples. five of these were classified as nematodes and, among them, two nematode morphotypes were identified as syphacia obvelata and aspiculuris tetraptera. the remaining three morphotypes belonged to the trichostrongylidae family. two different cestode morphotypes were detected, which were identified as schizorchis ochotonae and hymenolepis nana. in addition, one trematode morphotype from the echinostomatidae family was detected. among the individuals examined,  <dig> % had infections with one to four helminths, with most of the infections caused by nematodes , whereas only  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the infections were caused by cestodes and trematodes, respectively. because of the high frequency of nematode infections found in this study and the minor prevalence of cestode and trematode infections, the latter two helminths were excluded from subsequent analyses.

the mean parasite prevalence, species richness , and parasite intensity for all of the brandt’s voles captured from six populations in two regions is presented in table  <dig>  a global analysis of relative differences in parasite community structure based on pairwise hellinger distances revealed strong differences between two regions . differences between all pairs of neighboring populations in either md or dwq region were non-significant.

note: brandt’s voles were captured from six populations in two regions . parasite species richness was defined as the number of helminth morphotypes per individual, and parasite infection intensity was estimated using fecal egg counts . mean ± standard deviation are shown.

mhc variability
a total of  <dig> individuals in six populations from two different regions were genotyped. overall,  <dig> different sequence variants  could be distinguished via single-stranded conformation polymorphism analysis, which were confirmed by sequencing. blast search results showed that sequence similarities between brandt’s voles labr-drb and mouse mhc class ii variants were 84% to 91%. all of the alleles detected showed the unique drb origin. four sequences revealed different nucleotide contents , but identical amino acid sequences, and were therefore treated as one allele. the remaining  <dig> alleles could be translated into unique amino acid sequences. these were labeled labr-drb* <dig> to labr-drb* <dig> according to their frequency following the nomenclature of klein, et al.  <cit> . mhc class ii drb sequences from this study are deposited at genbank . the phylogenetic relationships of these alleles are displayed in figure  <dig>  in md we identified  <dig> alleles, while dwq yielded  <dig>  nine of the  <dig> alleles identified in this study were shared between two regions; figure  <dig> shows the relative frequency and distribution of each allele.

evidence for positive selection
the rates of synonymous  and nonsynonymous  substitutions were calculated separately for abs and non-abs. for the abs, dn  was significantly higher than ds , resulting in a dn/ds ratio of  <dig>  . in contrast, the non-abs ratio between nonsynonymous  and synonymous substitutions  did not significantly deviate from unity . moreover, dn was  <dig>  times higher in the abs than in the non-abs. this indicates positive selection processes that maintain polymorphism in the functionally important regions of the mhc.

population differentiation
no indication of linkage disequilibrium between pairs of microsatellite loci or between microsatellites and the mhc locus or deviation from hardy-weinberg equilibrium within loci was found . the study populations differed in their levels of genetic diversity with regard to both genetic markers . regarding the microsatellite markers, there was low variation in the mean multilocus heterozygosity  values among populations, but the mean d <dig>  values varied notably from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . there was a wide range in the mhc heterozygosity observed among populations, from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . every population had a significant observed heterozygosity deficit compared to the expected heterozygosity. the corrected values for mhc allelic richness varied widely as well, from  <dig>  in population m <dig> to  <dig>  in population d <dig> .

abbreviations: note: brandt’s voles were captured from six populations in two regions : pop population, n sample size, mlh multilocus heterozygosity, d <dig> difference in repeat microsatellite units averaged over all loci, hobs observed heterozygosity, hexp, expected heterozygosity according to hardy-weinberg. mhc allelic richness was corrected for sample size.

differentiation among populations was highly significant for both types of markers . in addition, differentiation test between all pairs of populations showed significantly differentiated for microsatellite loci and mhc . pairwise fst values for microsatellite loci ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , and for mhc from  <dig>  to  <dig> .

note: above the diagonal we indicate pairwise fst of microsatellites. below the diagonal we show pairwise fst for mhc. bold values indicate that fst reached statistical significance after correction for multiple testing.

association between parasite load and mhc heterozygosity
using generalized linear mixed models , we investigated the effects of population genetic diversity on parasite load, the results of which are listed in table  <dig>  we calculated models for the influence of each genetic predictor separately. neither neutral genetic nor mhc diversity showed significant effects on the parasite load. no support for mhc heterozygote advantage  or association with mhc allelic richness  could be detected at the population level.

note: full models:  nematode species richness;  nematode infection intensity. β ± se = the coefficient ± standard error, t = t-value, p = p significance value.

similarly, the two separate glmms, which included either prevalence or infection intensity as response variables , in addition to mhc genotypes  and mlh as predictors, also did not reveal any support for heterozygote advantage. there was no support for the hypothesis that mhc heterozygous individuals are less infected than homozygotes . the same applied to mlh . additionally, restricting the data to each of the three most common nematodes  did not reveal any evidence for heterozygote advantage .

association between parasite load and specific mhc alleles
our glmms did reveal relationships between specific mhc alleles and parasite load in brandt’s voles. five of the  <dig> alleles had specific effects either in terms of positive or negative associations towards parasite loads . the labr-drb* <dig> and labr-drb* <dig> alleles were significantly associated with the status of s. obvelata infection. allele * <dig> was associated with a higher prevalence , while allele * <dig> was significantly related with an elevated infection intensity . as for a. tetraptera, voles that carried the labr-drb* <dig> allele were significantly less infected than animals without it , while labr-drb* <dig> alleles were associated with an increased probability of a higher infection intensity . furthermore, positive associations of the subfamily trichostrongylidae and labr-drb* <dig> alleles were revealed for both prevalence  and infection intensity .

abbreviation: note: most abundant labr-drb* alleles . data are based on multivariate generalized linear mixed models: full models for  nematode prevalence and  nematode infection intensity. β ± se, the coefficient ± standard error: t t-value, p p significance value.

our glmms also revealed that alleles associated with high or low infection intensity differed between sampling regions. we found a significant region-specific effect  of the labr-drb* <dig> allele on the intensity of infection with a. tetraptera. in md, animals carrying labr-drb* <dig> had fewer parasites than animals without it, but in dwq the association was the opposite.

discussion
the aim of our study was to investigate whether parasite-mediated selection could explain mhc variability in free-ranging brandt’s voles. mhc class ii-drb exon <dig> polymorphism and nematode burden were surveyed and selective mechanisms that may be acting on the mhc in the presence of nematodes were tested.

in  <dig> individuals of l. brandtii,  <dig> distinct labr-drb alleles were detected. the alleles showed high levels of nucleotide and amino acid sequence divergence. polymorphism was highest in the functionally important antigen recognition and binding sites of the mhc. in the abs, significantly more nonsynonymous substitutions than synonymous substitutions were found. this is considered a clear indication of positive selection  <cit>  and characteristic of proteins with antigen-presenting functions  <cit> . high levels of polymorphism given by the number of alleles as well as by the sequence divergence, especially at abs sites, are common findings in mhc genes, and were found in a variety of studies  <cit> . because the mhc plays a major role in vertebrate immune systems, pathogen-driven selection processes are thought to be involved in the maintenance of diversity at mhc loci  <cit> . many studies of wild mammals have demonstrated a correlation between mhc diversity and resistance against pathogens. in a large survey of avian malaria in  <dig> populations of the house sparrow , variable selection pressures were observed to select for different host allelic lineages resulting in population-specific associations between mhc alleles and risk of infection  <cit> . similarly, rodent species that face a rich ectoparasite fauna also maintain increased allelic polymorphism at the mhc  <cit> .

it is important to note that while we monitored the community of gastrointestinal parasites in the fecal samples, we concentrated our attention on helminth parasite species because of their prevalence  <cit> , their impact on fitness and mortality in a wide range of wild animal species  <cit> , and because their infestation intensity can be assessed non-invasively by fecal sampling. overall, we detected eight distinct helminth egg morphotypes and an infestation rate of  <dig> %. to date, the studies of individual mhc and parasite loads in natural populations, particularly for mammals, have mostly focused on helminths  <cit> . however, most organisms are faced with enormous numbers of pathogens, and identifying and measuring the vast community of parasites and pathogens that can infect a natural population will be crucial  <cit> . whether results from highly simplified study systems  are applicable to more complex systems is questionable. therefore, extending the scope of studies across a broader range of parasite taxa would enhance our understanding of mhc-parasite dynamics in natural populations. a serious challenge lies in fully characterizing the mhc and pathogen load. this is unlikely to be possible in most study systems, and even if it were, statistical analysis may be intractable. the best study systems will probably be characterized by intermediate levels of pathogen diversity and simple, well-characterized, mhc structures, thus avoiding oversimplification while retaining statistical tractability  <cit> .

in our study, we found neither support for the heterozygote advantage hypothesis on the population nor on the individual level, and heterozygosity of mhc alleles was lower than expected in all of the study populations. these findings suggest little or no direct selection for mhc heterozygosity in populations at our study sites, at least for the generation of voles we sampled. consistent low mhc heterozygosity may have arisen from underdominance  <cit> . the lack of associations between mhc genetic diversity and parasite load at the population level in our study adds to the mixed results of former studies  <cit> . studies have indicated that if hosts and pathogens share a long-term co-evolutionary history, selection via diverse pathogens causes high mhc polymorphism in a species or population, whereas low mhc polymorphism indicates the presence of relaxed pathogenic selection pressure  <cit> . alternatively, it might have been because mhc diversity was not fully characterized as a result of methodological errors, such as null alleles. however, as the mhc sequences could be amplified from all of the study individuals, and on the basis of at least two independent polymerase chain reaction  and single-stranded conformation polymorphism  assays, as well as forward and reverse sequence analyses, respectively, the obstacle of null alleles is improbable.

we detected an association between parasite load and specific mhc alleles in the individuals. the labr-drb* <dig> and labr-drb* <dig> alleles were significantly associated with the status of s. obvelata infection. as for a. tetraptera, voles that carried the labr-drb* <dig> allele were significantly less infected than animals without it, while labr-drb* <dig> alleles were associated with an increased probability of a higher infection intensity. positive associations of the subfamily trichostrongylidae and labr-drb* <dig> alleles were revealed for both parasite abundance and infection intensity. in md, animals carrying labr-drb* <dig> had fewer parasites than animals without it, but in dwq the association was the opposite. differences in vole susceptibility to parasitism were not explained by differences in the geographic distribution of alleles; all above alleles were detected in at least five populations and in both sampling regions. the association between certain alleles and susceptibility, or resistance to certain parasites and spatial variation in resistance, matches the predictions for rare allele advantage, but also for fluctuating selection  <cit> . rare allele advantage arises as the evolution of new parasite and pathogen phenotypes reduces the relative fitness of common host genotypes, thereby providing a selective advantage to rare host  <cit> . evidence in favor of this hypothesis comes from multiple studies demonstrating associations between specific mhc alleles and resistance to viral  and bacterial  infections as well as blood-borne parasites and helminths  <cit> . in reality, however, natural populations are exposed to fluctuating environmental conditions and, subsequently, host-pathogen interactions are similarly expected to vary spatiotemporally  <cit> . charbonnel and pemberton  <cit>  detected fluctuating selection at an mhc locus during a 13-year survey of a population of feral sheep, perhaps driven by interactions with parasitic nematodes. empirical genetic evidence for geographic heterogeneity in selective pressures has been shown in fish  <cit> , birds  <cit>  and mammals  <cit> . a selection model demonstrated that temporal variation in pathogen resistance may be sufficient to maintain polymorphism in the absence of both heterozygote and rare-allele advantage  <cit> . while it is generally accepted that any or both of these proposed mechanisms can play a role in shaping the distribution of mhc variation, distinguishing between them in natural populations can be challenging due to similarities in the expected genetic outcomes, requiring long-term studies of multiple populations to examine temporal changes in parasite resistance to alleles and spatiotemporal variation in the forces driving parasite abundance  <cit> . under rare-allele advantage, one would expect to see different alleles conferring resistance to the same pathogen in different populations, and for resistance to change with time, so that different alleles become associated with resistance. under fluctuating selection, one would expect to observe external biotic and/or abiotic forces driving spatio-temporal variation in pathogen abundance, leading to distinct subsets of alleles being selected for in different populations and/or different time periods  <cit> , and higher population structure at mhc relative to neutral loci.

in wild rodents, parasite prevalence and intensity are known to underlie spatial and temporal variation, as well as intrinsic factors such as the immune status, sex, and age of the host  <cit> . by using the individual multivariate glmm approach we were able to focus on ‘pure’ parasite driven selection mechanisms because our models allowed us to include confounding factors that could obscure the detection of mhc effects. in  <dig> adult brandt’s voles, male voles were significantly heavier than females . there were no significant associations between parasite load and host body mass, however, vole gender had a significant effect on nematode prevalence and intensity . furthermore, some aspects of the biology of brandt’s voles suggest that a stable equilibrium between these voles and their parasites, which is a prerequisite for rare allele advantage, may rarely be achieved. mixing of voles and parasite populations over an extensive area is possible, and the dynamic nature of this environment may mitigate the evolution of a stable equilibrium between mhc polymorphism in the host and parasite abundance and diversity. in addition, most of the parasites hosted by voles do not have direct lifecycles  <cit>  and variability among populations may be dependent on the abundance of intermediate or final hosts of these parasites. in the case of strongyloides, which have been found to be the most abundant and widespread parasites in wildlife, the abundance of intermediate hosts can affect population level differences in parasite abundance  <cit> . thus, a significant association between 1) parasite infection and specific mhc alleles, 2) marked spatial variation in parasite infection and an association with specific mhc alleles, and 3) the dynamic nature of the environment in which voles are found, all implicate a role for fluctuating selection in maintaining mhc polymorphism in voles.

a potential criticism of the present study is that we must more rigorously characterise the diversity that is being detected. the ease with which mhc variation can now be resolved could paradoxically impede progress with our understanding of mhc dynamics  <cit> . a large number of studies are characterizing mhc variation from genomic dna extracts with little or incomplete knowledge of  the number of loci that are actually being simultaneously pcr amplified;  whether any or all of these genes are actually expressed and  whether the variation that is resolved reflects sequence differences at structurally important regions such as the peptide-binding amino acids  <cit> . ultimately, an inability to determine the actual number of expressed loci, identify alleles as being structural mhc variants, assign alleles to loci and determine whether an individual is heterozygous or homozygous for a particular locus compromises rigorous statistical testing of association between mhc and parasite load, either by introducing variation that is not directly under selection, or precluding detection of overdominant selection  <cit> . this is the first time that field population of brandt’s voles have been typed at the mhc region, we have made every effort to initially ensure that pcr primers do actually amplify single expressed products to clarify that subsequent analysis based on genomic dna is appropriate  <cit> . detailed molecular groundwork is required to ensure that the full complement of mhc variation is accurately assessed in future experiment. the use of next-generation sequencing for mhc screening  <cit>  is likely to be a great help in terms of more accurately characterizing mhc diversity. despite all this, it will be a particular challenge to be able to completely validate studies from mrna extracts, especially from natural populations.

CONCLUSIONS
our results are consistent with pathogen-mediated selection operating through rare allele advantage and fluctuating selection, but these two mechanisms could not be differentiated. our results failed to show any effect of heterozygote advantage, and mhc polymorphism in wild brandt’s voles may be constrained through underdominance. furthermore, our results add to a growing body of evidence showing that the mode and relative strength of pathogen-driven selection acting on mhc diversity varies within specific wild populations, while the understanding of what maintains mhc diversity will also feed into our general understanding of host-pathogen coevolution and the maintenance of genetic diversity.

