BACKGROUND
histopathological analysis is the traditional mainstay of cancer diagnostics, and is relied on heavily to discriminate between malignant and benign tissues. however, in spite of its long and successful history as a routine medical technique, it is plagued by a number of well-known problems. for example, histological diagnosis often depends upon judgment calls by individual pathologists, leading to variations in diagnosis  <cit> . in addition, it may be difficult in some cases to differentiate between malignant and benign tissues. in such cases, microscopic observations have often been complemented by staining for molecular markers, such as expressed genes. this led directly to today's emerging approach, gene expression profiling, by which the expression levels of thousands of genes throughout the genome are measured by dna microarrays or alternative techniques. using this technique, diagnostic systems using multiple genes have been constructed  <cit> . clinical status parameters such as prognosis or drug resistance are the popular targets, and the supervised learning theory is often applied.

in most examples of cancer classification, binary classifiers have been used, with multi-class predictors only rarely applied. however, because more than three tissue types are often differentiated during pathological diagnosis, a stable or optimized multi-class predictor is needed.

in this study, we developed a new multi-class predictor based on a probabilistic model. we examined various combinations of binary classifiers to perform optimized multi-class prediction, and applied our system to gene expression data from four tissue types of human thyroid origin. thyroid cancer is a relatively common cancer, accounting for roughly 1% of total cancer incidence. there are two main types of thyroid cancer, papillary carcinoma  and follicular carcinoma . in addition to these malignant types, a benign tumor, follicular adenoma , is also prevalent. the intriguing problem in thyroid cancer therapy is the preoperative differential diagnosis of follicular carcinoma vs. adenoma. the main diagnostic procedure is fine needle aspiration, but because the tissue structure is disrupted during the sampling process, the differential diagnosis is extremely difficult  <cit> . papillary carcinoma is relatively easier to distinguish, but good molecular diagnostics would still be of potential clinical value. thus, thyroid cancer represents a good example of a tumor type for which conventional histopathologic diagnosis faces limitations.

we performed gene expression profiling of the four thyroid tissues by adaptor-tagged competitive polymerase chain reaction   <cit> , a high-throughput rt-pcr technique. we first analyzed the global differences in gene expression among the four thyroid tissues, and confirmed that the data matrix contained information for class separation. then, we applied our new multi-class predictor for differential diagnosis of the four tissue types. the multi-class predictor outperformed previous methods used in the field.

RESULTS
difference in gene expression among the four thyroid tissues
we first examined whether there were significant differences in gene expression between the four thyroid tissue types by performing spectrum analysis based on correlation ratio   <cit> . correlation ratio is an indicator for correlation of gene expression with two classes. high cr values indicate strong gene expression differences. genes were first sorted by cr value order, and then the crs of the original total data set were compared with those of permuted data. figure 1a shows the results of comparison between fa and normal thyroid tissue . the crs of the original data set are consistently higher than those of the permuted data. because those of the original data were consistently higher throughout the full range of crs, the correlation was not restricted to a small number of genes, but was a global character. with five other comparisons, we achieved similar results , which suggested that there were significant differences in gene expression among the four thyroid tissues. the maximal  permutation p-values of the top  <dig> genes are  <dig>  for fa vs. fc,  <dig>  for fa vs. n,  <dig>  fc vs. n, and <10- <dig> for the other four comparisons.

we then compared the cr spectra of all pairwise comparisons. the cr of each pair was calculated; genes were sorted by cr value order, and plotted . figure 1b shows the cr values of the top  <dig> genes: this figure represents the degree of gene expression difference of pairwise comparison, not indicating significance of gene expression difference . throughout this region, fa vs. n and fa vs. fc exhibited the smallest and the second smallest cr values. this result may reflect the difficulty in diagnosis: fa and n maintain microscopic follicular structures; fa and fc are the most difficult tissues to be differentially diagnosed. the other four comparisons, i.e., fc vs. n, fc vs. pc, fa vs. pc, n vs. pc, exhibited no substantial difference in cr in the high cr region . in the middle cr region , the crs of n vs. pc are close to those of fa vs. fc.

the cr spectra directly represent global differences in gene expression. we also evaluated these results by conventional measures, using p-values and q-values  <cit>  of the standard t-test. when the cut-off p-value  is set at  <dig> , the numbers of genes and corresponding q-values are as follows: fa vs. n,  <dig> genes ; fa vs. fc,  <dig> ; n vs. pc,  <dig> ; fc vs. n,  <dig> ; pc vs. fa,  <dig> ; pc vs. fc,  <dig> . these results parallel those from the cr spectrum analysis. comparisons such as fa vs. n and fa vs. fc exhibited small numbers of significant genes and high q-values, and those such as pc vs. fa, and pc vs. fc exhibited large numbers of significant genes and low q-values. fc vs. n and n vs. pc are the middle of the above two.

differential diagnosis by binary classifier
before performing multi-class prediction, we examined the performance of binary classifiers in the differential diagnosis of each pair of the four thyroid tissues. we constructed each diagnostic system based on the weighted-voting algorithm  <cit> , which has excellent predictive ability for gene expression data. as shown in figure  <dig>  classifiers for pc and one of the other tissues are stable, and exhibited good classification. in contrast, those for fa vs. fc and fa vs. n were not optimal, exhibiting unstable accuracy curves. thus, the results using binary classifiers paralleled those of statistical analyses of individual genes by cr and false discovery ratio .

strategy for construction of a multi-class predictor
in this study, we constructed a multi-class prediction system based on a combination of binary classifiers. each unit binary classifier was constructed by the weighted-voting algorithm, where the diagnostic genes were selected by the criterion p ≤  <dig> . in this criterion, all of the corresponding q-values were less than  <dig> , maintaining the least inclusion of false positive genes. it should be noted that application of the following strategy is not limited to weighted-voting. we examined the following four types of construction methods using different numbers of binary classifiers.

1r: constructed using classifiers discriminating between one class and all of the other classes. 1r is conventionally referred to as "one-to-the-rest"  <cit> .

11: constructed using classifiers discriminating a pair of classes.  <dig> is conventionally referred to as "one-to-one"  <cit> .

1a: constructed using classifiers discriminating between one class and any subset of other classes.

aa: constructed using classifiers discriminating between any pair of disjoint subsets of classes.

for this study of the four thyroid tissues, the numbers of classifiers were four , six , twenty-two , and twenty-five . 1a includes all of the binary classifiers of 1r and  <dig>  and aa includes all of the binary classifiers of 1r,  <dig> and 1a. the combinations in this study are shown in figure  <dig>  1r and  <dig> have been used in previous studies  <cit> , but 1a and aa are novel.

the conventional construction rule for multi-class prediction from outputs of each binary classifier was designed for  <dig> and 1r. binary output functions are usually used , and prediction is performed by simple summation of the outputs. it should be noted that outputs are null when a group of classes, i.e., ''rest'' of ''one-to-the-rest'', wins. this rule, however, is not applicable to aa, because aa includes classification between groups of classes.

to incorporate general binary classifiers, we invented a method to integrate probabilistic outputs from the classifiers . first, for each pair of class subsets, l or m , the corresponding binary classifier was assumed to produce the probabilistic outputs q and  <dig> - q. when weighted voting is used as a classifier, the probabilistic output is calculated by one-dimensional logistic regression from the prediction strength of weighted voting. thus, the probabilistic output  of each of the multiple classes was calculated by integrating the set of probabilistic outputs calculated above. finally, we obtained a single discrete class prediction as the class, which takes the maximum class probability. using a simple integration method called simple summation , we calculated the sum of the probabilistic output q to obtain the probability of each class, when the selected class subset l included the class. sis is a probabilistic version of conventional voting  <cit> . in addition, we propose a method called shared summation , by which the probabilistic output of a multi-class group is shared equally by each class . this method is based on a probabilistic decision process using probabilistic outputs from binary classifiers.

from four patterns of classifier combination  and two output summation methods , we generated seven types of multi-class predictors .

classification of thyroid tissues
using  <dig> samples from the learning set, we evaluated the seven multi-class predictors described above by leave-one-out cross-validation . for  <dig> iterations, one sample was left out, unit binary classifiers of an appropriate combination were constructed using data from the remaining  <dig> samples, each binary classifier was run, and the binary outputs were summated and classified. as shown in table  <dig>  prediction accuracies of 1a and aa were higher than those of conventional methods, i.e.,  <dig> and 1r. the prediction accuracy was greatest  for 1a-sis and 1a-shs, and the next for aa-shs .

the details of the predictor 1a-shs were analyzed by confusion matrix . there were some misclassifications with fc as fa and fa as n. in contrast, there was very little misclassification of pc.

our multi-class predictor was validated with an independent test set consisting of  <dig> samples. a multi-class predictor based on 1a-sis, 1a-shs, and aa-shs was constructed using gene expression data from the learning set , and was applied to the independent test set. the overall prediction accuracy was  <dig> % with all of the three predictors. the confusion matrix of 1a-shs is shown in figure 5b.

comparison with other methods
we compared our method with other multi-class predictors popular in the field of cancer classification using the same learning data set  as well as the other three data sets. the additional data sets are as follows. all data sets and algorithms were evaluated by loo. with any algorithms, limited numbers of trials in classifier conditions  were performed to avoid excessive overlearning.

the esophageal cancer data set
this data set is also composed of original gene expression profiles obtained from esophageal cancer of japanese patients by atac-pcr  <cit> . the task here is differential diagnosis of three histological types: poorly differentiated, 14; moderately differentiated, 97; well differentiated,  <dig> 

the gcm data set
the original global cancer map data set consists of  <dig> cancer types  <cit> . because the number of combinations of binary classifiers increases exponentially as the number of classes increases, we selected five cancer types: breast,  <dig> samples; prostate, 10; leukemia, 30; renal, 11; mesothelioma,  <dig> 

the srbct data set
gene expression profiles about small round blue cell tumors  of childhood, which contain  <dig> samples and  <dig> genes measured by cdna microarrays  <cit> . srbcts, which include the ewing family of tumors , rhabdomyosarcoma , burkitt lymphoma , and neuroblastoma   <cit> . the composition of the samples are  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> .

firstly, we tested our predictors based on the weighted-voting algorithm with various diagnostic gene sets. we selected diagnostic genes with seven threshold p-values, i.e., 10- <dig>  10- <dig>  10- <dig>  10- <dig>  10- <dig>  10- <dig>   <dig>  due to unstable results with a small number of genes, we used at least  <dig> genes in cases where the number of selected genes was less than  <dig>  in table  <dig>  we presented only best accuracies with respective threshold p-values. with the thyroid cancer data set, 1a-shs/sis exhibited best results. 11-shs exhibited the accuracy as high as those by 1a-shs/sis, but threshold p-value was their 10-fold. with the gcm set, aa-shs exhibited the highest accuracy. with the esophageal cancer data set, the highest accuracy was observed with 1a/aa-shs. as a whole, these results suggest 1a and aa are superior to conventional combinations of the classifiers, i.e.,  <dig> and 1r.

our predictors were compared with other multi-class prediction methods reported in the field. one is the combination of support vector machines  described by ramaswamy et al.  <cit> , and the other is the shrunken centroid method   <cit> . the first method corresponds to 1r-sis without probabilistic outputs by our definition, and linear-kernel svm is used as a unit binary classifier instead of a weighted-voting algorithm. to select diagnostic genes, we performed recursive feature elimination  <cit> : prediction accuracies were determined with various numbers of genes, i.e., all genes,  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  the greatest accuracies with respective gene number are shown in table 2: the accuracies were less than those obtained by our method.

the shrunken centroid is an improved method of the simple nearest prototype  classifier. we evaluated this method by loo with various shrinkage parameters from  <dig> to  <dig> with  <dig>  as an interval, i.e., a total of  <dig> parameters. with the all four data sets, our method yielded results superior to the shrunken centroid.

tissue sample display by class probability
the outputs of our multi-class predictors include not only the label, but also the class probability of each class. this information can be used to differentiate samples under the same label, and further characterize differences among them. in figure  <dig>  the learning set samples are displayed in the three-dimensional space constructed from the class probabilities of fa, fc, and n, and indeed all four tissue types could be resolved into separate locations. it should be noted that several samples are located apart from their respective clusters, partly due to an error in labeling in the histopathological diagnosis. otherwise, these could represent samples with molecular features distinct from the other members of their assigned clusters.

discussion
in spite of their integral role in cancer diagnosis, many histopathological diagnostic protocols are still dependent on judgment calls made by individual pathologists, and as a result are significantly prone to error. more objective measures are needed, such as computational interpretation of microscopic images or complementary diagnosis by gene expression. for diagnosis by gene expression profile, conventional binary classifiers are not sufficient because the number of tissue types to be differentially diagnosed is usually greater than two. in this study, we have described the differential diagnosis of four thyroid tissues by use of a novel multi-class predictor with a test prediction accuracy of as high as 79~85%. as a result, our diagnostic system represents a promising first step towards an automated pathological tool to complement current diagnostic procedures.

our approach to multi-class prediction is a novel one characterized by increasing combination of binary classifiers and a probabilistic approach for outputs. traditionally, "one-to-one" or "one-to-the-rest" approaches have been applied to integrate combinations of unit binary classifiers. as shown above, 1a and aa exhibited prediction accuracy better than conventional approaches. our results suggest that conventional methods such as "one-to-one" and "one-to-the-rest" are not necessarily optimal, recommending use of more combinations of binary classifiers. the main disadvantage of aa and 1a is that the number of classifiers increases exponentially as the number of classes increases. however, this is not a significant disadvantage when the method is applied to cancer classification problems, because the number of classes for separation is nearly always less than seven.

another characteristic of our predictor is the introduction of a probabilistic model to the outputs. probabilistic output of the multi-class predictor, here designated as class probability, offers detailed information about each sample, which could not be obtained by binary outputs. in particular, it is useful to visualize the relationships between the classes using a two- or three-dimensional plot of class probabilities. this visualization may in fact be more effective than unsupervised approaches such as principal component analysis and multi-dimensional scaling  <cit> , because the class probabilities were calculated from weighted sums of selected diagnostic genes. in particular, it is useful for gaining a deeper understanding of individual samples. for example, among the fc samples, some appear rather similar to fa, and a few seem separate from all of the classes. detailed analysis of class probability may lead to discoveries of new tumor classes. it is also possible that some of the samples may have been initially misdiagnosed by the pathologist. reexamination of these tissue sections may lead to more accurate diagnosis.

one may argue that our assumption that the choice of unit binary classifier is an independent process  is too simplified. for example, because one class appears in different classifiers in different combinations, these classifiers may not be independent. a simple solution for this problem is introduction of prior probability in the choice of unit binary classifier. for example, our predictor is only modestly effective at separating fc from fa, but this shortcoming could be improved by the introduction of appropriate prior probabilities.

another possible critique is our equal sharing of outputs of unit binary classifiers. the optimal ratio of output sharing can be obtained by taking account of correlations between similar targets, such as  and . our preliminary results using a method similar to that previously used by hastie et al. in the pairwise case  <cit>  suggested that the prediction accuracy was equal to that of shs. we suspect that shs is a good estimate for the sharing method deduced by this more detailed model. in any case, the optimum model of outputs should not decrease accuracy as increase in number of constituent binary classifiers. however, with the thyroid data set, the accuracy of 1a was higher than that of aa, suggesting that the current probabilistic model is incomplete. our complete version of the output model, requiring a larger computer resource, will be described elsewhere .

multi-class classification techniques can be roughly divided into two types. one is the decomposition of multi-class problems into binary ones. ''one-to-the-rest'' methods  <cit> , pairwise comparisons, i.e., ''one-to-one'' methods  <cit> , error-correcting output coding  <cit>  belong to this type. there have been comprehensive studies centered on svm  <cit> , but there have been no definitive methods in this type. recent developments also include logitboost  <cit>  or genetic algorithm  <cit>  as unit classifiers. the other type is binary classification algorithms that can be naturally extended to handle multi-class problems directly. svm with multiclass objective functions  <cit> , discriminant analysis  <cit>  and regression and decision trees are of this type. recent developments include shrunken centroid  <cit> , an advanced version of nearest centroid  <cit> , and total principal component regression  <cit> . our method is an extension of one of the former type approaches. for comparison with previous methods, we chose a ''one-to-the-rest'' method using a support vector machine from the first type  <cit> , and the shrunken centroid method  <cit>  from the latter type. with the four data sets, including two in the public domain, we established that our method was superior to these two methods.

ramaswamy et al.  <cit>  pointed out that the weighted-voting was generally not well-performed as mc-svm. this may be because they selected genes in the order of signal-to-noise ratio, and used the gene number as the threshold. in contrast, we used the p-value as the threshold: the p-value threshold would be essential to obtain multi-class predictor with the weighed-voting algorithm, because using the number of genes instead may incorporate unnecessary genes or ignore necessary genes in some classifiers.

the shrunken centroid  <cit>  is a simple modification of the nearest centroid method. the prediction accuracy obtained was higher than that of the combination of svm, but still fell significantly short of our algorithm. moreover, because the best results were obtained by comparison of different shrinkage parameters, the predictor may be overfitted. the discriminant hyperplanes resulting from the shrunken centroid were rather simple, and a more complex classification such as that for thyroid tissue may require more complicated discriminant surfaces, such those obtained by our method. one of the advantages of the shrunken centroid method is that each sample can be described by class probabilities calculated from discriminant scores. this feature is similar to our class probability, and enables visualization of samples as in our method.

the main shortcoming common to previous multi-class studies of cancer classification is the use of sample data matrices, which are easily diagnosed by conventional techniques. the solid tumors or small round blue cell tumors used have been of different tissues of origin, and could be differentiated easily by microscopic observations as well as by gene expression analysis. because solving such problems is of little clinical value, such data matrices are not adequate for the benchmark test of predictors. use of data matrices which model realistic problems is of pivotal importance for evaluation of techniques.

CONCLUSIONS
among tasks in histopathology, differential diagnosis of thyroid tissues is a difficult one. we have developed a new multi-class predictor based on a probabilistic model using gene expression data. tests on four types of thyroid tissues revealed its excellent performance in prediction. the novel approaches introduced in this study show promise as a means to differentiate between similar tumor types from the same tissue of origin. however, before we can draw a conclusion on their efficacy, a number of confirmatory experiments, including analysis of artificial data sets, are necessary. nevertheless, we believe these algorithms will contribute to significant advances in the pathological diagnosis of cancer in the near future.

