BACKGROUND
the animal mitochondrial -genome generally encodes  <dig> protein,  <dig> rrna, and  <dig> trna genes. although their arrangement is rather variable among invertebrate mt-genomes, a typical gene arrangement has been highly conserved among vertebrate mt-genomes from jawless fishes to mammals with some exceptions  <cit> . this implies an extremely long-term persistence of mt-gene order probably for >  <dig> million years across diverse clades of vertebrates. however, it has been unclear whether such high-conservation of gene order is a consequence of some constraints, or whether it results only by sharing a common ancestry. this has been a long-standing enigma for more than  <dig> years since the initial reports of the whole mt-genome sequence of vertebrates  <cit> .

to address this problem, we analyzed codon usage and trna gene arrangements of the vertebrate mt-genomes to examine possible constraints on the gene order of vertebrate mt-genomes.

RESULTS
amino acid usage and trna gene arrangement
we began by focusing on the fact that all of the  <dig> proteins encoded by the vertebrate mt-genomes are transmembrane proteins  <cit> , which are rich in hydrophobic amino acid residues . the frequency of codon usage for hydrophobic amino acids is, consequently, higher in the vertebrate mt-genome  compared to a general nuclear genome . based on this observation, we divided the mt-trna genes into two groups according to the hydrophobicity of their corresponding amino acids, and then examined their positions in the vertebrate mt-genomes . this revealed that genes for trnas that specify hydrophobic amino acids  are located close to the control region  compared with the other genes for trnas specifying hydrophilic amino acids .

a the mtdna strand on which the trna gene occurs: h, heavy strand; l, light strand.

b base-pair distance between the 3'-end of control region and the 5'-end of each trna gene.

such trna gene localization may indicate that, in the typical vertebrate mt-genomes, highly-used trna genes are located in the genomic region close to the cr, where the transcription efficiency is thought to be relatively high. the transcription of the vertebrate mt-genome is initiated from regulatory elements within the cr  <cit> , and thus, the complete transcription of the genes into mrna and functional rnas would be more successful in the genomic region closer to the cr. in fact, the two rrna genes immediately adjacent to the cr  are highly expressed  <cit> . likewise, the trna genes localized close to the cr, which specify hydrophobic residues, would also be highly expressed. such an efficient production of the highly-used trnas may be favorable for translation of vertebrate mt-genomes.

correlation between codon usage and trna gene position
given the increasing availability of full-length mt-genome sequence data from a broad range of vertebrate species, the trna gene arrangement with regards to amino acid usage can be assessed more quantitatively by analyzing a correlation between physical  distance from the cr to each trna gene and codon usage of the mt-genome. we analyzed correlation between these two parameters using both parametric and non-parametric methods based on the mt-genome sequences of  <dig> representative vertebrates from jawless fish, cartilaginous fish, ray-finned fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals . among these  <dig> species,  <dig> represent the "evolutionarily stable" mt-gene orders including the typical gene arrangement of vertebrates and slightly rearranged gene orders of lamprey and birds . the remaining  <dig> species from ray-finned fish, amphibians, and reptiles represent rearranged gene orders within these lower taxa. more rearranged mt-genomes were sampled from ray-finned fish  than from amphibians and reptiles  because ray-finned fish is a sister group to all tetrapods, and shows greater diversity in terms of mt-gene rearrangements.

in the correlation analysis, we aimed to eliminate the effects of shared common ancestry  <cit>  based on independent contrast analysis  <cit>  of the codon usage and trna positions. independent contrasts for these two variables were estimated using the program caic  <cit>  based on a composite tree of the sampled species that was constructed from recent molecular phylogenies for the major clades of vertebrates . this method focuses on differences only between sister lineages or nodes in a phylogeny, which have arisen after a split, therefore yielding sets of independent "contrasts"  <cit> . our data points were derived from ancestral states  based on independent contrasts of trna genes . thus, many data points were above the level of major clades such as mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, actinopterygians, chondrichthyans, and agnathans, and the total number of data points became much smaller than the number of pair-wise comparisons.

as a result, we found a significant correlation between the trna positions and codon usage . these results imply that the trna genes that correspond to highly-used codons were located nearer the cr compared with the others. the data points for the trna-leu  and trna-thr genes, however, deviated visibly from the trend. the usage of their corresponding codons was relatively high, although their genomic positions were distant from their putative transcription start site in the cr . when these two genes were excluded, the correlation became stronger .

the significance of the above correlations, however, may be due to the larger number of degrees of freedom generated by multiple-species comparisons on multiple trna genes, although we sought to eliminate the effect of shared common ancestry as described above. to limit this effect and to corroborate our results, we took two other approaches: first, we averaged codon usage and distance from the cr for each of  <dig> trna across taxa, respectively, yielding  <dig> independent data points of  <dig> non-homologous trna genes. this set of data might reflect an ancient adaptation between codon usage and trna positions of an original vertebrate mt-genome. second, we analyzed variations of codon usage and distance from the cr of each of the  <dig> trna genes across taxa, specifically focusing on the rearranged gene orders within lower taxa. the second analysis might detect a recent adaptation between codon usage and trna positions in taxonomic groups concerned .

by way of the first approach, we found a weak  correlation between mean codon usage and trna positions , implying that the trna genes corresponding to highly-used codons were located nearer the cr. this relationship became stronger and the correlation significant when the outlier trna-leu  and trna-thr genes were excluded . these results would support the correspondence between codon usage and mt-trna positions possibly in the origin of the vertebrate mt-genome gene order, although such constraint might have been weak.

the second approach involving the meta-analysis of the results of the respective  <dig> trna gene sets showed that the rearranged gene orders within lower taxa had little effect on the preexisting correlation between codon usage and trna positions . this result can be explained as a result of elimination of novel gene arrangement deviating from the relationship. in fact, among  <dig> of phylogenetically independent cases of gene-order rearrangements , three cases  were observed to have improved correlation between trna position and codon usage compared to the evolutionarily stable gene orders; majority of the cases of gene order rearrangements showed no improvement in the relationship . this implies that not a few gene order rearrangements without improvement have existed for some periods of evolutionary time. it is noted, however, that the correlation between trna position and codon usage was significant  for the above three cases only. their novel gene order arrangements might be maintained through some forms of natural selection.

on the basis of these sets of analyses, we propose that the trna gene arrangement of vertebrate mt-genomes, and possibly that of an ancestral, original vertebrate mt-genome, may be adaptive with regard to translational efficiency. the genes close to the cr, where the transcription initiation sites of both strands exist, appear to be highly expressed in the vertebrate mt-genomes  <cit> . consequently, genes of trnas specifying highly-used codons would be favorably located close to the cr to ensure the efficient translation of the protein-coding genes in the vertebrate mt-genomes.

mitochondrial gene arrangement and translational constraint
on the basis of the results obtained from our analyses, we suggest the existence of translational constraint on the positions of mt-trna genes, but not on their gene copy numbers, in the vertebrate mt-genomes, although the constraint may be weak. in nuclear genomes, translational selection is known to promote adaptation of trna gene number to the usage of the corresponding codon  <cit> . clear association of trna gene number with codon usage has been observed in the genomes of various organisms ranging from e. coli to humans  <cit> . the vertebrate mt-genome is also likely exposed to translational selection because vertebrates are considered to be metabolically active and have high rates of atp synthesis. however, translational selection would not act at the level of trna gene numbers in the vertebrate mt-genome since it is extremely compact and the number of contained genes is limited.

recently, some studies suggest the replication and translational constraints affected the positions of translational genes such as rna polymerase, rrna, and trna genes in bacterial genomes  <cit> , and abundant and broadly expressed genes in the human genome  <cit> . such constraints associated with translation and gene expression may also have limited the gene order rearrangement of vertebrate mt-genomes, specifically the rearrangements which interfere with transcriptional efficiency of mt-trnas . this constraint may have driven the conservation of the mt-gene arrangement among vertebrates from jawless fishes to mammals for more than  <dig> million years.

gene-order rearrangements are often found in vertebrate mt-genomes within lower taxonomic categories such as families, genera, and species , however, there are no extensive rearrangements shared across higher taxa, which are likely to have persisted for long evolutionary periods of time  <cit> . this observation further implies the existence of constraint on vertebrate mt-gene orders, possibly through translational efficiency as discussed above. exceptionally, mt-genomes of birds and lampreys show some little deviation from the typical gene order; either of the bird or lamprey have mt-genomes showing some changes in trna-glu, trna-thr, and trna-pro gene positions . these non-typical gene orderings, however, interfere little with the correlation reported above . this also implies that the deviations of the trna-leu  and trna-thr from the supported relationship  do not arise from the rearrangements of birds and lampreys.

we found two trna genes that contradict our notion. the trna-leu  and trna-thr genes were located distant from their putative transcription start site in the cr, but the usage of their corresponding codons was relatively high . the presence of such outlier trnas is not strange because mt-trna genes are also under constraints associated with their other functions such as punctuation markers during the pre-mrna processing of adjacent genes  <cit> . however, one attractive possible constraint on mt-trna position is deamination gradients during replication and possibly transcription of the mt-dna  <cit> . deamination commonly occurs in single-stranded dna exposed during replication or transcription, causing mutations from adenine to guanine and from cytosine to thymine  <cit> . consequently, the gene loci exposed in single strand for longer time in replication and transcription are more prone to suffer these deamination mutations. in the replication of mtdna  <cit> , the heavy -strand is initially replicated from the h-strand replication origin  in the cr. the parental, original h-strand is exposed as a single strand . subsequently, using this original h-strand as a lagging strand, the light -strand is replicated from the l-strand replication origin  in a wancy region  <cit>  . based on this view, the trna genes located more distant from the ol along the direction of l-strand replication would be exposed as a single strand for a longer time. consequently, such trna genes are more likely to undergo the deamination mutations. a similar deamination gradient might also exist in transcription initiated from the cr  <cit> .

the present analysis considering the asymmetric nature of mtdna replication provided results match with the above prediction . the trna loci that are expected to be exposed as a single strand for a longer time tend to have more guanine  and thymine  in their anticodon region on the coding strands . this suggests that the trna gene arrangement of typical vertebrate mt-genome is also adaptive in avoiding mutations in anticodons through deamination during replication, and possibly, in transcription  <cit> . regarding the correlation coefficients, the deamination-related constraint may be stronger than the codon/amino-acid usage-related constraint discussed above.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we propose that the high conservation of the gene arrangement of the vertebrate mt-genome is underpinned not only by a shared common ancestry, but also by translational constraint acting on the trna gene arrangement. this conclusion can be derived from the simple observation that the mt-trna genes corresponding to hydrophobic amino acids, which are frequently used in translation of the mt-genes, are localized close to the cr. in addition, an analysis considering the asymmetric nature of mtdna replication suggested that deamination-related constraint against mutations in trna anticodons is also an important determinant of the trna gene arrangement in the typical vertebrate mt-genome. the translational constraint together with the deamination-related constraint may have contributed to shaping and maintaining the typical gene order of the vertebrate mt-genomes.

