BACKGROUND
iron as a trace metal is essential for almost all forms of life. its biological role is attributable to its properties as a transition metal. it readily switches between its ferric  and ferrous  state and therefore serves as an essential prosthetic group in most cellular electron-transfer reactions. in addition, iron is a critical component of heme in hemoglobin and myoglobin, where it serves in oxygen binding and transport, which is essential for respiration in most animals.

the same oxido-reductive properties that make iron essential for life are also the cause of its toxicity, if the concentration of the free ions runs out of control. the ferrous ion can participate in fenton chemistry and produce hydroxyl and lipid radicals with detrimental effects on structural constituents and metabolic functions of the cell. the eukaryotic cell is equipped with various proteins to handle iron, to secure its vital functions and to limit its toxicity. this includes proteins for iron uptake , its transport in the plasma , and its non-toxic storage and sequestration . iron metabolism is therefore interlaced with the metabolism of these proteins .

the vital and destructive roles of iron are reflected in its tight regulation and the narrow leeway of fine-tuning in cellular subsystems. the molecular arsenal as well as the dynamic range of iron metabolism is remarkably well conserved in mammalian species. quantitative data, scaled to body size, are surprisingly similar between, for instance, humans and mice, certain exceptions notwithstanding. the levels of variables extend over several decadic orders in a hierarchy of dynamic modes. duodenal iron uptake is meticulously poised within a very narrow limit. as another step towards this end, the body recycles iron from degraded fractions such as erythrocyte hemoglobin. this establishes turnover rates as an additional multi-level hierarchy within the system .

mammalian iron metabolism has been intensively studied for over  <dig> years, with the fundamental paper by mccance and widdowson  <cit>  being among the earliest reports. these comprised the iron content of cells and organs and characterized biochemical fractions defined by ionic state and the nature of carrier proteins. in later years the distribution kinetics of tracer isotopes yielded insight into the dynamic turnover of iron fractions in organs and the whole organism. the molecular "machinery" of proteins involved in iron handling was stepwise revealed during the  <dig> s with the identification of iron carrier proteins and the genes encoding them. thus, a global understanding of iron biology based on cellular and molecular events is coming into perspective.

certain features of iron metabolism make it a suitable subject for systems analysis aiming at integration of cellular and systemic dynamics and regulation. the cellular fate of iron is handled by a relatively small set of specialized receptor-, exporter-and storage proteins. though some overlap with the handling of other trace metals was described, iron handling by corresponding proteins does not involve too many overlapping cellular processes. this makes systemic integration less difficult than in many other fields of biochemistry. iron can be measured by specific chemical and physical methods, and the availability of isotopes has made dynamic studies possible. the regulation in iron deficiency and iron overload as well as after transgenic perturbation in animal models may be characterized.

a theoretical description of mammalian iron biology focuses on two complementary aspects of systems analysis:  <dig> ) the phenomenology of what is going on in a living system, i.e. to deal with concentrations and fluxes in functionally different or disturbed states of the body.  <dig> ) to deal with the regulatory structure that brings about these phenomena.

the mouse has become the model animal of choice for studying systemic and cellular iron metabolism. the method of genetic knock-out, knock-in, and forced expression of specific genes and the possibility to target such effects to certain cell types  made it possible to study the regulatory cross-talk within cells and between cells and organs in greater detail. it allows mimicking physiological differences and pathological states in the intact animal rather than in isolated cells.

a phenomenological description of internal iron kinetics has been previously published for the mouse strain c57bl/10scsnph  <cit> . the authors administered radioactive ferrous citrate into the tail vain of healthy adult animals on an iron-adequate diet and followed the distribution of the tracer into bones, spleen and liver. their mathematical model consists of  <dig> iron compartments , and of  <dig> fluxes between these compartments. the authors followed the time course up to  <dig> weeks and provided estimated quantitative values for the  <dig> pool sizes and  <dig> fluxes with the help of ingenious "by-hand" simulation of the observed curves. limitations of computer capacity at that time precluded the attempt to address uncertainty and redundancy of the different parameters. therefore, many of the numerical values remained uncertain or speculative in their quantitative importance.

mathematical models of iron kinetics were previously published for dogs  <cit>  and for human subjects  <cit> . the parameterization in such models was derived from a detailed analysis of the time course of radioactive tracer in plasma and in erythrocytes, in one case complemented by body surface measurements  <cit> . the models summarized body tissues in compact compartment form , and the results of these studies became the knowledge basis for diagnostic interpretation of human diseases as it is medical practice today.

in this paper we present a phenomenological model of the murine iron system in the absence of pathological deviation, but under different, well controlled conditions of iron supply in the food. based on our systematic measurements we estimate quantitative values of rate constants for the iron flux from plasma into  <dig> peripheral organs of the body, estimate the recycling rate of peripheral iron, and of the kinematic properties of iron-containing compartments. figure  <dig> shows the model layout with its compartments and the transfer of iron between them. the dynamic and static properties of iron metabolism will be characterized in terms of systemic homeostasis. it is intended to use this detailed flux and pool model as basis for the study of the iron status of targeted genetic variants of the c57bl <dig> mouse strain.

RESULTS
tracer uptake into murine organs
we use protocols of experiments on mice of the c57b <dig> strain  <cit> . the main tissue-related data are summarized in the additional file 1: table s <dig> to s <dig>  they may be scaled and recalculated to represent the state of the whole organism, using the organ weights . the experimental data were obtained from iron-deficient, iron-adequate, and iron-loaded mice  <cit> . additional file 1: table s <dig> to s <dig> give the calculated organ tracer contents at different time-points after administration, scaled to the whole body. figures  <dig> and  <dig> show a synopsis of the system's behaviour under these conditions. the measured radioactivity in the organs is given as mean plus-minus standard deviation along with a simulated time course of the "best fit" . the coefficient of variation in these data was in the range of 30%. this is common in iron studies.

the parameter estimates  were obtained by an optimization algorithm that minimized the fit criterion as defined in the paragraph "parameter estimation strategy" of methods section. rate parameters were estimated under the assumption of approximate steady-state fluxes. displayed are the best-fit values. the statistical limit of acceptable parameter value was obtained by perturbing the tracer measurements at random  around the mean within the standard deviation, both displayed in additional file 1: table s <dig> to s <dig> 

the value of the total plasma iron clearance rate had to be prescribed as fixed value in order to avoid excessive parameter correlation . their value was chosen to the convenient value of  <dig> per day, approximately in keeping with the data of trinder et al.  <cit>  and brodsky et al. <cit> . any other choice of the total clearance rate will affect all out-of-plasma estimates in the table proportionally.

the criterion of best fit "fval chi_sqr" was selected from an analysis of the data structure .

"sq root of mean weighted squared dev"  is a measure of a typical deviation between measurement and optimal fit.

estimation of clearance rate parameters
the estimation of the rate parameters requires tackling with the mathematical difficulty of data fluctuation and parameter redundancy in this multi-level time hierarchy . the resulting uncertainty of parameter estimates, after elimination of parameter interdependence, was in the range of the data scatter. table  <dig> contains the estimated fractional turnover rates for all fluxes shown in figure  <dig>  with estimates of their statistical fluctuation obtained by monte-carlo resampling of the data protocol . additional file 2: figure s <dig> contains the "best" estimates of the fractional turnover rate constants, and additional file 2: figure s <dig> displays the relative distribution of plasma iron turnover fluxes into periphery. the "fit quality" addressed in table  <dig> is a global measure of the deviation between model and data. a value of  <dig> - <dig>  is satisfactory.

calculation of flux rates of iron exchange between the central and peripheral compartments
the system of equations to predict the "best fit" is an idealized summary of tracer dynamics. it can be used to calculate the distribution dynamics of steady-state flux rates of transferrin-bound iron into and out of the various organs .

plasma iron pool
the transferrin-bound iron pool in plasma is in the range of 1- <dig> μg, see additional file 1: table s9). this is small compared to all other pools. it equilibrates tracer iron with the internal iron within minutes. there is another pool of similar size in the transcapillary vascular fluid  <cit>  which equilibrates with a rate constant of about 1d- <dig>  since our data do not contain ferrokinetic measurements of the extravascular pool, we decided not to introduce it as a separate compartment of the model.

total plasma clearance of iron
the total clearance rate of transferrin-bound plasma iron is given by the sum of fractional clearance rates into the periphery . its absolute value is not accessible from our data set, because the first time point was  <dig> h, i.e. when the clearance was nearly complete. precise determination of plasma clearance would require repeated blood sampling and measurement of plasma radioactivity in each animal at very short intervals after injection . cavill et al.  <cit>  have summarized the corresponding diagnostic problems in humans. such procedures are not feasible in mice. therefore, we used a rough estimate of plasma iron clearance taken from 2-h points in the murine experiments with a diet design similar to ours  <cit> . they permit the calculation  of the approximate total clearance rate of the plasma iron pool. the estimate from 2-h values may be somewhat too low due to early reflux of label iron via bone marrow and spleen into the plasma. based on other literature data we introduced a rounded total fractional clearance of  <dig> daily turnovers of the plasma pool. this was a set value in the parameter estimation and defines the time scale for all other iron data. different values, higher or lower, would affect the values in additional file 2: figure s <dig> and additional file 1: table s <dig> proportionally, but not the relative values of iron distribution into tissues and organs as shown in additional file 2: figure s <dig> 

fractional iron clearance into the peripheral compartments
iron uptake into the erythropoietic system
the bulk of tracer outflow from plasma goes into the erythropoietic bone marrow and is rapidly incorporated into hemoglobin  <cit> . about 63% of plasma iron is cleared into bone marrow in iron-adequate mice and practically the same fraction  in iron deficiency. this fraction is somewhat lower than in other species . in iron-rich mice it decreased to about half of that  under steady-state conditions. however, corresponding plasma iron turnover rates increase only by 22% . therefore, the absolute rate of iron flow to the erythron is reduced in iron-loaded condition . switching the system into the storage mode  <cit>  appears to overshoot and reduce the influx into the erythrocyte-forming pathway. slightly reduced hemoglobin contents were observed accordingly  <cit> .

flux rates through compartments and size of tracer-accessible peripheral pools
based on the iron concentration in plasma  and fractional clearance parameters  it is possible to calculate the absolute flux rates for iron from the plasma into the connected compartments . dividing steady state iron flux rates into a given compartment by the fractional clearance rate of that compartment gives an estimate of the "tracer-accessible" pool size . additional file 1: table s <dig> and additional file 2: figure s <dig> show that there are  <dig> scales of iron pool .

hierarchy of iron residence times in different organs
a hierarchy of iron residence times is revealed based on estimated clearance rates from the compartments . additional file 1: table s <dig> shows the expected average residence time of an iron molecule when it reaches a given compartment. there is a rapid circulation of iron between plasma, bone marrow and spleen , but a spectrum of longer residence times in the other organs . in the latter  <dig> organs iron may be kept for a month and longer, which would point to a complex interplay of biosynthesis, storage and export that cannot be unravelled by whole-body ferrokinetic study. in the case of rapidly renewed cells  this residence time is the same as that of the whole cell, whereas in stationary cells it reflects the well-known specific renewal rate of protein within such cells  <cit> .

comparison of "tracer-accessible" pools with the unlabelled non-heme iron pool
the pools accessible for radioactive labels  may be compared with the non-heme iron content of the same compartment . the latter store increases considerably with higher iron loads in parenchymal organs , whereas heart muscle and presumably other organs do not pile up such stores. by contrast, the 59fe-accessible "kinetic" pools increase only  <dig>  to  <dig>  fold on iron load . it also turns out  that the relative size of the tracer-labelled pool in liver and spleen drops from ~ 25% to ~ 6%, while this share is increased from ~ 20% to ~ 40% in kidney and heart.

discussion
the mathematical model
from the viewpoint of systems analysis, iron metabolism of the body is an open black-box with input, internal processing and output. absorption fluxes and losses are relatively slow compared to internal iron circulation  <cit> . the most relevant internal dynamic events occur within the first few days after tracer injection. they involve the plasma iron turnover and the turnover of the erythron. on this time scale the system is nearly closed, with input  and output  being slow compared to the dominant rates of inner metabolism. iron absorption from guts is in the range of  <dig>  μg per day . such a system will approach an inner steady-state with slowly drifting concentrations and fluxes.

to study such a steady-state one can measure stationary content variables and inject a tiny dose of 59fe, preferentially bound to its transferrin carrier  <cit> , into the central compartment of radioactive iron. in the initial hours after mixing of the injected iron, when the periphery does not appreciably return tracer, the flow of blood into the organs is proportional to the flow of tracer. this initiates distribution dynamics of the tracer in conformity with the pools and stationary rates of the unlabelled bulk of iron in the steady-state, which is not disturbed by the addition of trace amounts. the time course of the ensuing run-off of tracer distribution obeys a system of ordinary differential equations .

iron status of the adult mice on different dietary regimes
the experimental data which form the basis for the model calculations presented here are derived in adult mice that were on different dietary regimes during growth. the adult animal develops a steady-state which is maintained during its further adult life, i.e. for approximately 1- <dig> years. this assumption is prerequisite for the ferrokinetic model. the empirical background for the model consists of the static iron status and of tracer dynamic data.

modelling iron metabolism by the 59fe tracer method
the literature contains numerous papers  <cit>  which measured the dynamics of iron metabolism on the intact organism with the help of the tracer 59fe. the basic rationale is that the tracer, while being always measurable as radioactivity, due to its tiny relative amount does not perturb appreciably the iron status of the body. most of the mathematical models derived from such measurements were obtained for humans, dogs and rats. vácha et al. <cit>  derived a whole-body model for the normal mouse , collected from measurements in blood, liver and spleen, without systematic control of dietary regime. the model was based on a number of ad-hoc assumptions of fluxes, which partly could not be substantiated by cellular mechanisms, and the parameters were in part estimated without a whole-model statistical fitting procedure . we can confirm, with the experimental evidence now available, that their ingenious model, in spite of some speculative elements due to limited molecular knowledge, gives a remarkably adequate description of the global dynamic structure of murine iron metabolism.

static iron status
this is defined as the iron content of the iron fractions in the different organs and tissues. it reflects the expression of protein carriers to which iron is bound . we can assume that this status is stable during the observation period.

dynamic fluxes
the second data type is the time course of iron flow through body organs after administration of a radioactive tracer. the data base stems from partly published measurements of our own labs  <cit>  and from studies done elsewhere under a comparable experimental design. the aim is to integrate the entire data set into an integrative model, thereby displaying the systemic structure which is not obvious from inspection of raw data.

kinematic model of iron steady-state
the crucial supposition for a representative model is that iron fluxes in the body are  balanced and cellular pools do not fluctuate violently during the experimental period. tracer injection permits to collect data on internal fluxes without upsetting the steady-state. analysis of the fate of tracer-59fe in the tissues in terms of a linear system of differential equations describing influx, outflux and internal metabolism of the system gives a picture of the prevailing "kinematics" of the system, i.e. it describes what happens, not the causes and controlling mechanisms. such a phenomenology is the prerequisite for any in-depth systemic description.

inhomogeneity of compartments
for some important tissues under consideration the assumption of homogeneity is not valid. this applies to liver, which consists of parenchymal cells  and cells of the res . both types have different iron regulation. similarly, the murine spleen has subcompartments, of erythropoietic and of macrophage cells. muscle tissue contains a large fraction of iron in myoglobin, the turnover of which is different from that of the macrophages in muscle. on the whole, the macrophages of res are spread over a multiplicity of organs and change their distribution in inflammation. for the sake of model calculation, nevertheless, we treated these organs as compartments.

numerical parameter estimation
tracer motion in a steady-state system of homogenous pools  can be modelled by ordinary linear differential equations. in theory, the concentration of tracer in these pools follows a time course described by superimposed exponentials. in the initially labelled central compartment  the tracer content falls monotonously. in all the other compartments, initially void of tracer, the concentration rises to a maximum and then turns into a monotonously decreasing phase of recycling into plasma together with outflux out of the body. the parameter values of the interconnected system can be obtained as "best fit" according to a suitable distance criterion. in practice this estimation process may run into two types of difficulty: statistical scatter and redundancy of the parameter space.

the scatter of measured data in most biological systems is considerable and cannot be avoided. the reason is partly individual variation between subjects and partly the technical difficulty to exactly repeat the same experiment. a statistical model of this situation can, at best, be a close approximation to the measured data in the form of an idealized curve. we repeated the estimation procedure on sets of artificially generated data which keep the error structure of the observed data. the range of parameter fluctuation was revealed in this way.

interdependence  of parameter estimates
this is an unavoidable problem of complex biological models. it became clear from the ace analysis  that our data contained two causes of parameter interdependence: insufficient resolution at very early time after tracer injection, and cases of double output of tracer back into plasma and out of the body. we overcame these problems by prescribing an approximate value of the total plasma clearance calculated from the data of trinder et al.  <cit> . furthermore, we replaced double outfluxes by a single lumped one, thus not specifying the precise fractional contribution of each pathway . in this way we obtained parameter estimates with a reasonable range of scatter avoiding strong intercorrelation.

further parameters of the model
the set of clearance-and rate-parameters resulting from the parameterization is given in table  <dig>  and visualized in additional file 2: figure s <dig>  the quality of the fit is satisfactory, as demonstrated in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  table  <dig> contains the most compact representation of the information content of the empirical data. it can be used to calculate flux rates , pool sizes  and as well as a characteristic temporal structure of the system . additional file 2: figure s <dig> through s <dig> visualize these quantitative estimates. these indirectly derived data indicate scatter intervals of system-relevant parameters. their totality is amenable to physiological interpretation of the static and dynamic state of the iron system in the mouse in the different "lifestyle" regimes studied.

physiological interpretation of the global system
iron metabolism can be described as a closed compartment system
the quasi-closed state of the iron system together with the ensuing internal steady-state makes into possible to simplify the non-linear structure to a system of ordinary linear differential equations. the dynamics of tracer motion depicts the statics of the underlying stationary flux-and-pool network. we could build on a number of previous attempts to model iron metabolism in this way  <cit> , reviews in  <cit> . the novel aspect here is the detailed reversible balance in a network of peripheral tissues that were previously combined ad hoc to black boxes.

iron metabolism is organized as temporal hierarchy on five time scales
analysis of the clearance parameters of our experiments  and of literature data  <cit>  lead to the following grouping of characteristic time periods:

-rapid mixing time of the transferrin-bound plasma/ecf pool: below  <dig> h

-total clearance time of plasma iron due mainly to flux into bone marrow, liver and muscle: ~  <dig> hour.

-clearance time of compartments that return tracer into plasma : between ~ <dig> days in the intestinal tract and ~ <dig> days in parenchymal organs.

-incorporation time into iron-carrying proteins in red blood cells, muscles, integument or fat: ~  <dig> month.

-characteristic life-time of iron molecules in the whole body: approaches  <dig> days in the adult mouse. if the mouse has acquired a store in the adolescent stage , this would be sufficient for its whole life. it is therefore difficult to induce iron-depletion anemia in the mouse .

the time hierarchy does not change appreciably between different iron statuses in normal mice .

iron turnover in the plasma compartment depends on the iron status
the concentration of transferrin-bound plasma iron in plasma is in the range of 100- <dig> μg/dl in the mouse . this is similar to other mammalian species . the iron concentration tends to lower values in iron-deficient and to higher values in iron-loaded mice. the iron clearance from plasma defines a half-time of renewal in the range of 1- <dig> hours, again similar for species otherwise as different as mus musculus and homo sapiens. rats  <cit>  and dogs  <cit>  are also in the same range. in rats, however, iron deficiency does not lower the plasma concentration  <cit> .

iron distribution into body periphery is a three-level hierarchy of flux rates
the initial tracer concentration in plasma becomes rapidly cleared within a few hours after administration and stays at a low, but steady value afterwards. this coincides with the ascending tracer curves in the peripheral compartments . the position of the maximum fixes the time point when plasma tracer is nearly washed out and the periphery begins to return some of the previously accumulated tracer iron into the plasma . from these values and by application of the steady-state assumption all iron fluxes can be estimated when the iron content of the central compartment is available. data by trinder et al.  <cit>  contribute an estimate of the total plasma turnover clearance rate .

three clusters of flux rates may be distinguished
-flux through the erythron 

-flux through peripheral compartments with storage function 

-flux through organs with slow iron turn-over  - <dig> - <dig>  μg per day per mouse.

share of flux into tissues mirrors transferrin receptor expression

the clearance time of plasma iron is in the range of  <dig> h, largely independent of the plasma iron content and hence the state of the animal's iron supply. this linear kinetics suggests that the total population of tfr <dig> receptor molecules  works far below its maximal capacity in all cells. the share of radioiron going into the body organs reflects this tissue-specific transferrin receptor expression. in contrast to the rather stable total clearance time the share of radioiron is dependent on the physiological state . in the states of iron depletion and of normal iron supply more than two thirds of the plasma iron turnover is directed to the erythropoietic bone marrow and is rapidly incorporated into hemoglobin. this is, again, similar to other species  <cit> . the corresponding fraction of tracer iron passes through the immature cells of the erythropoietic lineage until it reaches the erythrocyte compartment.

tracer distribution iron-rich condition reflects the switch-over to the storage mode
the flux through the storage pathway into parenchymal organs increases from 25% to 49% of plasma turnover . stores are filled up in liver, kidney, spleen/res , to a lesser extent also heart and skeletal muscle, but not integument and brain.

tissue cells equilibrate influx and reflux of iron to maintain the iron pool
an adult mouse does not grow much during its life-time of ~ <dig> years . iron is taken up by cells with a time characteristic of a few days and must, therefore, be balanced by corresponding iron-release. muscle, fat, heart, lungs, brain and testicles excrete iron into plasma or extravascular fluid. the influx of tracer is mediated by transferrin receptor. it is not clear from tracer data whether the export is mediated only by the ferroportin channel  <cit> , or also via catabolism of heme-bound iron. ferroportin is dominantly expressed in liver, duodenum, and macrophages, and to a lesser extent also in other tissues  <cit> . ferroportin is not involved in the case of loss of whole cells . the tracer data as used here cannot distinguish between export of iron and loss of whole cells. they yield only an estimate of the total flux out of the compartment.

intracellular residence time of iron is longer than the life time of its protein "carriers"
the life-time of the iron-storage proteins  is in the range of one day in the liver  <cit> . up to  <dig> iron ions can be stored in one ferritin molecule  <cit> , and become released on proteolytic ferritin degradation. the residence time of iron in the liver cell, however, is much longer-in the range of 1- <dig> weeks . this shows that iron released into the very small labile iron pool does not leave the cell, but is re-utilized. this slow export conforms to well-known data showing how slowly iron is mobilized from ferritin stores to replace iron losses, e.g. after phlebotomy . intracellular iron stores are no inert long-term reserves, but are continuously turned over within the cell and may therefore be directed, in accordance with changing requirements, into the three competing pathways .

readily accessible tissue iron pools are a fraction of the non-heme iron
these iron pools are stored in different subcompartments, mainly in non-heme form. the iron-loaded liver stores ferritin in the hepatocytes and a less mobilizable  form in the kupffer cell  <cit> . the labelled and unlabelled iron data from whole organs do not permit to differentiate quantitatively between parenchymal and macrophage iron in such mixed cases. tracer dynamics identifies iron pools that become quickly labelled. their pool sizes have been estimated from the fractional plasma iron turnover and the tissue clearance rates . three groups may be distinguished. red blood cells contain as hemoglobin the largest readily labelled iron pool . there is a second cluster of pools , each containing about 20- <dig> μg fe. in particular the hepatic iron pool is expandable in iron overload to reach a kinetic pool level of ~  <dig> μg fe, presumably in ferritin form. a still larger store can possibly accumulate on a longer time scale, which is not covered here. there are additional pools with an iron content  of about  <dig> μg fe each, which can moderately expand up to 4- <dig> μg . other organs, such as fat, testicles or brain, are not able to store more iron in overload. additional file 1: table s <dig> shows that in some tissues the readily accessible pools are only a fraction  of cellular non-heme iron.

there are two kinetically distinct major iron pools in the mouse body
the total tracer-accessible iron amounts to ~ <dig> μg . the residence time in the main compartments excluding intestine  is between  <dig> and  <dig> days. this comprises about 20% of the total iron . the reminder is not readily accessible. the residence time of molecules here is ~ <dig> days  <cit> .

iron turnover occurs at similar rate in intestine and skin, but assignment to iron loss vs. iron reflux is only indirectly estimable
physiologically iron enters the body via duodenal and  small-intestinal absorption in a tightly controlled way. it leaves the body by desquamation, exfoliation of epithelial cells, by blood losses, and to a lesser extent via bile and urine  <cit> . the net amount leaving the murine body is, according to literature references,  <dig> to  <dig> times larger than in other animals and man  <cit> . a consequence of this higher excretion is that heavy iron-load is sometimes difficult to attain in mouse models.

net iron losses cannot be measured by the tracer method as applied here. however, the fractional clearance rates  yield indirect information on iron fluxes through intestine and integument . iron clearance of the epidermis integument is about 5% per day and that of the stomach-intestinal epithelium ca. 36% per day . from the fractional uptake from plasma one can calculate influx rates of ~ <dig>  μg per day into epidermis, and a sum of ~ <dig>  μg per day into intestine plus stomach . these values are about 39% lower and higher in iron deficient and iron-load regimes, respectively. the data do not support a calculation of the rate of net iron loss through these compartments, because there may be a fraction that is recycled into plasma. the iron residence times for intestine are similar to the known exfoliation times of epithelium , which suggests that the main fraction goes into loss. for skin integument  such external information was not available.

murine erythrocyte iron turnover has a random elimination component together with a lifespan-determined removal component
during one month after administration 60% of the tracer  accumulates in the red blood cell compartment  15;19; <dig> μg fe/d into bone marrow in iron-deficient, -adequate, and -loaded animals, respectively, of which 12;17; <dig> μg fe/d pass through the rbc compartment back via into res into plasma. this turnover rate is quantitatively analogous to ~  <dig> mg fe/d per  <dig> kg in iron-adequate humans.

the life span of mouse erythrocytes has been studied in mathematical detail by horký et al.  <cit> . they also formulated an age-independent linear elimination component acting simultaneously with a lifespan-determined senescence process. our elimination rate  is somewhat higher than obtained in  <cit>  . however, these estimates are not very reliable, as they stem from an indirect deduction. this applies also to the size of the "readily accessible" iron pool in red blood cells .

the spleen is a mixed indicator of erythropoiesis and res activity
the murine spleen is an erythropoietic organ  <cit> . therefore, one subcompartment of iron in the spleen is expected to behave similar to iron in the bone marrow. figures  <dig>   <dig>  and additional file 1: table s <dig> to s <dig> show a similarly quick uptake phase in both bone marrow and spleen. the ratio of tracer iron content between both organs after  <dig> h is about  <dig> to  <dig> in adequate and iron-rich mice, and  <dig> in iron-deficient animals. thus, the quantitative contribution of the spleen to total murine erythropoiesis is not high. furthermore, the iron-deficient spleen loses iron as quickly as the bone marrow, reflecting the rapid flow into "iron-deficient" erythropoiesis. in contrast to the bone marrow, the iron-adequate, and even more so the iron-loaded spleen retains 59fe for long periods. this reflects a storage behaviour which is similar to that of res cells in the liver and elsewhere. the spleen contains 5% and the liver 16% of the whole population of macrophages  <cit> . the res system serves as scavenger to remove senescent erythrocytes together with their hemoglobin and colloidal iron from the circulation  <cit> . part of this res iron is rapidly recirculated into plasma, thereby completing the iron-recirculation back to the erythrocyte pool. except in iron deficiency, another part of the res iron is stored as ferritin or hemosiderin  <cit> .

the quantitative contribution of both spleen compartments to whole body iron turnover is low. the spleen is therefore an indicator, but not the main quantitative locus of the total erythropoietic and macrophage activity. in iron-deficiency splenic iron clearance is very rapid , while it is distinctly slower  in iron loaded mice. this may reflect distinct differences in the role of the spleen depending on the state of iron-repletion. a precise quantitative partition of splenic iron fluxes into a res-and an erythron-fraction would require separation of the cells.

experimental design for characterizing the iron status and the dynamic turnover of the c57bl <dig> mouse strain
the c57bl <dig> mouse is a widely used strain for genetic modifications to address the regulatory networks of iron metabolism. any such transgenic strain needs a characterization of its iron kinetics . this includes a survey of static and dynamic characteristics of iron metabolism under the limitations set by thrifty experimental expense. the turnover model developed here permits to derive diagnostic requirements for healthy or diseased mice, after a steady-state has been established and maintained for the time of at least one red blood cell turnover. the following data should be scaled up to the total body level:

-plasma iron steady state, measured by transferrin level and its iron saturation

-liver and spleen total iron and non-heme iron 

-hemoglobin iron content, if possible red blood cell turnover 

-percentage uptake of tracer from duodenum 

-organ content of tracer iron, blood-corrected, by several measurements between  <dig> and  <dig> h at least in liver, spleen, red blood cell compartment and bone marrow

-long-term rate of iron loss.

the biochemical parameters yield a survey of the static of iron metabolism and its steady-state level. ferrokinetics yields the fluxes. this full programme can be reduced, if in a particular situation preliminary analysis of data and their comparison with the mathematical model indicate that certain features of the iron status are not changed or are negligible.

CONCLUSIONS
the model of iron phenomenology in normal mice of different iron status is the basis for further development of a whole-body model, in which the homogenous compartments are being specified by internal kinetic models of different pertinent cell types. this will comprise the major pathways of iron uptake, iron secretion, biosynthesis of heme proteins, ferritin and hemosiderin storage  as well as the overarching regulatory structure   <cit> . our group intends to contribute to this goal by way of transgenic constructs targeted to iron-regulatory genes in specific cell types.

availability
the ferrokinetic models were submitted to the biomodels - the public systems biology models repository - http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels and are publicly available for download and use. the models are available under the unique ids model <dig>  model <dig> and model <dig> for fe deficient, fe adequate and fe loaded, respectively.

