BACKGROUND
with advances in high throughput experimental biology, the number of large scale protein interaction net-works  have grown rapidly. at the same time, collaborative efforts to annotate proteins and genes using gene ontology  <cit>   annotations has generated detailed attributes that describe these entities. knowledgebases with go annotations, such as uniprotkb  <cit> , provide a wealth of annotation data at different levels of specificity. go provides standardized annotations that describe various attributes of a gene or protein, including localization attributes, molecular function, and the biological processes it participates in. as proteins may involve in multiple roles and functions, go attributes associated with a protein or a gene can be high-dimensional.

while each individual protein or gene has a unique role in the biological system, many of them form communities to govern higher-order biological processes or functions. biological networks are believed to be modular and hierarchically organized; one may decompose a ppi into modules or functional clusters that interact with one another  <cit> . protein complexes, for instance, are made up of tightly connected subunit proteins that appear as dense subgraphs in the ppi. other functional groups may be structurally less obvious. examples include signaling pathways, where proteins rarely appear to be structurally cohesive. in spite of their "sparse" structure, proteins comprising them share biologically significant signaling propagation function.

motivation
the amount of information contained within large biological networks can often overwhelm researchers, making systems level analysis of ppis a daunting task. as majority of function annotation and high throughput or curated interaction data are encoded at protein or gene level, higher-order abstraction maps such as complex-complex or process-process functional landscapes, are often unavailable. however, availability of such information is invaluable as it not only allows one to ask questions about the relationships among high-level modules, such as processes and complexes, but also allows one to visualize higher order patterns from a bird's eye perspective.

for instance, consider the alzheimer's disease  related ppi in intact  <cit> . an ad interaction network can be studied at different levels of organization, from broad-level process-process interactions to in-depth complex-complex interactions. such maps would reveal higher-level patterns that otherwise would have been invisible. the objective here is not to study a process associated with ad in isolation, but instead focus on the interplay of related processes in tandem to identify the causative mechanisms of ad. for example, one might ask the following questions: how do signaling pathways implicated for ad associate with one another? how do proteins related to transportation play a role in ad, and how are they associated with bioenergetics? a bird's-eye view of the functional landscape of ad network may provide answers to these questions. an example is shown in figure  <dig> . observe that the associations between signaling pathways  are depicted in the summary. it is worth mentioning that it is extremely di cult to answer the aforementioned questions by simply looking at a large ppi containing large number of proteins and interactions as nodes. this problem is further exacerbated by the high-dimensional nature of ppi; each protein may have hundreds of annotation attributes. it is therefore crucial to have some form of summarization that maps higher-order information of the underlying ppi. fortunately, the modular nature of biological networks-either structurally or attribute wise-lends itself to the possibility of building such a summary.

although tools to abstract high-level and functional information from gene lists have been proven to be key to analyzing high throughput data  <cit> , similar tools that automatically abstract and summarize ppis at multiple resolutions to provide high level views of functional landscape of ppis are still lacking. at first glance, it may seem that state-of-the-art graph clustering techniques  <cit>  can be used for generating high quality summaries of ppis as these techniques have been successful in identification of novel protein function and protein complexes. intuitively, a biological network can be decomposed into modules-groups of vertices sharing a common function-that are then collapsed into a representative node to form a summary graph of the underlying network. depending on the granularity of the decomposition, summaries of various level of detail can be formed. despite the benefits of graph clustering, these techniques suffer from the following key weaknesses that make them less suitable for building high quality higher order functional summaries of ppis.

firstly, several existing graph clustering approaches  <cit>  overwhelmingly emphasize structure cohesiveness over attribute coherence. in practical applications of ppi summarization, however, attribute coherence is key to forming meaningful, interpretable modules. in ppi, groups of proteins  that share a common vertex property can form a meaningful cluster that represents a particular biological function. otherwise, clusters with inconsistent vertex properties, even if structurally well-connected, may not simply summarize into one functionally interpretable cluster. secondly, majority of existing graph clustering techniques form non-overlapping partitions  <cit> . consequently, they cannot be used to generate high-quality summary because "interactors" in biological processes and pathways are likely to overlap  <cit> . thirdly, these techniques typically focus on identifying dense subgraphs from a graph. however, higher-level clusters in ppis are not always structurally dense. proteins in signaling pathways, for instance, are structurally loose, but share important functions. such groups of proteins often have significant biological implications despite their loose structure, and should be present in any summary of the underlying network. finally, because the annotations that describe proteins and their functions are high-dimensional, finding the right choice of attribute coherent groupings is combinatorial and non-trivial. the reader may refer to  <cit>  for examples related to these limitations.

overview
in this paper, we present a novel data-driven algorithm called fuse  that addresses the aforementioned challenges . given a ppi, it generates a k-node functional summary graph  that best represents the higher-order abstraction of the ppi by simultaneously evaluating interaction and annotation data. we argue that a "good" functional summary of a network is not merely a graph of all function-function relationships, but a graph that reduces details of the original ppi to form a subset of interconnected functional clusters. a functional cluster represents a subnetwork of proteins that shares a common function. in particular, the functional summary graph must simultaneously satisfy the following requirements:  the summary is at a specific level  of detail,  the summary is representative of the original network, and  redundancies are minimized. specifically, fuse exploits minimum description length principle  <cit>  to generate the "best" summary by maximizing information gain while satisfying the level of details constraint. figures  <dig> and  <dig> depict a 30-node and a 10-node fugs of the ad network, respectively, generated by fuse. figure  <dig> depicts examples of functional summaries generated by fuse.

the goal of fuse is not only to generate a higher level functional summary that is representative of the underlying ppi, but also to generate a k-node functional map whose visual complexity  permits user analysis. with close to  <dig> terms in the gene ontology , interaction network of  <dig> functional modules will not be a useful summary, as it is just as daunting as the original ppi, if not more. fuse addresses this challenge by enabling generation of summaries that are small and understandable.

we evaluate the performance of fuse on several real-world ppis. we also compare fuse to state-of-the-art graph clustering methods with go term enrichment by constructing the biological process landscape of the ppis. our experimental results demonstrate that fuse is highly effective in constructing higher order functional maps with superior accuracy and representativeness compared to these state-of-the-art graph clustering methods. using ad network as our case study, we further demonstrate the ability of fuse to quickly summarize the network and identify many different processes and complexes that regulate it. in addition, we analyze the topological features of the functional landscape of human ppi that leads us to the identification of functional hubs .

related work
functional landscape of an underlying protein interaction network has been explored in  <cit> . the approach the authors used, however, rely on manual short listing of  <dig> biological processes for analysis. while this approach makes visualization permissible, it neither scale with the growing number of annotations, nor does it fully utilize the large number of annotations available. additionally, the processes that are relevant depends on the context of the network.

graph clustering methods identify functional clusters based on the underlying assumption that the topology of interacting proteins can be mined to identify protein clusters  <cit> . cluster function can then be inferred and annotated by finding enriched annotations within the cluster. while such methods have been proven effective for identification of complexes, they are less suitable for identifying higher level functional clusters, such as biological processes and pathways, where interactors within them are likely to overlap  <cit> . interactions within a process are also not necessarily cohesive. cfinder  <cit>  locates overlapping communities based on structure of the network, but ignores the wealth of functional knowledge already encoded in go annotation data. while most graph clustering techniques rely solely on network topology, several recent techniques utilize annotation information when clustering the networks  <cit> . however, these techniques form non-overlapping partitions. additionally, with the growing amount of annotation data, the attribute space of the nodes in an interaction network is high dimensional as a single protein may be linked to hundreds of annotations. however, these state-of-the-art approaches are not designed for clustering high-dimensional attributes of go annotated interaction networks. for instance, in  <cit> , a "semantic" distance function is used to measure semantic similarities between nodes with multiple mips complex annotations. the curse of dimensionality limits the applicability of such an approach on go annotations  <cit> . to the best of our knowledge, no existing method directly addresses our need for generating overlapping clusters from high-dimensional attributed graphs. note that existing subspace clustering approaches that allow overlapping subspace clusters typically produce a huge number of clusters that are difficult to interpret  <cit> .

lastly, the high dependency on interaction topology makes graph clustering ineffective for many context specific networks. although there are many networks associated with diseases, there are few, if any, with complete interaction knowledge available. the high probability of false positive interactions may also occur. this hampers accurate identification of cohesive clusters.

RESULTS
experiment settings
we have implemented fuse in scala and java. we now present the experiments conducted to evaluate the performance of fuse and report some of the results obtained. we used the coverage metric to evaluate the fraction of the annotated protein interaction network covered by a summary. a functional summary with high coverage is desirable because it is more representative of the underlying interaction network than a summary with low coverage. additionally, the redundancy metric is the average number of functional clusters each protein belongs to. this is an indicator of the amount of cluster overlap in the summary. detailed definitions are described in the methods section. the ppi datasets employed in this study are shown in table  <dig>  biological process , molecular function , and cellular component  go annotations are used. unless specified otherwise, we set β =  <dig> , b =  <dig>  and d =  <dig> in order to balance coverage and redundancy of the functional summaries. we assign all edge weights be  <dig> . all experiments were run on a  <dig>  ghz intel core  <dig> duo t <dig> machine, with  <dig> gb memory, and a  <dig> gb sata disk.

dataset
currently, there does not exist any gold standard to compare functional summaries of ppis. typically, biological graph clustering approaches use mips complex annotations  <cit>  as gold standard data for testing cluster quality. these annotations, however, are limited to complexes and not for other functional clusters like pathways. go annotation data is also used as gold standard for evaluating clustering algorithms. as our approach utilizes attributes of go, using go annotations as gold standard evaluation may lead to results biased in favor of fuse. instead, we obtained a different set of curated attributes as gold standard-the molecule class annotations from hprd-which is distinct from go attributes. note that these annotations are only available in the h. sapiens dataset. consequently, we use this dataset for the comparative study. to create a gold standard reference summary, we generated a network from subgraphs induced from the hprd network using nodes grouped by their molecule class attribute, signifying the molecular functional groups within the network. subgraphs from five functional groups corresponding to subgraphs of proteins classified as g protein coupled receptor, protease inhibitor, rna binding protein, cytoskeletal associated protein, and calcium binding protein are extracted and merged to form the reference summary network . fuse and state-of-the-art graph clustering methods are then evaluated on this network to determine whether the graph can be partitioned and summarized to reconstruct the gold standard functional groups.

fuse vs graph clustering methods
we compare the performance of fuse with four state-of-the-art graph clustering methods for life sciences applications, namely markov clustering   <cit> , mcode  <cit> , and nemo  <cit> . we also compare fuse with csv  <cit> , a recent cohesive subgraph visualization method. note that in order to obtain higher order modules of a ppi, the current approach is to first use an existing graph clustering method on the network to generate the clusters followed by function assignment. for example, in krogan et al.  <cit> , the global yeast ppi is first clustered using mcl to generate non-overlapping clusters. then, each cluster is compared against mips complex annotations  <cit>  and the complex annotation with the greatest overlap is assigned to represent the cluster.

cluster quality comparison
we first emphasize on the qualities of an ideal summarization. first, the generated clusters have to be representative of the underlying graph, which implies that coverage of the clustering should be sufficiently high. second, attribute purity  <cit>  of the clusterings should correspond to the functional groups that were merged apriori. this can be determined through the purity of the molecule class attribute within the proteins in each cluster. each functional group should also be well-represented. we use precision, recall, and f-measure to quantify these features. for each cluster, we determine the molecule class functional group that best matches the cluster. the purity of that cluster is then defined as the proportion of nodes in the cluster that belong to the best matching group. as a functional group may be represented by several smaller clusters, we define recall for each functional group as total coverage of the functional group among the clusters that best matches that functional group. then, the precision of a clustering is defined as the average purity among all clusters. the recall of a clustering is defined as the average recall among all functional groups. lastly, the f-measure  provides an overall measure of clustering quality.

observe that fuse generates summary with significantly higher f-measure score compared to the graph clustering-based approaches for all values of k. in other words, fuse may generate summaries at multiple levels of complexity while remaining representative of the underlying graph. observe that, although nemo, csv, and mcode generate clusters with high precision, the recall scores are very low . this is because these two approaches identify highly cohesive subgraphs, which tend to be part of protein complexes. csv in particular are limited to identification of near-clique structures. proteins in complexes belong to the same functional groups and hence the high precision. however as mentioned earlier, biological networks are not comprised solely of complexes. consequently, majority of the underlying network was poorly represented by these approaches due to heavy bias towards complexes. specifically, most of the clusters match the rna binding protein class of proteins, leaving other groups barely represented. for instance, the protease inhibitor subgraph is not well represented because of its inherent loose structure. although the recall score of mcl is relatively higher as this method is known to perform very well in biological clustering applications, it is still below  <dig> . note that the mcl approach failed to partition the underlying network into five clusters representing the five functional groups. the csv approach, on the other hand, were not able to generate larger number of partitions.

notice that these existing approaches indirectly affect the summary complexity whereas fuse allows direct adjustment of summary size, which explains why summaries at any level of detail can be obtained by the latter. figure  <dig> shows that fuse generates summaries at different granularity without greatly affecting the precision and recall of the clusterings. the peak f-measure score of  <dig>  is obtained in fuse at k =  <dig>  corresponding to the five gold standard functional groups that comprise the dataset. observe that the recall and precision scores are equally high. as cluster granularity deviates from the underlying five functional groups, obviously the f-measure score drops.

function representativeness comparison
the accuracy and representativeness of the function assigned to each cluster is key to generating high quality functional maps. here, we introduce measures that quantify the representativeness of functions assigned to each clusters and compared fuse to graph clustering methods in this aspect.

to obtain the functional landscape of a ppi, graph clustering methods often assign function to clusters through functional enrichment techniques. to this end, we compute the statistical significance of association of the cluster with every go term based on the hypergeometric distribution  <cit> . the term with the best p-value is assigned as the representative function, denoted by ar ∈ Δ, of the cluster. to evaluate the representativeness of this assigned function, we reuse the precision and recall measures introduced earlier with slight modification. specifically, the representative purity of a cluster c is defined as the proportion of nodes in the cluster that are annotated with the representative function, i.e. |{v∈c:▵v=1}||{v∈c}|. we also define representative recall for each functional group as total coverage of the functional group among the clusters that has the functional group assigned as representative function, i.e. |{v∈c:▵v=1}||{v∈v:▵v=1}|. then, the precision of the representative functions is defined as the average representative purity among all clusters, and the recall of the representative functions is defined as the average representative recall among all functional groups.

effects of user-defined parameters
effect of parameter k
recall that the user-defined parameter k controls the granularity of the summary. intuitively, as k increases the amount of information contained within the summary as well as its complexity increase. figure  <dig> reports the effect of k on the summaries of test datasets. as k increases, the summary information content , denoted by sic, rises rapidly until it saturates to a peak value before tapering off.

  sic= ∑c∈s⊖-ψc|v|logp) 

where p) is the probability that a protein in network is annotated with term u or its descendants. note that summary profit cannot be used for comparing summaries with different k values because it does not make any assumption about the information content of a go term attribute. in contrast, sic measure is summary profit with a twist - small clusters are weighted higher than large clusters. this allows one to compare information content of summaries with different k values. other factors being equal, a summary with many small clusters will contain more information than a single large cluster. the above results imply that k is useful up to a certain value, after which increasing k only increases summary complexity while providing little information gain.

effect of parameters b and d
we investigated the effect of user-defined parameters b and d on summary coverage and redundancy. we use the global s. cerevisiae dataset with k =  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows that increasing b or decreasing d lowers overall summary redundancy at the expense of lower summary coverage. on the other hand, when d is increased or b is decreased, both summary redundancy and coverage increases. an intuitive explanation of this phenomenon is that more cluster overlap penalty means fewer combination of clusters to choose from, lowering the likelihood of finding a summary with high coverage. both parameters allow users to control the coverage and redundancy tradeoff.

runtime and scalability
we now assess the scalability of fuse with respect to network size and |sΔ|. note that the latter feature is important as it will continue to grow as more annotation information becomes available. to assess the scalability with respect to network size, we generated synthetic networks of vertex size |v | =  <dig> to |v | =  <dig>  for every term t, a vertex has a 2% probability of being annotated with it. the number of terms is |sΔ| =  <dig>  the edge density of the synthetic networks is such that the probability that a pair of vertices interact is  <dig> , resulting in an average of  <dig> million edges in a network of  <dig> vertices. summary granularity is set to k =  <dig>  to measure the effect of |sΔ| on running time, we generated synthetic networks by varying |sΔ| ranging from |Δ| =  <dig> to |Δ| =  <dig> 

case study on ad network
in this section, we construct a low and a high resolution functional summaries of the ad network to illustrate the benefits of fuse in providing a higher level functional view of the underlying ppi. a low resolution summary delineates broad functional overview of the processes related to the disease whereas a high resolution summary provides in-depth functional landscape of the disease, revealing associations between processes related to the disease. figure  <dig> shows a low resolution summary  of the ad network. it indicates that the ad network is represented by an interconnection of several key processes, include protein phosphorylation , cell-cell signaling , and microtubule-based transport and localization  processes.

at the center of the summary lies protein folding and calcium ion homeostasis pathways . protein misfolding is central to ad pathogenesis  <cit> . misfolded amyloid-β accumulation is shown to induce calcium overload, leading to a variety of structural and functional disruption in neurons  <cit> . the two functional clusters are among the nodes with the highest degree in the summary. cell fate processes that trigger or inhibit differentiation and cell fate  are also linked to ad  <cit> . it has been suggested that wnt signaling dysregulation, a key developmental pathway, leads to reduced synaptic plasticity and function in ad  <cit> . processes such as peptide cross-linking and negative regulation of angiogenesis  imply vascular roles in ad pathogenesis  <cit> .

from signaling regulation perspective, five major signaling pathways are implicated - small gtpase , notch , wnt receptor , glutamate , and g-protein coupled receptor signaling path-ways . several functional clusters connect with multiple signaling pathways, indicating that signaling pathways crosstalk in ad pathogenesis. for instance, the serine/threonine kinase gsk-3β, a potential therapeutic target, is known to be regulator of both the g-protein coupled receptor pathway and the wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway  <cit> . ps <dig> may be involved in regulating both notch and wnt pathways in ad  <cit> .

the tight interplay of multiple pathways and processes in the aforementioned functional summary of ad network highlights the complexity of the disease. the disease remains poorly understood despite decades of research. while the summary does not suggest causal relationships, in part because of the undirected nature of the fsg, we hope that by having a global, big picture view of process-process interactions, researchers can better identify the causative mechanisms of ad. most studies considered an aspect of the processes in isolation. an integrative study, however, may lead to a more consistent view of the disease that addresses distinct, often competing hypotheses.

inferring functional cluster hubs
structural information provided by the summaries presents an opportunity to study the topology and connectivity of higher order abstractions of the underlying ppi. here we analyzed the association patterns of functional clusters in summaries of the global h. sapiens ppi. to this end, we generated cellular component  and biological process  summaries of the human network. for each summary type, we varied the level of detail by setting k from  <dig> to  <dig> 

in light of heavy-tailed distribution of functional cluster degrees at higher k values, we identified functional cluster hubs in the summary of the human network  . while patil and nakamura defined hub as proteins having degree of more than  <dig>  <cit> , we chose a higher threshold such that they correspond to the  <dig> most connected functional clusters. the list of functional hubs is shown in table  <dig> 

we observed that cc cluster hubs in s. cerevisiae can be categorized into several major functional groups. a significant percentage of the cluster hubs - such as cytosolic large ribosomal subunit, cytosolic small ribosomal subunit, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4f complex, preribosome, small subunit precursor, preribosome, large subunit precursor, and polysome- are core to regulation and functioning of protein translation. it is unsurprising that these functional clusters have high degree, since every protein must be translated or regulated by these machinery. the complexity of this mechanism also suggests that it requires many processes to regulate it.

complexes involved in chromatin remodeling and transcription, including nuclear nucleosome, ino <dig> complex, replication fork protection complex, astra complex, and swr <dig> complex, are also highly represented. the functional cluster vacuolar proton-transporting v-type atpase complex is known to have diverse roles and is associated with a wide array of processes  <cit> .

apart from that, we also observed the existence of several 'currency structures', i.e., structures that may be acted upon by proteins from multiple processes. they are generally not specific to a single bio-logical process. we classify clusters nuclear nucleosome, nuclear microtubule, cytoplasmic microtubule, and extracellular region as such.

next, we analyzed the bp functional cluster hubs. from table  <dig>  we found many translation related processes . chromatin assembly and remodeling processes  also served as key process hubs. finally, we found major post-translation protein modification and transport processes, such as protein refolding, atp synthesis coupled proton transport, cotranslational protein targeting to membrane, and proteasome assembly, acting as hubs.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we propose fuse, a novel data-driven and generic algorithm for generating functional sum-maries at multiple resolutions from a ppi, providing a high level view of its functional landscape. it exploits mdl principle  <cit>  to generate the "best" summary from both interaction and annotation data by maximizing information gain for a specific resolution. our experimental study with real-world ppis revealed that fuse is effective and have higher accuracy compared to graph clustering techniques in ppi summarization. it is also robust against incomplete interaction knowledge . we note that the graph clustering techniques have the ability to uncover novel complexes, whereas fuse is designed to determine process-process, complex-complex, and process-complex associations with higher confidence. in this aspect, graph clustering and fuse play complementary roles. as part of future work, we intend to use fuse-generated summaries as training data for network comparison of various protein interaction networks at functional level. we believe such comparison may yield interesting findings on function-function and process-process relationships among different networks.

