BACKGROUND
cichlids are famous for their astonishing rate of phenotypic diversification and speciation. with over  <dig> described species, cichlid fish form one of the most diverse and species-rich groups of animals  <cit> . lacustrine cichlids in africa and in the neotropics are well-known examples of adaptive radiations  <cit> . in particular, the cichlid radiations in nicaraguan crater lakes  provide a promising opportunity to study the early stages of speciation and diversification. this is because members of the midas cichlid species complex  have diverged repeatedly in several crater lakes, both sympatrically and allopatrically, often within a few thousand years  <cit> . little is known so far about the molecular and developmental mechanisms that drive the observed phenotypic diversity between recently diverged species. the midas cichlid complex underwent a rapid diversification within very short time spans  and, interestingly, repeatedly evolved several adaptive traits  in parallel in multiple crater lakes . therefore, midas cichlids are an excellent model system for the comparative study of the phenotype-genotype relationship.figure  <dig> 
range and prominent phenotypic differences of members of the midas cichlid species complex.  map of the pacific coast of nicaragua in central america. besides the large nicaraguan lakes , multiple crater lakes  have appeared in the course of the last  <dig>  years. these crater lakes have been colonized by midas cichlids from the large lakes, resulting in new species.  midas cichlids from lake xiloá, amphilophus xiloaensis, the focal species of this study.  three selected traits that are interesting from an evolutionary-developmental angle. in the large lakes and in many crater lakes, cichlid species and morphs show differences in coloration, body shape and lip shape.
summary of discovered midas cichlid species



species
described by
endemic to lake
coloration
body shape
lip shape
genome availability

a. citrinellus

a. labiatus

a. zaliosus

a. astorquii

a. chancho

a. flaveolus

a. globosus

a. supercilius

a. amarillo

a. sagittae

a. xiloaensis

a. viridis

a. tolteca
the  <dig> species of the midas cichlid species complex listed with their range, a selection of their observed phenotypic variations  and availability of a sequenced genome .



the midas cichlid species complex currently includes  <dig> described species . two ancestral “source” species occur in the big lakes, lake managua and lake nicaragua - amphilophus labiatus  <cit>  and a. citrinellus  <cit> . these two species repeatedly and independently colonized the much younger crater lakes of nicaragua and gave rise to several endemic species. since the late 1970s, many endemic crater lake species have been described. six species, a. zaliosus, a. astorquii, a. chancho, a. flaveolus, a. globosus and a. supercilius were recently described and are endemic to crater lake apoyo  <cit> . four other species of this species complex are endemic to crater lake xiloá   <cit>  and one to lake asososca managua, a. tolteca  <cit> . despite these numerous recently-described species, more midas cichlids certainly await formal species description  <cit> .

the focal species of this study, amphilophus xiloaensis, was first described in  <dig>  <cit>  and is endemic to lake xiloá . this crater lake is estimated to be approximately 6100 years old  <cit> . lake xiloá has the greatest fish species diversity of any of the nicaraguan crater lakes  <cit> , including four midas cichlids with an exceptionally high haplotype diversity relative to the lake’s age  <cit> . since these species are so young, they share ancient polymorphisms  <cit>  and some hybridization still occurs, as has been reported for african cichlids  <cit> .

many studies have assessed the early ontogeny of fishes in classic model organisms such as zebrafish, danio rerio  <cit> ; medaka, oryzias latipes  <cit> ; stickleback, gasterosteus aculeatus  <cit>  and rainbow trout, oncorhynchus mykiss  <cit> . however, there have been only a few studies on cichlid fishes so far, most of which deal with the development of african species such as oreochromis niloticus, oreochromis mossambicus, labeotropheus fuelleborni and labeotropheus trewavasae  <cit> . developmental studies of neotropical cichlids have also been pursued, including a very detailed description of the development of the south american cichlid cichlasoma dimerus  <cit> . because ontogeny can differ strongly among species, there is a need for more developmental work  <cit> .

midas cichlids are a famous example of parallel evolution and rapid diversification  <cit> . this makes them interesting, not only from an evolutionary and ecological standpoint, but also from a developmental “evo-devo” perspective. a detailed description of the embryonic development of the midas cichlid is still lacking. the present study aims to be a foundation for future studies examining the genetic and developmental factors that lead to phenotypic diversification among an extremely young species of a particularly species-rich lineage of cichlid fish.

RESULTS
description of the early development of the midas cichlid
we document in detail the early development of the midas cichlid, amphilophus xiloaensis, during the first seven days following fertilization at 28°c. we illustrate and discuss the main features of  <dig> developmental stages in the first seven days of development and compare them to previous descriptions of teleost development. as a reference, we mainly use the well-documented developmental staging of the zebrafish  <cit> , the medaka  <cit>  and two of the most comprehensive descriptions of cichlid development - the nile tilapia oreochromis niloticus  <cit>  and the south american cichlid cichlasoma dimerus  <cit> . lastly, we discuss differences in the rate of early development, which is comparatively slow in midas cichlids. the age of the embryos is given in hours post fertilization  or days after fertilization  at 28°c, unless otherwise indicated.

zygote period 
unfertilized or newly-fertilized eggs of a. xiloaensis have an ovoid shape, with the longitudinal axis longer  than the transverse axis  and the animal pole narrower than the vegetal pole . the egg is surrounded by the chorion, a translucent envelope that sticks closely to the egg . this persists throughout later developmental stages, when there is almost no perivitelline space between the chorion and the vitellus . the vitellus is composed of large dark-yellow yolk globules/platelets of varying sizes , giving it a grainy appearance, as reported previously for the midas cichlid and closely-related neotropical cichlids  <cit>  . the micropyle, the pore in the membrane that guides sperm to the oocyte  <cit> , has a funnel or cone-shaped configuration. it is surrounded by a tuft of filament that can best be observed with dark field illumination , and can only be seen until the first four to six cell divisions . after spawning  the eggs stick to each other and to the substrate, or to the petri dish under laboratory conditions, by a mucous secretion . in contrast to zebrafish  <cit> , the chorion does not swell and lift away from the fertilized egg during the zygote period, which lasts until the first cleavage occurs around  <dig>  h .figure  <dig> 
embryos during cleavage and blastula stages.  zygote stage ;  early 1-cell stage ;  late 1-cell stage ;  2-cell stage ;  4-cell stage ;  8-cell stage ;  16-cell stage ;  32-cell stage ;  64-cell stage . schemes illustrate the position of cells and cleavage planes from a top-down view . abbreviations: ap, animal pole; bm, blastomeres; ch, chorion; cp, cleavage plane; ft, filament tuft; mi, micropyle; ml, mucous layer; ps, perivitelline space; vp, vegetal pole; y, yolk. scale bar = 500 μm.
micropylar region and mucous layer.  at the one-cell stage, the micropylar region is surrounded by the filament tuft.  the mucous layer adheres the eggs to the substrate and/or to one another at low  and high magnification . abbreviations: ch, chorion; mi, micropyle; ft, filament tuft; ml, mucous layer. scale bar = 500 μm.



one-cell stage . fertilization induces cytoplasmic movements at the animal pole, where the blastodisc increases in volume and replaces the yolk . the blastodisc gradually segregates from the yolk and forms a more prominent, clearly defined cell at  <dig>  hours, and the perivitelline space becomes visible. the cytoplasm is uniform, but darker than in other teleosts  <cit>  .

cleavage period 
after  <dig>  hours, cleavages occur every 35 minutes . the cleavage mode is meroblastic  discoidal, as in other teleosts. the six synchronously-occurring divisions of this period result in stereotyped arrays of blastomeres, as reported previously  <cit>  . the egg is telolecithal and the meroblastic divisions keep a connection between yolk and blastodisc during the cleavage period.

two-cell stage . the first cleavage furrow is vertically oriented , dividing the blastodisc into two cells  of equal size. both cells stay connected to the underlying yolk  .

four-cell stage . in the second division, the cleavage plane is oriented in a right angle to the first cleavage plane, resulting in four blastomeres arranged in a  <dig> ×  <dig> array if viewed from the animal pole .

eight-cell stage . the third set of cleavages occurs in two planes parallel to the first cleavage plane, dividing the four blastomeres into eight blastomeres. they are arranged in a  <dig> ×  <dig> array. viewed laterally, only four cells are visible .

16-cell stage . the fourth cleavage plane also occurs on two planes, this time parallel to the second cleavage plane. the two rows of four blastomeres are divided into four rows of four blastomeres  .

32-cell stage . the fifth set of cleavages generates a  <dig> ×  <dig> array of cells, although the pattern is less stereotypic than in previous stages. all cells are still in contact with the yolk. often, the blastodisc curves around the yolk, shaping the underlying yolk in a dome-like structure .

64-cell stage . during the sixth set of divisions, cells start to be cleaved completely from the others, forming a second layer of cells on top of those that are still connected to the yolk . unlike in previous stages, there are no regularly-patterned cleavage planes or stereotypical cell arrangements .

blastula period 
the blastula period extends from the 128-cell stage until gastrulation. cleavages occur with increasing irregularity. the blastodisc acquires a more uniform appearance, and starts to thin and spread around the yolk . at 50% epiboly, when half of the yolk is covered by the blastodisc, gastrulation begins .figure  <dig> 
embryos during late blastula and early gastrulation phases.  128-cell stage ;  early high stage ;  late high stage ;  sphere stage ;  dome stage ;  15% epiboly ;  20% epiboly .  30% epiboly . the position of the germ ring  is indicated by the dashed lines. abbreviations: b, blastodisc; bd, blastoderm; es, embryonic shield, ez, evacuation zone, gr, germ ring; ps, perivitelline space. scale bar = 500 μm.



morula stage . cleavages continue to occur. as in the 64-cell stage divisions, no clear cleavage planes can be identified. the seventh, eighth and ninth cleavages result in  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> blastomeres, respectively. consequently, cells gradually become smaller, without a clear increase in the size of the blastodisc .

high stage . the blastodisc is a thick, ball-shaped structure on top of the yolk, the hallmark of this stage compared to later stages .

sphere stage . after the high stage, the blastodisc gradually flattens, resulting in a spherical shape .

dome stage . the flattening of the blastodisc continues, starting to cover the top of the yolk, which bulges towards the animal in a dome-like shape, as described for zebrafish by kimmel et al.  <cit>  .

early epiboly stages . the blastodisc, which gradually transforms into a uniformly thick layer, starts to cover the yolk and is now called the blastoderm. this stage can be measured by the percentage of epiboly. we defined two stages of early epiboly depending on how far the blastoderm margin  has spread over the yolk: 15% and 20%, measured by the ratio between the distances between the animal pole and blastoderm margin, and between the animal and vegetal pole .

gastrula period 
when 30% epiboly is reached, cells start to accumulate at one position on the dorsal side of the blastoderm margin. gastrulation starts at this position by the involution of cells, eventually giving rise to the three germ layers. epiboly continues until the blastoderm completely covers the yolk. in contrast to zebrafish segmentation, the next period of development, starts before 100% epiboly is reached .figure  <dig> 
embryos during gastrulation and segmentation stages.  50% epiboly ;  70% epiboly ;  80% epiboly ;  90% epiboly ;   <dig> somites ;   <dig> somites ;   <dig> somites ;  pre-hatching stage . the position of the germ ring  is indicated by the dashed lines. abbreviations: br, brain; ea, embryonic axis; fb, forebrain; gr, germ ring; he, heart; hb, hindbrain; l, lens; ym, yolk melanophores; mb, midbrain; opr, optic primordium; ov, otic vesicle; s, somites; tb, tailbud; yp, yolk plug; scale bar = 500 μm.



30% epiboly – shield stage . when epiboly has progressed to 30% of the yolk, a thickening appears at one position of the blastoderm margin . this thickening is referred to as the “shield”  <cit>  and is the result of cellular movements. gastrulation and cell involution take place in this part of the blastoderm . in zebrafish, this stage occurs later, at 50% epiboly. due to epiboly and convergence towards the embryonic shield, the blastoderm becomes thin at the animal pole. this is referred to as the evacuation zone, because of the reduced number of cells  <cit>  .

late epiboly stages . at 50% epiboly, the dorsal side of the blastoderm thickens further and the future embryonic axis becomes visible, with the anterior end in the direction of the animal pole . after 70% of the yolk is covered, the speed of epiboly continues at a constant rate of about 5% per hour . later stages of epiboly are characterized by the presence of the yolk plug, the section of yolk at the vegetal pole that has not yet been encompassed by the blastoderm .

segmentation period 
during the segmentation period, the long axis of the embryo forms and extends further, even before epiboly is complete. structures including the somites, tail, eye and auditory vesicle begin to take shape. additionally, the brain starts to grow in size. pigmentation appears first on the yolk sac and later on the body axis. .

6-somite stage/90% epiboly . somitogenesis starts before the end of epiboly. at 90% epiboly, eight somites have formed and the tail bud appears at the posterior end of the body axis. at the anterior end of the embryo, the brain primordium, without visible morphological subdivisions, and the optic primordia, which evaginates from the future diencephalon part of the brain primordium are visible. the otic  vesicle is forming in the posterior head region. .

12-somite stage . at the 12-somite stage, epiboly is finished and the entire yolk is covered by blastoderm. the tail bud and optic primordia become more prominent .

16-somite stage . at the 16-somite stage, the first melanophores appear on top of the yolk sac as well as in the posterior part of the embryo. the tail extends further and starts to curl inside the chorion. the pericardial sac forms between the anteriormost region of the yolk and the head region, slightly lifting the head from the yolk .

24-somite stage . at 24-somite stage, the lens primordium can easily be seen. the heart begins to develop, and myotomal contractions start to occur .

pre-hatching stage . the eye and lens have expanded in size and the head thickens due to brain growth. at this point, the three brain vesicles - the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain - have become structurally differentiated and can easily be distinguished . muscle contractions become more frequent. embryos hatch between  <dig> and 60 h. because hatching is variable, it is not particularly useful as a staging index. the tail is still curled and the head is bent around the yolk. the elongated, tube-shaped heart, which cannot yet be morphologically divided into atrium and ventricle, starts to beat at this stage .

post-hatching period 
in the four days after hatching, the embryos  rapidly start to develop the paired fins and craniofacial skeleton . the rudiments of all organs are present and their morphogenesis  continues until the end of the first week of development.figure  <dig> 
larvae in early post-hatching stages .  post-hatching stage ;  early pharyngula period ;  high-pec stage ;  open-mouth stage ;  protruding-jaw stage ;  one-week larvae . abbreviations: a, anus; ag, adhesive glands; at, atrium; dm, dorsal melanophore ; em, eye melanophores; ffv, fin fold veins; fr, fin rays; gi, gills; he, heart; hb, hindbrain; hm, head melanophores; lj, lower jaw; mhb, midbrain-hindbrain boundary; mo, mouth opening; my, myomeres; ov, otic vesicle; pfb, pectoral fin bud; rp, rays primordia; sb, swim bladder; v, ventricle; vm, ventral melanophore . scale bars = 1 mm.
head and heart development in post-hatching stages .  post-hatching stage ;  early pharyngula period ;  high-pec stage ;  protruding-jaw stage ;  open-mouth stage ;  one-week larvae .  the developing heart at 66 h , 96 h  and 168 h . abbreviations: agp, adhesive gland primordium; at, atrium; av, atrio-ventricular valve; cb, cerebellum; dag, dorsal adhesive gland; fb, forebrain; gi, gills; he, heart; ht, heart tube; ir, iridophores; l, lens; lj, lower jaw; hm, head melanophores; mb, midbrain; mhb, midbrain-hindbrain boundary; ov, otic vesicle; pfb, pectoral fin bud; rh, rhombomeres; v, ventricle; vag, ventral adhesive gland. a-f, i: scale bar = 500 μm; g: scale bar = 200 μm; h: scale bar = 100 μm.
detail of tail, melanophore and xanthophore development in post-hatching stages .  caudal fin development at post-hatching stage , protruding-mouth stage  and one-week larvae stage .  formation and dendrite extension of melanophores at high-pec stage  and one-week larvae stage .  xanthophores on head  and in the dorsal stripe above the yolk  visualized under uv light.  scheme summarizing the chromatophore distribution at 168 h/7d. abbreviations: dm, dorsal melanophore ; dx, dorsal xanthophores; hm, head melanophores; hx, head xanthophores; ffv, fin fold veins; fr, fin rays; my, myomeres; vm, ventral melanophore . a-c, f, g. scale bars: 500 μm. d-e. scale bars: 250 μm.



post-hatching stage . melanophores start to form ventrally in what is called the “ventral stripe” in zebrafish  <cit> . unlike in zebrafish, no melanophores are formed in the dorsal and lateral stripe during the early stages of development . in contrast to zebrafish, but similarly to medaka, stickleback and other cichlids  <cit> , the yolk has no posterior extension. in zebrafish, a small projection of the yolk extends posteriorly up towards the anal region  <cit> . still, the yolk sac is not completely round, and forms a cone-like tip at the posterior end. further posterior to the end of the yolk sac, the digestive tract and anus can be seen. shortly after hatching, the adhesive gland apparatus forms. the apparatus consists of two pairs of glands in the dorsal head region above the midbrain  and one pair of glands anterior to the eye  . they are used by the larvae to attach to the substrate and to each other before they reach the free-swimming stage, as previously described in cichlids  <cit>  and the cave fish astyanax mexicanus  <cit> . under the described laboratory conditions in petri dishes, larvae mainly stick to particles such as remnants of the chorion that remain in the dish after hatching. thereby, groups of larvae may all connect to a single particle and group together. the first red blood cells start to move through the circulatory system; this allows for the better visualization of the developing heart, which retains its tube-shaped form .

early pharyngula period . the brain vesicles increase in size resulting in a further thickening of the head region  and the isthmus, the connection between mid- and hindbrain, becomes more prominent . the head starts to lift from the yolk. also, vascularization starts along the ventro-caudal part of the medial fin fold  . the tail has straightened and the surface of the fin fold has increased, especially ventrally . the adhesive glands are becoming more prominent at this stage .

high-pec stage . melanophores start to form in the eye , but only a few can be seen along the ventral zone of the body axis . the pectoral fins can be seen as elongated blade-shaped tissues projecting dorsally from the yolk. head and body axes now have nearly the same orientation and the head lifts up from the yolk . the brain ventricles, midbrain and isthmus can be seen more clearly . also, the heart can now be morphologically separated into the ventricular and atrial chamber, separated by the atrio-ventricular valve. the cardiac looping is already in progress, moving the atrium to a more dorsal position and transiently generating an s-shaped structure, comparable to heart development in zebrafish  <cit>  .

open-mouth stage . a few melanophores start to form dorsally, and eye melanophores have increased in density, causing the eye to become opaque . silvery reflective iridophores can be detected in the eye and become more prominent after the fifth day of development . the mouth opening and gills become visible . also, the chambers of the heart have become fully differentiated  and the caudal fin starts to form, acquiring a more rounded shape .

protruding-jaw stage . more melanophores form dorsally and appear for the first time in the head region. also the first few xanthophores start to appear after day six, and can be detected under uv light . they form both dorsally to the yolk and in the head region. they become more prominent after seven days of development . the ventral melanophores condense in the posterior part of the body, giving them a segmented appearance that correlates with myomere position while anteriorly and also dorsally to the heart they are a coherent mass of cells . the lower jaw extends anteriorly, stretching the head in a more anterior direction . the caudal fin starts to develop fin rays that are readily populated by melanophores . compared to earlier stages, the strong vascularization in the ventral medial fin fold becomes less evident .

one-week larvae . the larva further increases in size, and the gills can be seen more clearly than in previous stages. the jaw becomes thicker and more strongly vascularized, and the larva is able to open and close its mouth freely . the melanophores increase in number, and they aggregate more clearly . some of them project dendrites dorsally into the space between two myomeres. xanthophores can now be detected both on the head and in the dorsal stripe in close proximity to melanophores . they appear colorless until day seven both in reflected and under transmitted light, and can only be detected using uv-light . silvery reflective iridophores are less prominent than in zebrafish, medaka and tilapia  <cit>  and can only be detected in the eye . the caudal fin rays have become thicker, and elongated melanophores are arranged around them . the heart is now fully developed and can be divided into the sinus venosus, atrium, ventricle, and bulbus arteriosus  <cit> . the ventricular walls have thickened, indicated by the reduced visibility of red blood cells . the swim bladder develops on the ventral side of the body, dorsal to the posterior end of the yolk plug . between days seven and eight, the swim bladder inflates and the larva begins to swim upright.

midas cichlid development is greatly influenced by temperature
the early development of the midas cichlid is slower than that of teleost genetic models such as medaka and zebrafish. however, it is comparable to the african nile tilapia . we compared the homologous developmental stages to the south american cichlid cichlasoma dimerus and the zebrafish danio rerio. we show that, when raised at the same temperature , the developmental rate between fertilization and 100% epiboly is approximately two times slower than in c. dimerus and over four times slower than in zebrafish . in particular, the rate of epiboly seems to be decelerated compared to zebrafish, a phenomenon that might be related to the large egg size. the influence of temperature on developmental rate is far greater than in zebrafish, where there is only a  <dig> -fold difference between embryos developing at 25°c and 31°c  <cit> . in midas cichlids, the difference is  <dig> -fold. despite this, later developmental stages seem to be less affected by temperature, with only minor differences in hatching time, development of pectoral fins and mouth opening between c. dimerus and a. xiloaensis .figure  <dig> 
the effects of temperature on developmental time. developmental rates in d. rerio  at  <dig>   <dig>  and 33°c , c. dimerus  at 25°c  and the midas cichlids at  <dig>   <dig> and 31°c , standardized to zebrafish development at  <dig> °c .
summary of midas cichlid development and comparison to the development of other teleosts.  summary of the most important steps of the first week of midas cichlid development at 28°c.  comparison between this study and three further studies on teleosts including c. dimerus, a south american cichlid  <cit> , o. niloticus, an african cichlid  <cit>  and d. rerio, the zebrafish  <cit> .



discussion
we describe the embryonic and larval development of amphilophus xiloaensis as a representative of the midas cichlid species complex. midas cichlids are an excellent example of rapid adaptation and fast speciation in sympatry  <cit>  and parallel evolution  <cit> . they allow us to integrate studies of genomics, development, adaptive radiation and phenotypic divergence into the field of “evo-devo”. the rate of divergence in many traits, including coloration and pigmentation, morphology of body shapes, lips, jaws and teeth as well as neural systems such as vision is much higher in cichlid fishes than in most other vertebrate groups  <cit> . in nicaraguan crater lakes, speciation and phenotypic diversification took place over a very short time and endemic species have been described even in crater lakes that are less than 2000 years old  <cit> . at least eleven species have evolved in less than  <dig>  years, carrying various traits that are divergent from the ancestral population  <cit> . studies from other cichlids  <cit>  and from sticklebacks  <cit>  suggest that a few mutations of major effect are expected to play important roles in driving phenotypic richness and ecological diversity. the mutation rate of midas cichlids has been estimated to be between  <dig>  × 10− <dig> and  <dig>  × 10− <dig> mutations per nucleotide per generation, comparable to the vertebrate average  <cit> . still, genetic differences between different midas cichlid species are small due to their long generation times  and recent time of divergence .

differences in developmental pathways  <cit>  are often involved in the basis of ecologically relevant phenotypic differences  <cit>  such as those observed in the midas species complex, including body shape and craniofacial shape  <cit> , lip shape  <cit> , coloration  <cit>  and pharyngeal jaw morphology  <cit>  . although most of these phenotypes arise later during ontogeny, differences might be already detectable on a subtle morphological and gene expression level – especially for craniofacial phenotypes associated with benthic-limnetic differences, as recently shown in other species . to examine if inter-species morphological and gene expression differences are indeed already present at early stages of midas cichlid development, a standardization of embryonic timing and a comprehensive - and comparative -staging system are necessary as a baseline for hypothesis-driven research in this field. this staging forms the basis for future comparative developmental work on different species of midas cichlids and closely related neotropical cichlids  <cit> . since development is greatly influenced by temperature, easily recognizable landmarks, along with a standardized temperature-time protocol, must be defined. this will ease the collection of comparable stages for molecular biological experiments, such as in situ hybridization or rna extraction.

in midas cichlids, embryonic traits such as the prominent adhesive glands and the early melanophore and xanthophore patterns differ from other model teleosts such as medaka and zebrafish. adhesive glands have recently been studied in the cavefish astyanax mexicanus  and described in other cichlids  <cit> , but are not present in medaka and zebrafish.

the embryonic melanophore patterns we observe are very different from model teleosts such as medaka and zebrafish  <cit> . the prominent dorsal and lateral melanophore stripes are almost completely absent in midas cichlid embryos, suggesting different migration patterns of neural crest cells, which are thought to generate all but the yolk melanophore in teleosts  <cit> . it has been proposed that some melanophores migrate from the yolk to populate the embryo, especially in the ventral zone; however, there has been some controversy surrounding this claim  <cit> . further histological analysis using neural crest markers could solve this controversy and clarify the genetic cause of the different melanophore patterns observed in midas cichlids.

the embryos of substrate brooders such as the midas cichlid are also easier to use for genetic manipulations such as transgenesis than the massive, yolky eggs of mouth-brooding cichlids from the african great lakes, although these were the first species in which transgenesis was successfully performed  <cit> . functional assays like those performed in zebrafish can also be carried out in midas cichlids . large clutch sizes and the slow development before the one-cell stage allow for the injection of considerable amounts of eggs. this method will allow researchers to transiently map the influence of gene overexpression or the activity of regulatory elements. additionally, genetic manipulations by morpholinos or crispr-cas, both of which have been shown to work in the nile tilapia  <cit> , might also be applicable in the midas cichlid. transcriptomic and genomic data sets, including a high-quality draft genome of a. citrinellus and low-coverage genomic information of eleven midas cichlid complex species  <cit> , is available to support these functional explorations . one limitation is the long generation time - about nine to twelve months under laboratory conditions. despite this drawback, it may still be possible to generate stable transgenes or knockouts, which would be relevant for experiments in neotropical, substrate-brooding cichlids. furthermore, the midas cichlid could also serve as an excellent outgroup for the african cichlid species flocks, allowing for functional screens or assays of genes and cis-regulatory elements  <cit> . as shown here, midas cichlids can be easily maintained, bred, stripped and raised in large numbers under laboratory conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
it is still not fully understood which genes and mutations underlie the parallel evolution of traits and the quickly-evolving species richness exhibited by midas cichlids. this study adds valuable information about the course of early development to help tackle questions about the molecular basis of phenotypic novelties from an evolutionary-developmental, evo-devo angle. the staging system in a representative midas cichlid species will serve as a foundation for future experiments and ease interspecies comparisons. it will help to reproducibly select standardized developmental stages during development to analyze gene function and differences in gene expression and patterns. midas cichlids have embryonic traits  that differ from the classical developmental model teleosts, medaka and zebrafish. it will be interesting to analyze the genetic causes of these differences. we also propose the midas cichlid as a new model organism for evolutionary developmental research. in addition to the availability of genetic resources and the possibility to perform functional experiments, midas cichlids and their adaptively relevant phenotypic diversity are well-described from an ecological and evolutionary standpoint. these advantages, taken together, make this system very attractive for evolutionary-developmental questions.

