BACKGROUND
cells control the abundance of proteins by means of diverse mechanisms. one such mechanism is the regulation of transcription, which is a continuous process whereby many factors combine to ensure appropriate rates of protein synthesis. understanding such complex processes is one of the main objectives in computational biology. in its early stages, transcription is controlled, among other mechanisms, by the binding of proteins called transcription factors  to specific regions of a given chromosome called transcription factor binding sites . these interactions between proteins and dna usually take place upstream from the gene, close to the transcription start site , in the so-called promoter region of the gene.

one of the biggest issues in identifying tfbss is that a single binding protein can bind to different dna sequences. related dna sequences to which the same tf can bind are grouped together into a tfbs motif. the identification of tfbss within a given set of dna sequences is an active area of research. in this context there exist two main approaches: i) the de novo discovery of motifs, and ii) the detection of tfbss using motifs that are already known.

de novo methods aim to find significant sub-sequence patterns within a set of tfbs sequences. some of the most popular approaches are meme  <cit> , gibbs sampling  <cit> , alignace  <cit> , and more recently priority and trawler  <cit> . for a review see  <cit> .

detection methods, on the other hand, focus on inferring new tfbss from known binding motifs. early detection methods assumed independence between positions within a putative tfbs sequence, e.g. in patser  <cit>  and consite  <cit> . however, it is now well established that this assumption is wrong  <cit> , and some methods that consider position dependency for modeling and finding tfbss using advanced hmm and bayesian models have appeared  <cit> . likewise, two recent detection methods have been developed that take into account interdependencies between tfbs positions. tomovic and oakeley proposed a method that incorporates a measure of positional interdependence into the overall score  <cit> . more recently, zare-mirakabad et al. developed a method based on joint information content and mutual information  <cit> . in this method, positional dependencies are taken into account by considering all pairwise combinations of positions .

the fact that tfbs sequences are usually very short means that the same or very similar sequences tend to occur by chance at a relatively high frequency. consequently one of the main goals in the prediction of tfbss is to reduce the false positive rate without compromising sensitivity. methods that take into account positional dependencies tend to be significantly more effective at meeting this challenge. however, there remains room for improvement. as we will show in the results section, existing methods have some drawbacks, such as overlearning of the training data, arbitrary threshold selection for testing dependencies, etc. the purpose of the work presented here is to provide a new method for measuring sequence-motif affinity that improves on existing approaches.

zadeh proposed fuzzy sets theory to mathematically model the imprecision inherent in certains concepts  <cit> . briefly, fuzzy sets theory allows an object to partially belong to a set with a membership degree between  <dig> and  <dig>  classical set theory is a special case of its fuzzy counterpart in which membership and certainty degrees are restricted to either  <dig> or  <dig>  atanassov proposed intuitionistic fuzzy sets  theory as an extension of the fuzzy sets theory  <cit> . ifss generalize the notion of a fuzzy set representing uncertainty with respect to both the degree of membership  and non-membership  of a set by allowing that the sum μ + ν ≤  <dig> 

owing to the fact that ifss are capable of modelling the uncertainty present in real-life situations, they have been widely applied during the past decades to a variety of problems . in recent years, it has been seen that the inherent uncertainty and noise that characterize biological data cannot always be modeled sufficiently well using probabilistic approaches and that, as a consequence, alternative approaches to modelling this uncertainty may be required  <cit> . in addition to the usual problems of missing values and noisy data associated with biological data, there exist some additional hidden factors that affect binding affinities in the context of sequence-motif scoring, e.g. cooperative binding and chromatin structure  <cit> . furthermore, the described motifs are subject to change as new experiments confirm new binding sites. in this work we make use of ifs theory to formally model the uncertainty associated with the problem of scoring dna sequences against tfbs motifs.

RESULTS
case studies
first, we wanted to show the ability of our proposed method, scintuit, to discriminate between the relative importance of poorly-conserved positions and well-conserved positions comparing it with the most representative scoring methods: i) scindep, a probabilistic method that assumes positional independence; ii) scdep, a scoring method proposed by tomovic and oakeley that take into account statistical interdependencies between tfbs positions  <cit> ; and iii) scmat, a scoring function proposed by zare-mirakabad et al. based on the dependency between all pairwise combinations of binding site positions  <cit> .

in figure  <dig> we show the binding sequences of the motif dof <dig> found in the jaspar database. it can be observed how the first position is highly conserved while the fifth position is poorly conserved. we then considered two sequences ): i) a sequence with a mismatch in the conserved position; and ii) a sequence with a mismatch in the poorly-conserved position. as has been explained above, it would be desirable that the score obtained for the case of the mismatch in the conserved position is lower than the scoring for the other sequence, as it shares the similarities in the most conserved positions of the motif. in table  <dig> we show the results for the three methods. it can be observed that our proposed scoring method discriminates between the two cases, while the other three approaches provide almost the same score for both sequences, missing the difference between the conservation level of the positions being compared.

scoring results for the first case study. unlike the other approaches, scintuit discriminates between the two sequences.

in the majority of cases, the sequences known to belong to a given tfbs motif have very similar nucleotide compositions and highly conserved positions. however, in the databases of known motifs there are a number of examples where individual sequences differ from the majority in highly-conserved positions. such a binding sequence can be considered an outlier with respect to the motif, i.e. a binding site that is not closely related to the other binding sites in the motif. when scoring new sequences against a given tfbs motif, we should generally tolerate small, additional variations in the sequence with respect to non-outliers, but be far less tolerant of mutations to outlier sequences. here we evaluate the extent to which each scoring method is able to discriminate between sequences belonging to these two categories. take, as a preliminary example, the binding sequences for motif mzf <dig> in the jaspar database, as shown in figure  <dig>  it can be observed how the highlighted outlier sequence ggagga does not contain the higly-conserved base g at the third position, while the highlighted sequence tgggga is clearly a non-outlier ). we selected the highlighted sequences and created two new sequences by mutating its sixth position giving ggaggg  and tggggt . in order to observe the discrimination degrees of the different scoring methods, we scored each sequence against the motif by means of the different methods.

in reality, it would be desirable that the scoring for the case of the mutated outlier sequence be lower than the scoring for the mutated non-oulier sequence. results obtained by the scmat, scdep, and scindep methods failed to capture the expected differences, giving the incorrect impression that binding is likely to occur. on the other hand, our proposed method obtained a more realistic distance between the sequences, providing a much lower score for the mutated outlier sequence ).

these insights are confirmed in the following sections where the experiments are extended to use large datasets, and the results are measured in terms of discovery rates.

prediction of tfbss
synthetic sequences
in order to compare the performance of the different methods in predicting tfbss, we used the non-redundant publicly available jaspar motifs database for our experiments  <cit> . we selected all motifs for which binding sequences are available , resulting in a dataset of  <dig> motifs. for each of these motifs, a random number between  <dig> and  <dig> binding sites were randomly selected and inserted in random sequences of a random length between  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp from a third-order markov model background distribution obtained from the rsat   <cit> . for each position of each sequence we computed the score for their corresponding motifs with an assumed known tfbs length .

usually, methods have a high sensitivity , so that the key difference between them is the number of false positives. although our ultimate aim is not to rely on essentially arbitrary thresholds to assess performance, we began our analysis by following the recommendations of tomovic and oakeley in  <cit> , selecting thresholds of  <dig>  and  <dig>  indicating a correct classification for a binding site. table  <dig> shows the precision ) of the different methods. in the additional file 1: "synthetic sequences experiment" we show thresholded results for the different methods. these indicate that our proposed scoring function performed best, giving the smallest number of false positives per tf whilst simultaneously giving a high number of true positives.

scintuit shows a much better precision than the rest of the methods.

in order not to rely on the selection of an arbitrary threshold for evaluating the results, we computed a precision-recall  curve for each considered method. pr curves are commonly used in information retrieval for evaluating classification performance and give a more informative picture of a method's performance than roc  curves  <cit>  when dealing with highly skewed datasets as is the case here  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the pr graphs. scintuit produces a better pr graph than the remaining methods . in addition, roc curves can be found in the the additional file 2: "roc curves".

scintuit provides better results for both experiments.

mutated sequences
to further evaluate our proposed method, we obtained a set of putative binding sites that are very similar to those that are already known. this is a common scenario in motif discovery, where the set of known sequences belonging to a given binding motif is incomplete. in order to simulate this situation, we proceeded in a similar way to our previous experiment; all the steps were the same except that we gave a single base mutation at a random position within the selected binding site for each motif. pr curves and auc values were computed to compare the performance of the different methods . roc curves for this experiment can be obtained from the additional file 2: "roc curves". the roc and precision-recall graphs shows how scintuit gives consistently superior values, with a higher auc value . it can be observed that the improvement of the performance of our method compared to scindep, scmat and scdep grew with respect to the synthetic sequences experiment discussed in the previous section.

real data
we analyzed the performance of the proposed methods when dealing with real experimental data. in order to do so, we made use of the published chip-seq data on binding of tfs in embryonic stem cells from mouse by chen et al. in  <cit> , as provided in the supplementary material of  <cit> . we considered the three tfs  that have binding sequences available in the transfac database  <cit> . thus, we obtained three sets of  <dig> bp sequence segments centered at tf binding locations, and we randomly selected  <dig> sequence segments from each set for our study . we scanned each set of sequences using the  <dig> tfs from jaspar for which binding sequences are available. the results demonstrate the superior performance of our new scoring method, as it gives the smallest number of false positives per nucleotide and per tf , and maintains an excellent true-positive rate . detailed results can be found in the additional file 4: "motif statistics". it can be seen that our method presents consistently low false-positive rates with all three sets of sequences, whereas the performance of the other methods is much more variable.

all the methods have a high true positive rate .

study of single nucleotide polymorphisms in tnfr <dig> gene for the response against aspergillus fumigatus
hematological patients are typically treated by chemotherapy and/or radiation. these treatments usually produce immunosuppression and severe neutropenia. this clinical situation can be exploited by opportunistic pathogens such as aspergillus fumigatus to cause a deadly infection called invasive pulmonary aspergillosis   <cit> . the importance of finding ways to combat this pathogen is evidenced by the fact that ipa occurs in roughly 10% to 40% of hematological patients, with overall mortality rates ranging from 50% to 90%  <cit> .

tumor necrosis factor  activates t lymphocytes in response to fungal infections through tnf receptors. one of the most important tnf receptors is tnfr <dig>  which plays a crucial role in immune regulation and host immune responses. experimental studies with tnfr <dig> knockout mice indicate that tnfr <dig> is indispensable in host resistance against several infections  <cit> . our hypothesis is that single nucleotide polymorphisms  in the tnfr <dig> gene may influence the innate immune response against aspergillus fumigatus.

the gene encoding tnfr <dig> contain numerous polymorphisms  <cit> . by means of different experiments, we concluded that tnfr1- <dig> polymorphism is critical in the development of the response against aspergillus because it might be regulating the cell-mediated th <dig> immune response. details on these experiments are out of the scope of this work and can be consulted in  <cit> . in this section, we use our proposed scoring method scintuit to investigate whether the tnfr1- <dig> promoter polymorphism is involved in the disruption of the recognition of a potential binding site for a critical transcription factor that could influence tnfr <dig> transcription level.

tnfr1- <dig> polymorphism binding affinity
for this experiment we used tfbs motifs found in transfac database  <cit> , which has been widely used in research involving regulatory elements  <cit> . in order to find interesting dependencies between the tnfr1- <dig> snp and tfs binding affinity we scored the human transfac tfbss against the tnfr1- <dig> polymorphism by means of the scintuit method.

tfs bind to short parts of the tnfr <dig> promoter region and, therefore, for each trial, we need to define a fragment of the promoter sequence containing the tnfr1- <dig> snp that might be considered as the putative tfbs. to this end, we need to determine the length of the sub-sequences and the relative offset to the position of the tnfr1- <dig> snp. for each of the  <dig> human tfs in transfac, we generated a set of putative binding sequences by using a window size of a fixed length equal to the number of position of the corresponding tf. moving the window across the sequence in 5'-3' direction gave us the sub-sequences for the tnfr1- <dig> snp that we considered to be putative tfbss . next, we scored each pair of sub-sequences  against the given tf applying the scintuit method.

we were interested in those sub-sequences that fulfil two properties: i) they have a high score in one allele  so they can be considered as candidates to be binding sites, and ii) the score is substantially lower when considering the remaining allele so the snp may affect to the binding affinity. for our current research we chose a conservative cut-off of  <dig> , and retained tfbss with a score above this threshold for further analysis. the scores for the selected tfbss with respect to their corresponding alleles  instead of a t at position -609) are shown in table  <dig>  subsequently we will discuss these findings from a biological perspective and show that the most interesting insights arise in the context of the icsbp tf, which represents the highest scoring of all the human transfac motifs.

human transfac motifs with a score greater than  <dig> . icsbp presents the highest scoring among all the human transfac motifs, showing a preference for binding the t allele.

functional effect of icsbp/irf- <dig> in the tnfr1- <dig> snp
in the previous section, we obtained predictive results using our scintuit scoring method and transfac database . from them, we selected four candidates according to the two properties outlined in the previous section, i.e e2a, hnf <dig>  icsbp, and pax- <dig>  we did not find described relations between ipa response for any of e2a, hnf <dig>  and pax- <dig> tfs. logos for these tfs are provided in figure  <dig> 

on the other hand, we found icsbp  to be directly related with the purpose of our study. icsbp/irf- <dig> shows a preference for binding the t allele . as a member of irf family of transcription factors it is an important modulator of ifnγ signalling cascade and was identified in association on the promoter region of numerous macrophage essential genes such as il <dig>  il1β, il <dig>  inos or isg <dig>  <cit> .

in addition, several genes regulated by icsbp/irf- <dig>  such as map4k <dig>  il-17r, and socs <dig>  are involved in different stages of the nuclear factor κb  signaling pathway  <cit> . therefore, we can hypothesize that icsbp/irf- <dig> transcription factor might be also regulating the nfκb signaling pathway through the control of the first gene of this signalling cascade, the tnfr <dig> gene. in support of this hypothesis, zhao et al. established that icsbp/irf- <dig> and tnfr <dig> are closely related genes  <cit> . they found icsbp/irf- <dig> to be associated with an enhanced ubiquination of tnfr associated factor  <dig> , a protein that mediate the signal transduction from members of the tnf receptor superfamily, and the activation of ap- <dig> and nfκb transcription factors.

on the other hand, several studies demonstrated that icsbp/irf- <dig> promotes the differentiation and activation of dendritic cells and macrophages cells  <cit> , and that, at the same time, tnfr <dig> mrna level is increased during this biological process  <cit> .

taken into account these observations, we hypothesize that the presence of tnfr1- <dig> promoter polymorphisms can modify the binding affinity to icsbp/irf- <dig>  and, therefore, it could be used to predict susceptibility to infection and to facilitate risk stratification of hematological patients. however, the question of whether the tnfr <dig> polymorphisms have biological relevance regulating mrna tnfr <dig> levels through icsbp/irf- <dig> transcription factor remains unanswered. functional analysis should be performed to demonstrate the role of tnfr1- <dig> polymorphism mediating the binding of icsbp/irf- <dig> to tnfr <dig> promoter.

discussion
we have introduced a new ifs-based approach for scoring dna sequences against dna motifs called scintuit. in this work we review three scoring schemes. these approaches have several drawbacks. scindep is based on an incorrect assumption that the nucleotides of a given tfbs are independent. in that context, scdep extended the score in order to account for positional dependencies. the problems associated with unnormalized scores at each position have been pointed out  <cit> . in addition, the results vary depending on the choice of the method and parameters for testing the dependencies. the main drawback with scmat is that it has a tendency to overlearn the training data and consequently its performance decreases when applied to real problems. there is therefore a need for a scoring method that accounts for positional dependencies without compromising either the consistency or the accuracy of the results.

as explained above, scintuit is based on the ifs theory, which has been successfully applied to problems that suffers from noisy and imprecise data. ifs theory represents uncertainty with respect to both the degree of membership and non-membership. the uncertainty associated with the tasks of scoring dna sequences against motifs makes intuitionistic concepts particularly suitable for handling this kind of data. taking advantage of such properties, we define the membership and non-membership degrees of a given pair bases at a given position not only as a function of their combined probability of occurrence, but also taking into account the importance of each individual base at its corresponding position.

one of the biggest issues for this kind of scoring methods is giving high scores for the known binding sequences of the motifs without overfitting. our proposed approach adequately solves the problem of computing the score of a given sequence against a given motif by considering the binding sequences that comprise the motif not only individually but also as part of such set of sequences. simple experiments shows how other methods fail in capturing realistic differences, while scintuit provides good results . our method assigned high scores for known binding sites, disfavouring mutations in the conserved positions of the binding site.

these insights are confirmed from experiments for predicting tfbss in large datasets. we compared the performance of the proposed scoring methods on recognizing motifs in sets of random sequences from a third-order markov model background distribution in two circumstances: i) when inserting known binding sequences, and ii) when inserting mutated binding sequences. in both situations we found that our proposed method gave the smallest number of false positives per tf whilst simultaneously giving a high number of true positives . more importantly, our method outperforms the other approaches when dealing with real experimental data derived from chip-seq assays. in this case, again, the number of false positive is significantly reduced . finally, we validated our method studying the effect of known snps of tnfr <dig> gene in the binding affinity of transfac tfs for the response against aspergillus fumigatus. we found the highest scoring for icsbp tf among all the human transfac motifs. although functional analysis should be performed, according to several previous studies, we hypothesize that the presence of tnfr1- <dig> polymorphisms could be used to predict susceptibility to infection of hematological patients.

in general, the obtained results on the different experiments demonstrated that the proposed intuitionistic approach provide a better and more accurate model for the detection of motifs and for the relationships between positions of the tfbss.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we have introduced scintuit, a new scoring method for measuring sequence-motif affinity, based on ifs theory. our main objective was to improve the prediction quality for tfs of the existing approaches, reducing the false positive rate without compromising sensitivity. we show that scintuit outperforms other approaches in motif recognition tasks, and prove how it can be successfully applied to real research problems. we have used our approach as a scanning method for the prediction of tfbss, but it also can be incorporated with methods for de novo discovery of motifs. as intuitionistic theory is specially suitable for problems that deal with imprecise concepts, we are currently working on a fuzzy approach that applies the proposed scoring in an ab initio method to find motifs in large sets of related dna sequences.

