BACKGROUND
biology is replete with periodically patterned elements, from the sensory bristles of a fruit fly to the hair and teeth of mammals. models of periodic patterning seek to explain the developmental origin of boundaries separating adjacent repetitive structures and the maintenance of cellular compartments once formed  <cit> . for example, the formation of feather tracts on the dorsal surface of chick embryos  <cit>  and mammary  lines on the ventral surface of embryonic mammals  <cit>  serve to pre-pattern regions competent for the initiation of these structures. similarly, a functionally equivalent field is established along the axis of the oral jaws in most vertebrates, competent to form tooth bud primordia  <cit> . in teleost fish this initial field is known as the primary odontogenic band   <cit>  and in mammals it is termed the dental lamina  <cit> . this band or lamina sets the regionally restricted 'field' along the jaw axis from which tooth induction is triggered.

as with all periodically patterned systems, an initial 'field of competence' is set from a once-homogeneous cellular region, followed by the establishment of positional information throughout the restricted 'field'  <cit> . the initial field may be set up by a number of diffusing molecules such as morphogens that allow regionalization to occur, from which cellular differentiation responds along a gradient  <cit> , probably by means of a reaction-diffusion-type mechanism  <cit> . positional information determines cell differentiation, cellular compartmentalization and subsequent unit placode initiation, the first of which is imperative for iterative initiation of adjacent placodes via activator-inhibitor mechanisms  <cit> . placode initiation is thought to be triggered by cellular accumulation  over a given threshold that reacts to a number of positional cues within the competent field  <cit> . within the placode itself, additional activators and inhibitors determine the boundaries of the placode unit and the spacing between units. studies of periodically patterned systems such as the developing vertebrate dentition and developing chick feathers have led to the identification of a number of molecules that have been modelled as activators or inhibitors within the specific developing system  <cit> . in feather placode patterning, shh and members of the eda pathway have activator roles, while bmp <dig> and bmp <dig> are thought to act as inhibitors  <cit> . during mouse odontogenesis the same molecules are involved in patterning the molar cusps. attempts have been made to model cusps according to activator-inhibitor patterning mechanisms; however, whether individual candidates can be classed as activators or inhibitors during tooth development is largely stage dependent  <cit> .

molecules involved in the establishment of vertebrate dentition have been well characterized from studies of the mouse  <cit> . a number of these molecules are known to have detrimental effects on the murine dentition when removed/inhibited from the dental network early in tooth development; shh  <cit> , pitx <dig>  <cit>  and pax <dig>  <cit>  are among those with severe dental phenotypes  <cit> . for example, inhibition of shh in mandibular explants during the transition of dental competence to initiation  leads to tooth arrest at the bud stage  <cit> . thus, it is clear that this gene is essential for the correct establishment of the global dental programme. however, these studies are specific to the mouse experimental model, which develops a single set of teeth with no replacements. we therefore know nothing of the resulting phenotypes when modifications occur to these networks, for example the hedgehog pathway, in vertebrates with numerous functional tooth rows and continuous replacement cycles.

the morphogenesis of teeth, like that of other periodically patterned vertebrate organs , is regulated both by sequential and reciprocal molecular interactions between two adjacent cell layers, the epithelium and the directly underlying mesenchyme  <cit> . during early stages, these distinct organs share a number of features and express a familiar suite of genes with common roles  <cit> . many studies have attempted to identify the morphodynamic control of iterative organization and how such patterning mechanisms change during development to generate evolutionary novelty  <cit> . we sought to characterize the expression of a set of these molecules in the dentitions of lake malawi cichlids to tackle an unanswered and fundamental biological question: how is the diversity of periodically patterned elements generated in nature? malawi cichlids are exemplars of natural craniofacial diversity. in essence, natural selection has conducted an experiment in micro-evolutionary diversification, and we want to know how development works to produce variation in phenotype  <cit> . the range of dental variety in malawi is tremendous given a common ancestor in the last  <dig>  to  <dig> million years  <cit> ; species possess about  <dig> teeth in a single row , or as many as  <dig> teeth in up to  <dig> rows. species differ in tooth size, spacing and shape in coordinated fashion  <cit> . we focus on three closely related lake malawi cichlids with alternative dental phenotypes : cynotilapia afra , a unicuspid species with two tooth rows of large, widely spaced teeth; metriaclima zebra , a bicuspid and tricuspid species with five or six tooth rows of intermediately sized and spaced teeth; and labeotropheus fuelleborni , a uniformly tricuspid species with  <dig> or more tooth rows of small, tightly packed teeth  <cit> . previously, we have used these species to identify the chromosomal basis of divergent tooth shapes among species  <cit> . here we address a different question: we ask how conserved gene networks are deployed to influence the diversity in the size, number, spacing within rows and number of rows of teeth.

RESULTS
variation in developmental gene networks prefigures differences in adult cichlid dentitions
we cloned cichlid orthologues of genes required during oral epithelial organization and tooth germ initiation   <cit>  as well as mesenchymal markers  involved in reciprocal signalling to the epithelium  <cit> . teleost tooth development has been well characterized in the zebrafish and thus our nomenclature for the early stages of tooth development will follow that model. two stages of early odontogenesis are relevant: the thickened epithelium stage and the bell-shaped epithelium stage  <cit> . developing teeth beyond this point will be referred to as tooth germs, spanning the progression of the tooth from a bell-shaped unit to various stages of functional maturity, characterized by cytodifferentiation.

the transcription factor pitx <dig>  described as a putative odontogenic-commissioning gene  <cit> , has a broad expression pattern that encompasses both the developing tooth unit and the inter-tooth region, marking the extent of the dental-competent oral epithelium, including regions of future tooth rows . pitx <dig> is one of the earliest dental epithelial markers  with expression in the thickened dental epithelium  and both the inner dental epithelium  and outer dental epithelium  of the maturing tooth . interestingly, the early pattern of pitx <dig> expression differs across the three species prior to and during morphogenesis of the first tooth, and reflects the future organization of these distinct dentitions . l. fuelleborni shows the greatest region of dental competence , consistent with the later elaboration of teeth and tooth rows . future tooth rows also show expression of pitx <dig>  labelling the lingual progression of the subsequent ob . similar to studies in other fishes  <cit> , we found that fgf <dig> expression is not associated with initiating tooth germs in malawi cichlids .

pax <dig>  one of the earliest mesenchymal markers of odontogenesis in the mouse, is either absent from or weakly expressed in the dentitions of zebrafish and mexican tetra  <cit> . by contrast, in malawi cichlids pax <dig> is expressed initially in oral mesenchymal cells as a dental field along the mesiodistal jaw axis , then it is strongly up-regulated in the underlying mesenchyme at the epithelial thickening stage of the first tooth . expression of pax <dig> is then restricted to cells of the dental mesenchyme enveloping the tooth during morphogenesis and is absent from the cells of the dental papilla . the expression of runx <dig> essentially replicates that of pax <dig> for the stages examined .

expression of shh is up-regulated from the primary ob into the individual tooth germs . shh continues to be expressed during tooth morphogenesis, marking the bell-shaped dental epithelium and later the ide of the tooth during cytodifferentiation . notably, shh is never present in regions between or around teeth, called the zone of inhibition   <cit> . in malawi cichlids shh expression continues to label obs, marking subsequent initiation of more lingual tooth rows, one at a time . c. afra does not develop a third ob , while m. zebra and l. fuelleborni initiate an ob for each future tooth row . bmp <dig> is co-expressed in the competent epithelial ob with shh and pitx <dig>  from the initial epithelial ob, bmp <dig> expression is up-regulated in the cells of the contorted bell-shaped epithelial germ and continues to be expressed during differentiation  before becoming localized to cells of the mesenchymal dental papilla . in addition, bmp <dig> is restricted to epithelial cells at the developing tooth tip , which will differentiate to ameloblasts, partially responsible for the secretion of enameloid, the first mineralized tissue of the teleost tooth  <cit> . these are an equivalent set of cells to the mammalian 'enamel knot'. bmp <dig> is expressed initially in the mesenchymal field along the mesiodistal axis prior to tooth germ initiation, much like pax <dig> and at the 3–4-teeth stage bmp <dig> is restricted to the dental papilla .

these data, in conjunction with data reported earlier for bmp <dig>  <cit> , suggest that early patterns of gene expression differentiate among malawi cichlid dentition types. l. fuelleborni, m. zebra and c. afra exhibit marked variation in the field of odontogenic competence both in the epithelium  and mesenchyme , in the spacing  and in the size  of the initial tooth germs. these differences are readily quantifiable , arise before teeth acquire their functional adult shape, and correspond directly to the size and spacing observed in the adult dentitions  <cit> . for example, c. afra embryos have the largest initial dental germs and surrounding zoi  while adults have the largest, fewest teeth  with the greatest inter-unit spacing compared with the other two species, m. zebra  and l. fuelleborni   <cit> . the measurements obtained from shh expression in table  <dig> highlight an early developmental origin of dental diversity among these three species. streelman and albertson noted a similar pattern from bmp <dig> expression, with a comparable range of cichlid species  <cit> . while some measurements shown here seem counterintuitive , it is because species also differ in more subtle aspects of tooth initiation. c. afra never initiates a tooth between the first three teeth to develop; m. zebra has an initiation order that places tooth  <dig> between teeth  <dig> and  <dig>  whereas l. fuelleborni initiates tooth  <dig> between teeth  <dig> and  <dig> . these early differences in tooth size, spacing and organization are perhaps surprising because cichlids  continuously replace their teeth; therefore, we might have expected inter-specific variety to develop gradually, over multiple rounds of tooth replacement, from a common dental 'ground' state, as is the case for tooth shape  <cit> .

 we report mean values  of measurements taken from the expression of shh at the first-tooth stage in the three cichlid species: ca, cynotilapia afra; mz, metriaclima zebra; lf, labeotropheus fuelleborni. md, mesiodistal; ob, odontogenic band; zoi, zone of inhibition.  mean values  from the 3–4-teeth stage. all values are in micrometres ± se.

organizing the periodic pattern with molecular 'spacers'
given the set of molecules localized to the first tooth germs , we hypothesized that other factors expressed within the zoi surrounding these germs might guide the size and spacing of early cichlid tooth units. we therefore analyzed the expression of genes involved in a putative spacing mechanism. we cloned three genes, eda, edar and wnt7b, with antagonistic effects on shh in the initiation of mouse teeth, mouse hair follicles and chick feathers  <cit> . edar  is expressed within the germs themselves in a pattern similar to shh . we observed the expression of both wnt7b and eda surrounding the initial shh-positive tooth germs  within the zoi/inter-germ regions across the three species.

eda is expressed locally and strongly surrounding the first-tooth germ  in all three species . by the 3–4-teeth stage, eda remains expressed in the mesenchyme locally and heavily at the lingual margin of the first tooth in c. afra and m. zebra , but its lingual expression is broader and more diffuse in l. fuelleborni . notably, there appears to be a lateral bias in the expression of eda in both l. fuelleborni and m. zebra, which may reflect the influence of  the initiation of tooth  <dig> between existing germs  <dig> and  <dig> or  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. an apparent eda-negative region exists in both l. fuelleborni and m. zebra where the fifth tooth in the series will appear, a different position in each species . c. afra lacks tooth initiation between these first three positions, an arrangement that continues into the adult dentition.wnt7b expression coincides with the zoi surrounding the first teeth in all species ; this is best illustrated comparatively with image overlays with shh as depicted in figure 5a–c.

remarkably, these genes seem also to be employed in the initiation and spacing of future tooth rows, an iterated expression pattern similar to tooth germ organization within each row. shh labels each ob for subsequent tooth rows ; eda and wnt7b are expressed between the first tooth row and the ob of the second . specifically, eda expression partly overlaps that of shh in the lingual ob, while wnt7b is expressed either side of shh. thus, eda from the enveloping mesenchyme  may induce and maintain shh expression in tooth germs as well as in future tooth rows, and planar epithelial wnt7b  may inhibit dental competence in these regions, similar to the role of these molecules in other systems  <cit> .

hedgehog signalling is required for initiation of periodic dental patterning
our data suggest that the zoi has an important role in patterning the size  of the shh-positive tooth germs, especially the first unit to initiate. we speculated that the first tooth might possess unique regulatory properties as a source for continued induction and patterning of the dental program. we tested the role of the first tooth as a source of communicative signal for the organization of the dentition using targeted chemical inhibition of the hedgehog pathway at the first epithelial thickening stage. c. afra embryos at the first-tooth stage ; figure 2c) were treated for  <dig> hours in  <dig> μm cyclopamine in 1% dmso , thus spanning the time from the initiation of the first tooth to the three-teeth stage , by which time the second row ob had established territory. a subset of treated embryos further developed for an additional  <dig> hours under standard conditions ; the remaining embryos from the same brood were allowed to develop for an additional six days  to span the period of both first row eruption and development of the lingual tooth row . treated c. afra fixed at  <dig> dpf showed varying low levels of shh expression localized to a reduced number  of tooth germs on each side of the dentary and the ob for the second row . shh expression appears within the region allocated for the zoi  normally expressing eda and wnt7b , suggesting a breakdown in both the initiation and spacing mechanisms . expression of eda in treated c. afra was absent in regions of tooth development , implying that eda may respond to signals from, or downstream of, the hedgehog pathway. 1% dmso control c. afra showed patterns of shh expression identical to standard controls .

in all treated individuals that were allowed to develop for a further six days , we found that the first tooth continues partial development and shows signs of mineralization, although it does not complete development or attachment . with the exception of a mineralized remnant of the first tooth, all other teeth, adjacent to the first and in subsequent rows, failed to develop . knockdown of the hedgehog pathway at the 3–4-teeth stage resulted in a functional, patterned and replacing dental system . these observations demonstrate that when perturbed  at the first-tooth stage, the dental programme cannot recover, despite continued cycles of periodic patterning past this stage in untreated individuals.

the periodic pattern generator for dental diversity
the comparison of gene expression across malawi cichlid species with divergent dentitions suggests a simple model implicating pitx <dig>  eda and wnt7b, and their interaction with shh and edar, as primary features of a periodic pattern generator for diversity in lake malawi cichlid dentitions . the model accounts for two aspects of dental patterning: how to put tooth rows in jaws, and how to put teeth in tooth rows. our data suggest that the combination of pitx <dig> and shh is required for a competent field of tooth initiation . m. zebra and l. fuelleborni exhibit expanded expression of pitx <dig> lingually on the embryonic lower jaw; c. afra does not . pitx <dig> and shh are also co-expressed in each subsequent ob for m. zebra and l. fuelleborni ; c. afra does not initiate a third ob. therefore, the lack of lingual/oral co-expression of pitx <dig> and shh in c. afra  may account for the reduction in row number compared with the other species . the lack of combinatorial expression of shh and pitx <dig> in the oral region of zebrafish may partially explain the lack of teeth  <cit> . here we show that this mechanism likely accounts for variation in tooth row number among malawi cichlids. thus, molecular mechanisms used to pattern the first row of teeth  are redeployed as 'triggers' of dental competence and initiation in each subsequent row. we suggest that the initiation of new tooth rows follows a 'copy and paste' mechanism wherein the dental expression network is redeployed for each new tooth row. therefore, our model posits that preceding tooth rows are required as a source of signal to initiate the next lingual row during sequential addition.

the combination of comparative gene expression data and perturbation of the hedgehog pathway suggests that the correct initiation and maintenance of the first-tooth germ, via activation of shh, is necessary for the periodically patterned dental programme in malawi cichlids . comparison of the cyclopamine phenotype at the first-tooth to the 3–4-teeth stages shows that disturbing the development of the first-tooth germ has an effect on the entire dentition, whereas disrupting the dentition at later stages results in a mildly reduced phenotype with additional teeth forming and completing development. we do not yet understand the molecular mechanisms  of this severe dental phenotype at the first-tooth stage.

our data imply that eda and wnt7b, expressed in the zoi, regulate initial tooth germ size and position within rows, through interactions with shh; wnt7b inhibits the germ through planar epithelial signals  and eda maintains the tooth germ  from within the surrounding mesenchyme . the zoi may not lie solely within the layers of the epithelium and we suggest that inhibitor/activator controls signal from within the underlying mesenchyme that envelops the thickened dental epithelium  <cit> . once the periodic pattern is established, other molecules may act as inhibitors from within the developing tooth unit, for example bmp <dig>  which is present both in the early epithelial thickening and within the dental papilla  during maturation , and bmp <dig>  which is restricted to the dental papilla .

the expression of eda in the mesenchyme surrounding the developing dental germs of cichlids  is more similar to that deployed during the patterning of feather placodes and salivary primordia  <cit>  than that observed in mammalian dentitions, where it is restricted to epithelium  <cit> . in our model, a large initial tooth germ in c. afra results from sustained local and intense eda expression on a comparatively similar inhibitory background of wnt7b . the size of this tooth germ is reduced in m. zebra  and l. fuelleborni  because the eda expression broadens earlier , a heterochronic imbalance setting the stage for more, closely packed shh-positive tooth germs . consistent with our results, transgenic mice  with increased levels of ectodysplasin expression exhibit larger tooth germs  <cit> . furthermore, eda null mutant mice have reduced tooth germs  <cit> . however, in the mouse, effects of eda on tooth size correlate positively with effects on tooth number; for example, higher levels of eda lead to a single extra molar  <cit> . our data and model point to an important distinction between overall levels of eda and its spatial expression over time. an earlier dispersion of eda expression after initiation of the first tooth , rather than continued localized expression around that first-tooth germ , may in fact lead to the production of more, smaller tooth germs .

the position of subsequent tooth rows is also specified in part by the expression of wnt7b and eda in our model. mesenchymal eda plays a permissive role in the positioning of the lingual ob . in c. afra, its expression is strongest medial to the first tooth, while in m. zebra and l. fuelleborni it appears more as a band along the mesiodistal axis . wnt7b also appears to demarcate the location of the second row, as its expression is either side of the shh-positive second ob  and, in a similar iterative manner to the patterning of individual tooth units, wnt7b is restricted to the inter-row space . once the initiation of the primary dental pattern for each row is established, the essential nature of shh and genes that occupy the zoi is lost; although they likely continue to be expressed during further morphogenesis , these molecules are probably no longer required for initiation of the secondary, replacement dentition  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
periodically patterned phenotypes such as the dentitions of lake malawi cichlids present important exemplars for evolutionary developmental biology. the discipline has heretofore focused on the molecular basis of evolutionary novelty among distantly related organisms  <cit>  or the genetic/transcriptional basis of discrete trait loss among closely related groups  <cit> . trait elaboration  is more difficult to study because phenotypes are subtler, but this remains the more common type of evolutionary change  <cit> . dental diversity is an intermediate case; quantitative elaboration takes the form of gain or loss of discrete units. our results support the general model that old genes, and entire developmental modules, are deployed anew to generate micro-evolutionary novelty in iterative structures.

