BACKGROUND
flax  for centuries has played an important role in human society. this dual-purpose plant served as a source of fibres for manufacture of textile and oil for the chemical industry. the substantial increase in the availability of genomic and biological data helps researchers and breeders to utilize biotechnological approaches to improve the productivity and quality of flax products. for example, lignin content reduction by gene down-regulation resulted in an improvement of flax fibre quality . flax fibres modified by genetic engineering with polyhydroxybutyrate are used for composite materials in biomedical products such as implants and wound dressing  <cit> . overproduction of different kinds of phenylpropanoid compounds in flax provides raw materials for such promising products as: oil with “ideal characteristics” which might serve as a dietary supplement protecting against atherosclerosis, seedcake extract constituting an “alternative antibiotic” effective in antibacterial protection, fibres successfully used for healing chronic ulcers, and micronized short fibres that appear to be suitable as a carrier and stabilizer of active substances  . additionally, in all these cases improved plant resistance against fusarium has been detected  <cit> .

beneficial properties of flax provide a strong argument for the renewal of its mass cultivation. in order to accelerate the interest in the cultivation of this crop, a constant concern for quality of seeds, and in particular a constant search for ways to improve the resistance of flax should be considered. it is estimated that about a 20% loss in the flax crop yield is caused by fungi. the diseases caused by them contribute to a reduction in the crop yield, seed and fibre quality, and therefore in the quality of products obtained from the crop, e.g. food, textiles, and animal feed. the most dangerous pathogens of flax are: fusarium oxysporum, which penetrates flax cell roots and spreads throughout the plant via the vascular system, leading to root rot and wilt of leaves, and fusarium culmorum, which causes rot at the base of the shoots, resulting in progressive plant necrosis and in consequence plant death  <cit> .

the plant response to the pathogen infection may be local or systemic. the first reaction to the pathogen attack is a hypersensitivity reaction. it is manifested by the local necrosis of cells around the infected site and often causes changes in the metabolism of the plant leading to the production of metabolites of actuating mechanisms for inducing the systemic immunity. the immunity system is divided into two main types: systemic acquired resistance  and induced systemic resistance   <cit> .

in the systemic acquired response , comprising the tissue surrounding the site of infection and leading to a rise in the level of plant resistance to possible subsequent attacks by a pathogen, pathogenesis-related  proteins are involved. they exhibit antifungal properties, associated with the enzymatic hydrolysis of chitin  and β-glucans , leading to the weakening and consequently to the destruction of the pathogen cell wall  <cit> . β- <dig> -glucanases and chitinases act in at least two different ways: directly, by degrading the cell walls of the pathogen, and indirectly, by promoting the release of cell wall-derived materials that can act as elicitors of defence reactions, stimulating the production of other pr proteins and low molecular weight antifungal compounds, such as phytoalexins  <cit> . there is a correlation between expression of pr proteins in plants and their increased resistance to infections, for example in tomato resistant to alternaria solani  <cit>  or in potato resistant to phytophthora infestans  <cit> .

currently, in order to increase the plant resistance to the pathogenic infection, genetic engineering is the most commonly used tool to produce genetically modified organisms . owing to targeted action this is the most effective method. the increase in the anti-pathogenic properties might be achieved by the overexpression of genes coding pathogenesis-related proteins and those involved in the synthesis of secondary metabolites .

recently the new technology has been exploited for gene function studies in plants. the technology is based on plant treatment with high concentrations of a short , single stranded dna fragment homologous to the targeted gene. this is a non-vector technology  of the gene modification and thus it is quite widely used in studies in mammalian cells, for example, to silence single genes in a cancer therapy  <cit> . this technique was applied for the first time in plant cells to induce changes in the expression of the gene encoding the transcription factor susiba <dig>  <cit> . it was highlighted that the oligo technique might replace vector-mediated transformation  because of the fact that both silence the gene with the same efficiency and produce a similar phenotype effect  <cit> . oligos after being introduced into the plant cell may bind to a homologous sequence in a transcript and therefore activate rna-dependent rna polymerase , which synthesizes a second strand, creating double-stranded rna . this fragment can down-regulate the gene acting by an rna interference  mechanism  <cit> .

recently it has been shown that small exogenous dna fragments might also activate homologous genes, if they are targeted to the regulatory sequences. up to now, this new mechanism, termed rna activation , is ascribed only to mammalian cells. the rnaa mechanism appears to be argonaute  <dig> dependent and is associated with histone changes  at dsrna-target sites  <cit> . the effects of the rnaa mechanism are shifted in time as compared to the rnai mechanism , indicating different kinetics of both reactions. however, in plants the mechanism appears to be based on dna methylation but not histone modifications. in addition, it has been shown that changes caused by the rnaa mechanism can be inherited after induction of epigenetic changes  <cit> .

it is agreed that the molecular background for epigenetic changes is dna methylation and, equally, a hypermethylation and a hypomethylation of the genome are often observed, and it does not matter what is the nature of inducing factors  <cit> . it seems that changes in the methylation of genes are one of the main epigenetic mechanisms of plant responses to stress conditions, or the introduction of foreign dna into the genome. double-stranded rna fragments formed by the activity of rna-dependent rna polymerase or the activity of plant polymerase iv in the complex with polymerase v may recruit methyltransferase capable of dna methylation and consequently the modification of gene expression  <cit> . short double-stranded dna fragments affect the methylation extent of regulatory fragments and/or coding portions of the homologous genes, and thus change their expression level. the process, which is mediated by an rna-dependent dna methylase , can lead to either the activation or the repression of gene activity  <cit> .

recently, in order to improve the resistance of flax to the pathogen infection, we have generated a transgenic plant that overexpresses β- <dig> -glucanase. the resulting transgenic flax  was characterized by a three-fold increase in resistance to fusarium oxysporum and fusarium culmorum infection. in vitro-cultured plants displayed a significant decrease in the content of carbohydrates, fatty acids and organic acids, and an increase in the levels of selected amino acids, polyamines and antioxidants  <cit> . in this work transgenic flax type b was used as a reference plant to new non-transgenic flax with induction of the endogenous β- <dig> -glucanase gene.

the aim of this research was to develop the non-invasive technology for the generation of a new type of flax based on the epigenetic modulation of nucleic acids. in particular, the main goal was to produce a new, genetically stable flax with increased expression of endogenous genes encoding β- <dig> -glucanase, which therefore results in improved resistance of flax to fusarium oxysporum and fusarium culmorum infection.

RESULTS
analysis of the expression of pr genes and pme1
the mrna levels of selected pr proteins  and pectin methylesterase  <dig> , another protein participating in the plant response to stress, were determined in the flax treated with oligos and in the f <dig> generation of the selected line labelled emo-βglu. the obtained results are presented in figure  <dig> figure  <dig> 
expression levels of pr genes and pme <dig> gene. the mrna level of β- <dig> -glucanases, chitinase and pectin methylesterase  <dig> genes in flax treated with oligos  at 24 h  and 48 h  after exposure to oligos in comparison with control, non-treated flax and in emo-βglu flax   in comparison with control flax was obtained from the real-time rt-pcr analysis. actin was used as a reference gene and the transcript levels were normalized to those of the control plant . data represent the mean ± standard deviations from three independent experiments. the significance of the differences between the means was determined using student’s t test . rq – relative quantity.



the analysis of the β- <dig> -glucanases revealed enhanced expression of the first isoform  in flax treated with four oligos and increased expression of the second isoform in flax treated with oligos b <dig> and b <dig>  at 48 hours after exposure to oligos. moreover, oligos b <dig> and b <dig> reduced the mrna levels of the second isoform of β- <dig> -glucanase at 24 hours  but did not affect its expression at 48 hours.

concomitantly, the activation of two other genes that commonly respond to environmental stress, chitinase and pectin methylesterase  <dig>  were detected. the mrna level of the pectin methylesterase  <dig> gene in flax treated with oligos at 24 hours after exposure to oligos was reduced  in comparison with the control, while at 48 hours oligos b <dig>  b <dig> and b <dig> caused up to  <dig> -fold higher expression. the gene encoding chitinase was found to be activated after 48 hours by b <dig>  and b <dig> .

similarly to the flax treated with oligos, the expression of genes – the first isoform of β- <dig> -glucanase, chitinase and pectin methylesterase  <dig> in f <dig> generation plants – was significantly higher than in the control. the transcript level of β- <dig> -glucanase, chitinase and pme <dig> was 2-fold,  <dig> -fold and  <dig> -fold higher, respectively, in the emo-βglu plants. changes in the expression of pr genes involved in sar were related to the increase of plant resistance to the pathogen infection.

callose content
the induction of activity of β-glucanase genes was not reflected in the respective enzyme activity measured as the callose content. figure  <dig> shows that the callose content decreased only in flax treated with two oligos, b <dig> and b <dig>  but these changes were not statistically significant. in the rest of the samples, the level of callose was similar to the control.figure  <dig> 
callose content. analyses of flax treated with oligos  at 24 h  and 48 h  after exposure to oligos in comparison with control flax  and emo-βglu flax  in comparison with control flax  were performed as described in the experimental procedure section. data represent the mean values ± sd from five independent experiments.



in contrast, a  <dig> -fold increase in the callose content was observed in the emo-βglu plants. the increase in the callose content in f <dig> generation plants may be due to the increased expression of one of the genes controlling the process of callose synthesis , where a  <dig> -fold increase in the expression of the cals <dig> gene was detected.

pattern of dna methylation of β- <dig> -glucanase gene
the determination of dna methylation of the β- <dig> -glucanase gene in the flax treated with oligos and in the emo-βglu plants was made in three promoter sites, in three exon sites and in one intron site.

the results obtained from the study of the dna methylation of the β- <dig> -glucanase gene in flax treated with oligos and in the emo-βglu plants showed a similar profile of the methylation for all checked sites. three analysed promoter sites and one site in the exon remained unchanged . however, the second and the third site in exons were in most cases demethylated at the internal cytosine of the ccgg sequence. also the analysed first site in the intron was demethylated in plants treated with oligos . the demethylation of the second exon site did not change substantially between particular plants treated with selected oligos b <dig>  b <dig> and b <dig> at either  <dig> or 48 hours after exposure to oligos. however, a smaller change and a lack of changes in the demethylation of the internal cytosine of the ccgg sequences were observed at  <dig> and 48 hours after b <dig> treatment. in the third exon site of β- <dig> -glucanase the highest demethylation occurred in flax treated with oligo b <dig> after 24 hours and in flax treated with b <dig> and b <dig> after 48 hours. interesting changes of dna methylation were observed in the intron, where after 24 hours only oligo b <dig> caused a reduced level of cytosine methylation. moreover, 48 hours after plants’ treatment with oligos, b <dig>  b <dig> and b <dig> had a similar pattern of methylation, with 13-17% of ccgg sites unmethylated.figure  <dig> 
methylation of crucial sites of β- <dig> -glucanase gene. the analysis of the methylation of two sites in exons and one site in the intron of flax treated with oligos  at 24 h and 48 h after exposure to oligos in comparison with control, non-treated flax  and in emo-βglu flax  in comparison with control flax from field  was determined by digesting genomic dna with restriction enzymes hpaii-mspi with subsequent semi-quantitative pcr reaction, the separation of pcr product on agarose gel and the quantification of the bands by densitometry. data represent the mean ± standard deviations from three independent experiments. the significance of the differences between the means was determined using student’s t test .



similarly to the plants after exposure to oligos, f <dig> generation plants called emo-βglu showed increased levels of demethylation in the third position in the exon and the first site in the intron. however, in these plants methylation of the second site in the exon was observed. similarly, the other potential methylation sites  were not changed .

analysis of expression of genes involved in the oligo mechanism
to explain the possible mechanism of oligo action, the expression levels of genes involved in the rnai and rnaa mechanism – rna-dependent rna polymerase, ago <dig> and ago <dig> – were investigated. assuming that the changes could also refer to the methylase/demethylase genes, expression levels of genes encoding methylases  and demethylases  were measured .figure  <dig> 
expression level of genes involved in the oligo mechanism. the mrna level of cmt <dig> , cmt <dig> , dme , ros <dig> , ago <dig> , ago <dig> , rdr <dig>  in flax treated with oligos  at 24 h  and 48 h  after exposure to oligos in comparison with control, non-treated flax and in emo-βglu flax   in comparison with control flax was obtained from the real-time rt-pcr analysis. actin was used as a reference gene and the transcript levels were normalized to those of the control plant . data represent the mean ± standard deviations from three independent experiments. the significance of the differences between the means was determined using student’s t test . rq – relative quantity.



flax plants at 24 hours after exposure to oligos were characterized by minor changes in the expression of the tested genes. oligo  <dig>  induced the reduction of the transcript level of the cmt <dig> gene , dme gene , ago <dig>  and ago <dig> . also oligo  <dig>  caused a decrease in expression of the cmt <dig> gene , cmt <dig>  and ago <dig> , whereas oligo  <dig> and  <dig> had no effect on expression levels of investigated genes.

flax plants at 48 hours after exposure to oligo  <dig> showed increased expression of the cmt <dig> gene  and cmt <dig> gene . the mrna levels of both demethylases  were reduced to 80-50% by the action of all oligos. also expression of the rdr <dig> gene was only slightly changed in flax treated with oligos .

in the f <dig> generation flax plants called emo-βglu the expression levels of methylases and demethylases were similar to the control. only a slightly increased level of mrna was observed for ago <dig> and rdr <dig> genes.

total level of dna methylation
as a result of the exposure of flax to oligonucleotides the changes in the total level of the genomic dna methylation were observed and presented in figure  <dig>  after 24 hours only b <dig> oligonucleotides caused a decrease  in the dna methylation level, while after 48 hours all used oligonucleotides affected the methylation status of genomic dna .figure  <dig> 
total level of dna methylation. analyses of flax treated with oligos  at 24 h  and 48 h  after exposure to oligos in comparison with control flax  and emo-βglu flax  in comparison with control flax  were performed as described in the experimental procedure section. data represent the mean values ± sd from three independent experiments .



also, the total level of dna methylation in emo-βglu plants was determined , and it was lower in emo-βglu plants as compared to control plants. such a change, in accordance with the principles of epigenetics, may cause activation of genes.

secondary structure of mrna and oligos and correlation between secondary structure of oligos and expression level of β- <dig> -glucanase gene
among several designed and tested oligos the four most effective in gene  activation were chosen for further analysis. the nucleotide sequences of selected oligos  and their predicted secondary structures were presented in figure 6a. the predicted secondary structure of mrna from the β- <dig> -glucanase gene and oligo binding sites were shown in figure 6b.figure  <dig> 
predicted secondary structure of oligos and β- <dig> -glucanase mrna and correlation coefficients between secondary structure of oligos and expression level of β- <dig> -glucanase gene.  nucleotide sequences of oligos  and their predicted secondary structures.  the predicted secondary structure of β- <dig> -glucanase mrna and the binding sites of oligos .  correlation coefficients between secondary structure of oligos and expression level of β- <dig> -glucanase gene.



both the oligos  and mrna were characterized by a great diversity of secondary structures in the sense that three main types could be recognized: a stem , a single-stranded loop, and a single-stranded chain whose length was variable. the mutual location of oligo complementary to the mrna sequence was very close , of average distance  and very distant  to each other.

the obtained data were used to calculate the correlation of identified parameters such as the secondary oligos/mrna structure and the methylation pattern with expression of the β- <dig> -glucanase gene. the highest level of correlation was observed for the length of the single-stranded 5'-terminus and the length of the paired sequence fragment of oligos . thus, the secondary structure of oligo was important for its effect on homologous sequences and the activity of the endogenous gene. the most important information was obtained from the analysis of the methylation profile of the endogenous gene under the influence of oligos. whereas in all promoter methylation sites, in the intron site and in the first exon site the changes in the methylation pattern were non-existent, the third site in the exon in most cases was demethylated in plants treated with oligos. thus, it might suggest that the β-glucanase gene activation upon oligo treatment is probably due to demethylation of the gene coding region.

resistance of emo-βglu plants to fusarium infection
the consequence of activation of the gene response to the infection in flax was an increase in the plant resistance to the fusarium culmorum and fusarium oxysporum infection, as shown in figure  <dig>  obtained data indicated that more than threefold increase in resistance of flax emo-βglu to the f. culmorum infection and more than twice to the f.oxysporum infection were observed. the resistance of emo-βglu plants was even higher than those ascribed to transgenic b-type plants  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
resistance of emo-βglu flax and control flax to fungal infection. the resistance of emo-βglu flax  in comparison with control flax  to fusarium culmorum and fusarium oxysporum was determined as % of infected flax seedlings. data represent the mean values ± sd from three independent experiments .



analysis of the main polymers in the cell wall of emo-βglu plants
important components of the plant defence against pathogen infection are the cell wall polymers. we evaluated the expression of genes involved in the synthesis and degradation of pectin , the level of pectin , the expression of genes participating in the synthesis and degradation of hemicellulose , the level of hemicellulose , the cellulose metabolism genes , lignin genes  and the level of these polymers , the level of mrna of genes involved in polyamine synthesis and degradation , the level of these compounds  and the expression of callose synthesis genes  in emo-βglu plants . the vast majority of genes involved in pectin, hemicellulose, lignin and cellulose metabolism were activated in emo-βglu plants, while the metabolic products of their activity only in certain cases reflected these activations.

minor changes in the total level of pectic and hemicellulose sugars were observed ; however, significant changes occurred in the uronic acid content of individual fractions of both polymers. thus, the reorganization of pectin and hemicellulose polymers rather than changes of their amount were the response to the change in the activity of β-glucanase genes and genes of these polymers’ metabolism. similarly, an insignificant change in the level of lignin in emo-βglu plants was observed, although more than 3-fold activation of certain genes  was observed. the biggest changes were measured for the cellulose level, which corresponds to an increase in the gene expression of this polymer’s metabolism  in emo-βglu plants. also, the level of polyamines was elevated ; however, this change could not be easily correlated with the expression of polyamine metabolism genes.

discussion
gmo technology is the most exploited method in modern plant biotechnology for generation of transgenic organisms for both scientific and commercial purposes. however, according to eurobarometer over 60%  of society does not accept gmo, which locks the door for the commercialization of gm plants and products. furthermore, the gm technology is laborious and time-consuming. thus, the challenge for new biotechnology is to develop a method of modulation rather than modification of the genome which, however, is similar to the agrotransformation effect.

the new technique of non-invasive modulation of the genome exploited in this work is based on the induction of dna modification. since the new technology does not use non-linear nucleotide sequences and the way of introducing them into the plant is the vascular system, the technology can be regarded as natural, and therefore not involving genetic modification. the obtained plants overproducing β-glucanase are defined as epigenetically modified organisms  and they are treated as an alternative to gmo.

the fundamental importance of the β-glucanase gene in flax resistance to pathogen infection was identified by in-depth investigation of previously generated transgenic plants overexpressing the heterologous  β-glucanase gene  <cit> . besides the improved resistance against the pathogen infection, the characteristic feature of these plants was changes in carbohydrate, phenolic and polyamine contents. the interesting finding was that despite the transgene  high expression, modified flax showed a large increase in the endogenous chitinase gene. there are several reports describing the induction of plant resistance to pathogen infection upon the overexpression of either β-glucanase or chitinase or both simultaneously  <cit> . however, none of these studies report transgene-endogenous gene cross-activation. we speculate that enzyme released upon overproduction  affect the cell wall compounds and induce endogenous counterparts. indeed, the product of β-glucanase might operate as an elicitor activating plant metabolism. for example, linear β- <dig>  glucans are elicitors of defence responses in tobacco, which activate phenylalanine ammonia-lyase, caffeic acid o-methyltransferase and lipoxygenase  <cit> .

the increased plant resistance to fusarium concomitantly with favourable changes in flax metabolism was a sufficient reason for the development of epigenetically modified plants and thus strengthening the market potential of flax.

for many years the epigenetic modification of mammalian cells has been successfully exploited. although successful, the molecular mechanism behind this new technology of gene activity modulation is as yet not fully understood. considering the data already published, it is assumed that these mechanisms might include gene silencing called rna interference  or gene activation by mrna biosynthesis  or modification of gene expression by dna methylation of cytosines and/or histones.

in the case of plants, there are only a few reports that have evidenced the down-regulatory action of oligodeoxynucleotides  on homologous plant genes. for example, antisense oligos were used to reduce the expression of the nucleus-encoded phytoene desaturase in tobacco, chlorophyll a/b-binding genes in wheat, the chloroplast-encoded psba gene in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> , susiba <dig>  a transcription factor, in sugar-treated barley  <cit>  and the gnom like  <dig> gene in tobacco  <cit> . in all these cases, plant treatment resulted in gene down-regulation, probably by an rnai mechanism. there is however no report on the up-regulatory role of oligos in plants, which is in contrast to mammalian cells.

in order to exploit this new technology for flax improvement, more than  <dig> different oligos,  <dig> nucleotides long, were investigated for their influence on homologous genes from the flax terpenoid pathway. a study of  <dig> different genes from this pathway revealed that 40% of them were down-regulated, 46% were not affected and, most importantly, 14% of them were up-regulated .

thus, we took the opportunity to treat the flax plants with several generated oligos homologous to different regions in the β-glucanase gene. successfully, four of them showed endogenous gene activation and plants activated in this way were further analysed. in vitro cultured plants showed an increase in β-glucanase gene expression accompanied by demethylation of ccgg sequences in it. this is in agreement with the general view that gene demethylation results in its higher activity . the detailed analyses of cultured plants provide data on changed activity of several other genes involved in both primary and secondary metabolism including chitinase, pectin methylesterase  <dig> and those engaged in cell wall metabolism. the reason for such global metabolism changes is as yet unknown. we speculate that overproduction of β-glucanase might lead to accumulation of elicitors that elicit plant metabolism by for example genome demethylation. indeed, partial demethylation of total genomic dna was detected, which supports this speculation. also the expression analysis of genes involved in the process of dna methylation partially reflects the reduction in dna methylation level. for example, demethylase genes  are strongly down-regulated in all cases. however, in most cases methylase genes are also down-regulated. perhaps the final dna methylation status is regulated by the interplay between methylase and demethylase genes.

although the molecular mechanism behind plant treatment with oligos is not fully understood, it is clear from this report that they might activate homologous gene expression and this event is accompanied by gene demethylation. this is corroborated by several reports concluding that genes are regulated by methylation/demethylation status .

the importance of crop plant gene modulation using emo technology might be limited by the stability over plant generations. in order to study the stability of flax features induced by oligos, third generation  plants called emo-βglu were investigated. similarly to the f <dig> generation and reference transgenic b-type plants, these emo-βglu type f <dig> plants were characterized by β-glucanase and chitinase gene up-regulation and demethylation of ccgg sequences in the β-glucanase gene. changes in primary and secondary plant metabolism concomitant with the decrease in total dna methylation were also detected. the process involved alteration in methylase  and demethylases  gene expression. the importance of gene-body methylation for gene expression is still not well understood, but in most cases highly expressed genes have low levels of methylation. since several different classes of gene expression were changed upon oligo treatment, the mechanism behind it is presumably of general nature. thus it is speculated that oligo treatment induces genome rearrangement and decreases in total dna methylation, and 48 h plant exposure is sufficient to do this and to keep this rearrangement inherited. perhaps the direct signal for genome rearrangement derives from the action of the activated β-glucanase gene resulting in production of elicitors. this view is supported by very similar molecular characteristics of emo-βglu and reference gm flax.

many literature reports have described changes in the methylation pattern of genes resulting from exposure to physical and chemical treatment. for example, arabidopsis plants subjected to low temperature stress  <cit>  showed extensive changes in methylation of the genomic dna of these plants. the induction of epigenetic changes in dna methylation of the genome was achieved by treating plants with jasmonic acid  and salicylic acid . an experiment with taraxacum officinale showed not only extensive methylation but also that 74% to 92% of the variation in the level of methylation induced by ja and sa, which was preserved in the next generation  <cit> .

the importance of changes in expression of flax genes and metabolism upon oligos treatment for plant resistance against fusarium infection was investigated. increased expression of pr <dig>  family genes concomitant with the accumulation of polymers  and polyamines is perhaps the molecular background behind it. both enzymes are well known to be involved in the plant response to pathogen infection. cell wall polymers are also active in cell protection and polyamines are signal molecules in this response.

since emo-βglu plants were similar to the plants treated with oligos in terms of changes in the expression of β-glucanases and the profile of β-glucanase gene methylation, and, most importantly, similar to stable transgenic b-type plants in terms of resistance to infection, it might be suggested that the changes caused by oligos were inherited. therefore, this new type of plant was called emo-βglu , and it is a remarkable alternative to gm plants.

emo technology is based on the use of short oligonucleotide fragments  introduced into plants in a non-invasive way. the use of short, single-stranded dna fragments allows one to alter the expression of homologous genes. the efficiency of the technology depends on the secondary structure of oligo used. the highest level of correlation for oligos structure and the expression of the β- <dig> -glucanase gene was observed for the length of the single-stranded 5'-terminus and the length of the paired sequence fragment of oligos. the technique does not require the use of a vector and consists of the infiltration or the uptake with nutrient  of short, 12-21 nt single-stranded dna sequences  in the sense or antisense orientation complementary to the coding and/or regulatory sequences of the modulated gene. it is assumed that subsequently produced  duplex rnai and/or rnaa and/or sirnaddm  as a product of activity of respective endogenous, ago-dependent enzymes  become a signal for gene expression regulation. these mechanisms include gene silencing called rna interference  and/or gene activation by mrna biosynthesis  and/or modification of gene expression by dna methylation of cytosines. all three potential mechanisms are shown in figure  <dig>  so far, the mechanism of rnai is the best studied, while the other two require further investigation.figure  <dig> 
effect of oligonucleotides on the metabolism of the homologous mrna or the modulation of homologous dna. a short , single stranded dna fragment when introduced into a plant cell may bind to a homologues sequence in a transcript and therefore activate rna-dependent rna polymerase . rdrp synthesizes a second strand creating double-stranded rna , whose presence brings to action risc and dicer complexes, and argonaute  proteins. the dsrna fragment could down-regulate the gene by an rna interference  mechanism and/or may also activate the target gene by an rna activatory  mechanism. furthermore, the presence of dsrna can also provoke rna dependent methylation of the homologous dna fragment. involved in this process are ago proteins, dna methyltransferases, demethylases, and, present only in plants, polymerase iv and v.



CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the data accumulated suggest that the oligo technology is relatively very simple and effective enough to achieve improved flax, modified in the preferred direction and stable in at least up to the third generation. the non-transgenic plants with the modulated genome showed the same characteristics as the reference transgenic plants. thus, it provides a new tool for crop plant improvement based on the epigenetic modulation of nucleic acids.

the authors of this paper inform that the emo-βglu flax seeds are available for scientific purposes upon request.

