BACKGROUND
adaptation, a reduction of the response to repeated stimuli, is considered to be a simple form of non-associative learning, as well as one of the most simple and widespread forms of neuronal plasticity. functionally, adaptation extends the operating range of sensory systems over a large range of stimulus intensities  <cit> . sensory systems are modified by experience through multiple mechanisms operating in a large variable time scale, ranging from milliseconds, seconds, minutes or even weeks, suggesting different temporal mechanisms of adaptation. vertebrate orns, like other types of sensory neurons, adapt to a given stimulus, by time-dependent modification in sensitivity. indeed, odor response declines during prolonged odor stimulation  <cit> . in mice, exposure to an odorant over a period of weeks results in increased odorant sensitivity  <cit> , while in humans, psychophysical studies have revealed that the perceived intensity of an odorant continuously decreases for minutes after odorant exposure  <cit> . in invertebrates such as c. elegans, prolonged exposure to an odorant yields a diminished response to the odorant for several hours  <cit> . thus, the kinetics of the changes in adaptation depends upon the stimulus context, as well as its duration and/or its frequency of repetition.

olfactory stimuli generate cellular responses by modifying the levels of different second messengers in both vertebrates and invertebrates. cyclic adenosine monophosphate   <cit> , cgmp  <cit>  and the inositol  <dig> ,5-trisphosphate  signaling pathways  <cit>  have been implicated, suggesting that olfactory transduction may require parallel or interacting pathways  <cit> . however, the precise subcellular localization of each secondary messenger, for example, whether they are present in the dendrites, cell bodies or axon terminals, as well as their precise kinetics and interactions, remain largely unknown. for example, the primary response of orns to odor-ligands is a rapid rise in camp, which directly opens ca2+-permeable cyclic nucleotide-gated  ion channels  <cit> . thus, camp, cng-dependent ion channels, and ca2+-dependent mechanisms have been proposed to mediate adaptation  <cit> . however, several ca2+-independent mechanisms have also been implicated in adaptation, including odorant receptor phosphorylation by protein kinase a  <cit>  and g-protein coupled receptor kinase  <dig>   <cit> . cgmp is also a likely part of the apparatus mediating adaptation, since a particular form of adaptation operating on a time scale of minutes, termed long-lasting adaptation , has been described, which is dependent on cgmp through carbon monoxide   <cit> . thus, based on the time scale of their kinetics, there is evidence for the coexistence of at least three different types of odor adaptation in a single orn: short-term adaptation, desensitization and long-lasting adaptation  <cit> .

in drosophila, a mutation in the inositol  <dig> ,5-trisphosphate receptor  affects olfactory adaptation  <cit> , when measured either behaviorally or physiologically . however, as these studies were based on mutations, which affect all cells of the organism that express the insp3r gene, the precise mechanisms at the cellular and molecular levels, and the neurons in which adaptation occurs and particularly in the orns, still remains to be elucidated. recently, taking advantage of a new in-vivo bioluminescence imaging technique  <cit> , allowing continuous monitoring of neuronal ca2+-activity over a long time range, we have shown that the odor-induced ca2+-response in the axon terminal of orns is related to odor duration  <cit> . a short odor-stimulus  induces a short ca2+-response due to the opening of the voltage-gated-calcium-channel , while a long odor stimulus, such as 5s, generates through the insp3r and/or the ryanodine  receptors in addition a slightly delayed second component, which relies on intracellular ca2+-stores. here, advancing beyond these findings, using the binary p expression system to specifically target in the orns, with the p) line  <cit>  different rnai constructs concomitantly with the gfp-aequorin  bioluminescent probe, complemented by a pharmacological approach, we describe a long-lasting form of adaptation. we also bring new insights into the activation of the insp3r and ryr signaling pathways, through feedback control involving gaba in the antennal lobes.

RESULTS
gfp-aequorin  is a ca2+-sensitive bioluminescent photoprotein having an excellent signal-to-noise ratio that can be utilized for continuous long-term imaging  <cit> . we have developed an in-vivo preparation that allows the detection of odor-dependent changes in bioluminescence intensity in the sensory neurons of a living fly . using the fluorescent property of the gfp moiety of the chimeric ga protein, targeted expression of ga  reveals the anatomical organization of orns. delivery of an odor, spearmint , citronella , or octanol , during  <dig> s to the antennae induces a significant increase in the bioluminescence intensity at orn synaptic terminals in the antennal lobe, reflecting activity-dependent increases in cytosolic ca2+-concentration . the light-induced responses are odor-specific, considering their intensity, duration, shape as well as the activated region in the olfactory lobe .

ca2+-response correlates with odor-duration and repetition frequency of the stimulus
to determine if the odor-induced response in orns correlates with the odor-intensity, distinct groups of flies were exposed to either a  <dig> s or  <dig> s pulse of each odorant  <dig> successive times, with a  <dig> min-interval between each application. as reported in previous studies based on the use of various fluorescent probes, such as synapto-phluorin  <cit>  or g-camp  <cit>  or gfp-aequorin  <cit> , a brief application  of an odorant increases the ca2+-induced bioluminescence intensity in the orns. the amplitudes of evoked activities remain relatively constant during repetitive odor-stimulations for each of the three odors . in contrast, a  <dig> s exposure causes a significant decrease in the amplitudes of ca2+-responses during repetitive stimulations  for the three odors. this decrease in the response is also visible in the duration , which is odor-specific . consequently, the total amount of emitted photons , which depends on both the amplitude and the duration of the response, is also odor-specific  . indeed, orns showed an attenuated response  to the second application, at about 50-70% of the magnitude of the first response to spearmint, citronella, and octanol. for the third application, the response was approximately 35-50% of the magnitude compared to the first exposure, for the fourth about 25-30%, a figure ultimately reduced to ~20-25% during the last stimulation, with the three odors following the same trend. this decrease could not be attributed to the ga exhaustion, since a longer odor application as long as  <dig> minutes generates a stronger  and continued response that remains for the entire duration of the odor application , confirming that the availability of the bioluminescent probe is not a limiting factor . in addition, to further support the fact that the amount of the ga probe is not a limiting factor, and consequently that the reduction of the ca2+-response following successive odor applications reflects the adaptation process, we have used the or22a-gal <dig> line to express the ga in a specific glomerulus   <cit> . using the same protocol of odor-application  , we remark that the repetition of the odor stimulus induces a gradual reduction in the successive responses, revealing the adaptation. more importantly, as generally used for other ca2+-probes  <cit> , application of kcl at the end of the experiment , which depolarizes the neurons and induces a massive entry of calcium, induces the burning of all remaining probe. additional file  <dig> clearly shows that a huge amount of ga probe was still available in these specific neurons . therefore, the gradual decrease in the ca2+-response cannot be due to an exhaustion of the ga, and thus represents an adaptation process. moreover, as can be seen below, in some experimental conditions, a decrease in the amplitude of the response does not occur when different signaling pathways or neuronal networks that affect adaptation are blocked implying that ga is still capable of reacting to intracellular changes in ca2+ concentration. finally, since adaptation has also been reported to depend on the frequency of the stimulus, increasing the frequency of the odor application  generates an adaptation with slightly different kinetics, which seem to be odor-specific  . together, these results demonstrate that orns rapidly adapt to odor stimuli, depending either on duration of the stimulus or frequency of its repetition. although the odor responses to relatively short duration stimuli  have been well documented  <cit> , responses to longer applications, such as  <dig> s, have not been described in detail. as recently reported  <cit> , the  <dig> s odor-induced response within the axon terminals of orns has two components: a first mechanism relying on vgcc and a delayed second mechanism that depends on the recruitment of intracellular ca2+-stores. thus, since  <dig> s odor application induces a strong and robust adaptation, we adopted these conditions  to further characterize this long-lasting form of adaptation.

adaptation of ca2+-response in axon terminals requires cholinergic synaptic transmission
first, odor-induced responses in orns generate spikes that propagate to the axon terminals, leading to the opening of the voltage-gated-calcium-channels , responsible for transmitter  release. indeed, as recently reported  <cit> , verapamil, a vgcc blocker  <cit>  completely abolished the ca2+-response in the antennal lobes for the three odors, indicating that presynaptic ca2+-entry was necessary to trigger the ca2+-response. second, modulation of the orns-pns synaptic transmission by local neuronal networks, either by feedback inhibition acting presynaptically   <cit> , or excitatory interactions acting post-synaptically   <cit>  has been reported. to assess if the ca2+-response monitored at the presynaptic terminal partly depends on neurotransmitter release and consequently on feedback control, we blocked synaptic transmission using α-bungarotoxin , a specific blocker of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors   <cit> . orns are indeed cholinergic neurons, while achr  have been reported in the antennal lobes  <cit> . however, exactly which neurons express which achr still remain unclear. application of bgt reduced the first odor-induced response  for the three odors by about 60% . more specifically, although the amplitude of the response remains consistent and does not decrease with odor repetition , the overall response, represented by the total photons, was smaller  and remains roughly constant for all applications . similarly, the duration of the response was much shorter as early as the first application, and remains constant for all successive applications . interestingly, these values roughly correspond to the first component , which is attributable to ca2+ -entry into the terminals triggered by the spikes. indeed, a higher magnification of the superposition of the odor-induced ca2+ -response of the first odor-application following α-bungarotoxin drug-application over the control flies  clearly shows that the second component described by murmu et al.,   <cit>  is absent or severely reduced. these results suggest that in the presence of bgt, the second component is not induced when nachr are blocked; therefore it might result from an "excitatory/positive" feedback. furthermore since the parameters for the subsequent responses  remain practically unchanged, it appears that this second component might be the main factor affected by the adaptation process.

insp3r and ryr are required to induce the second component, which amplifies the odor-induced response
murmu et al.   <cit>  have shown that interfering with insp3r or ryr primarily decreases the second component of the ca2+ -response to odor application. indeed these receptors are the two major channel/receptor complexes controlling the release of ca2+ from intracellular stores  <cit> . in drosophila, mutation in insp <dig> receptor gene  generates defects in olfactory adaptation  <cit> . to assess whether the insp3r and/or ryr signaling pathways play a role in the adaptation of olfactory responses and in particular, serve to increase  the presynaptic response, ca2+ -responses were analyzed using specific inhibitors or in flies with genetical defects in insp3r or ryr signaling pathways in orns. thapsigargin is an inhibitor of the endoplasmic reticulum  ca2+ -atpase which depletes intracellular ca2+-stores  <cit> . its application for  <dig> min  decreases the total number of photons  as well as the duration of the response , mostly for the first and the second application of the odors, after which the decrease was less marked. again, the peak amplitude of the response was not significantly different from that of control flies, nor did they show a significant decrease in response  . on the other hand, flies simultaneously expressing ga and an interfering rna construct directed against the insp3r  show a reduction of light emission   during olfactory responses. they also present, to various extents, a decrease in the response duration . however, the peak amplitude of the response was slightly decreased for spearmint and octanol, but not for citronella.

ryrs are expressed in the antennal lobes  <cit> , although in which precise neuron remains unknown. using a similar strategy, the contribution of the ryr to ca2+-response was evaluated. at  <dig> μm and above, ryanodine is a blocker of the channel associated with the ryr  <cit> . ryanodine incubation for 15-min decreases the response   and the duration of the response  to spearmint and octanol but not to citronella, suggesting an odor-specific effect. moreover, the amplitude does not decrease in response to the three odors . flies simultaneously expressing ga and a rnai directed against the ryr  show a decrease in response to olfactory stimuli for the three odors tested, both in total photons , and response duration . moreover, though slightly different than ryanodine, compared to control flies, amplitude is affected, but they still adapt to repetitive stimuli .

overall, although some differences can be observed between the results obtained from the pharmacological versus a genetic approach and more specifically between ryanodine and the ryr-rnai  similar results were obtained with the two independent methods. these observations confirm that insp3r as well as ryr, and consequently the ca2+ released from the intracellular ca2+-stores contribute to the olfactory response, by allowing orns to increase and maintain their response according to increasing odor duration, and importantly, to adapt to a prolonged and/or repeated stimulus.

release of presynaptic ca2+-stores within orns depends on gabaergic synaptic transmission in the antennal lobes
each glomerulus of the antennal lobes receives about  <dig> axons from the orns expressing the same receptor gene  <cit> . the axon terminals of the orns make synaptic contacts with dendrites of a few uniglomerular projections neurons , which propagate olfactory information to higher brain centers. although the majority of pns are cholinergic, some of them have been recently shown to be gabaergic  <cit> . the axon terminals of the orns also make contact with local interneurons , the majority of which are gabaergic  <cit> . recently several other classes of lns have been described, revealing an unexpected higher level of complexity  <cit> . functionally, lns can either be inhibitory  <cit>  or excitatory  <cit>  and modulate the processing of olfactory information, possibly by refining odor-tunings  <cit> . to study the possible contribution of the neuronal network, especially of the gaba  on the orn' axon terminals, we interfered with the gabaergic synaptic transmission both pharmacologically and genetically, given that majority of lns are gabaergic. the drosophila genome encodes three gabaa receptors subunits   <cit> , and two gabab receptors  <cit> . gabaa receptors are pentameric and may exist as homomers or heteromers. picrotoxin blocks rdl homomultimers, whereas rdl/lcch <dig> heteromers are insensitive to picrotoxin but are blocked by bicuculline  <cit> . we monitored the response of individual flies to repeated odor-stimulation after applying the two gabaa receptor antagonists, bicuculline and picrotoxin . in the presence of bicuculline , the amplitude of the first response to the three different odors was not affected as compared to controls . however, in contrast to the controls, the amplitude of the subsequent responses did not show any decrease . moreover, the total number of photons is significantly reduced , while the duration of the response is shorter , indicating that it roughly corresponds to the first  component only. picrotoxin  strongly reduces the odor-induced response for the three odors tested . in contrast to bicuculline, the amplitude of the response is dramatically reduced after application of picrotoxin . consequently, the total number of photons is also dramatically reduced , as well as the mean of the response duration .

gabab receptors are expressed on the axon terminals of orns  <cit> . to investigate the putative contribution of these receptors, we used cgp <dig>  a specific gababr antagonist. at  <dig> μm, cgp <dig> modifies the amplitude of the odor-induced response to the first odorant application, and prevents a decrease in the amplitude of evoked ca2+-activities during repetitive stimulations with the three odors tested . however, it significantly decreases the total number of photons , since the duration of the response is reduced . further, simultaneously expressing ga and a rnai directed against the gababr <dig>  in the orns  impairs the odor-induced response . for the three odors, the amplitude of the response is reduced , while for spearmint and octanol , it still adapts following repetitive odor application  . moreover, similarly to cgp <dig>  the number of total photons is decreased , as well as the duration of the response . as in mammals, the gabab receptor is a heterodimeric g protein  <cit> . thus, to selectively abolish gabab signaling in presynaptic orns, as previously described  <cit> , we used the pertussin toxin , a selective inhibitor of several subtypes of g-proteins   <cit> . similarly to knocking-down the gabab-receptor, disrupting g-protein signaling decreases the ca2+-response. however, although a decrease is observed, it is not significant  for the three odors. again, although some differences could be observed between the different conditions used , which are also related to odor-specific differences, overall, relatively similar results obtained by independent approaches indicate that gabaergic synaptic transmission plays a crucial role in ca2+-transients occurring in the orn terminals, which might be involved in the control of ca2+-release from intracellular ca2+-stores.

blocking gabaergic signaling in orns yields functional defects in olfactory behavior
olfactory acuity   <cit>  has been dissociated from defects in adaptation, suggesting that the mechanism for cellular adaptation is independent of stimulus reception. we previously reported that disturbing the intracellular ca2+-store release by knocking-down the insp3r or the ryr within the orns yields olfactory behavior defects  <cit> . here, similarly, we wondered if disrupting the gabaergic signaling specifically within the orns, which impedes adaptive ca2+-response , could also yield specific defects at the behavioral level. in otherwords, what are the functional consequences for the fly of disrupting gaba signaling within the axon terminals of the orns? to address this question, we used the olfactory t-maze test  <cit> . flies were exposed to an odor and then tested with the same odor  in the t-maze . we recorded the behavioral response of sibling flies of three genotypes used for brain imaging:  ,  and . pharmacologically manipulated flies cannot be used in this test. all appropriate controls , were also tested, and did not show defects . without pre-exposure, all flies  preferred the control arm , meaning that they were repelled  by the odorant , except for the uas-ptx flies with citronella, for which the ri value is - <dig> . to determine if odorant exposure affects the response to odors, sibling flies were pre-exposed to the odorants for  <dig> min. we found that after pre-exposure there was a significant change in the response of the control flies : the preference toward the control-arm disappeared and the control flies then preferred the odor-arm for all three odors , mean ri value of ~ <dig>  . we interpret this "pre-exposure" effect as "adaptation". interestingly, the inversion in the olfactory response, as a result of the pre-exposure, was significantly different in the or83b,ga/gbi-rnai and or83b,ga/uas-ptx flies. as shown , these flies had mean ri values around  <dig> indicating that they had become almost indifferent to the odor after pre-exposure. thus, in contrast to the controls, which showed attraction to all three odorants after pre-exposure, these flies were unable to choose or could not discern between air and odor and hence were randomly distributed. taken together, these results illustrate that olfactory behavior is severely impaired in flies lacking gababr or g-protein downstream signaling pathways, specifically in orns.

discussion
odor-induced ca2+-responses within orns adapt to long-lasting or repetitive stimuli
this study provides evidence that the bioluminescent  ca2+-sensor is sensitive enough to monitor the ca2+-response following various protocols  of odor application.  <dig> s of odor induces a response which does not significantly decrease if repeated every  <dig> min, whereas a longer stimulus, such as  <dig> s, is sufficient to induce a decrease in response following repeated odor stimulations  . similarly, using a  <dig> s odor stimulation and increasing the frequency of repetition to 1-min intervals also induces, in an odor specific manner, a faster adaptation . we also demonstrate that prolonged odor application  generates a sustained ca2+-response within the orn axon terminals , indicating that the orns are capable of responding as long as the odor is presented, of even longer . this work also indicates that the gfp-aequorin probe is not a limiting factor for the detection of the ca2+-activity. these physiological results  are consistent with previous studies  <cit>  which report that adaptation depends both on the duration of a stimulus and on the frequency of its repetition.

different physiological approaches, based either on fluorescence brain imaging or electrophysiological techniques have previously reported odor-induced activity in different interconnected neurons in the antennal lobes of different invertebrate model organisms, including honeybees  <cit> , locusts  <cit>  and drosophila  <cit>  with the goal of deciphering the neural odor code. however, except for the study of stopfer and laurent   <cit>  performed in locusts, which indirectly described a form of adaptation, long-lasting forms of adaptation within orns such as that described here has not been reported. this is likely due to the experimental design of these previous studies, which either generally took into account the odor-induced signal solely after the response was stabilized   <cit> , or used a shorter odor stimulation duration , which as demonstrated here, is not sufficient to induce detectable and reliable adaptation. additionally, others have relied on extracellular recordings of the sensillae of the antennae  <cit>  which reflects the activity occurring in the cell-bodies of the orns. here, monitoring the axon terminals of the orns,  <dig> s odor stimulations, repeated at 5-min intervals, induced a relatively long-lasting adaptation that resembles in term of kinetics, the long-lasting adaptation  reported by zufall and leinders-zufall   <cit>  in orns in salamanders. indeed and interestingly, the recovery time   occurs over a similar time scale in salamander orns . however, in contrast to lla, which was reported in isolated orns, the adaptation described here seems to rely on different mechanisms, since it is sensitive to a "feedback control" provided by gabaergic synaptic transmission within the antennal lobes.

olfactory adaptation requires the recruitment of the intracellular ca2+-stores
in drosophila, mutants lacking insp3r  <cit>  are defective in olfactory adaptive behavior. in vertebrates, different forms of olfactory adaptation have also been reported in the orns  <cit> . first, we show in drosophila that an adaptation mechanism occurs in axon terminal of the orns in the antennal lobes. second, using two independent approaches, pharmacological and genetic, we show that odor-induced specific adaptation relies principally on insp3r and ryr. when these two different receptors are blocked or knocked-down, although some difference  can be observed between different conditions, overall the odor-induced ca2+-response no longer adapts or is severely affected. more specifically, it seems that the lack of adaptation is due to the non-induction of the "second delayed and slow rising component" of the ca2+-response, which is triggered in particular and specific conditions: when the duration of an odor stimulation is relatively long . alternatively, the second component of the response is also induced and visible particularly on the first and to a lesser extent, on the second odor applications, especially when the odor is successively repeated. this second component gradually vanishes with sequential repetition. that is, we show that adaptation is not directly due to a decrease in the response, but rather indirectly to a defect in presynaptic ca2+-increase, due to a lack of triggering release of intracellular ca2+-stores, normally occurring in the first and successive responses following either a sufficiently strong  or repeated stimuli . these results suggest that one of the major intracellular mechanisms of adaptation depends on internal ca2+-stores. in brief, we have blocked the intracellular mechanism that allows the cell to adapt to long lasting or repetitive stimuli. interestingly, in mammals, in hippocampal ca <dig> pyramidal neurons, intracellular ca2+-stores, which are controlled by insp3r and/or ryr at the presynaptic terminal, have been previously implicated in neurotransmitter release as well as in synaptic plasticity  <cit> .

gabaergic synaptic transmission in the antennal lobes is required for adaptation
in vertebrates, neuronal plasticity related to odor representation occurs at the synapse between the orns and the second-order neurons in the olfactory bulb glomeruli, a region analogous to the invertebrate antennal lobes. at this synapse, signal transmission is modulated presynaptically by several mechanisms, a major one being via the metabotropic gabab receptors. this suppresses presynaptic ca2+-influx and subsequently transmitter release from the receptor neurons terminal  <cit> . at least two kinds of presynaptic inhibition  are mediated by gabab receptors. intraglomerular presynaptic inhibition seems to control input sensitivity  <cit> , while interglomerular presynaptic inhibition seems to increase the contrast of sensory input  <cit>  . in drosophila, a similar mechanism seems to occur, as interglomerular presynaptic inhibition, mediated by both ionotropic and metabotropic receptors on the same axon terminal of the orns, mediate gain control mechanism, serving to adjust the gain of pn in response to orn stimulation  <cit> . yet another study has suggested that gabab but not gabaa receptors are involved in presynaptic inhibition  <cit>  yielding a contradiction. here, by monitoring the ca2+-release from the axon terminals of orns, in experimental conditions that generate a long-lasting form of adaptation, we have shown that gabaergic synaptic transmission plays a role in adaptation . both ionotropic gabaar antagonists, bicuculline and picrotoxin, block partially or completely the ca2+-response, while, cgp <dig>  a metabotropic gababr antagonist, also blocks the adaptation, albeit not completely. it should be mentioned here that application of picrotoxin per se induces a strong transient ca2+-release within the axon terminals of the orns, even without odor application . this "transient release effect" likely disturbs the resting state of the neurons, which probably accounts for the important reduction observed in the amplitude of the odor-induced response. nevertheless, these results suggest that both types of gaba receptors  are involved in adaptation. moreover, as proposed by the study of olsen and wilson   <cit> , it cannot be ruled-out that orns also express different subtypes of gabaar , since our results showed that picrotoxin and particularly bicuculline, two distinct inhibitors of gabaar, block adaptation. another possibility is that the effect of the two gabaar antagonists results from the blockage of gabaar on other neurons in the antennal lobes, as the lns or certain pns . lastly and unfortunately, this pharmacological approach does not allow distinguishing by which precise neurons this gabaergic-dependent adaptation is mediated. with the goal of clarifying precisely in which neurons gabaergic transmission acts, we blocked the metabotropic gababr  or its signaling pathway  directly within orns. this yields defects in long-lasting adaptation for several conditions, seemingly in an odor specific manner . therefore, although gabaergic effects have been described in orns of both drosophila  <cit>  and mammals  <cit> , to support "feedback inhibition", we here report that in different experimental conditions such as a long odor duration  and/or repetition of the stimulus, it also participates in the adaptation process. indeed, our results suggest that gaba signaling support a positive  feedback control instead of an inhibitory feedback, as formerly reported by other studies  <cit> . though these results seem to be contradictory, some explanations can be provided. first, as aforementioned, the experimental conditions are different: we used a relatively high odor concentration with relatively long odor duration . in addition, we recorded immediately from the first odor application and the successive one, while in the experimental protocol of certain studies, the odor is generally presented several times  before the beginning of recording  <cit> . consequently, it seems that these previous studies were performed on already adapted orns. this implies that the neuronal network in the antennal lobes was already stimulated, and therefore its dynamics was probably already modified, since as described here, an important effect occurs immediately after the first odor application. moreover, ga allows monitoring, in continuity over a long time period, the intracellular level of calcium with high sensitivity to  . in addition, although we can't precisely assign which glomeruli are activated, this approach allows visualizing simultaneously the odor-induced ca2+-activity from the entire antennal lobes . therefore, we are monitoring the outcome of the overall response of the antennal lobes, instead of the response from single or a few glomeruli. finally, in vertebrates it has been reported that in certain experimental conditions, gaba could be excitatory [for a review:  <cit> , although this contradiction cannot yet be precisely explained. furthermore, it seems that a given synapse can display inhibitory effects under one protocol and an excitatory effect with another. notably, it has been reported that a short stimulation of gaba is inhibitory, while during a long stimulation, the gaba effect can switch from inhibitory to excitatory. interestingly, this particular "switching effect" could potentially explain the current "contradictory" situation reported here: in our experimental conditions, in which we used a relatively long odor stimulus , gaba generates an excitatory effect, whereas in previous studies  <cit>  based on short  odor stimuli, gaba seems to be inhibitor. this difference in the duration of stimuli could perhaps account for such inverted or "switching effects".

blocking the gabaergic pathway within the orns disrupts olfactory behavior
to explore the behavioral and functional consequences of disturbing the gabaergic signaling pathway, we studied flies with a gababr <dig>  orn-specific genetic knockdown, as well those with a component of its signaling pathway, the g-protein, blocked by the pertussis toxin. both groups of flies present strong behavioral deficits, as adaptation-disrupted flies are not able to discern between odors and air after 5-min of exposure to odor . interestingly, control flies reverse their choice preferring odor after a 5-min pre-exposure  suggesting that in these experimental conditions, the meaning of the odor changes in the fly's adapted state. these results are consistent with previous studies suggesting that adaptation could serve to extend the operating range of sensory systems over different stimulus intensities  <cit> . in other terms, adaptation modifies the sensitivity  to the odor, as previously reported in different organisms, such as c. elegans  <cit>  and vertebrates  <cit>  including humans  <cit> . this phenomenon is similar to that in other sensory modalities, as in visual system, where light adaptation in photoreceptors sets the gain, allowing vision at both high and low light levels  <cit> . as previously reported  <cit> , odors could be repulsive  or attractive . in our experimental conditions in control flies the odors are repulsive. however, after 5-min of preexposure, the flies adapt to this odor concentration, and when tested at the same concentration odors are then likely only weakly perceived and therefore might correspond to an attractive "weak-odor concentration". in a former study in similar experimental conditions, we reported that the flies are attracted by each of these three odors for a weak odor concentration . interestingly, reverse odor preference has already been reported in c. elegans, resulting from presynaptic changes involving a receptor-like guanylate cyclase  via the diacylglycerol/protein kinase c pathway  <cit> . finally, the fact that without pre-exposure all groups of flies preferred the control arm and were repelled by the odorants indicates that the odor acuity of these flies is intact. in other words, odor-adaptation and not odor-acuity is affected in each of these groups of flies. these results strengthen the idea that odor perception and adaptation are indeed two distinct and separable processes.

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated that the adaptation process occurring specifically in the axon terminals of the orns depends on intracellular ca2+-stores, through insp <dig> and ryanodine receptors. moreover, we provide evidence that this ca2+-release requires synaptic transmission, since it does not occur when the cholinergic receptors are blocked . it also requires a feedback control through gab a, since blocking gabab signaling within orns prevents or strongly affects adaptation, suggesting that a local neuronal network mediated by gabaergic neurons is involved . in complement to the brain imaging data, knocking-down the metabotropic gababr <dig>  or its signaling pathway specifically in the orns, yields olfactory functional behavioral deficits. these results, combined with the results of blocking the insp3r or ryr  <cit>  suggest that a crucial olfactory integration process that can be ascribed to a form of neuronal plasticity and/or short-term memory occurs directly in the orns immediately after the first odor application or during a prolonged odor application. thus, this effect could resemble the long-lasting form of odor adaptation described previously at the cellular and systems levels in vertebrates, including humans  <cit> . by extension, we hypothesize that in humans, the well-known "odor-specific transient functional anosmia" following a prolonged odor exposure, which results from an adaptation, may also rely on intracellular ca2+-stores.

