BACKGROUND
the wealth of sequence data from a wide range of species, has allowed for large-scale studies of genome evolution and detailed reconstruction of the ‘parts lists’ of our earliest ancestors  <cit> . the study of network evolution not only requires these detailed ‘parts lists’, but also information on how these parts are assembled into a molecular machinery in different organisms. despite the progress in both the generation of large-scale functional data in multiple organisms, as well as the inference of functional relations from sequence data, the overlap in functional networks in different species is typically very small. the reconstruction of ancestral networks on a scale that would allow for general statements on network evolution is not yet possible  <cit> .

previous studies attempt to circumvent this problem by assigning an age to proteins in an s. cerevisiae protein interaction network, assuming that patterns of connectivity between proteins of different ages offer a glimpse on how the network changed over time. a recurrent observation in these studies is the simultaneous emergence of interacting proteins  <cit> . to date, two distinct theories have been put forward to explain this phenomenon. multiple interacting proteins, added to the network at the same time, may be more likely to be functional and therefore under positive selection  <cit> . alternatively, a tendency to interact with proteins of similar age can arise as a side effect of a neutral network expansion process in which new proteins are added to network peripheries while old proteins are mainly located at network cores  <cit> . in this work, we amend both these explanations by demonstrating that gene duplication events contribute to the overrepresentation of interactions between proteins of similar age.

protein age, as defined by the taxonomic distribution of the family it belongs to, is assumed to correspond to a time frame in which the protein was ‘added’ to the network  <cit> . however, few genes in s. cerevisiae’s genome and thus in its protein interaction network have emerged absolutely de novo. most genes are the result of either small scale or whole genome duplications, replacing an ancestral gene by two daughter genes.

in the classical view of functional divergence after gene duplication, one of the daughters keeps the ancestral function while the other is free to evolve an entirely new function   <cit> . on the network level, this would indeed correspond to a node being ‘added’ to the network , but the protein evolving a new function, unless it is not recognized as a homolog, belongs to the same family as its paralog and thus has the same ‘age’ by definition. thus, even if network evolution can be considered as a process in which new nodes are simply ‘added’ to the network, the age of a protein does not correspond to the time frame of emergence in the network.

moreover, neofunctionalization is not the only possible scenario of divergence after duplication  <cit> . for example, duplicate genes are preserved in the genome to achieve a dosage increase  <cit>  or daughter genes both perform part of the ancestral function  <cit>  . these processes cannot be modeled by ‘adding’ proteins to a network. if, due to network rewiring, genome and network evolution would be completely independent, we would expect paralogs to behave like random pairs in the network. on the other hand, if gene duplication events leave an imprint on the network, we would expect paralogs to share more interactions partners than non-paralogs, reminiscent of their initial complete redundancy. indeed, even if the vast majority of paralog pairs does not share any interaction partners, the relative overlap in interaction partners of paralogs is higher than of pairs belonging to different families  <cit> .

here, we investigate the influence of gene duplication events on the age structure of s. cerevisiae protein interaction networks. we find that interparalog interactions account for a small part of the overrepresentation of interactions between proteins of a similar age. intriguingly, we find another, unexpected effect of gene duplications on the age structure of the network. it turns out that the major contribution to the observation that proteins interact with proteins of a similar age is from interaction partners that are shared by paralogs, mostly likely an ancestral interaction that is preserved after duplication. we investigate whether this result can occur as a side effect of neutral network growth by duplication and divergence, and find that our simple model can only replicate an overrepresentation of interparalog edges, not the conservation of edges with proteins of the same age after duplication.

RESULTS
we perform an in depth analysis on the effect of gene duplications on age structure in an s. cerevisiae literature curated protein-protein interaction network   <cit> , consisting of  <dig> nodes and  <dig> edges. we assign an age to the  <dig> nodes that belong to a known protein family  <cit> , based on the taxonomic distribution of this family. we use the work by kim and marcotte as an anchor point and group proteins into the same  <dig> age categories they use, ranging from families that have members from all three kingdoms , those with members from only two kingdoms  to eukaryote-  and fungal-  specific families   <cit> . moreover, we use their method to calculate normalized interaction densities between different age groups and implement the statistic they propose, Δd, to measure age-dependence among these interaction densities . a positive value of Δd indicates a higher than expected connectivity between proteins of similar age categories. the literature curated pin has a Δd value of  <dig>  . in addition to Δd we define a new measure to quantify interaction densities between age groups and the potential gradient in these densities. results using this alternative measure Δdnew are discussed in the last section of the results and discussion.

no evidence for artifacts in the data causing the observed interaction preference among proteins
the tendency to interact with proteins of a similar age has been reported by several independent studies, each using a different pin, different families to infer age and different levels of granularity in age categories. however, we need to be as sure as possible that this phenomenon is not caused by any artifacts in the data. to correct for possible biases in the literature curated pin, we do the same analyses on  <dig> other networks, one based on y2h  <cit> , one on tap/ms  <cit>  data and a combination of both techniques , and find Δd values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . the relatively small overlap in interactions of these networks  indicates they sample different portions of the underlying real pin  <cit> , though of course some of the interactions that occur in only a single network are false positives. interactions between abundant proteins are likely to be overrepresented in all of these networks  <cit> . we compare the abundance of proteins in the different pins to a background distribution of all proteins for which abundance was measured . we find that only networks including interactions based on tap/ms data differ significantly from the background. to ensure the interaction preference among proteins of a similar age is not limited to abundant proteins and thus not representative of the underlying complete interaction network, we remove the  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> most abundant proteins and recalculate Δd. we find that removal of the most abundant proteins does not lead to a decrease in Δd  and conclude that interaction preference among proteins of a similar age is not limited to abundant proteins. similarly, we determine which functional categories assigned to protein families are overrepresented in the different networks, remove all proteins from the categories and find again that Δd does not decrease .

we experiment using different age groups representing various other intervals on the species tree and find that Δd does not depend on the specific age categories abe, ae/be, e and fu . because our definition of age is dependent on the taxonomic distribution of a protein family, we expect that slowly evolving protein families, as their members are recognized across more distant species, tend to be older  <cit> . indeed, if we compare the distribution of dn/ds ratios  <cit>  among the different age categories, we find faster sequence evolution for young proteins . interacting proteins are under similar evolutionary constraints and tend to have similar rates of evolution  <cit> , thus the overrepresentation of interactions between proteins of a similar age could be a side effect of the correlation of protein age with evolutionary rate. if the observed Δd value would depend on similar rates of sequence evolution rather than on similar age, we would expect that if we bin proteins according to their dn/ds ratio , Δd for these categories would exceed Δd based on age groups. in contrast, we find that if we calculate Δd based on evolutionary rate, it is − <dig>  while for this network , Δd based on age groups is  <dig>  . even though protein age correlates with the rate of sequence evolution, the latter is not the determining factor in the interaction preference among proteins of a similar age. in conclusion, we have found no evidence that a positive Δd value is caused by biases in the data.

interactions between paralogs play a minor role in the interaction preference among proteins of a similar age
several studies investigating the evolution of protein complexes revealed that they often originate from duplications of genes encoding self-interacting proteins  <cit> . on a network level, this would result in clusters of interacting proteins of the same age . interparalog interactions are thus a possible explanation for the ‘simultaneous emergence’ of interacting proteins. of the  <dig> interactions between proteins that belong to a known family,  <dig> are interactions between paralogs , belonging to  <dig> different families . of these  <dig> interparalog edges,  <dig> are interactions between members of the same protein complex .

even though they comprise only a small fraction of all the edges in the pin, interactions between paralogs are more abundant than one would expect given the size distribution of protein families and even the age structure of the network . if we remove all interparalog edges from the network, we reduce the network to  <dig> nodes and  <dig> edges  and Δd decreases with approximately 24% to a value of  <dig>  . this value of Δd is still significantly higher than random , indicating that growth of functional modules  by duplication of subunits only accounts for part of the overrepresentation of interactions between proteins of a similar age.

interaction partners shared by paralogs play a major role in the interaction preference among proteins of a similar age
gene duplications do not only influence the pin by generating interactions between paralogs. ancestral interactions with other proteins, if conserved in both paralogs after duplication, can also alter network topology. in this specific literature curated pin, the relative overlap of interaction partners between paralogs is significantly higher than of pairs belonging to different families . this overlap does not necessarily affect the age structure of the network. interestingly, we find that the interaction partners shared by paralogs are more often of the same age as the paralogs, than the interaction partners they don’t share , indicating that duplication of protein interactions can also contribute to a positive Δd.

in order to reduce the effect of interaction conservation after duplication events on Δd, we collapse the network into connected families . interestingly, Δd decreases to  <dig> , a value that is not significantly different from random . in addition to intrafamily edges, we have removed all edges that occur multiple times between family pairs . the decrease in Δd shows that families of a similar age often have multiple edges connecting their members.

the most likely scenario  in which gene duplication generates additional edges between two families, is when a member a of one family duplicates and both daughters a’ and a” keep the ancestral interaction with the protein b from the other family. the two edges representing these interactions overlap as both contain the protein b. for example, rpb <dig>  and rpb <dig>  are rna polymerase subunits common to all three polymerases and are connected to different members of cog <dig> and cog <dig> . on the other hand, if proteins from both families duplicate, the edges representing the interactions do not necessarily overlap: e.g. if a’ interacts with b’ and a” interacts with b” and a’ does not interact with b” and a” does not interact with b’. this scenario occurs in the rna polymerases as well: proteins rpa <dig>  rpb <dig> and ret <dig>  members of cog <dig>  are connected to rpa <dig>  rpo <dig> and rpo <dig> respectively, members of cog <dig>  and part of rna polymerase i, ii and iii  <cit>  .

for each family-pair that occurs multiple times in the network , we calculate the fraction of protein-pairs that is overlapping. we find that for 80% of the families, all protein-pairs overlap , suggesting that the amplification of the number of interactions between proteins of a similar age occurs mainly through asymmetric expansion rather than duplication and reuse of small functional modules. interestingly though, if both families are of the same age, this fraction is much lower . however, there is a strong bias towards pairs of old families, suggesting gradual duplication of functional modules , rather than duplication of entire functional modules at a time  <cit> .

age-dependent interaction densities in an extended duplication-divergence model
the results described above demonstrate that gene duplications contribute strongly to the observed interaction preference among proteins of a similar age. first of all, interparalog edges explain part of the overrepresentation of edges among proteins of a similar age in the network, suggesting a role for functional module growth by duplication of subunits. the major contribution in most networks however, is from the conservation of ancestral interactions with proteins of a similar age. are these interactions preferentially conserved? in other words, if the ancestral protein interacted with some proteins that are older and some proteins that are of the same age, do the daughter genes after duplication typically lose the interactions with the older proteins and do they tend to keep those interactions with the proteins of the same age? or is a small bias in the number of interactions with proteins of a similar age of the ancestral protein, amplified by subsequent duplication events? in other words, does natural selection play a role or does this phenomenon arise as a side effect of network growth by duplication and divergence?

due to limited availability in protein interaction data in different species, the direct inference of ancestral protein interaction networks and subsequent evolutionary events is primarily anecdotal  <cit> . therefore we prefer to use a network growth model to directly test some of our assumptions on network evolution. first and foremost, we want to establish whether conservation of interactions with proteins of a similar age after duplication, arises as a trivial side effect of neutral network growth. we adjust a well-studied and simple model of network growth by node duplication  <cit> , which we will refer to as the duplication-divergence  model, to accommodate family relations between nodes. in the model, we use families to define the age of a node and to calculate statistics on paralogs in order to compare them to those obtained from the data.

the model is initialized with a fully connected graph of  <dig> nodes, which are of  <dig> different families but have the same age. when a randomly selected node is duplicated, both copies are connected to the same nodes to which the ancestral node was connected. duplication is followed directly by a rapid subfuctionalization process: for each ancestral neighbor, we delete its edge with one of the two daughter nodes with a probability q. during the subfunctionalization steps, it is possible to favor one of the two daughter nodes when deleting an edge , leading to systematic asymmetric divergence  <cit> . in our extension of the original model, with a probability a, this subfunctionalization process is accompanied by drastic changes in sequence, leading to one of the paralogs founding a new family . otherwise, both paralogs belong to the same family and thus have the same age. with a probability p a new connection is formed between the duplicates, analogous to e.g. a homodimer becoming a heterodimer .

previously published results show that a dd model without the implementation of protein families can only yield networks with a negative Δd value, i.e. networks in which nodes mostly interact with nodes of a different age  <cit> . this is because in the dd model, nodes with a high degree have a larger probability to connect to a new node, by duplication of one of their neighbors. since in network growth models in general, old nodes have more neighbors than young nodes  this results in old nodes preferably gaining a new edge. in a model without family relations between nodes, one of the twin nodes will always be assigned a new age after duplication and therefore the edges gained will be mainly connecting an old node to a young node.

using our implementation of protein age, that is more congruent with the bioinformatic data analysis, we systematically study the dd model by running it under many different parameter conditions. we find that in our extended model a positive Δd value is possible under parameter conditions that have been shown to yield networks that are topologically similar to yeast protein interaction networks  <cit> . given a low probability of founding a new family , a high level of divergence after duplication  and a relatively high probability of a connection between twin nodes after duplication  our model yields networks with a Δd value that is comparable to that of a yeast pin .

these specific parameter conditions lead a high number of interparalog interactions in the network: due to high divergence after duplication the relative contribution of novel edges between twin nodes is higher . in the dd model the positive Δd value hinges on interactions between members of the same family, as is also illustrated by the high interaction densities between proteins of the exact same age . if we remove interparalog edges from a model network, Δd decreases below zero and if we collapse the model networks into networks of protein families, Δd decreases even further . in the data we do not observe such a preference for young families to interact with old families.

we gain two important insights from the extended dd model. first of all, we find that the number of interparalog edges in networks produced by the model is much higher than one might expect based on the values of p and a alone. it turns out that only a small fraction  of interparalog edges in the model stem directly from the gain of an interaction between two daughter nodes immediately after a duplication event. after a duplication event in which an edge is gained between daughter nodes, this new edge can be propagated in the network through subsequent duplication of these daughter nodes. importantly, this demonstrates that the effect of relatively rare events on network topology can be amplified in networks that grow by duplication and subfunctionalization of nodes. moreover, this mechanism indicates that previous estimates of the degree of neofunctionalization after duplication that are based on the overrepresentation of interactions between paralogs are likely to be too high  <cit> . secondly, despite the fact that conservation of ancestral interactions is more likely to occur under these parameter conditions , we find that low levels of functional divergence alone do not lead to a higher Δd value . this indicates that an overrepresentation of edges between proteins of a similar age, due to conservation of ancestral interactions in both duplicates, does not arise automatically from a process of network growth by node duplication such as we modeled here.

alternative measures for age-dependence in interaction densities
in  <cit>  the number of interactions between members of two age groups is normalized with respect to the number of nodes in each age group ). as a consequence, age groups with low connectivity in general have lower interaction densities . moreover, Δd is sensitive to random removal of nodes or edges from the network: it declines as more nodes or edges are removed , while random removal of nodes and edges should not affect the overall tendency to interact with nodes of a similar age in the network.

we define an alternative measure for the tendency to interact with proteins of a similar age, Δdnew, based on interaction densities normalized by the age groups’ connectivity . this new measure neither reflects differences in connectivity for different age groups  nor does it scale with the number of nodes or edges in the network . we reperform all of our analyses using Δdnew instead of Δd. we find Δdnew values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>   indicating that the interaction preference among proteins of similar age is neither due to artifacts in the measure of interaction density nor to the measure of the gradient in interaction densities. we test how Δdnew depends on possible biases in the data, such as protein abundance, overrepresented functional categories, evolutionary rate and the choice of age groups and find that, like Δd, these biases do not affect the positive value of Δdnew .

if we remove interparalog edges we find that Δdnew is decreased for all networks . if we collapse our networks into networks of protein families , we find that Δdnew decreases in  <dig> out of  <dig> networks . if we compare the Δdnew values to those of randomized networks , we find that Δdnew is not significantly different from random networks for two out of  <dig> networks: the y2h and the tap network . in the model networks, there is little difference between Δdnew and Δd . in conclusion, we have factored out age group properties confounding the previous definition of interaction densities, namely size and connectivity, and find that our results remain largely unchanged.

CONCLUSIONS
several studies relate the age of a protein to how that protein is embedded in the molecular machinery  <cit> . in order to use this information to understand the evolution of the molecular machinery, one needs a clear conception of what ‘age’ actually is. concerns regarding potential biases in protein age defined through the taxonomic distribution of detected homologs have been raised before  <cit> . this is important because an incorrect understanding of protein age can lead to premature conclusions on network evolution. for example, the observation that old proteins tend to have more interactions has been proposed as evidence supporting the preferential attachment model of network evolution  <cit> , but a slow rate of sequence evolution as well as a low propensity for gene loss have been associated with increased connectivity  <cit> , which would be an alternative explanation.

we test whether the overrepresentation of interactions between proteins of a similar age can be explained by biases in both the genomic as well as the functional data and find that this is not the case. in contrast, interactions between paralogs as well as interaction partners shared by paralogs account for part of the tendency to interact with proteins of a similar age. the fact that interaction partners that are shared by paralogs are more often of the same age has not been previously reported. the most parsimonious evolutionary scenario explaining the fact that two paralogs share an interaction partner, is one in which the pre-duplication ancestor of the two paralogs had an interaction with another protein and this ancestral interaction was conserved in both daughter nodes after duplication. an initial small bias to interact with proteins of a similar age could have been amplified by duplication events.

we test this hypothesis in a network growth model, which is initialized with a fully connected network of  <dig> nodes of the same age. we find evidence that amplification through duplication is possible in the case of interparalog edges: novel edges between paralogs are created at a low rate but because of subsequent duplications of these interactions, creating these novel edges can have a profound effect on network topology. if duplication and the conservation of ancestral interactions with proteins of a similar age would be sufficient to generate an interaction preference among proteins of a similar age we expect it to emerge from this model. the fact that our model can only explain the part of the interaction preference among proteins of a similar age that is caused by interacting paralogs, suggests that future work should be directed at identification of additional important factors. for example, our model neither implements de novo gene invention or interaction gain, network rewiring, nor gene loss. moreover, protein interaction networks tend to include several types of interactions, ranging from phosphorylation to possibly indirect interactions of proteins that belong to the same complex. in summary: our analyses of protein interaction data suggest an important role for gene duplications in the preference to interact with proteins of a similar age. yet results from our model indicate that a process of duplication and subfunctionalization alone does not explain the preference to interact with proteins of a similar age we observe in s. cerevisiae protein interaction networks.

