BACKGROUND
different organisms preferentially use a different subset of the synonymous codons specifying a certain amino acid. in fact, codon usage is emerging as an important regulatory factor, and codon usage bias can be detected not only between organisms  <cit> , but also in the same organism between differentially expressed genes  <cit> , in different tissues  <cit>  and developmental stages  <cit> . a correlation was found in some cases, most notably among prokaryotes and in some metazoans , between the codon usage and the abundance of the cognate trnas, indicating that in these cases at least codon usage is probably governed by evolutionary selective forces  <cit> . however, "translational selection" may not be the only adaptive process shaping codon usage, which can be biased due to interactions not  involving codon-anticodon interactions such as splice-site recognition  <cit>  and mrna turnover  <cit> . particularly, while the available genome-scale analyses done for several plant species demonstrate that codon bias in plants is adaptive  <cit> , heterologous gene expression studies in plants led to a tentative conclusion that translation efficiency of the foreign genes is often considered secondary to mrna processing and stability as a determinant for expressivity  <cit> .

for many reasons, acetylcholinesterase,  is a useful model for a comparative study addressing the issue of codon bias and translation efficiency, as well for post-translational events  <cit> . vertebrate genes encoding the enzyme from several sources were expressed in a wide variety of systems such as bacteria  <cit> , yeast  <cit> , mammalian cell cultures  <cit> , transgenic mice  <cit>  and more recently in plants  <cit> . the enzyme is known for its role in the termination of synaptic transmission by hydrolyzing acetylcholine, but during the past decade evidence has been gathered indicating its critical role in various processes such as development, stress responses, innate immunity, and bioscavenging  <cit> . this complex array of functions is enabled through the equally complex molecular biology of the ache gene: the intricate control of its transcription, alternative splicing and translation and the equally intricate post-translational events governing its function such as subcellular targeting, glycosylation, proteolytic processing, membrane anchoring and protein-protein interactions  <cit> . interestingly, non-cholinergic functions of ache are underscored by identification of ache-like activity and genes potentially encoding the enzyme in several plant species  <cit> .

original reports from our laboratory indicated that plants can express this complex human enzyme. however, yields of plant-expressed ache were modest because of limitations in the prototype expression construct and host plant  <cit> . here we demonstrate that ache accumulation in plants is limited at the translation stage and that the enzyme levels can be dramatically increased as compared to our previously reported results, by conforming its codon usage and gc content to that of highly expressed plant genes. the optimized sequence results in increased translatability of the mrna without affecting its accumulation or processing.

RESULTS
design and cloning of the plant-expression optimized oache-s gene
more than a third of the codons of the human ache gene  are infrequently utilized in dicotyledonous plants . furthermore, a non-canonical near-upstream element of a plant polyadenylation signal  <cit>   and two plant 5'-intron splice signals with downstream 3'-splice signals were identified in haches  <cit>  . in addition, potential methylation signals associated with transcriptional silencing   <cit>  are abundant in the gene, reflecting its high gc content . interestingly, the gc content in mid-exonic regions is even higher, with peaks exceeding 75% . these regions are separated by deep troughs with much lower gc content . in designing a plant-expression optimized version of the gene, we took measures to correct for these potential problems. thus, the rare codons present in hache-s were changed in the synthetic plant-expression optimized ache gene  to more frequently used alternatives so that the codon adaptiveness index  would match that of the most abundant nuclear-encoded plant protein – the small subunit of ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase . furthermore, the rna processing signals were abolished, most of the potential methylation signals were eliminated, and the overall gc content was reduced to 55%, much closer to the typical plant gene . in particular, most of the gc content peaks were considerably dampened. please note that our optimization strategy did not eliminate all infrequently used codons, giving preference to the elimination of all other deleterious sequences. however, the content of such  codons was reduced to about 20% . when cloning hache-s and oache-s into plant expression vectors, two minor changes in the amino acid sequence of the encoded proteins were required due to the need to introduce an ncoi site to facilitate the cloning . these deviations from the human sequence  are both in the cleavable signal peptide directing the protein to the secretory pathway.

optimization of transgene enhances ache accumulation in plants
binary expression vectors ptm <dig> and ptm <dig> encode hache-s and oache-s, respectively . we compared their expression in n. benthamiana leaves by agrobacterium-mediated transient assay. in the hache-s-infiltrated leaves ache-s accumulated to  <dig> ±  <dig> mu/mg protein, whereas the optimized sequence was expressed at  <dig> ±  <dig> mu/mg protein . thus, the accumulation level of the enzyme with the plant-expression optimized gene was about  <dig> fold higher than obtained with the human sequence.

in optimizing the human ache-s gene sequence, we took a preemptive approach: modifying many molecular features that might have otherwise proven deleterious to the expression of the transgene or to the accumulation of its product. thus we have modified key signals leading to transcriptional silencing , aberrant transcript processing  and translation attenuation . it was therefore of interest to explore which of these changes contributed to the dramatic improvement in ache accumulation observed with the optimized construct. to this end we removed the two 5'-splice sites, the potential poly-a site or all from the human sequence creating constructs ptm <dig>  ptm <dig> and ptm <dig> respectively. conversely, we reintroduced the same sites into the plant-expression optimized sequence, creating ptm <dig>  ptm <dig> and ptm <dig> respectively. these new ache-encoding plant expression constructs, alongside the ptm <dig> and ptm <dig> were introduced into n. benthamiana by agrobacterium-mediated gene transfer .

because of the integration position effect, transformants harboring the transgenes exhibited a range of recombinant gene expression levels, manifested in the distribution of ache activities observed . only kanamycin-resistant plants that had detectable  ache activity were considered for the following analyses. accumulation of ache activity significantly differed  between plants expressing variants of haches and plants expressing oaches . the highest ache activity level obtained among the haches plants was  <dig> mu/mg protein, with a mean of  <dig> ±  <dig> mu/mg protein . these results are somewhat higher but comparable to results previously described by us regarding the expression of the non-optimized sequence encoding the catalytic core of the enzyme in tomato plants  <cit> . in sharp contrast, the highest specific activity level demonstrated for oaches plants was  <dig> ±  <dig> mu/mg protein and the observed mean was  <dig> ±  <dig> mu/mg protein .

the distribution of ache accumulation data  is to a good approximation lognormal, and can be fitted to a logarithmic function, which allows one to predict the theoretical maximal level of ache accumulation that may be obtained with each of the construct families. these values are in a good agreement with the actual observed maximal values, being about  <dig> and  <dig> mu/mg protein for the human and optimized constructs, respectively . it therefore appears unlikely that by screening additional transformants we could have identified haches lines that would accumulate significantly higher levels of ache, than those we report. we conclude that expressing oaches constructs leads to a 10-fold increase in ache accumulation as compared to the haches constructs, and that the enhancement is due to the sequence optimization and not due to insufficient transformant pool size.

hache-s and oache-s transcripts accumulate to similar levels in transgenic plants
our analysis of the human ache-s gene shows it contains several plant rna processing signals that theoretically could lead to the production of truncated, presumably inactive, ache. however, removing these sequences in hache-s  or their reintroduction into the oaches sequence  did not have a considerable effect on the enzyme accumulation levels . in contrast to the highly significant difference between the two construct families, no significant differences were found among plants expressing variants of the haches sequence  or the one expressing variants of the oaches sequence . this implies that the three potentially deleterious sequences  do not play a major role in this case.

to corroborate this conclusion, we amplified by pcr cdna derived from either ptm <dig>  or ptm <dig>  lines using primers specific to the region encompassing the potential introns. in both cases the only fragments amplified corresponded to the correct, full length, sequence . therefore, it seems unlikely that spurious splicing events are responsible for the poor performance of the hache-s construct. similarly, an rna blot analysis using probes specific for the human vs. plant-expression optimized sequences, demonstrated single, identically sized transcripts in both hache-s and oache-s of the predicted length , abating the probability that premature polyadenylation was limiting hache-s expression as compared to oache-s.

transcript accumulation levels and integrity were further assayed by quantitative real-time pcr analysis using primers and probes to either the 5'-utr  or to the 3'-utr , common to both hache-s and oache-s, and were normalized to the co-determined levels of 18s rrna. normalized mrna levels were correlated with normalized ache activity . for each construct, there exists a statistically significant linear correlation between the accumulation levels of ache activity and those of ache transcripts when assayed either with the tev 5'-probe  or the vsp 3'-probe . as expected, this suggests that for either type of recombinant gene, the accumulation of the enzyme product depends on the levels of its cognate mrna, which vary among the different plant lines for each construct due to the positional effect of transgene integration  <cit> , a phenomenon not unique to plants  <cit> . however, for both constructs, the distribution of transcript accumulation data is statistically indistinguishable for either the tev 5'-probe  or the vsp 3'-probe . furthermore, the quantitative real time rt-pcr assays directed, respectively, at the common 5' and 3' utrs correlate well with each other . thus, oache-s and hache-s transcripts accumulate to similar levels in the respective transgenic plants and it can be concluded that optimization of the ache-s sequence did not significantly increase transcript abundance, ruling out the latter as an explanation for the increased ache activity in the oache-s plants. the explanation that neither transcription nor stability were affected seems more likely than the possibility that the optimization of the sequence resulted in simultaneous but opposite changes in transcription and stability .

optimization affects translation of the ache transcript
having ruled out transcriptional and post-transcriptional events that may affect the accumulation level and the bona fide processing of the transcript of hache-s, we turned our attention to translational events. in our design of the optimized gene we took care not to introduce any amino acid changes and the mature protein products are expected to be identical. nonetheless, our cloning procedure did necessitate minor changes in the n-terminus of the proteins, an r2g substitution in the hache-s sequence and insertion of a at the same position in the oache-s . this region is part of the cleavable er-targeting signal peptide in humans  <cit>  and plants . to rule out the possibility that these small differences may effect the post-translational stability of the respective proteins, we incubated leaf explants from representative transgenic plants with or without cycloheximide to inhibit cytosolic proteinsynthesis  and followed the degradation of the enzyme by assaying the residual ache activity over a period of several hours . the half-life time of the enzyme under these conditions is about  <dig> hours with no significant differences between hache-s or oache-s plants . in the absence of cycloheximide , a 20–30% loss of ache is observed , which may be the result of the ex-vivo conditions of the experiments including the activation of wound-inducible proteases and depletion of the explants' energy resources. interestingly, under these conditions that allow protein turnover, enzyme activity is lost somewhat  slower in oache-s derived explants as compared to its loss in hache-s explants. this may suggest that ache translated from human-sequence transcripts is replenished  less efficiently than ache translated on plant-optimized transcripts.

taken together, our results indicate that the higher levels of recombinant protein in the oache-s transgenic plants as compared to the hache-s plants are not due to transcriptional, post-transcriptional or to post-translational events. rather, it appears that increased translation rates of the oache-s mrna are responsible for the fact that ache accumulates to higher levels in the oache-s plants.

initiation is often considered to be the rate-limiting step for the translation process, and the regulation of mrna sequences and secondary structures flanking the initiatory aug are considered to play critical roles  <cit> . all of our constructs contained the same 5'-utr , but the 5'-proximal regions of the coding sequence were vastly different between the optimized and the human constructs in terms of their codon usage and gc content . by in silico folding of the common 5'-utr and the first  <dig> nucleotides of the two coding sequences , it can be shown that in the six most-stable putative secondary-structures predicted for hache-s, the initiatory aug is found within a relatively long and stable stretch of double helical rna , while the equivalent region of oache-s is predicted to be at a base of a very short and considerably less-stable stem-loop structure . it may therefore be speculated, based on these hypothetical structures, that the 5' proximal coding region plays an important role in controlling translation initiation.

to test this hypothesis, we have swapped a  <dig> bp fragment of the 5' proximal region between the native and optimized constructs and created two chimeric sequences: o-hache-s and h-oache-s , which were transiently expressed in n. benthamiana leaves . expressing h-oache-s, which contained the native 5'-proximal sequence , resulted in a drastic and highly significant  drop in the expression level when compared to the fully optimized sequence, but expression level was still modestly higher than for hache-s. in contrast, ache accumulation levels driven by the construct ohache-s  were only marginally higher than, and statistically not different from, those obtained with haches . therefore, optimization of the 5'-coding region of the human ache gene, representing only about 10% of the entire sequence is necessary, but not sufficient, for enhanced expression of the gene in plants.

discussion
the history of molecular biology and its applications during recent decades is inseparably linked to the ability to express proteins in heterologous systems – i.e. the expression of a "target" protein from one species in "host" cells of another species  <cit> . from a biotechnology perspective, success in such efforts can be defined by "high-level" accumulation of the bona fide target in the host. this requires selecting the appropriate host species , defining its optimal growth conditions and/or optimizing genetic elements that control the expression and accumulation of the target. for example, expression in escherichia coli of mammalian ache, a glycoprotein, results in low yields of the unglycosylated, misfolded and destabilized protein  <cit> , pointing to the need for a eukaryotic expression system. the importance of determining appropriate conditions is demonstrate by ache of the electric ray, a cold-adapted fish, which, when expressed in mammalian cells, failed to accumulate if the cells were grown at 37°c, but could accumulate if the growth temperature was lowered  <cit> . similarly, human ache produced in pichia pastoris was poorly secreted into the medium as compared to ache from the snake bungarus fasciatus  <cit> , probably because of a transcription-attenuating gc rich region close to the 5'-end of the human coding sequence   <cit> .

our initial attempt at expressing human ache in transgenic plants was modestly succesful, based on the definition suggested above: the enzymatic activity was indistinguishable from that of authentic human ache, but the level of activity was fairly low  <cit> . an important factor responsible for the low observed activity in crude extracts was the presence of the anticholinesterase glycoalkaloid tomatine in the transgenic host – tomato plants  <cit> . however, low expression/accumulation levels of foreign proteins in transgenic plants have unfortunately been the norm rather than the exception, despite an obvious, and rather natural, bias in the literature to focus on the latter . low yields of the recombinant protein product can be the result of limitations at every stage of gene expression, from transcription, through transcript processing and half-life, translation, post-translational modifications and turnover. several strategies have been developed to overcome such limitations, including expression in plastids  <cit> , use of virus-assisted expression systems  <cit> , and optimizing the expression cassette to include strong promoters, appropriate 5'- and 3'-utr, fusing targeting sequences, and conforming codon usage to that of plants  <cit> . plastid expression is precluded because ache is a glycoprotein and viral systems able to support the expression of >70-kda proteins have only just become available for testing  <cit> . we therefore opted to focus on optimization of the gene sequence, which was synthesized de novo , and was introduced into the low-alkaloid species n. benthamiana  <cit> , lacking appreciable anticholinesterase activity .

we present evidence for a substantial  increase in the accumulation of ache activity in soluble protein extracts obtained from transgenic n. benthamiana plants expressing the full length s variant of human ache as compared to our previously reported results concerning the expression of the ache core domain in tomato plants . in order to directly assess the effects of coding sequence optimization on the expression of the gene and the accumulation of its product, we compared the performance of the optimized gene construct  to its native counterpart  in n. benthamiana by transient expression assays  as well as in stable transformants . we demonstrate that optimization results in a  <dig> to  <dig> fold increase in the accumulation of the enzyme. our results imply that a major contribution to the successful expression presented here is due to the optimization of the construct, although there were species- and isoform specific effects. for example, expression in tomato plants was considerably lower than in n. benthamiana and expression of the catalytic domain  was lower than that of ache-s . the latter may reflect the stabilizing effect of the carboxyl-terminal peptide of the s isoform  <cit> . our results further establish that expression of ache in n. benthamiana appears to have been marginally, if at all, limited by transcriptional, post-transcriptional, or post-translational events . it stands to reason, therefore, that enhanced translation of oache-s transcripts as compared to those of hache-s is responsible for the better performance of the latter construct.

without dismissing other explanations, most previous reports suggested that limitations in expression of transgenes in plants are mainly due to unfavorable mrna metabolism, more specifically to reduced synthesis, premature polyadenylation, aberrant splicing and reduced stability of transcripts of foreign gene in plant cells . indeed, the case is quite compelling for at least one well-studied group of transgenes encoding the insecticidal δ-endotoxins of bacillus thuringiensis . when introduced into plant nuclear genomes, b.t. genes expressed poorly, and the dismal expression levels correlated well with low abundance of the full-length transcripts. a systematic and thorough investigation into the molecular mechanisms of low b.t. mrna levels  by pamela green and co-workers, led to their conclusion on the importance of "instability of mrna as a cause of limited expression of foreign genes" in general  <cit> . b.t. genes, like many other eubacterial genes, are at-rich and have multiple au-rich destabilizing sequences and au-rich plant polyadenylation signals in their mrnas. all of these factors may contribute to rapid mrna decay  <cit> . the eubacterial codon-usage bias towards au-rich codons was also concluded to contribute to mrna decay  <cit> , although rare codons are clearly not sufficient to cause transcript degradation  <cit> . we, like others, observe good correlation between the transgene transcript levels and protein accumulation levels. nevertheless optimization did not increase mature mrna abundance  and we have no evidence for aberrantly shorter mrna species in plants that express the non-optimized hache-s construct. furthermore, eliminating three potentially deleterious rna sequences from hache-s did not result in improved performance, while introducing them into oache-s did not lead to reduced expression. thus, we conclude that mrna metabolism is unlikely to be key element in controlling expression of the ache transgene in plants.

what could be, then, the factors that limit the expression of the human ache gene in plants? in many cases of heterologous protein expression, the problem that "proteins are often difficult to express outside their original context,"  <cit>  can be overcome by changing codons to reflect frequencies observed in highly expressed proteins in a particular expression system. codon usage bias is the primary factor in limiting heterologous gene expression in prokaryotes  <cit> , chloroplasts  <cit> , and mammalian cells  <cit> . codon bias is associated with translational bias: highly expressed genes tend to utilize a limited set of codons and avoid the use of others, while codon preference positively correlates with their cognate trna content  <cit> . rare codons, especially when clustered in the 5'-coding region , can lead to ribosome stalling, which acts to reduce elongation rates  <cit> , and in some cases  may in turn destabilize the mrna  <cit> .

codon bias is inherently linked to a skew in the sequence's gc content. many of the genes whose expression was attempted in plants, including the b.t. genes, are bacterial and highly au-rich. because au-rich sequences destabilize mrna in plants  <cit> , the rule of thumb was to elevate the gc content as part of the optimization process. at 65%, the gc content of human ache is particularly high, and in specific areas, such as the 5'-proximal region, it is 75% gc . at the molecular level, the high gc content of the 5'-proximal region may act to stabilize secondary mrna structures, which in the context of mammalian cells may attenuate the transcription machinery  <cit> . while we do not observe differences in the overall steady state levels of the ache transcript accumulating in either oache-s or h-ache-s plants, secondary structures also affects translation initiation  <cit>  and may also have a role in controlling the translation elongation rate  <cit> . by creating chimeric constructs consisting of optimized and native human sequences we were able to show thatthe gc-rich 5' membrane proximal region comprising about 10% of the gene had a pronounced inhibitory effect on the expression level from the otherwise fully optimized gene . interestingly, the reciprocal swap represented in o-hache-s didn't significantly improve the expression when compared to haches. this demonstrates that the optimization of the 5'-proximal region of the coding sequence, while critical for efficient translation, could not by itself account for the high level of ache accumulation seen in oache-s expressing plants. our results therefore suggest that in plants, both translation initiation and elongation are the most likely stages to be affected by sequence optimization of the ache gene. our results also raise the interesting speculation that while in plants the high gc content of the gene may be a major obstacle for translation while in mammalian cells, normally growing at a much higher ambient temperature  the region provides for yet another potential checkpoint for the highly complex regulation of ache gene expression in mammals  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the work presented here leads to the conclusion that human ache accumulation in plants is limited at the translation stage and that this limitation is specifically linked to its highly biased codon usage and gc content. changing the sequence to conform it to those that typical of highly expressed genes in plants results in increased translatability of the mrna without affecting its accumulation or processing. the contributions of codon-optimization and gc-content adjustment to expression enhancement are difficult to be separately assessed, but it is clear that both are important. while the overall gc content should be adjusted to resemble the general base composition of highly expressed genes of the expression host, one should also pay particular attention to more localized gc-content skews, revealed by the type of analysis shown here . similarly, there is evidence to reject "across the board" replacement of synonymous codons to the most preferred one for each amino acid and in fact rare codons at certain strategic points along the sequence play an important role in functional protein synthesis whereby pausing at such rare codons allows proper folding of the already synthesized protein domains  <cit> . we are currently evaluating the relevance of this last point for the ache gene. additional factors, such as subcellular targeting of the protein product and its subunit composition may affect the levels of its accumulation in the transgenic host. indeed, we have preliminary evidence demonstrating that er retention further increases the accumulation of some ache variants  in stably transformed plants to about 1% of total soluble protein . such a level of expression allowed us to efficiently purify the enzyme and we are currently testing its organophosphate scavenging potential in animal models.

