BACKGROUND
cellulosic sugars are the primary currency of the bio economy. lignocellulose is the most abundant source of biomass on the planet and represents an enormous storehouse of sugars. monosaccharides from biopolymers of lignocellulosic feedstock can be fermented into a wide variety of biofuels and biochemicals including ethanol, organic acids , solvents , 5-hydroxymethyl furfural, levulinic acid and lubricants
 <cit> . hemicellulose can also be used to produce ethanol, xylite, furfural, nylons and plant gums such as thickeners, adhesives and stabilizers
 <cit> . canada, with its enormous forests and huge annual amounts of agriculture residues, is a huge producer of cellulosic biomass. the weight of straw produced from cereal crops equals or exceeds that of grain, and represents a significant opportunity as a biorefinery feedstock to contribute to environmental, social and economic sustainability
 <cit> . similarly, recent work has shown that alfalfa is 2 ~  <dig> times more efficient than corn or soybean as a biomass source owing to its high biomass yield, perennial nature, fixation of aerial nitrogen, and production of valuable co-products, making it a model forage species for biofuel research
 <cit> . however, cellulosic material is remarkably recalcitrant; making the release of fermentable sugars with current hydrolysis options commercially cost prohibitive
 <cit> .

a crucial step in the bioconversion of lignocellulosic feedstock to biofuels and biomaterials is to maximize the saccharification of cellulose and hemicellulose components to fermentable sugars in a manner that is cost effective. one of the challenges is the high cost of enzymes involved in the saccharification of the lignocellulose and the loss of some of the hemicellulose sugars during pre-treatment. most acidic and alkaline pretreatments  remove a significant fraction of hemicellulose and/or lignin, thereby enhancing enzyme accessibility. while pretreatments like ammonia fiber expansion  do not physically extract hemicellulose or lignin as separate fractions, they do modify the cell wall ultra-structure through mechanisms that are currently not well understood
 <cit> . it is reasonable to assume that varying types of pretreated biomass would require specific mixtures of enzymes that were tailor-made for efficient hydrolysis
 <cit> . similarly, in order to minimize costs pertaining to enzyme production, identification of major enzymes and optimization of their relative ratios could reduce enzyme usage without sacrificing the rate or yield of substrated during hydrolysis
 <cit> . likewise, plant cell walls are a primary source of nutritional energy for ruminants, but with many forages less than 50% of the cell wall fraction is digested
 <cit> . substantial benefits would be realized if a greater percentage of this potential energy was made available for fermentation in the rumen through an increase in the digestibility of the plant cell wall fraction.

this study was designed to examine the ability of key fungal enzymes from aspergillis niger and thielavia terrestris, in combination with commercial enzymes  or mixed rumen enzymes to further enhance the breakdown of alkaline peroxide  pretreated alfalfa hay and barley straw. ap pretreatment was selected as it accomplishes a degree of delignification, with relatively low environmental impact and without the need for special reaction chambers
 <cit> . the process causes selective removal of lignin and xylan through a combination of lignin oxidation and de-acetylation and also decreases cellulose crystallinity, enhancing the susceptibility of plant cell walls to enzymatic degradation
 <cit> . however, conservation of acetyl and feruloyl ester linkages and only partial lignin oxidation has been reported at the low concentrations  used in this study
 <cit> . therefore, we utilized a selection of purified auxiliary enzymes ; pectinase ; α-arabinofuranosidase ; endoglucanase gh <dig> ; endoxylanase ; β-glucosidase  and β-xylosidase  to explore their ability to enhance the activity of commercial enzyme and rumen enzyme mixtures. a similar approach using a combination of statistical design, robotic dispensing of substrate slurry and high throughput micro plate techniques to assess enzymatic hydrolysis at comparable protein to biomass loads and reaction volumes has been reported earlier
 <cit> . the high throughput micro assay adopted in this study is based on chundawat et al.
 <cit> , a procedure which has been standardized for solid delivery in biomass slurries, mass transfer related parameters, reproducibility and validity through comparision to conventional national renewable energy laboratory protocols
 <cit> .

RESULTS
formulation of enzyme mixtures for effective hydrolysis of alkaline peroxide treated alfalfa hay
glucose release from enzymatic hydrolysis of ap alfalfa
compared to rumen enzymes alone, a combination of rumen enzymes  with β-glucosidase  and β-xylosidase  resulted in a two fold increase  in glucose release from ap alfalfa hay. these results suggest a positive synergetic interaction between rumen enzymes with β-glucosidase and β-xylosidase. the observed increase in glucose yield with supplementary β-glucosidase  and β-xylosidase  activity reflects possible feedback inhibition of rumen cellulase by oligomers released as results of enzymatic digestion. it has been well documented that the presence of sufficient β-glucosidase is important in reducing the inhibition of cellulose by cellobiose
 <cit> . the reason for suboptimal β glucosidase activity in the rumen enzyme preparation is unknown, but may reflect the fact that the enzyme mixture used originated from the fluid fraction of rumen contents. it is well known that significant quantities of beta-xylosidase and beta-glucosidase activity are associated with the particulate fraction of rumen contents. it is also possible that in the rumen, intact bacteria uptake cellobiose directly from rumen fluid thereby preventing it from accumulating to levels that impede cellulose digestion
 <cit> .

the model predicted optimized enzyme mixtures containing accellerase  <dig>  with polygalacturonase , endo-xylanase , feruloyl esterase  and β-glucosidase  resulting in higher glucose release as compared to control  . these results agree with a recent report identifying hemicellulose as an important physical barrier to enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose, as it blocks enzyme access to the cellulose surface
 <cit> . hemicellulose, particularly in the form of xylan and its oligomers, has been documented to inhibit cellulase activity even more than the accumulation of glucose or cellobiose
 <cit> . the present study indicates that more efficient cellulose hydrolysis would be achieved by formulating accellerase xc  with endoglucanase  and beta-xylosidase  activity  as compared to accellerase xc alone. enhanced glucose release as a result of the addition of egl7a may be attributed to additional cellulase activity or to the broad substrate specificity exhibited by members of gh <dig>  these endoglucanases have been reported to readily act on xylan, arabinoxylan
 <cit>  and xyloglucan
 <cit> . the phylogenetic analysis among the catalytic cores of gh <dig> enzymes in the cazy database suggests that gh <dig> endoglucanases and xylanase may have diverged from a common ancestral gene, possible resulting in gh <dig> endoglucanases retaining remnants of xylanse activity
 <cit> . these results can be explained by hypothesis that gh <dig> improves overall cell wall conversion through exposing more xylan trapped within the cell wall matrix, increasing the release of xylo-oligomers. it has been reported that xylo-oligomers are strong inhibitors of cellulase and inclusion of β-xylosidase  reduces the inhibitory impact of these end products on cellulose hydrolysis
 <cit> . furthermore, xylanases  alone have been shown to enhance the bioconversion of both cellulose and hemicellulose
 <cit> .

xylose release from ap pre-treated alfalfa
a seven fold increase in xylose release from alfalfa  was predicted when mixed rumen enzymes  were complemented with β-glucosidase  and β-xylosidase . furthermore, the model predicted a four-fold increase in xylose release  when accellerase  <dig>  was complemented with β-glucosidase . interestingly, optimum xylose yield did not require the addition of xylanase, suggesting that there was sufficient xylanase already in accellerase  <dig>  of the commercial enzyme mixtures investigated, accellerase xc contained the highest xylanase activity , and consequently was expected to be most efficient at xylan hydrolysis. however, complementing accellerase xc with endoglucanase  resulted in  <dig>  fold higher xylose yield  from ap pretreated alfalfa as compare to accellerase xc alone. these results suggest improved xylan hydrolysis with increased cellulose solubility and reflect the layered structural complexity of cellulose and xylan in the plant cell wall.

formulation of enzyme mixtures for effective hydrolysis of alkaline peroxide treated barley straw
glucose release from ap pretreated barley straw
maximum glucose yield  from barley straw was observed  when mixed rumen enzymes  were combined with family  <dig> endoglucanase  and acetyl xylan esterase . glucose yield from accellerase  <dig> was nominally  higher when it was mixed with feruloyl esterase  and endoglucanase  . approximately  <dig>  fold more glucose was released  by supplementing accellerase xc  with feruloyl esterase  and acetyl esterase . these results demonstrate the importance of esterase activity for holocellulose hydrolysis in barley straw. our results also resonate with an earlier report
 <cit>  of conservation of acetyl and feruloyl ester linkages in hot water pretreated corn stover. it has also been documented that peroxide treatment at low concentrations  did not result in notable lignin oxidation, whereas treatment with h2o <dig> at ≥ <dig> % resulted in significant cleavage of carboxyl groups
 <cit> . our results are consistent with the notion that ferulic acid linkages to lignin and /or other xylan/pectin chains are in part responsible for recalcitrance of cellulose microfibrils even after mild oxidative treatment. cleavage of these linkages seems to be imperative in providing access of both cellulases and xylanases to the core of the cell wall matrix
 <cit> .

xylose release from pre-treated barley straw
xylose release from barley straw was five-fold higher when mixed rumen enzymes  were complemented with polygalacturonase  and feruloyl esterase  . this suggests that cross-linked pectin/xylan limited the digestion of barley straw. furthermore, an optimized mixture containing accellerase  <dig> , arabinofuranosidase , 16% and 10% acetyl-xylan-esterase axe16a_aspng and axe16b_aspng respectively, and 7% e-bgluc, was predicted to release  <dig>  fold more xylose  from barley straw than accellerase  <dig> alone. likewise complementing accellerase xc  with feruloyl esterase  and acetyl-xylan-esterase  resulted in the highest xylose yield  from barley straw as compared to accellerase xc alone. these results suggest that cross-linked polymers with lignin are the primary recalcitrant structure inhibiting the conversion of barley straw to fermentable sugars. synergistic interaction between feruloyl esterase and xylanase to increase the release of ferulic acid as well as synergetic interaction between feruloyl esterase, xylanase, cellulase, arabinofuranosidase and arabinanases to increase the release of reducing sugar has been reported by others
 <cit> .

our results are consistent with previously reported correlations between lignin phenotype  and enzymatic deconstruction of monocot  and dicot  cell walls. with dicots , a strong negative correlation has been shown between initial lignin content and cellulolytic decomposition of dilute acid pretreated fibrous substrates
 <cit> . our model also suggests that efficient deconstruction of delignified ap alfalfa can be achieved by core enzymes alone, while feedback inhibition by released products was also an important factor controlling sugar release. with barley as a monocot, digestibility has been reported to not depend on initial lignin content, but rather the degree of ferulate bridges was strongly negatively correlated to digestibility
 <cit> . this observation was reflected by our results where esterase activity was shown to be critical for the comprehensive enzymatic deconstruction of barley straw.

to validate predictions made by statistical design, the profile of glucose and xylose released from ap pretreated barley and alfalfa as a function of incubation time and protein concentration were further studied. at 6 h, glucose release from ap treated barley as well as alfalfa was observed to be nearly linear for all four mixtures with increasing enzyme concentration . for ap treated barley straw, optimized accellerase  <dig> mix was superior  to accellerase  <dig> at 24 h . although both optimized accellerase  <dig> and accellerase  <dig> showed similar yields after 24 h, and 48 h of incubation with alfalfa hay, the optimized accellerase  <dig> mixture resulted in higher  glucose yield from ap treated alfalfa . at 48 h, with all four enzyme mixtures, sugar release tended to plateau at protein loads above 20 mg/g glucan, with optimized accellerase  <dig> exhibiting the highest glucose release from ap treated barley straw . similarly optimized accellerase xc for barley straw and alfalfa hay, were also observed to enhance xylose release  from both substrates . plotting data collected at 15 mg/g of glucan against time showed that optimized enzyme mixtures released more glucose and xylose than the original commercial enzyme preparations at terminal incubation .

modeled predictions were further validated with a scale up assay using  ap treated barley straw in a 2 ml reaction volume. we selected optimized accellerase xc mix for the scale up validation as it predicted the same enzyme components   for enhanced glucose as well as xylose from barley straw. superior performance of optimized accellerase xc over accellerase xc was confirmed in the scale up through the observation of increased glucose and xylose release . a direct relationship was observed between xylan conversion  and glucose conversion  for accellerase xc as well as for optimized accellerase xc . however, the correlation between xylan and glucan digestion in optimized accellerase xc  was higher than conventional accellerase xc, suggesting improved glucan conversion as a result of enhanced xylan saccharification.. since fae 1a and axe 16a were important components of optimized accellerase xc, we further analysed the release of acetate. accellerase xc exhibited a weak correlation between xylose and acetate release, while there was a strong correlation between xylose and acetate release with optimized accellerase xc. the synergetic relationship between accellerase xc with fae 1a and axe 16a was evident by the direct relationship between xylose release and acetate release during incubation . these results suggest that accellerase xc lacked sufficient esterase activity to effectively, hydrolyze ap pretreated barley straw, a limitation that was overcome in part by the addition of complementary esterase activity.
3c. enzymes were included at 15 mg/g glucan. error bars represent sd of the mean .

CONCLUSIONS
fungal esterases  improved the activity of both commercial enzymes in this study. our results demonstrate that the breakdown of hemicellulose facilitates the hydrolysis of barley cellulose. addition of endoglucanase  enhanced the activity of commercial enzymes against both alfalfa hay and barley straw. use of enzymes from thermophilic or anaerobic fungi to formulate "intelligent" enzyme cocktails could enhance the efficacy of existing commercial enzyme preparations. characterization of enzymes that act synergistically with enzymes produced by rumen microorganisms could also lead to an improvement in the utilization of low quality forages by ruminants.

