BACKGROUND
a facile and completely general method for modification of any genomic sequence of interest in bacteria would be of enormous value for a wide range of applications, including construction of strains for metabolic engineering, studies of the effects of mutations acquired during adaptive evolution, and construction of strains for molecular biology studies that require chromosomal modification of genes such as allele replacement or epitope tagging.

the most frequently used techniques for genetic modification of escherichia coli and salmonella enterica are the two-step recombination method  <cit>  and the ‘gene gorging’ method  <cit> . both methods use the bacteriophage λ recombination system to promote gene replacement  <cit>  in strains with a low intrinsic recombination rate. for this purpose, datsenko and wanner  <cit>  developed the red helper plasmid, pkd <dig>  and the blattner lab developed two derivatives, pacbsr  <cit>  and pk-ht  <cit> . some variations on these commonly used methods use a λ red recombinase encoded in the genomic dna  <cit>  rather than a red helper plasmid.

the two-step recombination method uses a selection marker to identify cells in which a mutation cassette composed of two homologous recombination fragments surrounding a selection marker has been integrated into the target site. subsequently, the selection marker can be removed by flp recombinase  <cit>  or by cleavage with the i-scei meganuclease followed by homologous recombination using the host’s reca system  <cit> . use of flp recombinase leaves a short frt sequence as a scar. use of the host’s reca system after double-strand breakage by i-scei leaves no scar at the end. in contrast, the gene gorging method relies upon screening to identify colonies in which a desired genetic change has been introduced by recombination of a mutation cassette into the genome. it also leaves no scar, but can be inefficient without the use of a special recombination strain  <cit>  or a specially designed synthetic dna with chemically modified bases  <cit> . these techniques have been used extensively and modified to enable deletions, insertions, and epitope tagging  <cit> .

in our hands, genome editing by both the two-step recombination method and gene gorging was highly inefficient in most cases. we focused our attention on the two-step recombination method because of the advantage of employing selection to identify cells in which the mutation cassette has been integrated into the genome. we identified and corrected three mutations that limit the efficacy of a previously used helper plasmid and streamlined the procedure so that it can be carried out with higher efficiency and fewer experimental manipulations. however, we still observed a wide range of efficiencies depending on the identity of the target gene.

we discovered that the intransigence of certain genes was due to active transcription that continued into the inserted mutation cassette and prevented cleavage at the i-scei site. difficulties in modifying actively transcribed genes present an important limitation to the use of genome editing procedures. inclusion of two successive terminator sequences in front of the i-scei cleavage site obviated this problem and resulted in highly reliable chromosomal manipulation.

modification of essential genes is also problematic using the two-step procedure because the first step results in interruption of the target gene by the mutation cassette. a solution to this dilemma is to include in the mutation cassette an extra fragment of the target gene that restores an open reading frame when the mutation cassette is integrated into the genome. however, since homologous recombination can occur anywhere within this extended extra fragment, many recombination events will fail to integrate the small region encoding the desired mutation into the genome. we addressed this problem by using a fragment of the target gene composed of synonymous codons to prevent homologous recombination within this extra fragment.

our optimized procedure is summarized in figure  <dig>  the new helper plasmid pslts encodes i-scei under the control of the anhydrotetracycline-inducible teta promoter and the lambda red recombinase genes under the control of the arabinose-inducible arab promoter, and carries a temperature-sensitive origin of replication. . the mutation cassette consists of a fragment containing 100 bp homology regions  that target the cassette to the desired chromosomal location. hr <dig> provides the region in which homologous recombination can occur after i-scei cleavage of the genomic dna. two hr <dig> sequences flank a sequence encoding a double transcriptional terminator  in front of the i-scei recognition site and a selection marker. the first step in the procedure is introduction of the helper plasmid pslts into the target strain. overexpression of the λ red recombinase is then induced by l-arabinose . the mutation cassette is then introduced into cells carrying the helper plasmid by electroporation . integration of the mutation cassette into the target location is accomplished by the λ red recombinase . cells in which the mutation cassette has been integrated into the genome are selected on plates containing the antibiotic for which the selection cassette confers resistance. subsequently, these cells are spread onto plates containing ampicillin  and anhydrotetracycline  . most of the cells do not survive the double-strand break introduced by i-scei. however, in a minority of cells, homologous recombination between the hr <dig> sequences enables survival and accomplishes the desired chromosomal modification . here we describe the development and validation of this method with applications in both e. coli and salmonella.

*these plasmids have been deposited to the addgene repository and are freely available for academic use.

RESULTS
construction of an optimized helper plasmid
the ideal helper plasmid for two-step scarless chromosomal modification would have three characteristics: 1) genes encoding the λ-red recombinase to increase the frequency of successful integration of the mutation cassette by recombination; 2) a gene encoding i-scei; and 3) a temperature-sensitive origin of replication to facilitate removal of the helper plasmid after recombination of the mutation cassette into the genome. further, the λ-red recombinase genes and the gene encoding i-scei should be inducible under different conditions. three plasmids with these characteristics, pkdts  <cit> , pwrg <dig>  <cit>  and predi  <cit> , have been reported.

we used pkdts as a helper plasmid to introduce a sequence encoding a 3 × flag tag at the 3’-end of rpod in e. coli. we re-constructed this plasmid as previously described by inserting the 1407 bp nco <dig> fragment encoding ptet-i-scei from pk-ht  <cit>  into the ncoi site of pkd <dig>  <cit> . we found that pkdts effectively promoted recombination of the mutation cassette into the genome, as judged by growth of colonies on medium containing the antibiotic for which a resistance gene was carried on the mutation cassette. however, cleavage at the i-scei site in the mutation cassette by i-scei was extremely inefficient. after induction of i-scei expression by anhydrotetracycline, only a small proportion of cells should survive; these cells have healed the double strand break introduced by i-scei by a homologous recombination that removes the selection cassette. in this experiment, when  <dig> colonies were spread individually onto plates in the absence and presence of anhydrotetracycline, no difference in the number of colonies was observed , suggesting that the intended cleavage of the genome by i-scei was ineffective.

we discovered three mutations in the region of pkdts derived from pk-ht. one of these, which results in replacement of  <dig> amino acid residues at the n-terminus of i-scei with a single amino acid , had been detected previously  <cit> . two other mutations resulted in missense changes of asn <dig> to ser and lys <dig> to arg in tetr . all three mutations were present in the pk-ht plasmid from which the fragment containing genes for i-scei and tetr was taken. any or all of these mutations might have been responsible for the failure of the i-scei cleavage step. after correction of these three mutations, the new helper plasmid, pslts, was successfully used to introduce a sequence encoding a 3 × flag tag at the 3’-end of rpod into e. coli . the frequency of viable colonies after induction of i-scei expression was  <dig>   × 10− <dig>  attesting to the efficiency of the i-scei cleavage step. among eight colonies that lost the selection cassette after induction of i-scei expression, all had the correct insertion . pkdts <dig>  a helper plasmid in which only the mutation in i-scei had been corrected, also successfully promoted recombination of the mutation cassette into the genome and showed the expected diminution in the number of colonies after the induction of i-scei expression . however, only four of eight colonies that had lost the antibiotic resistance marker had the correct insertion . the remaining four colonies were wild type.
e. coli 
k- <dig> mg1655

scarless deletion of thrb in e. coli k- <dig> mg <dig> and argc in s. enterica sl <dig> was easily accomplished using pslts . again, all of the colonies that had lost the selection cassette after induction of i-scei expression had the intended deletion. the general design of constructs for both insertion and deletion of sequences is diagrammed in additional file 1: figure s <dig> 

colony purification after introduction of the mutation cassette improves the efficiency of recovery of mutant strains
the recovery of colonies containing the desired mutation can be improved by re-streaking colonies obtained after introduction of the mutation cassette onto a second set of plates containing lb and ampicillin  and the antibiotic for which the mutation cassette confers resistance. without this colony purification step, we routinely found some wild type colonies among those that grew on agar plates containing lb, ampicillin and anhydrotetracycline . for example, in the experiment in which we introduced a sequence encoding a c-terminal 3 × flag tag on rpod in e. coli k- <dig> mg <dig> using pslts as a helper plasmid, 50% of the colonies obtained on lbaatc agar plates were wild type when colony purification was not performed after integration of the mutation cassette. in contrast, no wild type cells were obtained when colony purification was performed . when we attempted the same genetic modification in s. enterica, all of the  <dig> colonies tested after induction of i-scei were wild type when colony purification was not done, while all of the  <dig> colonies tested had the desired modification when colony purification was performed. apparently some wild type cells were able to survive in the vicinity of colonies that had integrated the mutation cassette and were able to detoxify the antibiotic in their immediate environment.

manipulation of highly transcribed genes requires an additional element in the selection cassette
the two-step recombination method using pslts worked well in many cases, including the insertion of a sequence encoding a 3 × flag tag at the 3’-end of rpod discussed above. however, we consistently failed to generate successful mutants when we attempted to introduce point mutations into rpe and acee in e. coli, to delete an intergenic region between thrl and thra and a small region in pta in e. coli, and to introduce a sequence encoding a 3xflag-tag at the c-terminus of gapa in e. coli and at the c-termini of gapa and fbaa in s. enterica. in each case, the mutation cassette was successfully integrated into the genome in the first step. however, spreading cells onto plates containing anhydrotetracycline to induce expression of i-scei did not result in the expected decrease in the number of colonies due to introduction of a double-strand break . this result suggested that i-scei failed to cleave at its target site in the inserted mutation cassette. we hypothesized that active transcription initiated at the promoter upstream of the target gene might extend into the mutation cassette and interfere with binding of i-scei to its target site. to test this hypothesis, we introduced one or two terminator sequences upstream of the i-scei site. we used the two most-efficient artificial terminators in the igem parts collection . when only one terminator element  was present before the cleavage site, only a slight decrease in the number of colonies was observed after induction of i-scei, suggesting that cleavage at the i-scei site was still inefficient. insertion of two terminator elements  resulted in a dramatic increase in cleavage efficiency, evidenced by the substantial decrease in the number of colonies obtained when cells were spread on plates containing anhydrotetracycline . in both e. coli and s. enterica, it was possible to identify a correct mutant by screening fewer than a dozen colonies when the selection cassette contained a double terminator element, whereas it was necessary to screen forty colonies to find a correct mutant when the selection cassette contained a single terminator element .
e. coli 
k- <dig> mg <dig> and 
s. enterica 
typhimurium sl1344

e. coli 
s. enterica 
*na, not applicable.

introduction of mutations in essential genes
introduction of mutations in essential genes is difficult because the typical strategy for initial integration of a mutation cassette into the genome disrupts the target gene. we have designed a modification of this strategy that enables efficient manipulation of essential genes.

frr and ppa are essential for growth of e. coli k- <dig> bw <dig> in rich media such as lb  <cit> . frr encodes a ribosome recycling factor and ppa encodes an inorganic pyrophosphatase. these genes were previously used to demonstrate a method for introduction of an amber stop codon that could subsequently be used in conjunction with a suppressor trna to enable condition-specific disruption of translation  <cit> . we targeted these genes to facilitate comparison of our approach and the previously published approach.

we designed a mutation cassette in which hr <dig> contains a silent mutation of a codon for serine  in either the 5’-half or the 3’- half of frr and ppa. to maintain the function of the encoded proteins during the procedure, we added an additional fragment that encodes part of the target gene so that an intact open reading frame was reconstituted either under control of its own promoter  or under control of the constitutive promoter upstream of the selection marker  preceding the target gene fragment  after integration of the mutation cassette into the genome. . each codon of this additional fragment was replaced with a synonymous codon to produce a sequence that encodes the same protein but cannot recombine with the target gene in the genome. an alternative design  restores a complete open reading frame for the wild type sequence of the essential gene, which resolves to a modified gene after double-strand cleavage and homologous recombination. in addition to maintaining the function of the target gene throughout the procedure, this strategy helps confine the sequences capable of recombination to a small window, thereby decreasing the frequency of recombination events that regenerate the wild type sequence . such recombination events may account for the variable frequency of integration of the amber stop codon into target genes in a previous report  <cit> . because unproductive recombination events increase the amount of screening required to identify colonies with the desired mutation, the synonymous codon strategy significantly improves the efficiency of the procedure, which is of particular importance for endeavors requiring a large number of modifications.

we were able to introduce silent mutations into both the 5’ and 3’ halves of frr and the 3’ half of ppa using this approach . the mutation cassette was successfully integrated in 100% of the colonies obtained after selection on agar plates containing the antibiotic for which the selection marker conferred resistance. we typically selected four colonies from these plates and spread them onto plates containing ampicillin with or without anhydrotetracycline to induce expression of i-scei. effective cleavage by i-scei was evidenced by a dramatic reduction in the number of colonies on the plates containing anhydrotetracycline. subsequently, we patched up to five colonies from each plate containing anhydrotetracycline onto plates in the absence and presence of the antibiotic for which the mutation cassette confers resistance. all of the colonies that lost the antibiotic resistance marker contained the desired mutation .
e. coli 
k- <dig> bw <dig> using pslts as a helper plasmid

frr
ppa
we were initially unable to introduce a silent mutation in the 5’ half of ppa due to a failure to integrate the mutation cassette, suggesting that our construct did not enable production of sufficient ppa to support growth. this failure might have been due to difficulties in transcription due to the dependence of ppa transcription on the constitutive promoter upstream of cat, although this was not an issue in the comparable experiment with frr. a more likely explanation is that translation of the synonymously coded fragment was sup-optimal. to explore this possibility, we introduced silent mutations in the cat gene upstream of the synonymous coding region of ppa in the mutation cassette to generate a ribosome binding site more closely resembling the bacterial consensus ribosome binding site  <cit> . this strategy was successful , suggesting that a strong ribosome binding site upstream of an essential gene that includes synonymous codons may be required to produce sufficient protein for cell survival in some cases.

λ-red recombinase can be used to increase the efficiency of double-strand break repair
the synonymous codon strategy described above can be used to regenerate an open reading frame for either the mutant target gene  or the wild type target gene  after integration of the mutation cassette into the genome. the latter strategy is useful when it is desirable to maintain the wild type function of the gene until the final step. this was the case when we endeavored to introduce three mutations found in the reca2278- <dig> allele  <cit>  into reca in e. coli because active reca is needed to repair the double-strand break introduced by i-scei  <cit>  in the second step of the genome editing procedure. even though wild type reca should have been available, we found that the frequency of loss of the selection marker after induction of i-scei was low; only two out of  <dig> colonies patched to lba agar plates lost resistance to the antibiotic . the reconstitution of the reca gene using synonymous codons may have resulted in a lower level of reca. to counter this difficulty, we over-expressed the red recombinase before inducing expression of i-scei. it has previously been reported that exo and beta of the red recombinase increase the efficiency of double-strand break repair by 100-fold in cells containing wild type reca  <cit> . indeed, overproduction of red recombinase dramatically improved the efficiency of the mutagenesis; all of the  <dig> colonies that were tested after the i-scei induction step had lost the selection marker , indicating that homologous recombination had occurred.

CONCLUSIONS
although impressive progress has been made in the past decade toward developing methods for introduction of specific genetic changes into the genomes of e. coli and s. enterica, the ease of performance and the efficiencies of even the best of these methods vary widely. we have identified the major impediments to the success of strategies that require creation of double-strand breaks by i-scei followed by homologous recombination to accomplish genetic changes. in addition, we found that transcription initiated upstream of the mutation cassette apparently interferes with the ability of i-scei to cleave at its recognition site. introduction of two terminators upstream of the i-scei site alleviates this problem.

genetic modification of essential genes is particularly challenging because the function of the gene must be maintained throughout the procedure. we have shown that use of a mutation cassette in which synonymous codons restore the coding sequence of the gene after integration into the genome has the double benefit of maintaining function and limiting the region within which homologous recombination can take place, thereby increasing the proportion of crossovers that incorporate the desired change into the genome.

the method described here has enabled highly efficient modification of every gene we have targeted, including a number for which previously published strategies have been unsuccessful. the streamlined approach we have developed substantially decreases the time and effort required to generate genetically modified strains; we routinely generate desired mutants within one week. in addition, the approach is also highly versatile, allowing introduction of one or several point mutations, insertions and deletions into even difficult targets, using a common set of materials and procedures.

the method described in this paper compares favorably to the most recently developed methods for genome editing in e. coli and s. enterica. the crispr/cas system developed for genome editing in eukaryotes has recently been applied to bacteria. this method is less convenient than the method described here because it requires construction of an editing fragment and a specific targeting rna for each mutation to be introduced, whereas our two-step recombination method requires only a mutation cassette. only two examples of successful gene editing have been reported in e. coli <cit> , so the general applicability of the system in bacteria is not yet proven.

a distinctly different method for accomplishing insertions, deletions and inversions in bacterial genomes using mobile group ii introns and the cre-lox system has been recently described  <cit> . this method is most useful for large-scale genomic changes, rather than smaller-scale changes, such as introduction of a point mutation or a sequence encoding a tag. furthermore, this method requires initial disruption of a target gene, and cannot be used in its present form for essential genes.

finally, a new two-plasmid method for scarless genome editing in e. coli has been reported by yang et al.  <cit> . this method combines gene gorging with the use of a selection marker whose loss is an indication of introduction of the desired mutation into the genome. the first plasmid carries the genes for the red recombinase and the i-scei endonuclease, as well as a selection marker flanked by i-scei sites and homology regions to target a particular genomic site. after integration of the selection marker, a second plasmid carrying a mutation cassette, again flanked by i-scei sites, is introduced. after induction of i-scei, cleavage at its recognition sites in the plasmid and the genome generates fragments that can recombine to integrate the mutation fragment into the genome. this procedure was shown to be very efficient in three cases. however, it is not well suited for editing of essential genes. the method was used to edit an essential gene . however, the procedure required a clever trick; initial replacement of metk with a gene encoding a transporter allowed uptake of s-adenosylmethionine and rendered metk activity dispensable. this approach will not be applicable to most cases. further, the yang et al. method requires more time and experimental manipulation than the method described here.

