BACKGROUND
endophytes are typically fungi and bacteria that inhabit plants without causing disease symptoms  <cit> . some endophytes have been shown to benefit their hosts by improving nutrient availability, overcoming abiotic stress and as biocontrol agents against plant pathogens  <cit> . in lolium grasses, the fungal endophyte, neotyphodium coenophialum, has been shown to protect its host against herbivory by production of a loline alkaloid, creating a symbiotic relationship  <cit> . taxol is a diterpenoid anti-cancer drug harvested from taxus  trees  <cit> . ecologically, taxol is proposed to act as a fungicide  <cit> . interestingly, taxus plants have been shown to host taxol-producing fungal endophytes  <cit> . taxol is reported to be synthesized by at least  <dig> different fungal genera, primarily endophytes that live symptomlessly within taxus and other trees  <cit> . fungal taxol has been identified using hplc/ms, a plant taxol monoclonal antibody and nmr  <cit> . though controversy exists whether plant compounds are required for its synthesis  <cit> , fungal taxol is produced independently of the plant following several rounds of in vitro culturing  <cit> . recently we isolated a taxol-producing fungal endophyte strain, paraconiothyrium ssm <dig> from taxus x media, and similarly demonstrated that it could produce taxol in vitro independently of its host  <cit> .

plant taxol consists of a taxane ring derived from the methylerythritol phosphate  pathway with a phenylalanine-derived side chain  <cit> . other reports have suggested that the mevalonate pathway contributes to taxol biosynthesis in older plants  <cit> . hmgr and dxr are rate-limiting enzymes in the mep and mevalonate pathways, respectively  <cit> . we have recently demonstrated that fungi may similarly utilize both mevalonate and non-mevalonate pathways for taxol biosynthesis  <cit> , suggestive of redundancy in the plant and fungal biosynthetic pathways. plant taxol biosynthesis has been shown to require an additional ≥ <dig> biosynthetic steps, with the committed step being taxadiene synthase   <cit> .

it has been known that taxol levels in intact trees vary by up to 125-fold from tree to tree  <cit> , but the underlying reason has never been addressed. specifically, plant taxol levels vary by species  <cit>  and even from tree to tree within a species; amongst other factors, the latter variation has been associated with tree age  <cit>  or season of sampling  <cit> . as one possible mechanism, taxol-producing fungal endophytes have been shown to elicit taxol production in vitro from taxus plant suspension cultures  <cit> . co-culturing of taxus chinensis with fusarium mairei fungus caused a 38-fold increase in a co-culture system  <cit> , while f. mairei fungal broth caused a two-fold increase in taxol production from taxus cuspidata suspension cultures  <cit> . in other studies, fungi have also been shown to elicit the production of other terpenoids in planta <cit> . the mechanism of taxol elicitation is not known, and there is no evidence that these fungi also elicit plant taxol production in intact plants.

based on the previous literature, here we tested the ecological hypothesis that the dramatic variation in plant taxol content may be caused by underlying variation in its taxol-producing fungal endophytes acting as elicitors of enzymes in the plant taxol biosynthetic pathway.

RESULTS
tree to tree variation in plant taxol concentration correlates with the quantity of its resident fungal endophytes
an initial result in vitro using a t. x media cell culture line showed a moderate correlation between plant taxol accumulation in vitro and the concentration of its resident fungal endophytic community . to determine if there was a correlation between taxol content and taxol-producing fungal endophyte in intact plants, tissue samples were taken from six nearby taxus trees, representing five plant species . wood samples from each species were found to contain an endophytic fungus. each fungus was cultured to purity; 18s rdna sequencing showed that the identity of all fungi corresponded to paraconiothyrium, with ~1% nucleotide substitutions in comparison to ssm <dig> its sequence , a taxol-producing fungal strain that we recently characterized from local t. x media plants  <cit> . as different endophytes could be present in each plant, the level of ssm <dig> fungus in each stem sample was measured semi-quantitatively using trflp-based fungal community 18s rdna fluorescence fingerprinting. trflp is a pcr-based method which amplifies the entire fungal community using dna pooled from plant tissue; amplicons are restriction digested, and the fragment size  indicates the fungal genotype, while the size of the peak  indicates the amount of fungus. a prior small-scale experiment showed that in planta fungal quantification using trflp was consistent with results using quantitative pcr . using trflp fingerprinting, cultured ssm <dig> showed a distinctive peak   and the same peak was identified in all trees. the trflp peak sizes were used for quantification of ssm <dig> quantity in planta . plant taxol levels from each pooled wood sample showed good correlation  with the quantity of resident ssm <dig>  .

variation in taxol yield within a single taxus tree branch correlates with micro-scale variation in the quantity of its resident taxol-producing endophyte
since endophytic fungal populations within a tree may vary at a micro-scale, taxol was measured in different adjacent primary branches within an individual taxus plant  and compared to the quantity of endophytic taxol-producing fungus paraconiothyrium ssm <dig> . plant taxol accumulation in adjacent primary branches showed good correlation  with the quantity of ssm <dig> fungi . the experiment was repeated at a finer scale by measuring taxol in adjacent secondary branches belonging to the same primary branch . plant taxol in adjacent secondary branches again correlated with the quantity of ssm <dig> fungi  . these data suggest that fine scale variation in taxol yield within intact taxus trees correlates with local variation in the amount of taxol-producing endophytic fungi.

endogenous fungi affect plant taxol yield in both young and mature taxus plants
to characterize the effects of resident taxol-producing fungi on the plant taxol biosynthetic pathway in intact taxus plants, we decided to treat plants with a potent fungicide, maxim xl. the efficacy of maxim xl fungicide on paraconiothyrium ssm <dig> was verified in vitro:  <dig>  μm was sufficient to completely inhibit the growth of paraconiothyrium ssm <dig> on agar . one-year-old taxus x media plantlets were injected with different concentrations of fungicide , and the injections were repeated over a three-month period . five months after the start of the experiment, the highest concentration of fungicide reduced plant taxol accumulation . the specificity of the fungicide was confirmed by decreased expression of fungal 18s rrna in comparison to taxus plant 18s rrna which showed no change following fungicide treatment . additional plantlets were injected with the high fungicide concentration and again showed declines in the taxol concentration based on tlc and hplc measurements .

to confirm the above results independently, the same fungicide  was also applied to mature taxus wood. since it was not feasible to treat mature trees with fungicide, fresh wood pieces  from a mature t. x media tree  were instead harvested and treated in vitro. wood pieces were exposed to fungicide or buffer for  <dig> h, incubated for two weeks and then pooled prior to analysis. the fungicide treatment again caused declines in plant taxol based on tlc analysis  and confirmed by hplc . the high specificity of the fungicide was again confirmed by decreased expression of fungal 18s rrna compared to plant 18s rrna . however, the effect of the fungicide may have been artificially exaggerated in the mature wood experiment  compared to the plantlet experiment  as the two-week in vitro wood incubation allowed growth of endophytic fungus in the buffer control .

two-way anova  statistically confirmed that the fungicide treatments caused significant declines in plant taxol . these data suggested a significant relationship between resident endophytic fungi and plant taxol production in nature.

endophytic fungi affect plant taxol yield by eliciting transcription of plant taxol biosynthesis genes
to determine whether the contribution by endophytic fungi to plant taxol was the result of direct fungal biosynthesis of taxol or elicitation of plant taxol biosynthetic enzymes, expression of key genes in the plant taxol pathway were assayed following the fungicide treatments in both young plantlets and mature wood. the diterpenoid taxane backbone of plant taxol is derived from dxr, a key enzyme in the mep pathway  <cit> . fungicide treatment resulted in decreased levels of dxr transcript in both intact plantlets  and mature wood . the expression of another plant enzyme was tested, hmgr, the rate-limiting step in the cytosolic mevalonate  pathway which contributes to the taxane ring but only in old taxus trees  <cit> . fungicide treatments caused no obvious decline in the expression of hmgr in young plantlets , but caused a decline in older wood . finally, in both young plantlets and old taxus wood, fungicide treatments caused a reduction in the expression of plant taxadiene synthase , the rate-limiting step in the plant taxol pathway  <cit>  . this result was verified at the protein level using a polyclonal antibody for taxus ts . it was theoretically possible that some of the observed decline in ts protein may have been caused by decreased fungal ts as it cross-reacts with the plant antibody . however, as the plant ts rt-pcr primers used never recognized pure cultures of paraconiothyrium ssm <dig> ts , the simplest explanation is that endophytic fungi elicit plant ts transcription or transcript accumulation. it should also be noted that primers for plant hmgr and dxr did not amplify fungal endophyte rna . six months later, an independent set of taxus plantlets was injected with maxim-xl fungicide or buffer and showed similar results as the first set of experiments . the primers used to quantify expression of taxus taxadiene synthase , dxr and hmgr, never amplified any fungal bands using fungal templates. several other taxus plant primers  designed from conserved sequences sometimes amplified a band, but further sequencing demonstrated that these fungal amplicons were not authentic ts, dxr or hmgr .

these independent results in young plantlets and old taxus wood demonstrate that endophytic fungi contribute to plant taxol yield by eliciting transcription of rate-limiting early and late steps in the plant taxol pathway. however, these results do not exclude a direct biosynthetic contribution by fungi to plant taxol.

application of herbicide suggests that the plant-endophyte interaction is critical for high plant taxol accumulation
in parallel with the fungicide treatments, fresh taxus x media mature wood pieces  were simultaneously treated with isoxaben, a herbicide predicted to be specific for plants rather than fungi as it is a cellulose inhibitor  <cit> . wood pieces were exposed to herbicide or buffer for  <dig> h, incubated for two weeks and then pooled  prior to analysis. though the herbicide treatment caused a much greater decline in the expression of plant 18s rrna, hmgr and ts compared to the parallel fungicide treatment , plant taxol yield was more affected by the fungicide treatment  which reduced endophytic fungal 18s expression to a much greater extent . therefore, in this in vitro system, fungi made a greater contribution to taxol yield than cultured wood alone. the highest taxol yield occurred when both plant 18s rrna and fungal 18s rrna expression were high suggesting that the ecological interaction may be important for maximum taxol biosynthesis in planta.

taxol inhibits growth of other fungal inhabitants of wood but not the taxol-producing endophyte
it was surprising that the fungal endophyte ssm <dig> would induce plant taxol biosynthesis in planta, given that the endophyte can produce the same metabolite by itself, at least in vitro <cit> . as taxol was reported to have fungicidal activity, we hypothesized that ssm <dig> might stimulate plant taxol in order to inhibit its fungal competitors in planta. strain ssm <dig> was isolated from taxus wood. we applied taxol  to three different fungi known to infect conifer wood: heterobasidion annosum, phaeolus schweinitzii and perenniporia subacida, of which p. schweinitzii is known to infect taxus wood  <cit> . taxol inhibited the growth of all three wood decaying fungi . however, taxol did not inhibit growth of an alternaria fungus that we had isolated earlier from taxus bark, nor a tree endophyte  or a non-tree pathogen of corn, fusarium graminearum . critically, taxol also did not inhibit growth of the ssm <dig> endophyte . this data suggests that taxol acts as a fungicide against potential fungal competitors of endophyte ssm <dig> that might share its wood environment, though not against the endophyte itself.

discussion
several earlier reports showed that taxol levels in suspension cultures  <cit>  and intact trees  <cit>  vary by up to 125-fold, but the underlying reason has never been shown. independent studies showed that taxol-producing fungal endophytes elicit the production of taxol from in vitro taxus cell cultures  <cit> , though did not determine the mechanism of elicitation. here we present data that these two phenomena are mechanistically related. specifically, we have shown that tree-to-tree, and even branch-to-branch, variation in taxus plant taxol accumulation positively correlates with the quantity of a resident taxol producing fungal endophyte, in this case paraconiothyrium ssm <dig> . the underlying mechanism involves endophyte-induced transcriptional activation of rate limiting genes in the plant taxol biosynthetic pathway .

given that the natural environment of the endophytic fungal strain is taxus wood, and that taxol was reported to be a fungicide  <cit> , we hypothesized that the endophyte might stimulate its host to produce taxol in order to inhibit fungal competitors that could also colonize the same woody environment. consistent with this hypothesis, taxol inhibited growth of fungi known to infect conifer wood including taxus wood .

nevertheless, this raises an important question as to why the endophyte needs to stimulate the host plant to produce taxol when the endophtye can produce the same secondary metabolite by itself, at least in vitro <cit> . we propose that this endophyte strategy may be to prevent colonization by its competitors but at minimal metabolic cost to itself. we have recently shown that taxol biosynthesis in this fungal endophyte  consumes expensive terpenoid and phenylpropanoid pathway metabolites  <cit> . such a relationship between taxus and its fungal endophyte, wherein the endophyte takes advantage of its host, would represent an interesting example of commensalism.

these results raise the reverse question: why does the taxus host retain an endophyte that produces a secondary metabolite that it can synthesize on its own? our results even demonstrate that an antibody raised to recognize taxadiene synthase , the rate limiting step in plant taxol biosynthesis, strongly cross reacts to the apparent endophyte ts , a result which appeared to be confirmed using a negative control  and positive controls  . this result suggests a shared evolutionary relationship between plant and fungal endophyte taxol biosynthetic pathways, rather than convergent evolution. one attractive possibility is that if a pathogen were able to successfully colonize the host, the plant may not be able to produce taxol locally due to the resulting plant tissue damage. by the host maintaining a taxol-producing endophyte, even at a metabolic cost to itself in the short-term, it may afford itself long-term protection against systemic infection in situations where it can no longer produce the taxol fungicide – a temporal form of symbiosis. testing this hypothesis would require being able to chemically trace the biosynthetic origin of taxol in planta before and after a fungal pathogen infection.

other fungi have also been shown to elicit plants to produce terpenoid-based compounds in planta <cit> . arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi induce the accumulation of mycorradicin in gramineous plant roots by inducing 1-deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phosphate synthase  and dxr, two key enzymes in the mep pathway  <cit> . terpenoid production in euphorbia pekinensis  plants increases upon inoculation with the endophytic fungus, phomopsis sp., by induction of plant phenylalanine ammonia-lyase  and dxr. finally, fungal elicitors have been shown to induce biosynthesis of the anti-malarial terpenoid, artemisinin, in artemisia annua  plant suspension cells  <cit> .

on a cautionary note, as only a modest correlation was observed between ssm <dig> and plant taxol concentrations, and since the fungicide treatments did not specifically target ssm <dig>  it is possible that other fungi within taxus might also elicit plant taxol biosynthesis, consistent with taxol acting as a fungicide. recently, we also demonstrated that other fungi inhabiting taxus can elicit taxol production from the endophytic fungus in vitro <cit> , raising the possibility of complex elicitor interactions on taxol accumulation in planta.

CONCLUSIONS
taxol levels in intact taxus trees were known to vary considerably from tree to tree but for unknown reasons. comparing five taxus species, good correlation was observed between plant taxol content and the quantity of its taxol-producing fungal endophyte. measuring different adjacent branches within an individual taxus plant, taxol yield correlated with micro-scale variation in the amount of the endophyte. fungicide treatment of intact taxus plants or wood caused declines in both endophyte concentrations as well as plant taxol accumulation, consistent with the correlation results. the fungal endophyte was found to affect plant taxol yield by eliciting transcription of rate-limiting genes in the plant taxol biosynthetic pathway. taxol was an effective fungicide against fungal pathogens of conifer wood, the natural habitat of the taxol-producing endophyte. the endophyte itself was resistant to taxol. these results show that the fungal endophyte stimulates its host to produce a fungicide to which it is resistant, perhaps to prevent colonization by its competitors but at minimal metabolic cost to itself. to the best of our knowledge, the taxol-producing fungal endophyte-taxus relationship represents an unusual type of plant-endophyte interaction reported in nature, wherein both partners synthesize and potentially benefit from the same secondary metabolite.

