BACKGROUND
transport systems are required in all organisms to facilitate movement of nutrients and other solutes across biological membranes. in prokaryotes, several classes of transport systems have been defined on the basis of their subunit composition and mode of energization  <cit> . the well-characterized atp-binding cassette superfamily  represents one of the largest families of solute-specific transporters. in the abc system, the driving force for solute transport across the membrane subunits is derived from atp hydrolysis. in bacteria, solute uptake often requires the presentation of substrate by a high affinity extracytoplasmic solute receptor . the three dimensional structures of numerous esrs specific for a wide range of substrates have been determined and, despite lack of sequence similarity, all were found to adopt a similar ternary fold  <cit>  where the substrate binding site is located at the interface of two α/β domains connected by a hinge. the transport cycle begins with substrate binding to the esr, inducing a conformational change to a "closed form" whereby the solvent is excluded from the substrate . the docking of the loaded esr to the abc complex triggers a conformational change of the latter, which induces the binding of atp and its hydrolysis by the nucleotide binding domain   <cit> . the esrs thus play a key role in both the recruitment of the specific substrate and the control of atp hydrolysis by the nbd.

the requirement for solute recognition by a periplasmic subunit prior to its translocation is not specific to abcs since esrs are also found in atp-independent secondary transporters, the so-called tripartite atp-independent periplasmic transporters . in trap systems, the periplasmic esr  is associated with two membrane components: a large transmembrane subunit involved in the translocation process  and a smaller membrane component of unknown function . trap transporters lack the sequence signature characteristic of nbd, and biochemical evidences suggests that their driving force does not come from atp but rather from the free energy stored in an electrochemical ion gradient across the cytoplasmic membrane  <cit> . the molecular mechanisms encompassing e.g. the recognition of the solute-esr complex and the coupling of the transport to the ion gradient remain unknown.

the trap family is widespread in prokaryotes, as predicted from sequence analysis of bacterial genomes  <cit> . however, the physiological role of few of them has been elucidated since ligands for esrs of trap transporters have only been evidenced for c4-dicarboxylate  <cit> , ectoine  <cit> , glutamate  <cit> , xylulose  <cit> , and sialic acid  <cit> . the best characterized trap transporters at functional and molecular levels are the high-affinity c4-dicarboxylate transport system  from rhodobacter capsulatus  <cit>  and the sialic acid transporter  from haemophilus influenzae  <cit> . in the latter, the structure of the periplasmic subunit  was solved very recently at high resolution, revealing, among others, an overall topology similar to abc esr proteins  <cit> .

in this study, we have focussed on the structural characterization of smom, a member of the dctp family. the smom gene was initially annotated as coding for a sorbitol/mannitol binding protein on the basis of its position in the genome, close to the smo operon encoding known sorbitol/mannitol catabolic genes  <cit> . there is now clear evidence that smom does not participate in sorbitol or mannitol transport. first, the gene smom is more than  <dig> bp away from the smo operon. second, two genes homologous to dctq and dctm are located in the region immediately downstream of smom, forming a putative functional trap transporter. finally, purified proteins from the smom family neither bind sorbitol nor mannitol but display a specificity for α-keto acid complexes , consistent with the suggested role of this transporter for supplying intermediates in the synthesis of valine and isoleucine. we thus propose to rename smom as takp  and, by the same token, the associated membrane proteins as takq and takm .

in this paper, we present the high resolution structures of takp in its unliganded form and complexed with sodium-pyruvate. this study reveals a key role for an ion in the attachment mode of the substrate, as well as an unexpected dimerization largely mediated by a helix swapping. the molecular mechanism of solute uptake is discussed in the light of these unique structural findings.

RESULTS
takp, a secondary transporter of α-keto acids
we became initially interested in the study of takp when we found that a rhodobacter sphaeroides mutant carrying a single tn <dig> insertion in takp displayed a higher resistance to selenite  <cit> . recently, takp from r. capsulatus was shown to bind monocarboxylic 2-oxoacid anions in vitro  <cit> . we carried out a phenotypic analysis of the takp mutant to determine the most physiologically relevant substrate of the tak transporter. however, no phenotypic difference could be characterized when comparing mutant and parent strains cultivated in minimal media supplemented with various α-keto acids . this suggests the presence of another import system in vivo or a non essential role for this esr in the transport process.

we overexpressed and purified takp from rhodobacter sphaeroides and confirmed its ability to bind a range of α-keto acids. a general feature of esrs is that substrate binding is accompanied by a diminished fluorescence from some tryptophan residue as a result of the conformational changes induced by the binding. indeed, we found that about 30% of the tryptophan fluorescence emitted by takp became quenched when adding a saturating concentration of substrate. this was accompanied by a shift of the emission peak: the difference spectrum between the unliganded and liganded  protein has its maximum around  <dig> nm, whereas the bulk fluorescence from the unliganded form peaks at  <dig> nm. these features suggest that the tryptophans which become quenched in the liganded configuration represent a more solvent-exposed fraction of the protein tryptophans in the unliganded structure. there are  <dig> trp residues in the takp sequence. from the structural information describe below, it turned out that one of these trp residues  is directly interacting with the ligand when present, so that its fluorescence may be strongly quenched as a result. two others undergo a significant displacement during the open/closed transition, which may also affect their fluorescence properties. clearly, the observed amplitude of the fluorescence quenching caused by ligand binding  implies that these sensitive residues have for some reason a larger relative contribution to the fluorescence emission than the other tryptophans of the protein.

the fluorescence quenching was used to titrate the binding of various ligands, as shown in figure  <dig>  because of the high binding affinity of these, we had to use a sufficiently low protein concentration to obtain an accurate determination of the dissociation constant, kd. if the protein concentration is below the kd, allowing the presence of a significant fraction of free substrate during the titration, the kd can be determined from a fit of the equation:

f/f0=1−Δf×=1−Δf× <dig> −4)
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=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@7441@

here, f is the fluorescence amplitude and f <dig> its value in the absence of ligand. Δ f is the normalized amplitude of the saturated quenching,  is the concentration of liganded protein,  and  are the concentrations of the total protein and ligand, respectively. the protein concentration was determined from its  <dig> nm absorbance and pertains here to the monomeric unit . figure 1a shows the change of fluorescence amplitude as a function of added pyruvate. the solid line shows the best fit obtained using the above equation, yielding kd≈  <dig>  μm.

as described below, it appeared that the protein was in fact homodimeric and one may wonder whether any cooperativity is taking place between the two monomers. in fact, the satisfactory fit with a simple binding function excludes that significant cooperativity or anticooperativity be present. this is illustrated by the dashed line that was computed by simulating a small cooperativity  and clearly represents the upper limit that could accommodate the data in this respect. the titration experiments show that the binding occurs on a single, homogeneous site. to ascertain that this site corresponds to the monomeric unit , we also ran  experiments at high protein concentrations . under such conditions, the binding titration  is essentially linear  and the concentration of binding sites is easily determined from the slope. the results confirmed that the number of binding sites was ~ <dig> per monomer and that the protein was ~100% active for binding the substrate – in agreement with the crystal structure described in the following.

the kd values were determined for different structurally-related compounds as shown in figure 1b, c and 1d. no binding was observed with α-ketoglutarate. in all cases the trend is the same as observed by thomas et al  <cit> . the length of the aliphatic backbone chain clearly influences the affinity, a result that will be discussed later in the light of the structure. we next focus on the structural characterization of the interactions of takp with 2-oxoacids, using pyruvate as a model substrate.

a dimeric venus-flytrap with a swapped helix
we determined the crystal structure of takp in its unliganded form and as a complex with pyruvate. the structure of the selenomethionine-labeled protein in its native form was first solved by the mad method and then refined to  <dig>  Å resolution with an r-factor of  <dig> % . after a successful co-crystallization of takp with pyruvate, the structure of the protein-substrate complex was solved by molecular replacement and refined to  <dig>  Å resolution . for the pyruvate complex all the residues fall in the favored region of the ramachandran plot whereas in the native one, trp <dig> and val <dig> are outliers.

unexpectedly, the resolved structures revealed a dimeric association of the protein in two different crystal forms, which is clearly too intricate to arise from the crystallization process. because this quaternary structure is unusual for an esr we confirmed the dimeric nature of takp in solution by gel filtration and cross-linking experiments . in the cross-linking experiment, even at the lowest protein concentration tested  the main band corresponds to the dimer. the monomeric form is not visible. therefore, the dissociation constant of this dimer is at least ten times below this value . given the high concentration of proteins in the periplasmic space the dimeric nature of takp in vivo is unambiguous. a tetrameric form of takp is also visible, especially at higher concentration  and may represent a real functional property of takp to assemble as a multimer.

within a root mean square  deviation below  <dig> Å, the two monomers of the asymmetric unit appear essentially identical. we describe first the monomer's structure and then the dimeric features. this monomer appears subdivided into two globular domains, each with a 5-stranded β-sheet flanked by α-helices . domain i  and domain ii  are connected by two short segments , which play the role of a hinge allowing the open/closed transition. a structural homology search using the program dali  <cit>  revealed a large number of structures similar to takp. among them, the takp monomer is structurally most similar to the glycine betaine-esr , to the extracellular ligand-binding domain of the glutamate receptor  and to an atp phosphoribosyltransferase . the two first structures were solved in the liganded form whereas the atp phosphoribosyltransferase was solved in an open form. thus, and despite very low sequence similarity, the takp fold is characteristic of a type ii esr  <cit> . recently, the crystal structure of siap was solved in the presence of a sialic acid analogue  <cit> . siap and takp are both members of the dctp family. they share 20% sequence identity and, despite an overall fold conservation, their structures differ markedly with a r.m.s. deviation of  <dig>  Å for the  <dig> best superimposed cα positions, both structures in their unliganded form . nevertheless, one secondary structural element seems to be unique to both trap esrs compared with others: located after the c-terminal part of domain i, a "clamp"  surrounding both domains i and ii is made of two long α-helices separated by a short β-strand parallel to the last strand of the β-sheet of domain ii. together with the dimerization, this clamp may limit the extent of the opening movement .

another structural feature specific to takp is a 55Å-long c-terminal kinked helix  extended away from its monomer and swapped with the equivalent helix from the adjacent monomer . this unique secondary structure element is clearly essential for the dimerization of the protein. the terminal helix swapping appears critical for dimerization since it involves about  <dig> residues and generates numerous intermolecular contacts. the helix is amphipathic with the hydrophobic residues packed against the back of the adjacent monomer at the dimeric interface and the hydrophilic residues exposed to the solvent. in addition to the large total surface area  buried in the complex, the dimer is stabilized by a total of  <dig> h-bonds and two intermolecular salt bridges . the dimer formation brings two monomers in a back to back configuration with the conserved residues in the swapped helix of one monomer interacting with a conserved surface located on the back of the other monomer . the sequence conservation in multimeric proteins tends to be enhanced at the interacting interface  <cit> . this is indeed the case and clearly visible from figure  <dig> 

a conspicuous feature of the dimeric association in takp is the presence of a water-filled channel buried at the dimer interface, which spans  <dig> Å from one ligand binding cavity to the other. as discussed later, we believe that substrate translocation through this connecting cavity may play a functional role.

co-recognition of a cation with pyruvate
in the second crystal form obtained with the substrate-bound protein, the asymmetric unit contains one dimer with both monomers now found in the closed configuration. in the cleft between domains i and ii of each monomer an extra electron density was unambiguously assigned to an ion-pyruvate complex . the two solute binding sites in the dimer are located on opposite sides resulting in a distance between substrates of ~ <dig> Å .

in the complex structure, the acidic moiety of the pyruvate is involved in a salt bridge with arg <dig> and one oxygen atom is h-bonded to tyr <dig>  the central feature for the binding of the pyruvate to the protein is the presence of a cation . this cation has a bi-pyramidal coordination with a square base. the four equatorial positions are provided by the o <dig> of pyruvate, the main chain carbonyl oxygen of trp <dig> and a bi-dentate and mono-dentate ligand provided by the side chains of glu <dig> and glu <dig>  respectively. the apical positions are occupied on one side by an oxygen atom from the acidic moiety of pyruvate and, on the other side, by the oδ <dig> of the side chain of gln <dig>  the measured distances between the cation and the six oxygen atoms range from  <dig>  Å to  <dig>  Å. these values are very close to the canonical distances expected for a magnesium or a sodium ion . since only sodium salts were present in our crystallization conditions this cation can be safely identified as a sodium ion. among the six residues involved in the recognition of sodium-pyruvate, only one  is provided by domain i, while the others belong to domain ii or to the hinge .

structural changes upon sodium pyruvate binding
two kinds of conformational changes occur upon complex formation. first, there is a 14° rigid body rotation of domain ii . indeed, superimposition of the liganded and unliganded structures results in a r.m.s. deviation of  <dig> Å for  <dig> cα positions, a value that is an average of a high r.m.s. deviation measured for domain ii  and a rather low value for the rest of the molecule, comprising domain i, the clamp and the swapped helix . the inter-domain closing is dominated by van der waals contacts with only one hydrogen bond  between domains i and ii in the closed form. the dimerization interface is not modified by the open/closed transition, i.e. the intermolecular hydrogen bonds and salt bridges are conserved. only one salt bridge  is specific to the closed conformation. because of the absence of the symmetric salt bridge , the dimer appears slightly asymmetric.

the second conformational change associated with ligand binding corresponds to a small but significant structural rearrangement inside domain ii, reflected by a r.m.s. deviation of  <dig>  Å after superimposition of the  <dig> cα positions of this domain in both structures. this rearrangement is mainly located in a loop-helix-loop region comprising residues  <dig> to  <dig>  a portion of the structure that is not involved in the direct binding of sodium or of pyruvate. the movement of this region upon substrate binding locks the inter-domain closing by increasing the fit between both domains, which results in a ligand binding cavity completely shielded from the external solvent . on the other hand, the internal water channel connecting the binding cavities is not affected by the open/closed transition.

discussion
ligand binding kinetics determined for numerous esrs from abc transporters by stopped-flow fluorescence spectroscopy have revealed a single-step equilibrium binding process. these data suggest that the protein is stable in the open unliganded conformation, and that ligand binding triggers the closing of the globular domains. this model has been supported by crystallographic studies, which provided evidence for the existence of three different conformational states of esrs: an open unliganded form, an open liganded form and a closed liganded form  <cit> . in the case of esrs from the dtcp family, an uncommon kinetic behavior was reported  <cit> , since the rate of substrate binding decreased when increasing its concentration. a model was proposed, involving a fourth  form of the protein. the binding would occur through the equilibrium between this predominant, non-binding, form and the open, binding configuration  <cit> . our data show that the unliganded takp was crystallized in the open configuration. this does not exclude the possibility that a more stable closed form might exist in solution, but it makes this hypothesis less likely.

despite the very low sequence identity, takp has been previously classified into family  <dig> of esrs in the pfam database. the high resolution crystal structure of takp confirms an esr overall fold. however, two additional secondary structure elements, a "clamp" and a helix swap, were not anticipated from primary sequence analysis. the topology and location of the clamp suggests a structural role in restricting the rigid body movement of domain ii upon substrate binding. the restricted opening of takp caused by the clamp appears when comparing the liganded and unliganded structures of esrs. the two β-strands hinge allows a rather large rotation of domain ii upon ligand binding  whereas it is significantly smaller in takp  and below the average in siap . the swapped helix also largely contributes to the limited opening of takp as can be viewed in a movie provided as additional file  <dig>  the requirement for a restricted movement upon solute binding might be important for the energetics of ligand binding. since the residues responsible for the binding of the substrate belong almost exclusively to domain ii, the proximity of the two domains in the apo state may facilitate the substrate-induced closing.

the natural ligand of takp is still unknown  <cit> . it is not necessarily pyruvate, but it should include a pyruvate motif. we made a structural model for each of the ligand molecules that were tested by fluorescence quenching. the ligand's three-dimensional structure was modeled as the lowest energy structure using the 3d utility from chemdraw. the molecular cavity in takp was visualized with the pyruvate moiety of the modeled ligand superimposed on the pyruvate structure. as a result, it clearly appears that the increased length of carbon chains from oxobutyrate  and oxovalerate  fit better the binding pocket than pyruvate , explaining why an increase in the chain length of the aliphatic backbone increased the ligand-binding affinity . an even longer chain elongated by one or two carbon atoms is predicted to have a higher affinity because there is still enough space to accommodate it. in addition, the reason why a branching carbon at position  <dig>  increases the kd is obvious from figure 7d, where this position is clearly outside of the cavity. since the ligand-binding cavity is rather hydrophobic and delineated by the side chains of y <dig>  f <dig>  v <dig>  v <dig> a <dig>  a <dig>  p <dig>  t <dig> and i <dig>  only ligands with a carbon chain of similar length are expected while similar compounds with a charged or a polar moiety should be poor ligands, a behavior observed in the case of α-ketoglutarate.

as revealed by the present work, a sodium ion plays a key role for the binding of the 2-oxo acids to the protein. since trap transporters utilize the transmembrane electrochemical na+ or h+ gradient as the driving force for solute import, it is tempting to believe that the concerted recruitment by the esr of the substrate group with a cation is a first step in the coupled transport of both partners  <cit> .

the presence of a swapped helix in takp was an original and unanticipated feature. the  <dig> swapped residues significantly contribute to the total surface that is buried in the dimer, therefore playing a clear role in the dimer formation. about a hundred proteins were found to be homologue to takp and they all have in common the long c-terminal extension corresponding to the swapped helix. because of its importance in dimerization this helix may be a marker of a novel family of dimeric esrs. this dimeric nature of takp is intriguing because esrs, especially when associated with an abc transporter, are believed to be monomeric. to our knowledge, there is one report of dimer formation, based on biochemical evidence  <cit> . however, sequencing has now revealed the presence of abc transmembrane dimeric subunits directly fused to one or two esrs, which implies that two or four binding sites are present per functional translocation unit  <cit> . multimerization of esrs that are not associated to abc transport systems is exceptional and then appears linked to a particular function: activation of transport in glutamate receptors  and activation/repression of dna translation by dna-repressor of the lacr family. in lactoferrin and transferrin, two esrs are fused into a single protein and are therefore associated as a "forced dimer"  <cit> . the role associated with the dimerization of takp remains to be investigated. our binding data exclude any significant cooperativity between the two sites, which is consistent with the structural results showing no significant modification of the monomer/monomer interfacial regions upon binding the ligand. a possible role for the dimerization of takp is proposed below.

the molecular interactions between the solute-esr complex and the multisubunit transporter are still unclear. one view is that, as a result of the conformational change associated with solute binding, the esr-substrate complex becomes competent to interact with the membrane subunits of the abc transporter, initiating the transport cycle  <cit> . on the other hand, it was shown that, at least in one subfamily of abc transporters, both the unliganded and ligand bound esr could interact with equal affinity with the translocating membrane protein  <cit> . some authors proposed that, in addition to the recruitment of the transported ligand, the esr plays the role of a plug that prevents the escape of the ligand on the wrong site of the membrane  <cit> . in line with these views, the present structure of a dimeric esr suggests a possible model of interaction with the membrane partners . in this model, the dimeric esr would stay more or less permanently bound to the membrane protein. this would break the functional symmetry in the homo-dimeric takp protein: the external binding site would be used for substrate and ion uptake from the solvent, and the connecting channel at the dimeric interface would facilitate the transport to the site on the membrane bound monomer. this model is consistent with the recent finding that one ore two pairs of esrs are sometimes directly fused to the membrane protein  <cit> . definitely, further work is needed to probe this model, whether in the context of an abc transporter or, like in the present case, of a trap transporter.

CONCLUSIONS
the x-ray structures of takp solved in the presence and in the absence of substrate reveal the structural determinants responsible for the binding of α-keto acids. the requirement of a cation for the binding of the ligand is suggestive of a role in the energization of the transport. moreover, an unexpected helix-swapped dimer is observed in two different crystal forms. although this quaternary structure does not generate a cooperative binding of the substrate, the connecting channel at the dimeric interface could be involved in the translocation process.

