BACKGROUND
the genetic health of populations is increasingly viewed as one of the most important factors in maintaining fitness in an uncertain and changing environment  <cit> . it is well established that inbreeding depression in diploid organisms significantly increases the risk of extinction  <cit> . by contrast, haplodiploid organisms have often been assumed to suffer less inbreeding depression as deleterious recessive mutations were thought to be purged through the haploid males  <cit> . however, some authors have challenged this assumption, partly because purging may not be effective against female sex-limited traits, such as hibernation survival and fecundity  <cit> .

haplodiploids may suffer further genetic costs of inbreeding due to their single-locus complementary sex determination  system, which is ancestral to the haplodiploid hymenoptera. under this system, individuals heterozygous at the polyallelic sex-determining locus develop into diploid females and hemizygotes develop into haploid males. when a diploid individual is homozygous at the sex locus a diploid male is produced. the frequency of diploid males depends on the number of csd alleles and so they are rarely produced in large outbreeding populations because many alleles are maintained by negative frequency-dependent selection  <cit> . however, genetic drift in small populations is expected to increase diploid male production  by reducing csd allelic richness  <cit> .

diploid males represent significant fitness costs, primarily through their inviability or sterility  <cit> . in a few species, diploid males can produce diploid sperm and mate, but this invariably results in sterile triploid progeny so the costs are merely deferred by a generation  <cit> . in social insects further costs of diploid males are apparent, as they replace 50% of the female workers and do not contribute to colony productivity  <cit> . this has been shown to slow the rate of colony growth in bombus atratus, under laboratory conditions  <cit>  and result in high mortality of founding queens in the fire ant solenopsis invicta  <cit> . recent modelling has demonstrated that dmp can initiate a rapid extinction vortex and suggests that haplodiploids are more prone to extinction than previously supposed  <cit> .

the study of genetic diversity and inbreeding in bumblebees is currently of particular importance as many species have been suffering from significant population declines and range contractions  <cit> . this has been attributed predominantly to the intensification of agriculture and the associated loss of flower rich meadows and other habitats on which bumblebees depend  <cit> . the remaining populations of rare species have become fragmented, genetically isolated and suffer from a loss of genetic diversity. they are now susceptible to inbreeding depression, with serious implications for their persistence  <cit> .

the genetic consequences of population fragmentation and isolation are exacerbated in bumblebees as a number of factors predispose them to low levels of heterozygosity and hence inbreeding. firstly, as haplodiploids, there are only 75% as many gene copies in any one generation compared to diplodiploid organisms, hence reducing the effective population size  <cit> . secondly, the effective population size of bumblebees is reduced still further by their social nature, as it is determined by the number of successful nests in an area and not by the number of more abundant sterile workers  <cit> . finally, the majority of bumblebee species are monandrous  <cit> . this increases their susceptibility to inbreeding compared to polyandrous species, which effectively have more breeding individuals per generation  <cit>  and which in some instances can avoid the costs of negative genetic incompatibility through postcopulatory selective fertilization  <cit> . whilst small effective population size in haplodiploids may not result in inbreeding depression per se it will decrease csd allelic richness, which in turn will increase diploid male production.

investigations into the effects of inbreeding in bumblebees have had varying outcomes. under laboratory conditions one generation of brother-sister mating in bombus terrestris had no effect on immune defence or body size  <cit> . however, a similar experiment found that inbreeding did have a significant negative effect on colony size, whereas the impact of inbreeding on other fitness traits was highly variable across maternal genotypes  <cit> . additionally, when b. terrestris queens were sib-mated for several generations, a negative effect on queen fecundity and colony size was observed  <cit> . the cost of diploid male production is unclear: duchateau et al.  <cit>  found that the growth rate of laboratory diploid male colonies of b. terrestris was not significantly affected, yet plowright & pallett  <cit>  found diploid male colonies of bombus atratus had a significantly slower growth rate, albeit with a very small sample size. diploid males have been observed in rare and threatened bumblebee species in the wild  <cit> , so the true costs of their production are important to ascertain.

this study aimed to determine the costs of brother-sister mating in the bumblebee bombus terrestris, specifically focusing on survival and growth in field conditions and the fitness of diploid male colonies. young b. terrestris gynes were mated in the laboratory with either their brothers or with un-related males. their survival during hibernation was recorded and those queens that established colonies in the laboratory generated three experimental treatments:

1) sib-mated queens not producing diploid male offspring 

2) sib-mated queens producing diploid male offspring 

3) outbred queen colonies 

the rate of growth of these colonies was measured and once they had produced  <dig> offspring they were placed in the field. the development and survival of these colonies were followed throughout a summer season to demonstrate the costs of inbreeding and dmp in a natural setting.

RESULTS
hibernation survival
in total  <dig> queens  survived the hibernation period and subsequent  <dig> hours. the probability of surviving hibernation was significantly affected by the maternal family line ; survival ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> % between maternal colonies . mating date was also a significant predictor of hibernation survival; queens mated earlier were more likely to survive . there was no difference in survival between queens mated to unrelated males and sib-mated queens .

colony foundation
out of the queens that survived hibernation,  <dig> produced at least one offspring and were considered to have successfully founded a colony. of these  <dig> colonies,  <dig> were outbred,  <dig> were inbred and  <dig> were diploid male colonies. there was no difference between colony founding ability between queens mated to unrelated males and sib-mated queens . additionally, colony founding ability was not predicted by maternal colony  or hibernation end date .

colony growth
the number of colonies reaching  <dig> and  <dig> offspring
the probability of a colony growing past the  <dig> and  <dig> offspring size thresholds was not influenced by inbreeding status  . maternal line did not significantly influence the number of colonies reaching  <dig> and  <dig> offspring  and neither did hibernation end date .

the rate of colony growth
we assessed the rate of growth of colonies after foundation by recording the time until they crossed three size thresholds:  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> offspring. the inbreeding treatments did not significantly influence the time taken to reach these sizes, neither did maternal colony origin or hibernation end date . however, due to the earlier emergence of offspring in the dmp colonies, the mean interval between emergence of the 1st and 15th offspring was considerably longer for the diploid treatment  than for either the inbred  or outbred  treatments . this variation was highly significant . post hoc tests confirmed that the diploid male treatment differed from both the others , but that no difference existed between the inbred and outbred colonies . maternal colony also influenced the number of days between the emergence of the 1st and 15th offspring .

the rate of colony growth is represented by the number of days from the hibernation end date to the emergence of the 1st, 5th and 15th offspring and the number of days to the emergence of the 15th offspring from the 1st offspring, respectively, with respect to inbreeding treatment, maternal colony and the co-variate hibernation end date. degrees of freedom are given in parentheses.

survival and growth under field conditions
survival in the field
the diploid male colonies survived for a shorter time period under field conditions compared to the outbred and regular inbred colonies; a mean of only  <dig>   weeks, compared to means of  <dig>   and  <dig>   weeks respectively  . post hoc tests revealed the outbred and diploid male treatments were significantly different ; no significant difference existed for other pairwise comparisons . maternal line and field placement date did not cause significant variation in field survival duration .

colony growth in the field
the number of offspring a colony produces is a major determinant of colony fitness. all colonies had  <dig> offspring when placed into the field. outbred and inbred colonies continued to grow under field conditions, producing total means of  <dig>   and  <dig>   offspring each. however, diploid male colonies produced very few additional offspring in the field, reaching a mean of only  <dig>   offspring. this striking variation between inbreeding treatments was significant  . post hoc tests confirmed that diploid male colonies differed significantly from both the outbred and inbred treatments ; the difference in mean size between outbred and inbred colonies was not significant . maternal colony and field placement date did not significantly influence final colony size .

discussion
for the first time we demonstrate that brother-sister mating in b. terrestris exacts high costs under field conditions through the production of diploid males. a number of fitness parameters were negatively affected by diploid male production, including colony growth rate, total offspring production and colony survival, but no significant effects of inbreeding in the absence of diploid male production were detected.

the costs of diploid male production were first evident whilst colonies were growing in the laboratory, where the number of days between the emergence of the 1st and 15th offspring was considerably greater for the diploid male colonies. this slower growth rate presumably occurs because colony resources are diverted away from the production of industrious female workers; diploid males are idle within the colony and so the workforce is approximately halved, resulting in less brood care and slower growth. these findings augment the study by plowright & pallett  <cit>  who found that dmp colonies in bombus atratus had a considerably slower rate of growth than all-worker-producing inbred colonies in laboratory conditions.

overall colony fitness was gauged by the total number of offspring produced by the end of the experiment, as the number of reproductives reared by a colony is highly correlated with the number of workers  <cit> . the mean number of offspring produced by the diploid male colonies was significantly lower than in the other treatments. in fact, the mean was only  <dig> , which is barely greater than the colony size of  <dig> when nests were placed in the field. the low number of offspring in these colonies would result in fewer foraging workers and hence a lower food intake. this would have initially impeded growth and subsequently led to colony starvation. this is reflected in lower survival of dmp colonies; the queens survived approximately a third of the time of the outbred colonies, and died presumably due to starvation due to the lack of foraging workers. a similar outcome has been found in the fire ant solenopsis invicta, where dmp colonies had lower brood weight, fewer adult workers and higher queen mortality compared to all-worker-producing colonies  <cit> . this was explained by the queen having to cope on her own for longer before there were sufficient workers to take over foraging duties.

as well as reducing colony survival, bumblebee diploid males impose a genetic load on populations as they yield no reproductive return for the resources invested in them. bombus terrestris diploid males produce diploid  sperm. they also have smaller testes and fewer spermatozoa than haploid males, and hence have reduced fertility  <cit> . although they develop normally in other respects and are capable of mating, duchateau & marien  <cit>  found that the queens mated to diploid males did not produce colonies. it has since been found that such queens are capable of producing a viable colony containing triploid offspring, but the triploid queens produced are inviable or infertile  <cit> . therefore, as in other species such as the sawfly athalia rosae ruficornis, the costs of diploid males are not all immediately apparent, but become so a generation later  <cit> .

diploid males have been found to be sensitive indicators of the loss of genetic diversity in hymenoptera. for example, an apparently abundant species of orchid bee euglossa imperiali was found to have large numbers of diploid males, ranging from 12% to 100% of the total population. this turned out to be the result of an extremely low effective population size  <cit> . in a further study of more orchid bee species, the highest diploid male frequency and the lowest genetic variability was found in the rarest species  <cit> . diploid males have also been found in rare and localised bumblebee species. in the japanese bumblebee bombus florilegus, diploid males were found in 28% of colonies produced in the laboratory from wild caught mated queens, a figure thought to be due to matched matings resulting from notably low genetic diversity and small population size. additionally, the frequency of triploid females was found to be  <dig> % in natural populations  <cit> . diploid males were detected at a frequency of 5% in the wild  in the threatened bumblebee bombus muscorum, again probably due to reduced genetic diversity brought about by population fragmentation and isolation  <cit> . as diploid males are produced from the first brood, they will be found on the wing, even if the colony from which they have been produced dies prematurely, as our results suggest is highly likely. because of the significant costs diploid males represent for bumblebee fitness, their frequency could potentially be used as an indicator of the genetic health of the population and hence its sustainability and conservation requirements  <cit> . where the production of diploid males is high, translocations from other populations might be considered as a means of increasing genetic diversity. however, given that dmp colonies are short-lived under field conditions, their apparent absence will not always indicate a genetically healthy population. a method of directly assessing csd allele diversity would therefore be of great value.

in this experiment the only apparent cost of inbreeding was the production of diploid males, as the non-dmp inbred colonies did not differ significantly from the outbred colonies in all the variables measured. it should be noted, however, that this lack of difference could be due to the inbred colonies resulting from only one generation of brother-sister mating, which would not substantially decrease their level of heterozygosity relative to the outbred colonies. indeed, one study has demonstrated decreased fecundity and colony size when b. terrestris queens are sibmated for several generations . despite the fact that some evidence indicates that hymenoptera, including bumblebees  <cit> , suffer from inbreeding depression, a meta-analysis has shown that the magnitude of fitness loss on inbreeding is less than that experienced by diploid insects  <cit> . this supports ideas that deleterious recessive alleles are expressed and thus purged in haploid males  <cit> . our data show that the high costs of dmp following inbreeding far outweigh any apparently small effects of conventional inbreeding depression. thus, whilst hymenoptera may be spared some costs of inbreeding by virtue of their haplodiploidy, their sex determination system imposes unique costs through diploid male production. due to these negative fitness effects, selection should act strongly on haplodiploids to avoid incestuous matings and the production of diploid males, a theory that has been supported by a recent study  <cit> . there is some evidence to suggest that this avoidance behaviour occurs through a kin recognition system  <cit> .

hibernation survival and colony growth in the laboratory were significantly influenced by maternal family line. this among-family variation has been found in a number of different fitness traits in bumblebees  <cit>  and is evidently an important aspect of their evolutionary ecology. the factors that maintain this variation in wild populations remain to be established. mating date was another significant predictor of the variation in hibernation survival observed; queens that were mated first were more likely to survive than those mated at a later date, despite standardised hibernation duration and conditions. this substantiates the idea that individuals that are born and reproduce early in the season have a higher survival rate and fitness  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the diploid males produced following inbreeding impose large costs on bumblebees through their influence on a colony's survival and productivity. we suggest that they act as indicators of the genetic health of the population, and therefore their detection could be an indication of genetic problems in bumblebees and other social hymenopterans. haplodiploidy may render the social hymenoptera less susceptible to inbreeding depression compared to diploid species, due to purging. however, our data demonstrate that the magnitude of fitness costs from dmp following inbreeding may well be as extreme as those expected to result from conventional forms of inbreeding depression in diploid species.

