BACKGROUND
mutualism is widespread in nature, even between potentially antagonistic partners. cultivation mutualism can be defined as relationships in which the consumer promotes the growth and net survival of the species it consumes. most species engaging in cultivation mutualism are terrestrial, and these mutualisms usually involve fungi rather than primary producers . mutualisms between primary producers and herbivores, with the exception of crops and humans, typically involve either protection of a few plants that are much larger than the herbivores  or facilitate pollination , and are thus not considered cultivation mutualism in the strict sense. therefore, the cultivation mutualism between the territorial damselfish stegastes nigricans and algae of polysiphonia on coral reefs  <cit>  is noteworthy by virtue of being marine and because it involves photosynthetic algae.

on coral reefs, damselfishes individually defend territories from invading vertebrate/invertebrate grazers and maintain algal turfs, from which they obtain all of their food  <cit> . these algal turfs are rich in biomass  <cit> , are highly productive  <cit> , and are dominated by delicate, filamentous rhodophyta, especially members of the genus polysiphonia  <cit> . these damselfishes browse mainly on the upright axes of filamentous algae  <cit> , digesting the material with a highly acidic stomach  <cit> , and absorbing the digested material in their long intestine with a slow gut turnover rate  <cit> . they have neither masticatory organs nor effective endogenous or exogenous carbohydrases for breaking down algal cell walls, and thus can only digest filamentous algae that have no cortical layer  <cit> . the algal turfs of the territorial damselfish, stegastes nigricans, are a monoculture of the filamentous red alga, polysiphonia sp.  <dig>  in okinawa, japan, which is the northernmost range of this species  <cit> . the fish intensively defends its territory against herbivores, weeds out indigestible corticated and/or calcareous algae, and harvests the filamentous alga. as a result, algal turfs within their small territories are dominated by only one algal species, polysiphonia sp.  <dig>  which is the most digestible alga species for this fish and is thus harvested by the damselfish as a staple food  <cit> . this polysiphonia sp.  <dig> is susceptible to grazing by territorial invaders and from competition from other algae, and therefore, inhabits only the territories of this damselfish species where other herbivores are chased away and other algae are weeded out  <cit> . in this way, the fish and the alga are highly dependent on one another.

reciprocal interactions between partners often vary geographically with the partners involved and the benefits received  <cit> . the alga-farming damselfish, s. nigricans, is widely distributed throughout the indo-central pacific  <cit> , and it is unclear whether its relationship with polysiphonia species is maintained throughout its geographic range. this fish neither sows nor transplants the algae, and it is proposed that water-borne diaspores  of the algae germinate into sporophytes/gametophytes  <cit> . however, little is known about the distribution and dispersal ability of polysiphonia species. damselfish larvae can potentially disperse over long distances, carried by currents during the pelagic larval stage, which lasts approximately  <dig> days  <cit> . however, genetic differentiation has been observed between populations of damselfish in the maldives and guam in micronesia, suggesting that long-distance dispersal is rare  <cit> . the broad distribution of s. nigricans poses a question as to whether the cultivation mutualism occurring is also widespread. if so, is this partnership conserved throughout the geographical range of the fish? the composition of s. nigricans algal turfs have been reported from several sites covering a wide geographic distribution  <cit> , however detailed and accurate classification of polysiphonia to species level has thus far not been attempted. morphological-based identification of filamentous red algae is highly problematic, mostly because they have a relatively simple morphology and exhibit extreme levels of phenotypic plasticity  <cit> . however, molecular identification using 18s rdna sequencing is known to agree with the species taxonomy based on anatomical data in polysiphonia algae  <cit> . the smallest difference between species was shown to be four bases in the 18s rdna sequence  <cit> , and as a result we used this criterion to distinguish species of polysiphonia in this study. thus, by determining the species identity of polysiphonia algae using dna sequencing data in concert with morphological characteristics, we explored the geographic pattern of the partnership between the fish and algal species, and detected the geographic distribution of the damselfish-algae mutualism.

RESULTS
we surveyed  <dig> territories of  <dig> damselfish species and thoroughly examined algae from each fish territory from coral reefs in egypt, kenya, mauritius, the maldives, thailand, borneo, the okinawa islands, and the great barrier reef . a total of  <dig> polysiphonia genotypes were found among  <dig> territories of  <dig> damselfish species in the indo-west pacific . these genotypes were different from each other by more than four bases in 18s rdna, and therefore were treated as species. molecular phylogenetic analyses of the collected polysiphonia species detected four clades: a , b, c, and d, as shown in fig.  <dig>  polysiphonia sp.  <dig>  which had previously been found only within stegastes nigricans territories in okinawa, was discovered from territories of this damselfish species in mauritius and the gbr, but nowhere else. polysiphonia clade a species were seldom found outside territories of s. nigricans. in contrast, polysiphonia sp.  <dig> of clade c occurred in the territories of  <dig> damselfish species and also outside damselfish territories throughout the study area. on the other hand, multiple species of polysiphonia coexisted in the territories of s. nigricans and hemiglyphidodon plagiometopon in some localities. in general polysiphonia algae were rarely found outside damselfish territories. in okinawa, two species of polysiphonia clades c and d occurred in  <dig> % and  <dig> % of these extra-territorial samples, respectively, although a very closely related neosiphonia species that lacks a prostrate axis occurred in  <dig> % of the extra-territorial samples.

- denotes the absence of the fish species at the site. abbreviations of species in parentheses were used in fig.  <dig> 

fig.  <dig> shows the percent composition of algae in the territories of four abundant and widely-distributed damselfish species, s. nigricans, s. lividus, plectroglyphidodon lacrymatus, and h. plagiometopon. algal compositions of the territories differed among fish species , and among study sites . algal turfs of these damselfishes were dominated by filamentous rhodophyta including polysiphonia algae. instead of polysiphonia, a mixture of filamentous algae of the genera neosiphonia, herposiphonia, anotrichium, and ceramium comprised substantial portions of the algal turfs in all damselfish territories from all localities except for territories of s. nigricans in okinawa. however, polysiphonia species in clade a, to which polysiphonia sp.  <dig> belongs, were consistently the staple species in s. nigricans territories at all study sites, although occupancy varied among study sites. occupancy was higher in okinawa than at the other sites . polysiphonia sp.  <dig>  dominated s. nigricans territories in okinawa, and also occurred in territories in mauritius and the gbr. however, coverage of polysiphonia sp.  <dig> in territories of s. nigricans were significantly higher from okinawa than from mauritius or the gbr . in okinawa, s. nigricans depended exclusively on this algal species, forming monocultures, whereas in mauritius and the gbr, polysiphonia sp.  <dig> did not always occur in the territories of s. nigricans and did not dominate where it did occur.

from egypt, kenya, the maldives, and the gbr, other species of clade a occurred in the algal turfs of s. nigricans. the polysiphonia species that was dominant in territories of s. nigricans from egypt was a sister branch of polysiphonia sp.  <dig> . however, the dominant polysiphonia species from kenya and the maldives were not closely related to polysiphonia sp.  <dig>  and they also inhabited the territories of other damselfish species. other damselfishes, i.e., stegastes lividus, plectroglyphidodon lacrymatus, and h. plagiometopon, shared polysiphonia sp.  <dig>  in most localities.

discussion
mutualism and other relationships between territorial damselfishes and algae in the indo-west pacific
throughout its geographical range, the territorial damselfish stegastes nigricans maintained algal turfs that were consistently inhabited by local polysiphonia species belonging to a single phylogenetic clade . polysiphonia sp.  <dig> of clade a was common in the territories of s. nigricans from the central indo-west pacific, but not from egypt, kenya, or the maldives, where other indigenous polysiphonia species of clade a were utilized instead of polysiphonia sp.  <dig> . two species of polysiphonia that occurred in the territories of s. nigricans from egypt and the gbr, and polysiphonia sp.  <dig>  were found only in s. nigricans territories. additionally, two other polysiphonia species were abundant and almost exclusively inhabited s. nigricans territories from the maldives and kenya. these results suggest that s. nigricans provides these polysiphonia species with their sole or primary habitat, and harvests these filamentous algae as a staple food in all localities from the indo-west pacific. in this way, the mutualism between s. nigricans and its crop polysiphonia species was maintained, but the partner polysiphonia species varied among localities. phylogenetic results suggest that shifts in crop algal species within clade a have occurred at least a few times in the west-central indian ocean. furthermore, the occurrence of polysiphonia species in clade a in the territories of s. nigricans varied geographically, being highest in okinawa, where the damselfish weed out algae other than the crop algal species. from okinawa, where the relationship between the damselfish and polysiphonia alga attains obligate mutualism, a single species of polysiphonia dominated the territories of s. nigricans to form nearly pure monocultures, whereas other polysiphonia species rarely coexisted within the territories. in the case of fungus-farming ants and termites, each colony is maintained as a monoculture of a genetically single cultivar  <cit> , and this is thought to be a key stabilizing factor in the mutualistic interaction on an evolutionary time scale  <cit> . in the gbr and mauritius, the coverage of polysiphonia sp.  <dig> in territories was lower than in japan, suggesting that the fish utilized not only this alga but also other algal species, as well as other resources such as detritus trapped in the algal turf  <cit> .

conversely, from most locations the algal turfs of three other species of damselfishes, s. lividus, p. lacrymatus, and h. plagiometopon, were dominated by filamentous rhodophyta, and shared a generalist polysiphonia species. this discrepancy in the structure of algal turfs between s. nigricans and other damselfish species is caused by differences in the inherent farming strategies of fishes, that is, intensive farming and extensive farming. in the intensive farming method, damselfish defend their small monoculture patch by selective weeding and vigorous exclusion of invaders. in contrast, in extensive farming, damselfish defend large but mixed-species algal turfs only by excluding invaders  <cit> .

the algal turfs of most damselfishes are known to be dominated by filamentous rhodophyta, but the dominant algal genera shift within the subclass rhodymeniophycidae with geographic range as well as on much smaller scales such as reef zones on a coral reef  <cit> , and species-specificity has been known only between a damselfish, s. nigricans, and polysiphonia sp.  <dig> in okinawa  <cit> . extensive molecular phylogenetic analyses of algae enabled us to detect patterns between damselfish and polysiphonia species at a species level, as this method is effective in detecting species interactions and coevolutionary processes in other mutualistic systems  <cit> . more intensive research on algal turfs of damselfishes at each location, and species identifications of polysiphonia algae using dna sequences are needed to understand the partnerships between damselfish and polysiphonia algae, their degrees of specialization in this cultivation mutualism system, and their geographic variations. other than our study sites and focus species, polysiphonia species are known to be abundant in the territories of damselfishes all around the pacific, including those of s. apicalis in the gulf of thailand  <cit> , s. lividus in guam  <cit> , s. nigricans, neoglyphidodon nigroris, plectroglyphidodon lacrymatus, and p. dickii in papua new guinea  <cit> , pomacentrus adelus, p. tripunctatus, and p. wardi in the gbr  <cit> , s. nigricans in fiji  <cit> , s. fasciolatus in tonga  <cit> , and microspathodon dorsalis in the gulf of california  <cit> , and even in the atlantic   <cit> . studies of these species and locations would improve our understanding of mutualism between herbivorous fish and red algae on coral reefs.

geographic structure of the damselfish-red alga mutualism systems
the mutualism between a marine herbivorous fish, s. nigricans, and the filamentous rhodophyte polysiphonia showed an asymmetric species-specific pattern in which indigenous polysiphonia species exclusively inhabited the territories of s. nigricans, but not necessarily dominated the territories except in okinawa. this mosaic pattern in the cultivation system is thought to be caused by differences in the history of interaction and coevolution between the fish and the algae and in the community of interacting organisms at each coral reef. selective weeding by s. nigricans is a fundamental trait mediating this mutualism, and this maintains a near monoculture of polysiphonia sp.  <dig> in okinawa  <cit> . weeding behavior by s. nigricans has been observed  <dig>  times per  <dig> minutes in okinawa  <cit> , and  <dig>  times per  <dig> minutes in kenya . in kenya, however, three species of polysiphonia coexisted with each other and with other algae in the territories. on the other hand, weeding behavior was not observed from the maldives at least in our observation  where territories of s. nigricans were inhabited by two species of polysiphonia. further study on the variation in weeding behavior, its efficiency in local conditions, and its genetic basis are needed to explain this discrepancy among localities. with respect to local environments, sea urchins were more abundant inside territories of s. nigricans in okinawa than in kenya and the maldives, and in okinawa invading herbivores were also much more abundant than in kenya . additionally, twelve species of territorial damselfishes coexist on reefs in okinawa . therefore, the density, diversity, and composition of competitors may drive the selection mosaic  <cit> . further studies on population genetics of damselfishes and polysiphonia algae, and measurement of fitness under interactions in each locality in this geographic range will reveal how geographic variation is structured and whether the geographic mosaic theory of coevolution is valid  <cit> .

geographic variation in the partnership and specialization between the cultivation mutualism participants has also been reported between a fungus-growing termite and its crop fungus  <cit> . in this system, microtermes termites are generalists and utilize genetically diverse symbiont fungi in south africa, whereas the microtermes species in western africa  are specialists and are associated with a single narrow lineage of fungi. the geographic patterns of mutualism are not obvious in fungus-growing attine ants or ambrosia beetles  <cit> , but may be generally structured as observed from plant cultivation systems in humans  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study revealed that the intensive-farming damselfish stegastes nigricans maintains similar algal turfs dominated or subdominated by a clade of polysiphonia species throughout a wide geographic range, but that the crop alga species varies among distantly isolated localities. these polysiphonia species inhabited territories of fish species exclusively or nearly exclusively. therefore, cultivation mutualism between s. nigricans and polysiphonia algae was maintained throughout the geographic range of s. nigricans, with some algal shifts in crops occurring from the west indian ocean and the red sea. this damselfish-alga mutualism is a model system through which we can approach the origin, establishment, and coevolutionary processes of the cultivation system.

