BACKGROUND
arthropod-borne diseases remain a major threat to global health and exact a huge toll on agriculture and food security. these diseases are largely controlled through use of insecticides that reduce insect populations. environmental applications of these chemicals may be associated with toxic residues and emergence of target insect resistance. alternatives to insecticide-based control include paratransgenic manipulation of insects with genetically engineered bacteria that deliver transmission-blocking molecules to disrupt pathogens within the arthropod vector . though several paratransgenic insect systems are under development, field use of this strategy has not yet been realized, largely due to lack of delivery methods that target transformed bacteria to the arthropod while minimizing collateral spread of foreign dna. the united states environmental protection agency  has issued guidelines for introduction of genetically engineered  species that state that ge organisms must:  be contained to specific environments of introduction,  not out-compete native species for resources,  minimize foreign gene contamination  into native gene pools  <cit> .

here we report a novel strategy for delivery of genetically-engineered bacteria in a paratransgenic system that targets the glassy-winged sharpshooter , a pest of grapes and citrus that spreads the pathogen, xylella fastidiosa . using simple and inexpensive materials for bioencapsulation  of the engineered symbiotic bacterium, pantoea agglomerans, we demonstrate targeting of the sharpshooter, h. vitripennis, under controlled conditions with an alginate hydrogel that is tuned to release its bacterial payload during xylem flow into the foregut of the insect. by deploying a microencapsulation system that permits gated delivery of the bacterial payload to the arthropod, while greatly minimizing release in the environment, we believe that robust field-applicable technologies for paratransgenic control of arthropod-borne diseases will be possible.

RESULTS
a paratransgenic model for the glassy-winged sharpshooter 
pierce’s disease  of grapevines, caused by the bacterium xylella fastidiosa, is a devastating disease of grapes that threatens grape production worth $ <dig>  billion and wine production worth $ <dig>  billion in california  <cit> . paratransgenic sharpshooters can be an answer to the threat posed by pd. early attempts to establish paratransgenic sharpshooters were focused on the gwss symbiont alcaligenes xylosoxidans denitrificans  <cit> . however, concerns that this bacterium may be a nosocomial human pathogen led us to a grape endophyte bacterium, pantoea agglomerans e <dig>  currently approved by epa for control of fire blight in apples and pears  <cit> . we hypothesized that the sharpshooter can acquire p. agglomerans in the same way as it acquires x. fastidiosa. to test this we genetically engineered this bacterium to express enhanced green fluorescent protein  and ampicillin resistance and used an artificial feeding system  to deliver recombinant bacteria to gwss  <cit> . the gwss was able to acquire the engineered p. agglomerans from the artificial feeding system and egfp-expressing p. agglomerans was found binding to the pre-cibarial and cibarial regions of the insect foregut . we further demonstrated that over a 15-day period, which is one third of the insect’s lifespan, egfp-expressing p. agglomerans persisted in the insect foregut primarily colonizing the pre-cibarial and cibarial regions . we tested  <dig> sharpshooters over two seasons to study p. agglomerans persistence inside the gwss foregut and observed  <dig>  % foregut colonization with egfp-expressing p. agglomerans over a period of 15 days. carriage of p. agglomerans in the foregut of sharpshooters was not affected by time . this confirmed that, once acquired by the insect, p. agglomerans persisted in the foregut for at least two weeks. colonization with egfp-expressing p. agglomerans occurs in the same spatial niche as the pathogen x. fastidiosa   <cit> , suggesting that p. agglomerans may be used as a delivery vehicle for paratransgenic control of pierce’s disease.fig.  <dig> glassy-winged sharpshooters acquired egfp-expressing p. agglomerans from an artificial feeding system.  glassy-winged sharpshooters were allowed to feed on p. agglomerans through artificial feeding system for 48 h. these insect were then kept on naive plants for 24 h to flush out the unbound bacteria from the foregut before dissection.  image showing egfp expressing p. agglomerans colonizing the foregut of gwss. inset: a higher magnification of same image showing p. agglomerans colonizing cibarium and precibarium of the gwss

fig.  <dig> egfp-expressing p. agglomerans persisted inside the foregut of the glassy-winged sharpshooter.  gwss were fed egfp-expressing p. agglomerans via an artificial feeding system for 48 h. the insects were moved to naive grape plant for 24 h to wash out unattached bacteria. they were subsequently housed on another naive grape plant for up to 15 days. insects were collected daily, and processed as described. homogenates were plated on lb plates to determine the presence of p. agglomerans.  percent of gwss carrying egfp-expressing p. agglomerans over a period of 15 days. no difference in proportions of gwss carrying egfp-expressing p. agglomerans was observed. p =  <dig>  by chi-squared test for homogeneity



microencapsulation strategy for paratransgenic control
we developed a biopolymer microencapsulation system for paratransgenic manipulation of sharpshooters with  <dig> overall goals:  encapsulation of transgenic bacteria to keep them alive, contained and prevent horizontal gene transfer to environmental bacteria  release of bacterial payload from capsules tuned to specific physiologic conditions within the arthropod to minimize environmental contamination  release of bacteria from the capsules to colonize the target region of the sharpshooter where pathogens reside and  use of encapsulation materials that are inert in the insect without adverse physiological impact.

a suitable polymer
we have developed a calcium-alginate microcapsule for containment of egfp-expressing p. agglomerans . to ensure that the particles would fit in the proboscis of the sharpshooter, we used a modified aerosolization-coascervation process to generate micron-sized particles. the particle size varied from 6–90 μm, with 57 % of particles in the range of 22–44 μm . by altering the particle composition, we were able to achieve rapid and sustained release of bacterial payload in response to sudden hydration. calcium-alginate based microparticles  resulted in sustained release of bacteria over a period of 7 days in response to hydration, which was significantly higher than calcium/barium-alginate microparticles . maximum release of p. agglomerans  was observed from calcium-alginate microparticles with 10 % glycerol over a period of 7 days, while minimum  release was observed from calcium/barium-alginate microparticles. based on these results we decided to engineer calcium-alginate based microparticles for acquisition experiments to achieve a quick as well as sustained release of bacteria inside the insect foregut after acquisition of microparticles by the sharpshooters during xylem feeding.fig  <dig> microparticles containing egfp-expressing p. agglomerans.  calcium-alginate microparticles containing egfp-expressing p. agglomerans .  same field under fluorescence. 



the encapsulation process protected p. agglomerans from desiccating conditions, which are expected during periods of coating on plants prior to ingestion by the sharpshooter . under extreme desiccation 100 % of unencapsulated p. agglomerans died within 7 days; on the other hand only  <dig> log decrease in colony forming units  was observed when encapsulated p. agglomerans were exposed to desiccation for the same time period . we further observed that calcium-alginate microparticles were able to keep p. agglomerans alive for 30 days, though the number of cfus in microparticles decreased over time. this survival of bacteria during desiccation is important, as similar conditions are expected during summer in grape growing areas of southern california.fig.  <dig> bacterial survival under extreme dehydration. encapsulation of p. agglomerans significantly increases bacterial viability compared to unencapsulated controls during desiccating conditions. unencapsulated p. agglomerans died in a week after dehydration, while encapsulated p. agglomerans survived for a month



addition of  <dig> - <dig>  % of india ink to the particle confers high-level uv-resistance, again a desirable quality during periods of application on plants in the summer time . exposure of both encapsulated and unencapsulated p. agglomerans in the absence of india ink to uvc resulted in 100 % killing in 20 min. there was no significant reduction in cfus over a period of 60 min when p. agglomerans mixed with alginate and india ink were exposed to uvc . however, when ca-alginate microparticles containing india ink were exposed to uvc there was one log reduction in p. agglomerans cfus in the first 5 min,  and cfu numbers remained steady thereafter for next 55 min. we speculate that bacteria present on the surface of microparticles were exposed to uvc and were killed in the first 5 min of exposure, but the bacteria embedded in the microparticles remained protected.fig.  <dig> 
p. agglomerans survival after exposure to uvc light. encapsulated and unencapsulated p. agglomerans in the absence of dye were killed after exposure to uvc within 20 min., while both encapsulated and unencapsulated p. agglomerans in the presence of dye were able to withstand uvc exposure for 60 min



we believe that calcium-alginate-10 % glycerol hydrogel particles with india ink, which protected against dehydration and uvc, are ideally suited to deliver transgenic p. agglomerans under field conditions to the glassy-winged sharpshooter. we hypothesized that these particles will swell during xylem flow and release the bacterial payload into the foregut of feeding insects.

a proof-of-concept
glassy-winged sharpshooters were able to acquire p. agglomerans from alginate-based microparticles painted on grape plants. in a control group, gwss fed on plants painted with unencapsulated p. agglomerans,  <dig>  % of the insects acquired p. agglomerans, which was significantly higher than the number of gwss that acquired p. agglomerans from plants painted with encapsulated p. agglomerans . amongst the groups of sharpshooters fed on encapsulated p. agglomerans maximum colonization was observed in insects acquiring p. agglomerans from 1 % alginate-based microparticles  followed by 2 %  and 3 %  alginate-based microparticles. though an increase in alginate concentration decreased p. agglomerans acquisition by the gwss, it was not statistically different between three tested concentrations of alginate -  <dig>   <dig> and 3 % . unencapsulated treatments resulted in the maximum cfus per insect head  and minimum cfus per head were observed in treatments using 3 % alginate microcapsules  . we did not observe significant difference between pantoea cfus acquired by the insects from microparticles engineered with  <dig>   <dig> or 3 % alginate .fig.  <dig> glassy-winged sharpshooters acquired egfp-expressing p. agglomerans from calcium alginate microparticles. percent glassy-winged sharpshooters carrying egfp-expressing p. agglomerans in their foregut. a higher percent of gwss acquired p. agglomerans from plants painted with unencapsulated p. agglomerans than from plants painted with encapsulated p. agglomerans.* p <  <dig>  by chi-squared test for homogeneity.** p >  <dig>  by chi-squared test for homogeneity

fig.  <dig> bacterial cfus per insect head. p. agglomerans  colony forming units  per insect head. no difference in p. agglomerans cfus acquired by the gwss from plants painted with unencapsulated or encapsulated p. agglomerans was observed. p >  <dig>  by one-way anova with tukey simultaneous tests for means with unequal variance



though the association between alginate concentration and pantoea acquisition did not attain statistical significance, there was a trend toward decreased pantoea levels in gwss with increasing alginate in microparticles. this suggests that manipulation of polymer composition may alter levels of bacterial colonization in the sharpshooter foregut.

discussion
here, we report a new paratransgenic strategy for control of xylella transmission by the glassy-winged sharpshooter, h. vitripennis. p. agglomerans e <dig>  an epa approved agent for biocontrol of certain crop diseases, has been genetically modified using plasmid pt <dig>  which has the bla gene as a marker, to express recombinant egfp in the foregut of gwss. we have demonstrated robust egfp expression in the insect foregut, in the region that harbors the plant pathogen, x. fastidiosa. furthermore, we report the use of a simple and inexpensive microencapsulation strategy to contain engineered pantoea and release the modified bacteria during conditions of xylem flux into the anterior mouthparts of the feeding insect. our results represent the first iteration of this paratransgenic delivery system. refinement of polymer chemistry and capsule application may increase the percentage of gwss that acquire transgenic pantoea in future trials. chemical functionalization of the polymer backbone to enhance bacterial release along with refined methods of increasing bacterial cfus per capsule are currently underway.

we propose the use of an epa approved biocontrol agent, p. agglomerans e <dig>  as a paratransgenic control vehicle for pd. p. agglomerans colonized the foregut of the insect from both an artificial feeding system and plants painted with unencapsulated and encapsulated bacteria. p. agglomerans persisted in the insect foregut over the entire duration of testing, up to <dig> days. the  <dig> -day period is significant since it represents close to one third of the insect’s lifespan. additionally, field applications of this approach could involve bi-weekly delivery of encapsulated bacteria to grape plants, thus offering fresh inocula to gwss on a regular basis. p. agglomerans can be engineered to produce anti-xylella molecules such as antimicrobial peptides  or anti-xylella antibodies to block x. fastidiosa. we have used plasmid pt <dig>  which has the bla gene as a marker in addition to an egfp gene. however, for field application, pantoea lines expressing anti-xylella molecules without antibiotic marker genes will be engineered. p. agglomerans lines with fluorophore genes or redantibody genes as markers are under development for field release. these strategies, coupled with a refined delivery system, will produce a robust toolset in the battle against gwss-mediated pd transmission.

field use of paratransgenic control for arthropod-borne diseases remains a future prospect, largely due to concerns about the fate of engineered bacteria. in the current model, we believe that environmental risks associated with release of foreign genes will be reduced. first, plasmid decay for the recombinant p. agglomerans  occurs at the rate of  <dig>  % per bacterial generation; thus engineered bacteria are expected to revert to wild-type forms. furthermore, engineered p. agglomerans grows at a rate comparable to wild-type counterparts , suggesting that it cannot out-compete the native organism. second, we have encased the recombinant symbiont in an alginate particle that inhibits release of payload into the environment. physical contact between engineered bacteria and native bacteria of the rhizosphere or phytosphere is greatly impeded by the presence of capsules. thus horizontal gene transfer between engineered p. agglomerans and commonly present bacteria of environmental consortia - a very rare event that occurs in the 10− <dig> to 10− <dig> range  - should be further diminished. the overall aim of this strategy is to reduce horizontal gene transfer to levels that are acceptable to regulatory agencies, rather than eliminating gene flow. abolishing gene flow between environmental bacteria is an unrealistic goal. however, by providing a physical barrier via microparticles we can minimize exchange between the large number of freshly released bacteria used in plant inundation and environmental microbes, with the aim of reducing unwanted gene flow.

we have contained engineered p. agglomerans using calcium-alginate microparticles. to deliver the bacteria to gwss, we have chosen to paint growing grape shoots, thus facilitating ingestion of the organisms during insect feeding. gwss and other sharpshooters are xylem feeders  <cit> . they initially contact a plant surface with the tip of their stylet before penetrating into xylem vessels  <cit> . we hypothesize that bacteria-laden microparticles that have been painted on plant shoots will contaminate the lumen of the insect’s stylet. during the sucking of xylem, hydrostatic pressure gradients as high as  <dig>  mpa/cm  <cit> , will cause rapid swelling of the alginate hydrogel and release pantoea into the cibarial region of the sharpshooter’s foregut. to optimize release of bacteria from the microcapsules and enhance colonization of the insect, hydrogels may be tuned by varying the composition and concentration of divalent cations  as well as alginate .

over 80 % of gwss that were exposed to unencapsulated  pantoea during feeding became colonized with the bacteria, at a mean cfu value of  <dig>  ±  <dig> . . we tested microparticles containing 1 %, 2 % and 3 % alginate  in the hydrogel. in all cases, there was a significant reduction in pantoea acquisition when compared to the control group  . when an alginate concentration of 1 %  was used, target gwss acquired pantoea at a rate of  <dig>  % with a mean cfu count of  <dig>  ±  <dig> . this rate of acquisition was the highest amongst the tested alginate concentrations and we believe that 1 % alginate particles merit further attention. rates of acquisition of encapsulated pantoea by target gwss may have been lowered for several reasons. first, it is likely that the experimental insects represented a heterogeneous population. it is difficult to maintain homogeneous gwss population under controlled conditions, thus, we used field-collected insects that were previously colonized with environmental bacteria, genetically distinct and of varying ages through the course of the summer. second, we used a very limited time frame for acquisition of bacteria through feeding by gwss. it is likely that future field applications that employ multiple treatments of plants with greatly protracted contact time between gwss and particles will increase colonization rates in the insect. third, many refinements in particle composition are possible. we are exploring use of particles made of other materials that would dissolve in the presence of enzymes present in the insect saliva to better release the bacterial payload. attractants and feeding stimulants may be incorporated to enhance bacterial delivery. indeed, future versions of the microencapsulation-delivery system should result in higher rates of target insect colonization with engineered pantoea.

microencapsulation is a first step toward addressing concerns associated with paratransgenic manipulation of arthropods. in this proof of principle, we deployed microcapsules to deliver a recombinant bacterium to an insect. we designed the alginate particles to swell under very high hydrostatic pressures encountered during xylem flux and to decrease contact between engineered bacteria and the environment during periods of application and residence on plants. microencapsulation will decrease direct interactions of released bacteria with other epiphytes when compared to unencapsulated bacteria. this should also decrease the interactions of released bacteria with rhizosphere organisms. we believe this is a first step toward targeted delivery of recombinant bacteria to arthropod vectors of disease. in ongoing projects, we are designing more advanced particles that respond to specific physiological cues within insects, such as ph and blood products, to establish a platform for field use of paratransgenics.

based on this technology, microcapsule-based delivery of transgenic bacteria to arthropods of clinical significance  for human vector-borne disease prevention becomes a real and logical extension, signifying a paradigm shift in paratransgenic techniques from the lab to field settings. a microparticle-based recombinant-bacterial release strategy could make paratransgenic control of chagas disease and malaria - for which paratrangenic manipulation has been shown to decrease parasite load inside the vector - and other vector-borne diseases a reality.

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first example of the use of microencapsulation to deliver recombinant bacteria to an insect gut. we have demonstrated that transgenic symbiotic bacteria can be delivered to the appropriate physiological niche within a disease-transmitting arthropod. furthermore, by acting as a barrier between transgenic bacteria and the outer environment these microparticles should reduce competition between the recombinant bacteria and native species, environmental contamination and horizontal gene transfer. this platform may be expanded to deliver recombinant bacteria to other disease-transmitting arthropod vectors, thus facilitating field use of paratransgenic control.

