BACKGROUND
leptospirosis, the most common zoonotic illness affecting humans, is caused by spirochetes of the genus leptospira <cit> . some leptospira species live exclusively in water or soil, while others cycle between environmental and mammalian reservoirs. leptospira can colonize/infect renal tubules of a wide variety of wild and domesticated mammals. human disease follows exposure to water or soil contaminated with urine of infected animals. leptospirosis can be asymptomatic, or manifest as a mild flu-like illness. in another subset of individuals  leptospira can produce more serious systemic infections resulting in pulmonary hemorrhage, jaundice, renal failure, refractory shock, myocarditis, and/or aseptic meningitis.

despite its medical importance, few virulence determinants of pathogenic leptospira have been characterized in any detail. investigation of the organism is hampered by its fastidiousness, slow growth in culture and the lack of available genetic tools. to date, only omp-a like lipoprotein loa <dig> has been demonstrated to be necessary for virulence, appearing to be cytotoxic and capable of inducing apoptosis.  <cit>  lipl <dig>  a major outer membrane protein of pathogenic leptospira, is expressed in vivo and, although it has been shown to bind to host extra-cellular membrane, lipl <dig> does not seem to be required for acute or chronic infection in vivo in animal models.  <cit>  other potential virulence leptospiral factors include liga and ligb that contain immunoglobulin-like repeats associated with adhesion to host cells in other gram-negative bacteria. other proteins shown to have laminin binding activity in-vitro include lena/lfha/lsf <dig> and related proteins lenbcdef. lena seems to also bind factor h of complement, so it might have more than one role in virulence.  <cit> . leptospiral lps, although not characterized in detail, has some unique characteristics which could explain why it is poorly recognized by the tlr4- md <dig> complex. this diminished recognition could contribute to leptospiral survival in the bloodstream and dissemination. other potential virulence factors for which more evidence remains to be published include mediators of motility and chemotaxis, including chemotaxis towards hemoglobin  <cit> .

sialic acids are a diverse family of acidic nine-carbon backbone  monosaccharides found in abundance on the surfaces of mammalian cells and are sometimes expressed by microbial pathogens. the most common sialic acid in nature is n-acetylneuraminic acid . expression of neu5ac by pathogenic bacteria has been linked mechanistically to complement and neutrophil evasion in disseminated infections with streptococcus and neisseria and with the induction of autoimmune neuropathy following infection with campylobacter. sialic acids are part of an even wider family of di-n-acetylated nonulosonic acid  sugars, which also includes pseudaminic and legionaminic acids. legionaminic acid was first described as part of the legionella lipopolysaccharide o-antigen  <cit> , which is thought to have roles in environmental and host associations  <cit> . legionaminic and pseudaminic acids are also found as post-translational modifications of flagellin, best studied in campylobacter and helicobacter <cit> . even further, recent data suggest that in helicobacter proteins other than flagellins may also undergo glycosylation  <cit> . our recent genomic and phylogenetic analyses indicated the presence of nulo biosynthetic gene clusters in the available genomes of l. interrogans <cit> . in this study, we sought to investigate the presence of nulo biosynthetic gene clusters in other leptospira species and to determine whether these genes produced functional biosynthetic pathways. here we define the presence of putative nonulosonic acid biosynthetic gene clusters in a variety of leptospira species. further biochemical investigations show that some leptospira are capable of endogenous synthesis of nonulosonic acids, including sialic acids.

RESULTS
nonulosonic acid biosynthetic gene clusters are present among pathogenic and some intermediately pathogenic leptospira species
the genome sequences of l. interrogans serovar copenhageni strain l1- <dig> and l. interrogans serovar lai strain  <dig> contain genes predicted to synthesize sialic acids or related molecules . using pcr and southern blotting, we evaluated the presence of this gene cluster in other isolates of leptospira, including pathogenic, saprophytic, and intermediate strains. polymerase chain reactions using primers designed from the genome strains amplified genes in the pathogenic strains l. interrogans serovar copenhageni and lai but not in the saprophyte l. biflexa . interestingly, one of the intermediate strains, l. licerasiae, gave a negative result, while the other, l. fainei, gave a faint positive. control reactions using primers designed from 16s rrna gene showed amplification in all the samples, verifying dna integrity. a probe based on the neua <dig> gene of l. interrogans was used for southern blotting of genomic dna from a number of leptospira reference strains and isolates. these experiments confirm and extend the pcr data. of particular interest is a pair of wild rodent isolates of leptospira in lanes  <dig> and  <dig> . whereas the intermediately pathogenic l. licerasiae strain did not give a positive result, the pathogenic serovar copenhageni isolate gave a strong positive band. also, the intermediate strain l. fainei gave a positive result in southern blotting, further confirming the faint positive result observed by pcr for this strain. since low sequence identity between primers or probes and the target sequences from less closely related species could produce a negative result in these experiments, other more functional assays were utilized next.

dmb-derivatization and hplc-ms analysis reveals multiple varieties of nonulosonic acids expressed by leptospira
strains were evaluated biochemically to determine whether nonulosonic acid biosynthetic pathways were functional in different species and strains of leptospira. bacteria were hydrolyzed with mild acetic acid to release nonulosonic acid species, and low molecular weight fractions were fluorescently derivatized with  <dig> -diamino- <dig> -methylene dioxybenzene , a molecule that specifically reacts with alpha keto acids, including nulos. dmb-derivatized reaction products were separated by high performance liquid chromatography  with a tandem electrospray ionization mass spectrometer. as expected by the gram-negative-like structure of leptospira, all samples displayed an early-eluting hplc peak corresponding to the retention time and mass of 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-manno-octulosonic acid . kdo is an 8-carbon α-keto acid present in the core region of lipopolysaccharide in most gram-negative bacteria. it serves as an internal positive control in these assays  and allowed comparison between different hplc runs. masses of some dmb-derivatized peaks did not readily correspond to masses of known varieties of nonulosonic acids . it is not known whether these masses represent nonulosonic acids. in contrast, a consistent m/z of  <dig>  indicates the presence of di-n-acetylated nonulosonic acids and was found in pathogenic l. interrogans serovar lai and l. alexanderi, and intermediate strain l. fainei. in all cases, the dmb-derivatized di-n-acetylated masses were accompanied with characteristic masses corresponding to the hydrated and hydrated sodium salt . these biochemical data show that pathogenic and intermediately pathogenic strains of leptospira are capable of expressing di-n-acetylated nonulosonic acids. however, in contrast, the pathogenic strain l. santarosai was not found to synthesize identifiable nonulosonic acid species at detectable levels . we also performed analyses on l. biflexa serovar patoc. in this case, we observed the presence of kdo by hplc and mass spectrometry, but identifiable nulo molecules were not present at detectable levels .

interestingly, hplc analysis of the two different genome strains of l. interrogans  gave distinct results. while l. interrogans serovar lai expresses di-n-acetylated nonulosonic acid , strain l1- <dig>  exhibited a peak with mass and retention time consistent with neu5ac  . additional ms <dig> analysis consistently reduced this trio of masses almost exclusively to the parent mass of  <dig> , as expected based on the behavior of standard neu5ac derivatized in parallel . since the common animal sialic acids neu5ac and neu5gc were found in the standard culture media used for leptospira , experiments were designed to exclude the possibility that l. interrogans strain l1- <dig> may incorporate exogenous sialic acid from the culture media. unfortunately, the lack of a readily available genetic system for leptospira rules out gene deletion as an approach to demonstrate endogenous synthesis. however, leptospires grown in defined serum-free media without sialic acids  still produced a neu5ac peak, confirming that l. interrogans strain l1- <dig> synthesizes neu5ac and this sugar is not acquired from growth media .

composition and phylogenetic analysis of nulo biosynthetic gene clusters and enzymes
next we performed analysis of the composition and phylogeny of the putative nulo biosynthetic gene clusters and the enzymes they encode in l. interrogans serovars lai  and copenhageni . consistent with the biochemical analysis of l. interrogans, genomic analysis of the nulo gene cluster reveals that the organism encodes a complete pathway for di-n-acetylated nonulosonic acid biosynthesis . there are multiple distinct open reading frames encoding synthesis of aminotransferases, nulo synthases, and cmp-nulo synthetases , suggesting that l. interrogans may express multiple nonulosonic acid species, a conclusion supported by our biochemical investigations .

phylogenetic comparisons were performed to provide additional insights into the potential functions of leptospira nonulosonic acid biosynthesis enzymes. we included in the phylogenetic analysis the well-characterized enzymes of campylobacter jejuni that participate in parallel pathways of legionamimic, pseudaminic, and neuraminic acid synthesis  <cit> . a schematic of these biosynthetic pathways is shown in figure  <dig>  noting the structural differences between neuraminic , legionamimic, and pseudaminic acids. these different nulos are used by c. jejuni to modify a variety of different surface structures including the o-antigen of lipooligosaccharides, flagellin, and other surface proteins. to add further resolution to our phylogenetic analysis, we also included nulo biosynthetic enzymes from two photobacterium profundum genome strains , previously demonstrated to synthesize legionamimic and pseudaminic acids respectively  <cit> . in addition, homologous enzymes from other leptospira genomes  were included in the phylogenetic analysis to better place the l. interrogans nulo enzymes into context with other putative leptospiral nulo biosynthetic enzymes.

the phylogenetic analysis of l. interrogans nulo biosynthetic enzymes demonstrates that a subset of these enzymes is more closely related to the c. jejuni legionaminic acid biosynthetic enzymes and more distantly related to the pseudaminic acid biosynthetic enzymes . specifically, the aminotransferases yp_ <dig> and np_ <dig> and the nulo synthetases yp_ <dig> and np_ <dig> in l. interrogans serovars copenhageni and lai respectively, are more closely related to legionaminic acid synthesis enzymes and more distantly related to c. jejuni and p. profundum pseudaminic acid synthesis enzymes . a similar relationship was found for the predicted epimerase/ndp-sugar hydrolases yp_ <dig> and np_ <dig>  moreover, we find that both homologs of the putative cmp-nulo synthetases in l. interrogans  are more closely related to legionaminic acid and neuraminic acid synthetases than to cmp-pseudaminic acid synthetases . note in this figure that cmp-kdo synthases were included to provide contrast and distinguish between enzymes that likely participate in cmp activation of eight carbon sugars  and nine carbon sugars . the sequences retrieved by blast of these leptospira genomes, together with their phylogeny, suggest that a number of leptospires do not encode homologs of cmp-nulo synthetases. in contrast, some leptospires encode putative nulo biosynthesis enzymes that are more closely related to the c. jejuni and p. profundum pseudaminic acid biosynthesis enzymes and more distantly related to the legionaminic acid enzymes .

in contrast to bacterial nulo biosynthetic pathways that synthesize neu5ac from mannac , the mammalian pathway relies on a nulo synthase with unique specificity for 6-phosphate-modified mannac, to generate 9-phosphate-modified neu5ac  <cit> . a set of adapter enzymes precede  and follow  the nulo synthase in the animal pathway . in some cases, ‘adapter’ enzymes have become fused into the same open reading frame with one of the other nonulosonic acid biosynthesis genes. one example is the mammalian udp-glcnac-2-epimerase, which is fused to a kinase that phosphorylates mannac to generate the substrate for the next step of the pathway, mannac-6-p. interestingly, when performing analyses of l. interrogans nulo biosynthetic pathway, we noted that one of the nulo synthases encoded by l. interrogans  has a unique c-terminal domain that is homologous to endonucleases that cleave phosphodiester bonds. by inference, we suggest that the route for n-acetylneuraminic acid biosynthesis in l. interrogans may be very similar to the animal pathway, condensing phosphoenolpyruvate with a phosphorylated 6-carbon intermediate to generate a phosphorylated 9-carbon sugar, followed by dephosphorylation catalyzed by the fused c-terminal phosphatase domain . this enzyme is distantly related to other nulo synthases and did not cluster with animal neuraminic acid synthases when these enzymes were included in the analysis , suggesting that this biosynthetic route may be ancestral. this conclusion is supported by previous evolutionary analyses of nulo pathways  <cit> .

nonulosonic acids are elaborated on leptospira surface lipoproteins
finally, efforts were made to identify the type of molecule modified with sialic acids in l. interrogans strain l1- <dig>  immobilized sialic acid-binding lectins from sambucus nigra agglutinin  and maackia amurensis lectin , which recognize sialic acids in α2- <dig> and α2-3-linked sialic acids respectively, were used to affinity purify sialic acid-modified molecules in lysates of the l1- <dig> strain. wheat germ agglutinin  also recognizes sialic acids, but is less specific, and also recognizes n-acetylglucosamine residues. as a control, buffers used in the solid phase assay were analyzed in parallel lanes of the gel, revealing that the faint bands present at ~60 kda were part of the supplied buffers and not specific for sialylated l. interrogans molecules. silver staining after sds-page gel electrophoresis of the eluted material from the affinity columns shows clear bands at ~21 kda and ~25 kda that are present at similar intensities in the mal and sna lanes . other bands appear to be enriched by affinity purification using one or the other lectin. for example, a faint band at ~43 kda is apparent in the material isolated by mal, but not by sna. alternatively, bands at ~ <dig>  ~ <dig>  and ~41 kda are much stronger in the sna-purified sample. these finding suggests that l. interrogans may modify surface structures with both α2-3- and α2-6-linked nonulosonic acids . however, future studies should further investigate the molecule modified by nonulosonic acids in leptospires, as well as their exact context and importance.

the affinity-purified material was subjected to dmb-derivatization and hplc analysis, which showed the neu5ac peak, but not the kdo peak , strongly suggesting that this material was free of lps-components. this does not rule-out that lps may be modified with nulos, just that lps was not present in this affinity-purified preparation. we performed mass spectrometry to identify protein components in the affinity-purified material. three proteins were identified by mass spectrometry : loa <dig>  lipl <dig>  and lipl <dig>  all of which have been described in previous publications as surface-exposed lipid-linked outer membrane proteins of l. interrogans <cit> . indeed, loa <dig> and lipl <dig> are among the most abundant proteins expressed on the leptospira cell surface  <cit> . loa <dig> was identified with the highest number of peptide matches. loa <dig> is an outer membrane protein encoded within all leptospira genomes sequenced to date. it has been observed to be upregulated in vivo <cit>  and it is one of very few leptospiral proteins so far that has been shown to be necessary for virulence  <cit> . additional studies are needed to define the precise context of nulo expression on l. interrogans and understand its potential significance in virulence.

CONCLUSIONS
based on a combination of experimentation and in silico genomic analysis, we have demonstrated the function of nulo biosynthetic gene clusters in pathogenic and intermediately pathogenic species of leptospira, several of which are capable of synthesizing di-n-acetylated nulo species, as well as the true sialic acid, n-acetyneuraminic acid, a finding of considerable consequence for the leptospirosis field. this finding expands the number of important human pathogens that utilize endogenous biosynthetic pathways to elaborate surface structures containing sialic acids and related nulo molecules  <cit> . sialic acids have proven roles in complement evasion, intracellular survival, and biofilm formation  <cit> , and evidence is emerging that some human pathogens with neu5ac on their surfaces can engage sialic acid-binding receptors  on leukocyte cell surfaces, resulting in phagocytosis or dampening of bactericidal activities  <cit> . the roles of other nulo molecules such as legionaminic and pseudaminic acids are less well defined, but these molecules have been shown to play roles in behaviors such as autoagglutination, motility, and host colonization  <cit> . curiously, disease caused by l. interrogans includes bacteremia and meningitis as components of the clinical disease spectrum, similar to the well-characterized neu5ac-expressing human bacterial pathogens group b streptococcusneisseria meningitidise. coli k <dig>  and haemophilus influenzae. as genetic tools and small animal infection systems for study of leptospira are further refined, analysis of the contribution of nulo biosynthesis to the virulence of this neglected disease can be further elucidated.

