BACKGROUND
experiments in transgenic mice showed that mammary carcinogenesis driven by the her-2/neu oncogene can be completely prevented by prophylactic vaccines that elicit protective immune responses  <cit> . one of the most effective vaccines was made of cells expressing the her-2/neu antigen and two adjuvant signals, interleukin  <dig>  and allogeneic class i major histocompatibility complex antigens, referred to as the triplex vaccine  <cit> .

a complete prevention of mammary carcinogenesis with the triplex vaccine was obtained when vaccination cycles  started at  <dig> weeks of age and continued for the entire duration of the experiment, at least  <dig> year . various attempts at reducing in vivo the number of vaccinations invariably resulted in all mice succumbing to tumors. this was the case with experiments in which we tested the effects of just  <dig> vaccination cycles starting at  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> weeks of age   <cit> .

biological experiments leave open the question of whether the chronic protocol is indeed the minimal vaccination schedule affording 100% protection, or whether shorter protocols could be applied that would result in the same efficacy. a biological solution would require an enormous number of experiments, each lasting at least a year. we approached this problem in two steps. first we developed a mathematical model/simulator  which describes the immune response activated by the triplex vaccine and we validated it using all existing in vivo experiments, then we used the simulator to search in silico for optimal vaccination protocols, defined here as protocols that minimize the number of vaccinations without reducing tumor prevention efficacy in comparison to the chronic protocol.

mathematical and computer models of the immune response have been proposed over the last two decades, using a variety of different approaches. the model we use to describe the cancer-immune system competition induced by the triplex vaccine originates from the cellular automata-like approach proposed by celada and seiden  <cit> .

using this approach, one can describe all the relevant entities of the phenomena and their interactions by means of rules derived from biological experiences. in our model and simulator we describe the most relevant entities and processes  needed to reproduce the immune response induced by the vaccine, a detailed description being found in the references  <cit>  and  <cit> , figure  <dig> summarizes the main logical interactions in the simtriplex simulator.

as reported, the model and the simulator have been validated against existing in vivo experiments. in silico experiments show excellent agreement with in vivo experiments, and in the validation range simtriplex represents a good cancer-immune system simulator  <cit> .

a validated simulator will reasonably reproduce, in the validation range, the immune response activated by a vaccination protocol, thus one can reproduce in silico different vaccination schedules and search for the "best" ones, i.e. the schedules with the minimum number of vaccine administrations which still prevent tumor formation .

in searching for an optimal schedule, we have tried different strategies. the first attempt was made by a "trial and error" method. we set successively repeating cycles of injections at different stages of the virtual mouse age, and the simulator was used to determine the survival of vaccinated mice. in this way we found an effective schedule of only  <dig> vaccinations, that is 27% less than the standard chronic protocol  <cit> . a second search strategy was based on genetic algorithms  <cit> . attempts at using an unconstrained genetic algorithm led to the conclusion that a genetic search should be constrained on biological bases  <cit> . furthermore it must be kept in mind that in vivo experiments in transgenic mice, as all biological experiments, are affected by natural immunological variability resulting from subtle individual variations in the generation of the immunological repertoire, and in interactions with environmental variables  <cit> . the simtriplex simulator, and its ancestor immsim  <cit> , faithfully model this aspect, for example, through the generation of a random repertoire of antigen receptors in each in silico mouse. from previous experience  <cit> , we concluded that a genetic search should take into account simultaneously different simulated individuals and we present what is probably a satisfactory result. section results provides computational results. and in section conclusions, the conclusions and final remarks are made.

RESULTS
on the parallel machine the genetic algorithm required  <dig> h and returned a  <dig> injections schedule. this schedule was then applied to the  <dig> samples of  <dig> mice and estimated that 88% of the mice remained tumor-free at  <dig> days of age. figure  <dig> shows that the tumor-free survival curves of groups of two samples of  <dig> virtual mice and  <dig> actual mice vaccinated according to different protocols were almost identical. figures 4– <dig> show the evolution of the mean values of the relevant immune responses when the ga vaccination schedule was applied to the mice in the sample  versus the same quantities previously computed  <cit>  for the chronic schedule . as shown in  <cit> , it should be remembered that the error level in steady phase of chronic schedule plots  was 5–8%.

the cancer cell plot  includes lines showing the upper and lower limits of the error, as well a top straight line which represents the limit of solid tumor formation and a stepwise line which represents the limits imposed to the ga search .

first, note that the cancer cells plot for ch-s is almost flat for t >  <dig> days, while the plot for ga-s shows an increasing number of cancer cells. the latter behavior is consistent with the imposed constraints requirement, for t > t*, to the ga, which was a safer level. this means that ch-s includes many redundant vaccine injections.

the same effect could be seen in tumor-associated antigens behavior . this is consistent with the cancer cells plots, since a higher number of depleted cancer cells would produce a higher number of taa. helper t cell behavior in ga-s  is almost equal , i.e. inside the errors bar, to the ch-s one. it is interesting to compare the plots of cytotoxic t-cells. the ga-s plots show in the initial phase , a smaller value of the peak which is outside the error bar limits. this means that the new schedule would produce a smaller cytotoxic response. in the second phase , the new schedule shows two small humps  which are due to the cytoxic response to the cancer cells peaking in the same period.

the ga-s b-cell plot  shows again slightly larger oscillation in the second period . those oscillations are effective  and due, as before, to secondary taa growth. the antibodies plots for both schedules  are equal in the limits of the error bars. this suggests that humoral response will be able to control the tumor growth in the new schedule as in the chronic one.

discussion
we have presented an evolutionary algorithm which efficiently finds effective vaccination schedules for protecting virtual mice from mammary carcinoma. modeling immune response has been attacked over the last two decades  <cit> . however, as far we know, this is the first attempt to use a validated simulator to predict immune response stimulated by a vaccine. the model prediction, if confirmed by our in vivo experiments, has practical application in vaccine discovering and testing.

comparing the behaviors of the relevant biological and immunological responses in the  <dig> schedules shows that the new protocol controls the tumor growth in much the same way as the chronic schedule. the genetic algorithm outlined here is the most efficient method tested so far to find optimal vaccination schedules in this biological model system. an alternative schedule has been suggested in  <cit> , based on a "trial and error" method . comparison of this result with the one proposed in figure  <dig> shows that the ga search is more effective than the trial-and-error one because it found a schedule of equal potency with less vaccinations.

the design of vaccination schedules is a key element in determining the protective effect of a vaccine  <cit> . however most actual schedules are decided a priori on a purely empirical basis, with a few "stepping stones" derived from basic immunological knowledge. only after a sufficient number of individuals has been vaccinated is it possible to define immunological correlates of protection  that can be used to guide, once again empirical, refinements of the vaccination protocol  <cit> . the latter approach works better for vaccines against infectious agents than cancer because immunological parameters measured in peripheral blood correlate poorly with the immune response inside neoplastic lesions  <cit> . paradoxically it is easier to improve on poorly effective schedules rather than to optimize effective ones, because once a successful protocol is established one does not risk a loss of protection just to spare some vaccinations, especially if side effects of repeated vaccinations are of minor consequence. the problem of defining optimal schedules was particularly acute in cancer immunopreventive approaches, like the triplex vaccine, which must keep a high level of protective immunity against a continuing generation of cancer cells for very long periods, ideally for the entire lifetime of the host  <cit> . experimental evidence showed that vaccination protocols much shorter than the chronic one only resulted in a delay of mammary carcinogenesis, but all mice eventually succumbed to tumors  <cit> . however, the very long duration of experiments , combined with the high number of vaccinations actually forbade an exhaustive search of a minimal vaccination protocol.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of the genetic algorithm applied to the simtriplex simulator suggest that the chronic protocol included a good number of redundant vaccine administrations, and that maximal protection could still be obtained by halving the number of vaccinations. this is an important result with regard to translation of cancer immunopreventive approaches to human situations, in which it is desirable to keep the number of vaccinations to a minimum, and in vivo experiments in mice to test the actual effectiveness of the vaccination protocol indicated by the genetic algorithm are now being set up.

the possible outcomes of the experimental validation include complete protection from tumor onset, indicating that further reduction in the number of vaccinations is feasible; or a significantly low degree of protection, indicating that more vaccinations are required. on the basis of the results of validation experiments, we will iteratively implement a cyclical refinement of the computer model to define further biological experiments, a strategy that was shown to significantly improve the efficiency of research  <cit> .

