BACKGROUND
prokaryotic regulatory networks are organized in a hierarchical way, on top of which a few transcriptional factors  may coordinate the expression of hundreds of genes of different functional categories , thus linking extracellular conditions to distinct physiological states  <cit> . it is generally accepted that cell-wide regulatory and metabolic circuits acquire an optimum of performance by connecting a large number of discrete network motifs  <cit>  that, once merged, endow cells with a remarkable ability to deal with changing physicochemical and nutritional scenarios.  <cit> . in environmental bacteria, such a regulatory optimum is often unsettled following the knock-in of new functions through horizontal gene transfer , typically by conjugative plasmids  <cit> . this is because the new encoded traits must find a suitable functional and physical site in the recipient cells to secure their establishment in the new host  <cit> , a process that is not devoid of regulatory, metabolic and structural problems  <cit> . many conjugative plasmids of bacteria thriving in sites polluted by recalcitrant chemicals  determine autonomous catabolic systems for biodegradation of such unusual carbon sources  <cit> . these mobile elements quickly spread through the microbial population of the site upon occurrence of a suitable environmental pressure  <cit> . this creates a natural scenario of network perturbation, as the enzymes and the regulators encoded by both the indigenous genome and the acquired plasmids can interfere with each other. yet, the literature contains numerous cases of bacteria whose native metabolic complement has been stably expanded to degrade recalcitrant and xenobiotic compounds because of naturally gained catabolic plasmids  <cit> . in these instances, one can safely assume that network implantation conflicts caused by hgt have been ultimately solved. moreover, the structure of such successful regulatory circuits is likely to bear both the problem and the solution somehow encrypted in their topology and their dynamics.

the metabolic network encoded in the so-called tol plasmid pww <dig> for m-xylene biodegradation carried by the soil bacterium pseudomonas putida mt- <dig>  <cit>  provides a suitable system to examine the evolutionary interplay between a pre-existing metabolic/regulatory chassis and a novel set of implanted genes that encode extra enzymatic functions. while the plasmid-less strain is able to grow on benzoate through the products of the chromosomally encoded ben and cat gene clusters  <cit> , acquisition of pww <dig> expands the metabolic capacity towards toluene, m-xylene and methyl-benzoates . this is brought about by the action of two large plasmid-encoded gene clusters. the so-called upper operon encodes enzymes for conversion of m-xylene to the corresponding carboxylic acid, , while the lower operon takes these products down to central metabolic intermediates: pyruvate and acetaldehyde. the regulation of this system involves two transcriptional factors xylr and xyls that not only separately respond to m-xylene and m-toluate, respectively, but they are also intertwined in two unusual ways. first, expression of xyls depends on activation of xylr by m-xylene. second, overproduction of xyls suffices to activate the lower operon promoter pm even in the absence of its cognate effector, m-toluate. as a consequence, the head substrate of the system can activate directly the pu promoter of the upper pathway and, indirectly, the lower operon as well. as shown in figure  <dig> this originates a complex regulatory architecture  <cit>  for controlling what otherwise appears to be a set of simple biochemical transformations. the question at stake is why such a complexity is necessary and what types of regulatory duties are encrypted in it. in other words, what is the rationale for such particular network layout. it is remarkable that such a question has hardly been raised before despite the abundance of molecular details on each of the components of the tol pathway  <cit> . the study of the system in its entirety has been difficult so far by the lack of a suitable model to examine the behavior of the network as a whole rather than its separate parts. fortunately, current computational tools allow the dissection of the logic structure of intricate regulatory networks on the basis of their topology, even if many interaction parameters between their constituents remain unknown  <cit> . boolean formalisms are particularly suited to this end, because adoption of binary logic gates for describing regulatory actions provides a rigorous representation of the system as a decision-making device or logicome  <cit> . furthermore, logic gates grant a mathematical relationship between the interacting components that can be translated into a set of equations for simulating the dynamics of the system  <cit> . the resulting modularization of the network allows adding complexity by connecting it to new logic gates, as well as network minimization , where unnecessary interactions can be removed in order to generate more compact  models  <cit> .

we have previously formalized the regulatory network of the tol system as a digital circuit by converting all known molecular interactions into binary logic operations  <cit> . in this work, we have further exploited such a boolean approach for decoding the underlying reason for the complex genetic circuit that controls m-xylene metabolism in this plasmid. to this end, we have  minimized the tol logicome by removing non-critical connections,  translated the resulting logic network into a set of piecewise-linear differential equations  <cit>  amenable to a dynamic modeling,  performed simulations on the extant circuit along with counterparts lacking distinct interactions and  matched in silico predictions to in vivo assays. as shown below, a minimized logicome model is composed of only five variables that not only faithfully described the behavior of the tol system but revealed that the entire network architecture frames the action of an unprecedented regulatory device that accounts of the entire topology of the system.

RESULTS
minimization and streamlining of the catabolic tol network
the organization tol regulatory and metabolic circuit of p. putida mt- <dig> for biodegradation of m-xylene is shown in figure  <dig>  the two pathways/operons encoded in the self-transmissible plasmid pww <dig> present in this strain are coordinately expressed in response to the aromatic compounds which can be used by this bacterium as a sole carbon source if no other more palatable growth substrate is available  <cit> . degradation of m-xylene takes place through two series of biotransformations. first, the upper pathway encodes enzymes for the conversion of m-xylene into m-toluate , which are expressed from the pu upon activation by the regulatory protein xylr in response to the aromatic substrate . second, the meta  pathway encodes activities for the ensuing metabolism of  <dig> mbz into intermediates of the tca cycle. this second operon of the system is activated by another plasmid-encoded regulator, xyls. this factor has the ability to trigger transcription at the cognate promoter pm either by itself  or in combination with  <dig> mbz, in which case much lower levels of xyls are required to the same end  <cit> . apart of these plasmid-encoded regulatory components, a number of host factors  and global regulators  mediate a fine tuning of the system to a large number of environmental signals. under the same physiological conditions, these default connections to the growth status of the host remain unaffected and they can be basically ignored. in particular, the action of the crc factor that inhibits xylr translation when cells grow in a rich medium  <cit>  can be suppressed experimentally by culturing cells in a synthetic mineral medium devoid of amino acids and other repressive substrates  <cit> .

structure of the minimalist logic circuit that governs the tol system
as shown in figure  <dig>  the upper tol pathway is expressed from the pu promoter that is in turn activated by xylr bound to m-xylene  <cit> . as both the xylr protein and the inducer are necessary to trigger pu expression, expression of the upper operon has an and logic  where both inputs are strictly necessary to generate an output . in the case of xyls expression, its logic is the same as for the upper expression as this regulator is expressed from a promoter called ps <dig> which also requires xylr bound to m-xylene for activity  <cit> . unlike pu, however, a second weak constitutive promoter  originates a low amount of xyls protein  <cit> . for meta pathway expression, the logic operation performed by the pm promoter  is not trivial -in fact it is remarkably puzzling. pm can be turned on by either xyls bound to  <dig> mbz  <cit>  or by overproduction of the same effector-free xyls due to activation of the ps <dig> promoter by xylr  <cit> . in this way, pm activation by xyls/ <dig> mbz is represented by a and gate which is in turn integrated in an or gate, where the second input is xyls itself . however,  <dig> mbz-dependent xyls activation is specified in the pl model as the result of upper and m-xylene . this is a reasonable simplification  <cit>  because enzymatic reactions are way faster than expression of the corresponding genes. therefore, the process of  <dig> mbz production can be considered instantaneous in terms of time-scale once the enzymes are formed. assuming such time-scale criteria helps to raise models that are easier to handle and avoid aberrant results likely to occur in qualitative modeling if different temporal hierarchies are mixed up. another simplification involves xylr. this protein controls negatively its own expression and it is therefore represented by a single not gate . however, since various experiments indicate that xylr auto-regulation allows a constant supply of protein levels  <cit>  we formalized xylr expression in the model as a simple unregulated process. the resulting set of equations  where instrumental for assembling the mini-logicome of figure 2c, which was employed to inspect the behavior of the tol network under a number of operational conditions.

coarse description of tol network dynamics
in order to simulate the activation of the tol network in response to m-xylene, equations 1- <dig>  where implemented in the genetic network analyzer software , as described in the methods section. also, m-xylene was placed as an input variable  <cit> , meaning that  no pl equation is specified in the model associated to this component, and  its concentration is not allowed to change during the simulations. as a pre-requisite to perform model simulation, parameter inequalities  where defined for all variables in the system as described previously  <cit> . this approach allows setting the thresholds of the interaction processes, a fundamental attribute when a component of the system has more than one target or synthesis rate .

a first simulation contemplated the tol system in the presence of the input m-xylene or its absence. in either condition, a single steady-state was found in the transition graph generated . a state transition graph describes the qualitative dynamics of the network, indicating the possible states of the system  and transitions between these states occurring under the influence of regulatory events. it should be noted that the states of a transition graph  do not signify time intervals but occurrence of consecutive conditions regardless of the time it takes to move from one state to the other. for instance, shift from s <dig> → s <dig> in figure 3a happens before s <dig> → s <dig> but it says nothing on the time involved in each transition: numbers  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> refer to the name of the state but not to any temporal scale. a steady state characteristically lacks a successive stage in the transition graph. if m-xylene is low, only xylr is high , while xyls is at low level  and the upper and meta levels/activities are zero . when m-xylene is high, all elements are high at steady-state. inspection of the transition graph  in m-xylene-high condition shows a progression of regulatory steps identical to the known activation itinerary of the tol pathway i.e. both upper and xyls are expressed in response to xylr activation, followed then by activation of meta due both to  <dig> mbz formation and xyls hyperexpression . this coarse equivalence between the non-perturbed boolean model and the recognizable behavior of the system in vivo in response to m-xylene set a reference for inspecting in silico the inner network logic as explained below.

xylr is the master regulator of a synchronized single-input module 
the chief control step for tol expression relies on signal  sensing by xylr. as mentioned before, this regulator of the ntrc family targets two σ54-dependent promoters, pu and ps <dig> . this network motif, where a master regulator controls multiple targets in response to a single signal is named single-input module  and it is overrepresented in bacterial regulatory networks  <cit> . the basic property of a sim motif is that by having different affinities for multiple targets, the master regulator can impose a temporal order of gene expression in response to the same signal  <cit> . this just in time gene expression device is often used for the control of genes encoding a complex machinery  where the components must be assembled in a given order  <cit> . in the case of the tol system, the temporal order of pu vs. ps activation is foreseen to have considerable consequences for the system, because xylr-dependent xyls hyper-expression is transmitted downstream into the node controlling meta expression .

in order to examine the consequences of having xylr as the upstream regulator in the simxylr motif we simulated the response pu and ps under various θxylr parameter values . to this end we just varied the value of the θxylr parameter in equations for pu and ps. the same value for the two promoters means synchronization  whereas setting different θxylr parameters for each promoter results in a temporal order of activation . but what is the actual state of affairs in the tol system in vivo? to answer this question we analyzed experimentally the activation kinetics of pu and ps. for this, we cloned these promoters upstream of a promoter-less luxcdabe operon placed in a low-copy broad-host range plasmid . the resulting transcriptional fusions were introduced into a wild type p. putida mt- <dig> strain to faithfully monitor the dynamics of the tol system. the system was induced with 3-methylbenzyl alcohol  as a proxy of m-xylene. 3mba is the first intermediate of the biodegradation route and it is equally able to trigger the tol system  <cit> . furthermore, its much higher solubility  makes 3mba more suitable for induction experiments in liquid media  <cit> . as shown in figure 4d, both cloned promoters were efficiently induced upon 3mba exposure. in order to quantify the response of pu and ps to 3mba, overnight grown cells were diluted in fresh m <dig> medium supplemented with either 3mba as the sole carbon source or with 3mba plus succinate. the luminescent signals of the strains were quantified along the growth curve and normalized respect to the respective optical density at  <dig> nm. the very small offsetting between pu and ps observed in the medium with both succinate and 3mba  disappeared altogether in the culture where 3mb was employed as sole c-source . the behavior of both promoters is thus virtually identical under the conditions tested . the lack of significant differences in the timing or overall kinetics of pu and ps activation indicated that the simxylr motif of the tol network operates in a synchronous way for triggering expression of the upper pathway and the xyls gene. finally, we could observe that pm activity reached its maximum activity with a noticeable delay in respect to pu and ps , as anticipated with the results of the simulation of figure 3b. this delay is expected because pm functionality does require more steps  than the instant trigger of pu and ps by effector-activated xylr .

the results above were very informative because -to the best of our knowledge- synchronous sim motifs have not been reported before in genetic networks. the role of simxylr for the tol circuit dynamics is therefore likely to be crucial. if upper were expressed earlier than xyls,  <dig> mbz production would occur also earlier than maximal expression of meta  and it would thus result in a transient accumulation of  <dig> mbz. in contrast, if xyls were activated before upper, expression of meta would start earlier and cells would have the degradation machinery for  <dig> mbz in place before the compound could actually materialize from m-xylene biodegradation. interestingly, proteins tura and ppra have been recently demonstrated to interfere with xylr binding to the pu promoter but not to ps  <cit> . such interference, which is factually equivalent to decreasing the affinity of xylr for pu, would favor the second scenario , thereby suggesting that these proteins have a role to set a temporal order in activation of the tol operons. alas, the signals that trigger tura and ppra activities are unknown  <cit> .

expression of the meta operon reflects the combination of two separate activation loops
as mentioned above, expression of pm/meta takes place through an uncommon process, in which the same regulator  operates either by itself at high concentrations or bound to  <dig> mbz, albeit at lower protein concentrations  <cit> . this is formalized by operatively considering  <dig> forms of the protein: inactive , active by binding the inducer  and active by hyperproduction . this last protein form  causes what we call the xylsh loop, that links production of the meta pathway directly to the first input of the system m-xylene . the logic of the circuit tells us that kinetics of this xylsh loop must intrinsically rule the timing of expression of the meta vs. the upper pathway, thereby accounting for the fine temporal tuning of pm output. to clarify the significance of such a dual regulation of pm by xylsa and xylsh we entered their absence/presence as variables of the tol model. we implemented such in silico mutation by changing parameter inequalities for xylra-dependent xyls expression and for the capability of high levels of xyls  to activate pm . these relatively small modifications were enough to inspect the behavior of the tol network as shown in figure 5b. the new parameter inequalities were implemented separately and the result of the simulations were compared to the wild-type network. the results shown in figure 5c indicated that the expression levels of the meta pathway are lower in each separate tol variant while the timing of pm activation remains the same than the intact system.

the predictions above were tested with in vivo experiments in which we analyzed the induction kinetics of the pm promoter using again the complete luxcdabe operon as reporter system. for this, a wild type strain of p. putida mt- <dig> harboring a plasmid with the pm-luxcdabe fusion at stake was separately exposed to different inducers known to have distinct effects in the rest of the network. in one case, grown cells were exposed to m-xylene . this inducer not only does activate xylr  but it also makes m-xylene to be converted into  <dig> mbz through the action of the upper pathway, which leads to formation of xylsa . in sum, m-xylene/3mba originate both xylsh and xylsa. in a second case, the one inducer that was exogenously added was  <dig> mbz, which coverts xyls only into xylsa, i.e. the xylsh loop is not activated. finally, pm- luxcdabe cells were exposed to o-xylene. this is as good inducer of xylr as m-xylene, but it is not a substrate of the upper pathway  <cit>  and thus cannot be converted into  <dig> mbz. this makes effector-less, overproduced xylsh the only possible activator of pm. this simple choice of inducers causes a selective action of xylsa, xylsh or both on pm, what faithfully mimics the effect of lacking each of these components of the circuit in the simulations above. note that -given the volatile nature of m-xylene and o-xylene, we resorted to an in situ, non-disruptive method to record the response of the pm-luxcdabe cells to these inducers. for this, the strains under examination were streaked in small sectors of m9-succinate plates and let grown overnight at 30°c. the plates with the patches of bacterial growth were then exposed to saturating vapors or m-xylene or o-xylene and the luminescent signals recorded every  <dig> min with a photon-counting device. to have a control that m-xylene and its non-metabolizable analogue o-xylene were equally able to trigger xylr activation under such experimental conditions, a pu-luxcdabe fusion strain was subject to the same procedure as well.

as shown in figure 6d, the expression profiles of pu in response to both xylene species were virtually identical, as quantification of the signal intensities in both conditions gave nearly overlapping induction curves . in contrast, the effect of each of these aromatics on the strain with the pm-luxcdabe fusion was different, as o-xylene triggered a lower response than the metabolizable inducer. quantification of signal intensities revealed that o-xylene-mediated pm stimulation was ~20% of that brought about by m-xylene . this figure reports the relative contribution of xylsh to pm functioning but it does not tell us much about the xylsa-only counterpart. to tackle this, we examined the response of pm to  <dig> mbz  vs. the sum of xylsa and xylsh made happen by 3mba. in this case, pm-luxcdabe p. putida cells were inoculated in liquid m9/succinate medium, added with  <dig>  mm  <dig> mbz or  <dig>  mm 3mba and the promoter activities monitored along the growth curve . as shown in figure 7c, maximal pm induction by  <dig> mbz was ~25% of the expression level of the promoter in cells exposed to 3mba, a percentage close to the same contribution of the xylsh-only loop.

the outcome of these in vivo experiments is that the pm induction levels derived from each of the two forms of xyls are similar when acting separately but they become synergistic by >4-fold when working together . this is mechanistically easy to explain, because overproduced xylsh can be converted to xylsa by exposure to  <dig> mbz. the xylsh loop thus ensures  that expression of the meta pathway is well underway before  <dig> mbz is formed through the action of the upper tol pathway and  that the lower route is boosted very significantly by  <dig> mbz. these in vivo results not only match the findings stemming from model simulations discussed above but also suggest that the rationale of the regulatory architecture of the tol network is to maintain a good level of all products of the two operons at all times following exposure to m-xylene and thus avoid any transient accumulation of  <dig> mbz by first anticipating its production from m-xylene  and then by amplifying expression of the  <dig> mbz-degrading genes  as soon as  <dig> mbz is formed. this regulatory device could have evolved to solve a metabolic conflict between the enzymatic modules encoded in the tol plasmid and the indigenous metabolic network of the host, as argued below.

CONCLUSIONS
the dual activation mode of pm by xyls is intriguing as it resembles, but does not entirely match, the feed forward loop  motif frequently found in regulatory networks  <cit> . in a typical ffl motif, a master transcription factor  controls a gene z directly and also regulates a second tf, which in turn has z as a target . depending on the sign of the interaction between these components  as well as the logic of signal integration at the target z , the resulting ffl endows the circuit with different properties e.g. filtering transient changes in the input signal or delay in the on/off responses  <cit> . in the tol system just examined, the forward interplay x→y→z  does occur, but × does not interact directly with z . instead, xylr controls the expression of a metabolic conversion component  that translates the upstream input  into the downstream input  <dig> mbz, which in turns enhances expression of meta . the tol circuit has thus properties reminiscent of those of coherent type-i ffls with an or logic, as intermediate expression levels were experimentally observed for the target z . however, we argue that this mode of operation is not just one variant of ffl, but a new network motif in itself. in fact, the interactions just described can be formalized as a distinct regulatory pattern composed of  <dig> intertwined regulators x→y ,  <dig> cognate effector molecules sx  and sy  and one metabolic activity w triggered by the first regulator that converts one effector into the other . this arrangement  not only ensures a good expression of catabolic system involving the consecutive action of many different genes. it also presets the tol system to deal with the appearance of  <dig> mbz and accelerates removal of this compound once it is formed. metabolic anticipation/amplification is clearly the effect of such a mam. but there might be an added bonus to this scenario, because undue accumulation of  <dig> mbz may lead to its non-productive misrouting into the chromosomal benzoate-biodegradation pathway of p. putida  <cit>  and generation of toxic dead-end intermediates  <cit> . the mam reported here may thus have helped to maintain the tol pathway as an autonomous metabolic machinery that interacts only minimally with the central carbon consumption routes of the host cells.

