BACKGROUND
in higher eucaryotes, gene transcription is controlled by a variety of mechanisms such as chromatin modifications or degradation via complementary mirnas. gene promoters and their cis-regulatory element composition, however, are the initial checkpoints for transcriptional gene activities and define the potential spatiotemporal expression of a gene. among other aspects, knowledge of the elementary functional units – transcription factor binding sites – is a prerequisite to understanding regulation of individual genes and their embedding into regulatory networks.

numerous approaches, both experimental and in silico, have been developed to uncover cis-regulatory elements  <cit> . chromatin immuno-precipitation combined with microarrays/chip-on-chip provides direct experimental evidence for protein-dna interactions on genome-scale and is a powerful approach  <cit> . yet, chip-on-chip is currently not easily applicable in many higher eucaryotes  <cit> . other established experimental methods such as staggered promoter deletions or dnasei footprints provide high-resolution views of single promoters but are infeasible for large-scale analysis. to overcome experimental limitations, computational methods have been developed as time- and cost-effective complements for large-scale motif discovery. these include mapping of known as well as detection of de novo motifs, e.g.  <cit> . in general, two types of data set are used for motif searches as sources of information: a group of functionally related, e.g. co-expressed, genes and orthologous promoter sequences. in the first case, candidate motifs are expected to be enriched compared to a statistical background model. hence, they can be detected by their over-representation in the respective gene group. in the latter it is expected that non-functional regions will be considerably more diversified compared to functional cis-elements. in a widely applied approach, candidate sites emerge as conserved patterns or phylogenetic footprints from  alignments between evolutionary related sequences. besides the use of single informative sources, several tools have been developed that combine conservation and co-expression information  <cit> . we applied phylocon in an earlier analysis  <cit> . phylocon detects motifs in data sets for which promoter sequences of genes co-expressed in one species are complemented with orthologous promoter sequences of one or more related species. in the first step, motif discovery is undertaken between orthologous sequences and initial motifs are generated from local alignments. in the second step, expression data are used to define groups of genes co-expressed in one of the species. subsequently comparing and merging initial profiles between co-expression groups iteratively refines motifs. the combined application of two sources of information has been demonstrated to provide increased predictive power compared to approaches using only one source, e.g. overrepresentation  <cit> .

in contrast to motif discovery from a confined or user-selected set of genes, network-level conservation detects globally conserved motifs from comparison between two genomes. functional motifs are identified by their unusually high retention in orthologous promoter pairs in comparison to those anticipated from single genome frequencies. an alignment-free implementation of the network-level conservation principle, fastcompare, has been successfully employed to motif discovery in yeast, nematodes, fruit flies and humans  <cit> . in our study we adopted fastcompare to study network-level conservation in sorghum and rice.

a large number of in silico studies to detect de novo cis-regulatory elements have been reported for the bakers yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae and some of its relatives  <cit> . in yeast, evaluation of biologically meaningful motifs is supported by a plethora of experimentally verified motifs as well as genome-wide chip-on-chip studies for transcriptional binding sites. recently, progress in genome projects of higher eucaryotes, e.g. vertebrates and the genus drosophila, has boosted motif discovery and our understanding of regulatory networks in these organisms  <cit> . in higher plants, however, thus far the lack of sequences of evolutionarily closely related plant genomes has restricted large-scale analysis mainly to dicotyledonous plants like the model system arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . for the economically and agriculturally highly important monocotyledonous plant genomes, however, until recently only the rice genome sequence was available. this limited comparative genomics approaches to a few hundred gene promoters for which orthologs in monocots have been described and analyzed  <cit> . with the completion and availability of the sorghum genome this limitation has now been overcome and we are now in a position to undertake genome-scale comparative studies between evolutionarily related monocotyledonous genomes.

sorghum and rice belong to two different grass subfamilies, the panicoideae and bambusoideae, respectively that diverged approximately  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . though genome sizes differ twofold, gene number and order are similar: about 60% of sorghum genes are located in syntenic regions to rice and orthologous relationships are well established by genetic markers as well as whole genome comparisons  <cit> . in addition, transcriptome data for rice that monitor genome-wide expression levels of many thousands rice genes have become available in recent years  <cit> . this now, for the first time, allows us to analyze conserved sequence elements on a genome scale and to detect candidates for transcription factor binding sites between monocotyledonous species.

in this study, candidate cis-regulatory elements in rice and sorghum have been elucidated by two complementary approaches. firstly, we derived transcriptional networks in rice from correlation matrices of three independent rice expression data sets. groups of co-expressed rice genes are obtained as maximal cliques of these networks and each gene of a clique is complemented by its sorghum ortholog. phylocon was applied to this data set to detect motifs in upstream sequences that are both overrepresented in co-expressed genes and conserved between orthologs. in a complementary approach, candidate motifs were identified by their preferred genome-wide conservation between syntenic promoters following the "network-level conservation" approach of elemento and tavazoie  <cit> . the numbers of motifs two genes have in common correlate with their degree of co-expression. both methods provide the first large-scale collection of cis-elements for rice and sorghum and indicate promising approaches for cis-element discovery in grasses in general.

RESULTS
preparation of input data set
phylocon as well as network-level conservation use evolutionary conserved footprints for motif discovery. we identified orthologs between sorghum bicolor and the genome of oryza sativa ssp. japonica from syntenic regions of the two species  <cit> . tandem duplications of genes frequently occur in plant genomes and typically comprise approximately one fifth of all genes  <cit> . to avoid complications by tandem duplications, we selected only gene pairs from syntenic regions that were detected as bidirectional best blastp hits. in total,  <dig>  orthologous gene pairs were identified. comparison of upstream regions that have been deduced from incorrect gene starts can strongly impair motif discovery between orthologs. thus, we restricted our analysis to those  <dig>  gene pairs that fulfilled our stringent criteria for aligned orthologous n-termini .

detection of locally overrepresented motifs: phylocon analysis
phylocon analysis is based on the comparison of conserved sequence profiles from orthologous pairs that are joined via co-expression of genes from a reference genome. in this study co-expressed genes in rice were deduced from three different whole-genome expression data sets: mpss data for several tissues and abiotic stresses  <cit> , and two oligonucleotide array experiments covering developmental stages, various tissues  <cit>  as well as drought and salt stress conditions  <cit> . in the following, we refer to the array experiments measuring developmental stages and tissues as yale- <dig>  while the array describing expression data for stress conditions is termed yale- <dig>  in total, the experiments comprise  <dig> individual measurements or arrays, respectively. figure  <dig> shows an overview of the motif discovery scheme applied in this study.

as it is highly problematic to combine expression data derived from different platforms, functional groups were identified separately for each of the three expression sets. firstly, we assigned mpss tags as well as  <dig> mers of the oligonucleotide arrays to the current rice rap <dig> gene predictions and selected genes that show significant expression levels . of the rap <dig> gene models,  <dig>  had an mpss tag that unambiguously mapped to one gene model. the oligonucleotide arrays contain a total of  <dig>   <dig> mers of which  <dig>  had a unique match to the rap <dig> gene annotation. for the yale- <dig> experiment, we obtained significant measurements for  <dig>  genes while  <dig>  genes showed reliable expressions in the yale- <dig> arrays .

to analyze for co-expressed genes we calculated an all against all pearson correlation matrix. for each expression set, co-expressed genes were defined as pairs whose pearson correlation exceeded the 99%-quantile of the background distribution of all correlation coefficients. background and quantiles were estimated from the all-against all pearson correlation matrix. next, an undirected graph with nodes representing genes and edges between them if genes were co-expressed, was constructed. from this graph, co-expressed gene groups were extracted as maximal cliques for each node. to avoid clusters with broad or unspecific expression patterns, we restricted our analysis to nodes with ≤  <dig> edges. after filtering for orthologs with congruent n-terminal alignments we determined  <dig>  cliques and  <dig>  gene pairs for the mpss data, and for yale- <dig> and yale- <dig>  <dig> cliques with  <dig>  pairs, and  <dig>  cliques with  <dig>  pairs. the resulting co-expression groups were subjected to a phylocon analysis. initially, we detected  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  position specific scoring matrices  from the yale- <dig>  yale- <dig> and mpss derived cliques, respectively. after filtering for simple repeats, the expected frequency in rice upstream regions was determined for the detected pssm's. for each co-expression group we tested whether the respective pssms were statistically overrepresented . to obtain a set of non-redundant motifs for each data set, similar pssms were subsequently merged to one motif by hierarchical clustering . as regrouping of pssms to one motif can potentially alter its significance we retested statistical over-representation of the newly formed motifs as described above. this procedure resulted in  <dig>  mpss motifs,  <dig>  yale- <dig> motifs and  <dig> motifs from the yale- <dig> data set. a list of sites supported both by sequence conservation as well as co-expression is provided .

detection of globally overrepresented motifs: network-level conservation
phylocon deduces motifs from a well-defined subset of co-expressed genes and their orthologs. in contrast, network-level conservation finds motifs by their global, i.e. genome-wide high conservation rate within syntenic promoters. our approach followed the fastcompare method as described in elemento and tavazoie with some modifications  <cit> . briefly, we investigated a k-mer search space of  <dig> mers up to  <dig> mers. as many transcription factor binding sites tolerate a certain degree of sequence degeneracy, we allowed for up to three variable positions within the k-mers. for exact words, a full enumeration of all possible k-mers was analyzed. for searches allowing variable positions we applied time-effective heuristics. in addition, we included symmetric dyad motifs of the general format x{ <dig> }-n{2-16}-x{ <dig> } to cover these binding site patterns. we also tested by a heuristic technique whether specific nucleotides at initially unspecified positions within the spacer of a dyad could result in higher scoring motifs.

the number of occurrences of k-mers per gene has been determined for  <dig> kb upstream regions of the  <dig>  syntenic gene pairs separately for both sorghum and rice genes. to score k-mers, the expected overlap for co-occurrence in syntenic pairs were calculated from single genome frequencies. ratios of the observed and expected number of co-occurrences were normalized and transformed to z-scores. motifs with an over-representation of two standard deviations above the mean  were selected as candidate motifs. this role was also supported by their unusually high degree of global conservation. of these candidate motifs, many motifs are size variants of one core motif. for example, one of our motifs, aacccta, resembles some previously described plant telomere repeats n and is highly similar to the telo-box that has been identified in arabidopsis thaliana as a cis-regulatory element active in meristematic cells  <cit> . besides the sequence of this telo-box like motif, several size and degeneracy variants  were also highly overrepresented in our dataset. in order to deduce a non-redundant list of significant motifs, only the highest scoring k-mers were retained from size variants. applying this motif clustering schema,  <dig>  k-mers  were recovered for further analysis . as described previously, initial dyad motifs were allowed to converge to higher scoring, more specific motifs. we detected many cases for which a large fraction of spacer positions converted to specific letters . several dozens of these motifs show a very rare occurrence  in the  <dig>  syntenic upstream sequences of rice and sorghum but a very large fraction of occurrences in single species are conserved between syntenic pairs . long and unusually highly conserved motifs may provide a highly specific site or several binding sites in close proximity to ensure a coherent regulation of the respective genes, at least in one biological process or response. co-functionality of genes sharing such sites is supported by several of our gene groups. the motif cacgngntttgac is conserved in two wrky transcription factors and a seven-helix transmembrane protein homolog to the mlo <dig> gene from barley. wrky transcription factors as well as the mlo <dig> gene have been experimentally linked to primary pathogen responses  <cit> . in another group, histones h2a and h2b as well as a high mobility group i/y- <dig> are present. all these proteins are known to build or dynamically interact with chromatin structures. for the motif gctctncncnaaga, conserved occurrences are found for enzymes of the phenylpropanoid- and lignin metabolism, two hydroxyanthranilate-hydroxycinnamoyltransferases and a ferulate-5-hydroxylase.

table gives motif examples with a high conservation rate in rice-sorghum orthologs. a full list of detected motifs is provided in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  the number of genes  in rice and sorghum containing the respective motif in their upstream sequence are shown in the columns '#rice' and '#sorghum', respectively. the following columns show the number of expected and observed co-occurrences in syntenic pairs, as well as the z-score. matches to known sites/motifs are indicated in the last two columns.

examples for long specific motifs are shown that emerged from dyad motifs with initially unspecified spacer sequences . note that many motifs have a low occurrence rate in rice and sorghum; however, most or all occurrences are conserved between orthologous pairs.

validations of detected motifs
to validate our motifs derived from network-level conservation and phylocon analysis, we compared our findings to previous reports on rice. the place and transfac databases were searched for matches between our motifs and known sites. place and transfac currently contain  <dig> and  <dig> sequences of rice transcription factor binding sites, respectively  <cit> . however, many sites are redundant between the databases  or represent binding site variations. hence, the exact number of different motifs is difficult to assess. in our search we also included motifs originally described in other plant species as cross-conservation has been reported for functional cis-elements  <cit> . using literature searches as well as public databases containing known rice binding sites, we found  <dig> of our motifs matching  <dig> known regulatory sites out of  <dig> distinct sequences in both databases . in addition, motifs extracted from literature searches but not present in databases have been detected, for instance a perfect match to the ethylene response element gggccc and motifs highly similar to the telo-box aaacccta reported in arabidopsis thaliana .

responses to environmental changes and expression patterns in higher eucaryotes frequently result from the combinatorial actions of two or more transcription factors that bind to several distinct cis-elements within a promoter  <cit> . for functional elements that control transcriptional activities, it is therefore expected that the number of shared elements of a gene pair will correlate with its expression similarity. for rice promoter pairs we analyzed the relation of co-occurrence of motifs detected by network-level conservation and their expression congruency. expression similarity between a rice gene pair was measured by the pearson correlation coefficient. to determine particular candidate motifs for a rice gene, all significant motifs were selected that were present in both upstream sequences of a rice gene and its respective syntenic sorghum partner. pairs were binned according to the number of motifs they have in common, and for each bin we determined the mean pearson correlation from its members. as shown in figure  <dig>  a positive association between the number of shared motifs and the pearson correlation coefficient for mpss and yale <dig> but not for yale <dig> data was detected. chi-square tests show significant deviations from independency . positive correlation was confirmed by a non-parametric, one-sided wilcoxon rank test . yale- <dig> was not significant .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
rice genome projects have generated in depth genomic datasets and a comprehensive set of genomic upstream sequences. however, promoter sequences from other grass genomes have become available only sporadically. comparative or computational biology approaches were therefore restricted to studies of individual pairs of interest and limited by the availability of only a few hundreds of grass promoter sequences. our knowledge of cis-regulatory elements in monocotyledonous plants by the low number of known transcription factor binding sites is limited to those that have been reported and deposited in plant motif databases. the few dozens of known motifs are in sharp contrast to findings that higher plant genomes typically encode on average more than  <dig>  transcription factors  <cit> .

with the completion of the sorghum genome, a genome-wide assessment of regulatory sites in rice and sorghum upstream sequences has now become feasible. in this survey, we employed approaches based on two different tools, phylocon and fastcompare. both tools and approaches have been successfully applied to motif discovery in many non-plant organisms including yeast and mammals. in addition, phylocon has previously been applied with success to cis-element analysis in genome survey sequences of brassica oleraceae vs. arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> .

fastcompare is based on the 'network-level conservation' principle. this presupposes that regulatory circuitries will be largely conserved between two evolutionary related species and functional network motifs can be detected by their higher global or genome-wide conservation rate compared to non-functional sequences. evolutionary conservation of functional elements is also assumed for phylogenetic footprinting that discovers motifs from a group of orthologous gene pairs. for the analysis based on phylocon, the orthologous groups that are compared and combined result from a prior selection of orthologous mate-pairs by co-expression analysis.

ab initio analysis of cis-regulatory elements is notoriously error-prone due to small motif sizes and motif degeneracy. our study was designed to select functional candidate sites and motifs that are associated with transcriptional activity. co-expression was derived from correlations exceeding the top 1% of background similarities. additionally, our clique approach required all group members to have a significant expression correlation with all other group members. in our survey, we restricted motif searches to 5'-upstream sequences of size  <dig> kb  or  <dig> kb   to model current knowledge of plant promoter sizes and,  to focus on plant core promoters that presumably contain most functional elements. though functional enhancers and cis-elements in e.g. mammalian promoters, have been reported up to several tens of thousands bases distant to transcription initiation sites , plant promoters seem to be more compact  <cit> . in addition, chance co-occurrences will strongly increase, in particular, for smaller k-mers and degenerated motifs. upstream sequences of larger size would thus have adverse effects by accumulating false positives or losing statistical power.

results reported in this study can be divided into two categories: conserved sites and motifs. phylocon position specific scoring matrices  are supported by their conservation between orthologous promoters and their simultaneous co-occurrence in genes with expression similarities. sizes of cis-elements in plants are comparable to non-plant species and typically range between  <dig> and  <dig> base pairs  <cit> . the mean size of phylocon pssms detected in this study was considerably longer . hence pssms likely represent concrete conserved sites rather than generalized statistical models for transcription factors. large sizes for phylogenetic footprints in grasses are consistent with a previous study of  <dig> maize and rice pairwise and  <dig> rice, maize and sorghum three-way comparisons, in which a minimum motif size ≥  <dig> bp was found to be significant  <cit> . such long sites for phylocon pssms can be composed of two or more motifs and close proximity of these sites is required for functionality in the respective co-expressed group. alternatively, some of the detected sites could represent signals associated with transcriptional gene activity such as mrna stability signals or mirna target sites, for which longer sizes have been reported  <cit> . complementary to these long conserved regions, many of the detected network-level conserved motifs represent candidates for transcription factor binding sites. after subjecting the individual detected sites to clustering, in total  <dig>  non-redundant motifs were found. the rice genome contains more than  <dig>  genes encoding transcription factors and a similar number of cis-regulatory motifs could be expected  <cit> . however, some of our motifs may still be too specific and one transcription factor may bind to several related motifs. consistent with this assumption, only for few k-mer positions did we observe sequence variability indicating that scoring functions favor specific k-mers or overrepresented k-mers with an overall low occurrence rate in a genome. furthermore, many of these motifs were obtained from dyadic motif searches that converged to motifs with highly specified spacer sequences. for these long motifs, similar considerations may apply as for phylocon sites discussed above. taking this into account, the number of motifs reported in this study is close to the number of transcription factors present in rice. on the other hand, our method may have missed transcription factor binding sites that tolerate high degeneracy. similar findings for highly degenerated motifs have been reported for a fastcompare analysis in yeast  <cit> . nevertheless, our list of motifs up to now provides the most comprehensive analysis of cis-elements in a grass genome.

in previous studies, the functionality of motifs has been confirmed by a variety of approaches. many surveys have reported an association of motifs with particular biological processes. for large-scale analysis, gene ontologies or metabolic pathways were correlated with particular motifs. in this study, however, we were only able to detect a few such associations, and all enrichments were in very broad biological categories, e.g. 'transcription' . missing associations likely result from limitations of the current rice go annotation. in our search, we found for only  <dig> rap <dig> rice genes  at least one go term belonging to the category 'biological process'. similarly, only  <dig>  rice genes  could be mapped on kegg pathways. in total, a functional annotation has been found for less than 5% of all rice genes. the sparse data basis and low resolution of the current rice go annotation that mostly assigns top level terms, are the most probable causes for the limited success in detecting significant enrichments.

several findings support the functionality of our motifs. phylocon sites are associated with conservation and co-expression. despite the limited availability of experimentally verified cis-regulatory elements in grasses, we find numerous matches to known plant motifs or sites in public databases and literature reports. this includes many variants of the acgt motif, like the g-box or the aba response element as well as ethylene response elements among others. interestingly, some top-scoring motifs do not match previously published elements and indicate novel cis-regulatory motifs. the number of motifs two rice genes has in common positively correlates with their expression similarity. this is consistent with the combinatorial nature of transcription regulation  <cit>  and strongly indicates that a large fraction of detected motifs are associated with control of transcription. control may be exerted as transcription factor binding sites or, as discussed previously, as mirna target sites or signals for mrna stability.

in summary, motifs reported in this study will provide researchers with a prioritized list of candidates for the gene of interest and can guide experimental designs for numerous sorghum and rice genes. additional grass genome projects, for instance brachypodium distachyon, a wheat relative, and maize are well advanced and can be expected to deliver important and information-rich comparative genome templates in the future  <cit> . this will enable and stimulate whole-genome comparative studies between three and more grass genome sequences. in particular, comparisons between two closely related grasses, maize and sorghum, will allow  branch-specific motifs to be accessed and, at the same time,  the identification of motifs common to the monocot clade.

