BACKGROUND
predation is a strong selective force which drives evolution of prey defenses. due to its variable nature, it is known to cause adaptations in the form of plastic responses in phenotypes, termed inducible defenses. since they were first described  <cit>  extensive research has revealed that this phenomenon is extremely widespread in many taxa, including bacteria  <cit> , plants  <cit> , invertebrates  <cit>  and vertebrates  <cit> . for inducible defenses to evolve, four prerequisites have to be met:  the ability to form effective defenses,  associated costs that can offset the benefit in times with no or low predation, depending on the environmental conditions,  reliable cues to assess the current state of predation and  heterogeneity of predation impact  <cit> . to date heterogeneity has often been used synonymously with variation in predation intensity , caused by the presence or absence of predators . however, it is not only relevant how much prey is eaten. it is also of importance which predator consumes the prey. it is known that different predators often pose different threats to their prey  <cit>  and that predators can change their impact throughout their own  <cit>  or their prey’s ontogeny  <cit> . thus, the specific modality  also plays an important role. modality describes where natural selection is leading in terms of direction and magnitude. differences in this modality can result from a variety of entangled ecological factors, such as prey-preference, feeding mechanism, predation strategy, habitat use, dangerousness and the mode of perception of the predator  <cit> . in contrast to predation intensity, measuring, characterizing and comparing modality is difficult, even more so without clear categories and definitions. additionally, variation in intensity and modality are non-exclusive changes, which can occur both on a spatial and a temporal scale, further complicating an assessment. since most studies concentrate on single predator systems, modality differences have been largely neglected. however, as sih et al.  <cit>  pointed out, almost all prey organisms have to face multiple predators. under these circumstances, modality matters. indeed, many studies on amphibians  <cit> , mollusks  <cit> , insects  <cit> , rotifers  <cit>  and crustaceans  <cit>  have demonstrated predator-specific responses, emphasizing the importance of modality.

daphnia, a group of model organisms in ecology, evolution and biomedical research  <cit> , provide a classical example for the role of modality. the predators they are facing are commonly categorized as invertebrate and vertebrate predators  <cit> . while vertebrate predators are considered to be primarily visual hunters and prefer larger prey, invertebrates are generally regarded as size-limited and mostly tactile predators. corresponding to these different modalities, the well-known responses of daphnids exposed to fish are to reproduce earlier at a smaller size  <cit> , to release more but smaller offspring  <cit>  and to migrate into darker and deeper water layers during the day  <cit> . in contrast, when encountering invertebrate predators, such as chaoborus larvae, daphnids mature later at larger size and produce fewer but larger offspring  <cit> . these above mentioned changes are, however, restricted to life history and behavioral defenses, with especially the latter considered to adapt fast and reversibly  <cit> . yet, more prominent features of the genus daphnia are numerous plastic morphological responses, such as helmets  <cit> , crests  <cit> , neckteeth  <cit> , elongated tail-spines  <cit>  and a crown of thorns  <cit> . except in one species , these defenses are solely built against invertebrate predators. while in one case they indeed have been shown to be caused by and act against multiple invertebrate predators  <cit> , in most cases they seem to be predator specific  <cit> . although this clearly questions the grouping of ‘invertebrate predators’ together as a single functional group, the potential differences in their modality have not been the focus of research so far.

in this context, we investigated if differences in the modality of invertebrate predators are relevant for the expression of inducible defenses. we used two contrasting predators with distinct differences in their morphology and ecology : triops cancriformis  and notonecta glauca . in addition, both predators are known to induce morphological defenses in daphnia <cit> . as the prey organism, we used a clone of daphnia barbata, an african pond and lake dwelling species  <cit> , which shares distribution and habitats with predators of both genera  <cit> . as a first step, we exposed d. barbata to the chemical cues released from both predators separately and analyzed morphological responses among all experimental groups. as a second step, we used direct predation trials to assess the adaptive value of each morphotype. we show that two invertebrate predators can induce different morphological defensive traits in d. barbata, which are based on the same structures, but built in different shapes. this is not only the first record of inducible defenses in d. barbata, but a unique case of defensive specialization across a wide range of taxa. surprisingly, the defense against one predator also offered protection against the other predator, in one case even matching the specialized defense. to explain why the prey shows nonetheless not one general but two distinctively defended morphotypes, a theoretical framework is needed. therefore, we introduce a ‘concept of modality' , which categorizes multipredator-prey systems into three major groups  and describes optimal responses in environments where predators co-occur or alternate. this concept is in line with the existing literature, but provides a general framework. it offers an explanation for the evolution of the different induced morphotypes of d. barbata, generates a basis to assess and compare the importance of modality in different multi-predator-prey systems and emphasizes the importance of a differentiation between predator co-occurrence and predator succession.

RESULTS
morphological parameters
significant changes in the morphology of d. barbata  between the treatments and within all measured parameters were observed . relative helmet length was significantly different in all three treatments . the control  daphnids had the smallest helmets. larger helmets were found in the triops-induced treatment and the longest helmets overall were from notonecta-exposed daphnids . the shape of the helmet varied as well. daphnids exposed to t. cancriformis built a backwards bending helmet which differs significantly in its angle relative to the body axis from both the control  and notonecta-induced daphnids .

p
c, non-induced daphnids ; n, notonecta-induced daphnids; t, triops-induced daphnids; sem, standard error of mean; h, test statistics.

furthermore, the length of the tail-spine increased significantly with exposure to notonecta as compared to both the control  and triops-induced daphnids . d. barbata exposed to triops did not increase tail-spine length compared to the control, but the morphology of the tail-spine was altered. specifically, the tail-spine was bent backwards  and had significantly more curvature as compared to the two other treatments .

triops-induced d. barbata showed an increase in microspine density at the cranial dorsal ridge , a widening of the dorsal ridge, longer microspines and a sideways orientation of the 5th microspine . d. barbata exposed to chemical cues released by notonecta on the other hand showed a much smaller decrease in the distance between 1st and 10th microspine  and no changes in the dorsal ridge width . additionally, they possessed longer microspines than triops-induced daphnids  and compared to the control showed only a minor increase in the angle of the fifth microspine relative to the dorsal ridge .

predation trials
predation trials using notonecta revealed that the notonecta-induced morphotype is better protected, having an 80% higher survivorship compared to the control . the triops-induced morphotype also held an advantage, having a 52% higher survivorship compared to the control . however, the defenses proved to be less effective against notonectids in direct comparison with the notonecta-induced morphotype . in contrast, when t. cancriformis was the predator, both morphs showed higher survival rates compared to the control . between the two induced morphs, no significant differences in the number of surviving daphnia were found .

discussion
our findings are the first records of inducible defenses in d. barbata. furthermore, we show that d. barbata responds to two different invertebrate predators  with distinctive morphological responses, rather than displaying a general defense. unlike in previous records of predator-specific morphological responses across wide taxonomical groups, they consist of neither a gradual extension of the same trait , nor of opposing traits  or the addition of a new trait . instead, the defenses are based on the same structures, but formed in a different way. this makes it impossible to order the morphotypes of d. barbata by the magnitude of expression of their traits . rather, the differences represent distinctive shapes, providing a rare example of qualitative predator specific defenses .

regarding the adaptive value of these differing traits, the morphs exposed to chemical cues released by triops had a clear disadvantage under predation by notonecta compared to the morphs exposed to notonecta cues. still, compared to non-induced daphnids, they showed a limited defensive value. surprisingly, both defended morphotypes performed equally well against t. cancriformis. at first glance, it seems contradictory that a mismatching defense works just as good as the specific adaptation. even so, as two distinctive morphotypes have evolved instead of a single general defense, either the benefits or the costs  have to differ in favor of the specific defense. although the predation trials showed no direct benefits , indirect benefits might exist. such could be an increase in handling time or in predator mortality . differences in costs are more difficult to assess, as they are often manifold  <cit>  and depend on both abiotic and biotic factors. as such, they differ in multi-predator environments from single predator environments  <cit> . depending on whether predators co-occur or occur subsequently, the costs may change even further. therefore, it is insufficient to assess the costs of defenses by simple comparisons of predator-exposed and non-predator-exposed individuals. predator-related environmental costs, like ‘survival trade-offs’  <cit> , can possibly surpass ‘costs of plasticity’  by far. costs may also be reduced under certain circumstances; for instance, when a defense against one predator simultaneously offers protection against another predator . consequently, it is crucial to understand the modalities of the predators in a given system to evaluate the costs of inducible defenses. to this end, it is helpful to visualize modality as an euclidean vector, showing both the direction and limit of natural selection caused by a predator. based on that, we developed a novel concept on the influence of modality in multi-predator regimes . in a system with one prey and two predators, three different scenarios are possible: the predators can be functionally equivalent , with both vectors pointing in the same direction, functionally inverse , with both vectors pointing in opposite directions or functionally diverse , with both vectors pointing in different directions. depending on the conditions, predator-specific inducible defenses can be found within each of the three categories.

previous reports of predator specific-defenses cover either type i  <cit>  or type ii  <cit>  but rarely type iii  <cit> . yet, systems with two predators should be most realistically described with two dimensions . in this case, the x-axis shows phenotypic characteristics relevant for the risk caused by the first predator, while changes in the y-axis only influence the predation risk from the second. a reason for the predominance of types i and ii may be a simplification by observation, which can happen if only one or a small number of related traits are observed. then it is likely that a second predator causes selection to go in the same or the opposite direction . vice versa, with more observed traits, the chance increases to find changes relevant to one predator only . additionally, natural selection can also lead to a simplification when fitness trade-offs do not exist and predators always co-occur. selection should then favor that type iiia and b systems convert into type ib, and thus display only one general defense . the same should happen if the cost of differentiating between predators is higher than the benefit of a predator-specific response. since d. barbata does not display a general defense, acting against both predators, this suggests that triops and notonecta have a different spatial or temporal occurrence. d. barbata is known to inhabit both small temporary ponds and larger lakes in africa  <cit>  as does notonecta <cit> , while triops lives in temporary freshwaters as pioneer species  <cit> . therefore, habitats might exist with only one of these two predators. an alternative explanation is that the different plastic defenses are an adaptation to a common succession pattern. when a dry pond gets filled with water, daphnids and triops hatch from resting eggs. thus, while there is an immediate threat caused by triops, notonecta have to migrate to the pond  <cit>  and lay their eggs. adult notonecta occur in smaller numbers, have a reduced feeding rate , consume more surface prey than juveniles  <cit>  and, therefore, exert less predation impact on pelagic organisms such as daphnia. as soon as juvenile notonecta hatch they are in high numbers and represent an immediate and strong threat to d. barbata. by then, the daphnids should already possess their defenses , being now well adapted.

further experiments are needed to analyze the response of d. barbata exposed to both predators simultaneously. previous studies  showed that responses to two different predators usually result in an intermediate response or a response identical to the ‘more risky’ predator. however, it is just as important to acquire field data about the predator-regimes that d. barbata faces. especially, as it is a condition for the two specialized defenses to evolve that the composition of the predator-regimes changes. for that predator succession seems to be the most plausible explanation. that predator succession influences the expression of inducible defenses is already known for frogs  <cit> , but not for any daphnid species so far. the importance of predator succession might even apply to many other prey organisms as well, not only in temporary habitats, but also due to seasonal changes in temperate zones. according to our concept , these frequently changing environments would allow for the persistence of type iii systems. however, even then it is a basic condition for type iii, that the predators show qualitative differences in their selection pressure. if the predators belong to different main types  these differences might be more likely, but this is not the case for triops and notonecta. thus, whether or not predators exert different selection pressures on their prey can only be answered by looking directly and in detail at the species in question.

CONCLUSIONS
in the case of d. barbata, it is evident that even the modality differences of two invertebrate predators matter. this led to the ability to react to triops and notonecta with a wide array of distinctive and specific morphological defenses, making d. barbata the morphologically most plastic daphnid based on current knowledge. with all the advantages that have established daphnia as model organisms, including a sophisticated genetic background  <cit> , we hope that this study provides an experimental basis for future research and further insight into the ultimate causes for the evolution of inducible defenses. from a theoretical perspective, we hope our concept proves to be a useful extension of the four prerequisites for the evolution of inducible defenses, outlined by tollrian and harvell  <cit> . furthermore, our concept can be easily adapted to any number of predators by using combinations of the three categories, their subgroups and, if necessary, by the addition of more dimensions. in conclusion, our study highlights the need to include predator modality in research regarding inducible defenses and predator-prey interactions in general.

