BACKGROUND
epigenetic marks are defined as enzyme-mediated chemical modifications of dna and/or of its associated chromatin proteins. being epigenetic, these marks do not alter the primary sequence of dna, but nevertheless contain information that may be heritable in daughter cells or potentially transmitted to downstream generations through germ cells. in plant and mammalian dna, the organic base 5-methylcytosine occurs at cpg sites and accounts for 1–6% of nucleotides. cytosine methylation being the most stable epigenetic mark, it is involved in three vital biological processes in mammals: embryogenesis, genomic imprinting and the regulation of transcription  <cit> . methyl cytosine also occurs at chg and chh sites  especially in stem cells  <cit> . another modified organic base, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine , whose presence was revealed in the nervous system forty years ago  <cit> , has been recently detected in mice, rats, rabbits and cattle  <cit> . the enzyme tet <dig> has been shown to catalyse the conversion of 5mc to 5hmc  <cit>  and is reported to regulate developmental processes, neurogenesis and cellular differentiation  <cit> . oxidative damage to methyl-cpg sequences has been reported to inhibit the methyl-cpg binding domain of methyl-cpg binding protein  <dig>  <cit>  and 5hmc has now been identified as the cause of so-called “oxidative demethylation”  <cit> . the tet <dig> catalytic domain is capable of hydroxylating 5mc in vitro at chg and chh sites  <cit> . the closely related enzymes tet <dig> and tet <dig> appear to have compensatory roles in undifferentiated tissues or redundant tissue-specific roles in differentiated tissues  <cit>  and have been shown in vitro to play an important role in mouse es cell lineage specification. their depletion also has an impact on pluripotency-related genes  <cit> .

these recent data raise questions about the role of 5hmc in methylation reprogramming processes inside the mammalian zygote. dna methylation is currently associated with loss of pluripotency and differentiation, even though dna methylation levels do not change very much during differentiation in mice es cells  <cit> . moreover, genes associated with pluripotency and germ-line specific genes actually gain methyl groups in the zygote  <cit> . this indicates that the methylation process during tissue-differentiation is not general and that gene-specific or lineage-specific demethylation can occur through the action of tet <dig>  <cit> . several questions remain, amongst which two are of primary interest: which genomic sites are actually modified during embryo development, and what are the contributions of 5mc and 5hmc to these changes.

embryo methylation profiles have been reportedly altered through in vitro procedures  <cit> . demethylation has been reportedly delayed in ivf-derived and icsi-derived rat embryos in comparison to in vivo fertilization  <cit> . the simultaneous study of both 5mc and 5hmc thus could be of great value for the comparison of in vitro and in vivo embryos. given that bovine developmental timing closely follows human developmental timing, that the impact of in vitro procedures on the bovine methylome has been documented  <cit>  and that a fully annotated bos taurus genome is available, cattle offer a good model for the study of methylome and hydroxymethylome changes during early development in response to in vitro constraints.

oxidative bisulfite sequencing , a recently developed method for quantifying 5mc and 5hmc, uses selective oxidation of 5hmc to 5-formylcytosine  to enable bisulfite conversion of 5fc to uracil. as 5mc are the only cytosines not converted to uracil by the procedure, sequencing a sample treated with oxbs allows their identification. by combining these results with those of traditional bisulfite sequencing , which leaves both 5mc and 5hmc unchanged, the levels of both epigenetic marks can be assessed through comparative data analysis  <cit> . however, such sequencing-heavy approaches, where each sample must be processed and then sequenced at least twice, are not compatible with the generation of multiple profiles from multiple samples in a cost-effective manner  <cit> . alternative high-throughput strategies focus on reducing sample complexity by using methylation profiling, either through genomic dna restriction by methyl-sensitive endonucleases, bisulfite conversion strategies or immuno-precipitation using methyl-binding proteins or antibodies against methylcytosine-containing sites  <cit> . some promising new methods include glib   <cit>  and the anti-cms protocol  followed by immunoprecipitation using an antibody against cms)  <cit> . however, using the current protocols associated with these methods, we cannot meet the specific constraint of embryonic epigenome analysis, which entails being able to work with a reduced amount of genomic dna  corresponding to a minimal amount of pooled embryos.

we speculate that a well-chosen combination of both methylation profiling and sequencing-based approaches should help meet the challenge of building the methylome and hydroxymethylome profile of early mammalian embryos. since methylation patterns are tissue-specific, information on the genome-wide distribution of 5hmc is still scant for human embryos and model species like bos taurus. consequently, in order to perform a first exploration of 5mc and 5hmc representation in mammalian embryos, we sought to develop a strategy for the rapid generation of differently methylated regions. the methyl-sensitive restriction-based strategy proposed herein is a high-throughput approach providing a genomic mapping of 5mc and 5hmc-containing sequences with uniform coverage by using different sets of methyl-sensitive enzymes. we combined three protocols to obtain a comprehensive survey of candidate 5mc and 5hmc sites during early bovine development: an adapted methyl-sensitive representational difference analysis  protocol  <cit>  using a mspi/hpaii isoschizomer system  <cit> , a variation using fspbi/bfai isoschizomers to reveal hydroxymethylation  and enzymatic cocktail-enrichment ligation-mediated pcr protocol  adapted from schumacher et al.   <cit> . this combined strategy allowed the profiling and mapping of an important amount of methylated and hydroxymethylated sites in early developmental stages.

RESULTS
all three of the library construction methods are based on selective restriction cleavage using some combination of methylation/hydroxymethylation-sensitive and methylation/hydroxymethylation-insensitive enzymes. the aim of each restriction enzyme combination was to identify both 5mc and 5hmc as well as to offer extended genomic coverage.

me-rda strategy: targeting 5mc sites in cpg islands
methylation-sensitive representational difference analysis  is a protocol composed of traditional rda methodology  <cit>  which combines methyl-sensitive and methyl-insensitive endonucleases for the identification of hypo- and hyper-methylated dna fragments  <cit> . its underlying mechanism uses pcr, subtractive hybridization and kinetic enrichment to amplify a set of restriction fragments present in one sample  but not the other . adaptors are ligated only to the tester fraction. when subtractive amplification is performed, only tester-tester homodimers are exponentially amplified while tester-driver heterodimers follow a linear amplification and progressively become underrepresented. the resulting enrichment in tester-tester homodimers constitutes indirect evidence that there are no corresponding amplicons in the driver representation, indicating that the corresponding restriction sites remained uncut, presumably because they were completely or partially methylated.

our strategy for the enrichment of methylated genomic loci is based on a modified protocol of me-rda and is illustrated in figure 1a. it uses mspi as its methyl-insensitive endonuclease, and its isoschizomer hpaii as its methyl-sensitive endonuclease  <cit> . as the cleaving activity of both mspi and hpaii have been shown to be either inexistent or severely inhibited in the presence of an internal 5hmc  <cit> , only 5mc bearing sites should be enriched by the procedure. enrichment of the mspi fraction is confirmed when intense bands are revealed by electrophoresis. bands for the mspi fraction could be obtained following a single round of subtractive amplification using a 1:  <dig> hybridization ratio of tester and driver dna . we chose hybridization conditions  where the cot value allows nearly 100% of complementary template hybridization in complex genomes, including all non-repetitive sequences. the subtraction having been successful, we chose to limit it to a single round in order to target partially methylated sites, which are underrepresented and could thus be eliminated through a second round of subtraction. the experimental range of validated amplicons for rda methods is between 100 bp and  <dig> kb, depending on the enzymes used  <cit> . in the present study, the validation range for mspi/hpaii me-rda amplicons was between 100 bp and  <dig> kb .

hme-rda strategy: targeting 5hmc sites
given the potential involvement of the recently discovered 5hmc mark in the epigenetic regulation of important biological processes, we decided to develop a modified me-rda protocol that uses a hydroxymethylation-sensitive endonuclease. by reviewing the restriction enzyme database rebase  <cit> , we found a pair of isoschizomers, namely bfai  and fspbi  to assess the hydroxymethylation status of cytosines. following the me-rda experimental design, tester dna was cleaved with fspbi and driver dna was cleaved with bfai . by using the same method to obtain hydroxymethylome data as was used to obtain methylome data, it was expected that the datasets would be comparable. furthermore, in order to target both methylation and hydroxymethylation  in the same reaction, it is possible to use a cocktail containing several restriction enzymes providing –ta protruding ends. this can be achieved by extending the hme-rda protocol into an rda cocktail protocol, using the same set of jta and nta primers. for simple, double or triple cleavage generating –ta ends, we designed adaptors creating a new bfai/fspbi site for subsequent adaptor removal. as a preliminary test, we successfully performed a me-rda cocktail protocol with double digestion of two –ta overhang restriction enzymes  .

help cocktail strategy: targeting 5mc in non-cpg regions
a study from schumacher and colleagues describes the benefits and limitations of strategies targeting both unmethylated and hypermethylated fractions  <cit> . in spite of showing in silico that the unmethylated fraction derived from hpaii cleavage results in ~  <dig> times more fragments than the hypermethylated fraction derived from msei, they proposed an informative approach based on enrichment of the hypermethylated fraction, which can improve information on methylated sites in distinct genomic regions. we thus chose to complement our me-rda 5mc data with a protocol based on the schumacher strategy, of which the hypermethylated dna fragment enrichment relies on frequent cutter tasi  cleavage . tasi sites are infrequent within gc-rich regions, leaving most cpg islands intact. after ligation to aatt-overhang specific adaptors, the unmethylated and hypo-methylated fragments were cleaved with a cocktail of methyl-sensitive endonucleases  in order to impede their further amplification. the resulting fraction was enriched in hypermethylated fragments that escaped digestion and was therefore subsequently amplified. on the resulting gel, we observed that the successful amplification of methyl-sensitive cocktail digestion transforms the electrophoretic smear by removing intense bands and reducing fragment size .

deep sequencing data analysis
using these three protocols, selected genomic libraries were prepared for blastocysts  and elongated embryos . the extent of dna cleavage was assessed in terms of intact sites in methylation-insensitive digestions. results show reactions are > 90% complete . read length averaged 235 bp for a total of  <dig> , <dig> analyzed reads . the number of clean reads per library was between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . the enzyme pair targeting 5hmc generated the lowest number of clean reads for both developmental stages . the help cocktail strategy required an extra step to filter contaminating fragments that did not harbour an internal restriction site. in the help cocktail strategy, tasi cleavage generates fragments with protruding tasi ends that may or may not contain methyl-sensitive sites. digestion by a cocktail of methyl-sensitive enzymes will cut tasi-tasi fragments if they contain unmethylated internal hpaii, acii or hinp1i sites. consequently, final help products should be enriched in tasi-tasi fragments containing methylated hpaii, acii or hinp1i sites or fragments containing no such sites. in silico analysis was used to discard the latter fragments , which brought no information on genome methylation status. if redundancy is removed, the portion of help cocktail fragments containing at least one expected restriction site and considered as real positives is about 20% of the identified contigs . the number of contigs was comparable for all libraries with an average of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  consensus sequences.

awith standard deviation. bnumber of cleaned reads  containing an intact site for a methyl-insensitive restriction endonuclease more than  <dig> nucleotides from the ends. such sites are indicative of incomplete genomic cleavage. cthe percentage of putative methylated restriction sites within cpg islands over the total number of sites identified for this library. as a reference, cpg islands cover  <dig> % of the bovine genome.

anumber of reads left after cleaning with seqclean. reads smaller than  <dig> nt after adapter trimming were discarded. bfor help, number of reads with an internal hpaii, acii or hinp1i restriction site. cnumber of consensus sequences after clustering with a 97% identity threshold. dnumber of consensus sequences with a blat genomic alignment with 92% identity over 92% of the length of the transcript. enumber of consensus sequences for which a single alignment fits the above criteria. fnumber of potentially methylated sites identified in the genome through the alignment and extension of reads. n/a = not applicable.

as expected, the genomic alignment of contigs resulted in a high proportion of mapped loci. for bovine genome sequences that could not be mapped, further analysis ruled out linker concatemerization. however the presence of numerous shorter contigs could not rule out potential chimeric fragments or the identification of still unmapped bovine genomic sequences. the proportions of unmapped contigs were the highest for libraries targeting 5mc in cpg islands and 5hmc in day- <dig> embryos . blat results also showed that a large proportion of contigs aligned with multiple locations of the genome. this situation was particularly evident for the method targeting 5mc in cpg islands , since only 6-7% of the contigs could be positioned unambiguously on the genome. these proportions were much higher for the other methods with 46%  and 59%  for 5hmc contigs and 58%  and 81%  for 5mc contigs . these values corroborated our results with respect to repetitive content as well as the positioning of the contigs within cpg islands. more than 30% of the contigs isolated using me-rda mapped to cpg islands whereas only 2-4% of the contigs found with the other methods mapped to these cpg-rich domains .

chromosomal mapping of consensus sequences
in order to evaluate the qualitative distribution of mapped sequences along bovine chromosomes, a chromosomal mapping of the  <dig>  putative methylated regions was generated and plotted alongside genomic coverage data for genes and cpg islands as well as a cytoband mapping adapted from liao et al.  <cit> . an illustration of the mapping of all chromosomes can be found in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  while the data itself can be visualized directly on the embryogene genome browser . we observe that the combined site distribution follows neither cpg islands nor genes and covers the entire genome. overall, all three methods provided a distribution across the entire genome and were shown to target different loci, thus providing wide coverage.

establishment of 5mc and 5hmc marks within repeated elements
characterization of the repetitive elements within the consensus sequences of the libraries  showed that me-rda sequences were enriched in satellite elements . furthermore, btsat <dig> accounted for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of satellite loci in the day- <dig> and day- <dig> embryo libraries respectively . since centromeres and telomeres are repeat-rich regions, a genomic coverage plot of btsat <dig> elements was generated to confirm the increased presence of centromeric and telomeric loci within the contig collections generated by me-rda . by comparison, the abundance of btsat4-associated loci in hme-rda libraries suggests a transition in the establishment of the 5hmc mark between day- <dig> and day- <dig>  since this specific sequence went from accounting for  <dig> % of repeat-containing contigs in the day  <dig> library to  <dig> % in the day- <dig> libraries. in contrast, btsat <dig> showed low representation in the help cocktail libraries  .

repetitive content as identified by repeatmasker. anumber of sequences  within which repetitive content was found. bpercentage of the total number of bases within the consensus sequences of the given library. cas a reference, annotated repetitive elements cover  <dig> % of the bovine genome.

retrotransposons also occupy a large contingent of the identified repeated elements. among the retrotransposons that were identified, the short interspersed elements were found more abundant in the help cocktail libraries, which were shown to target more 5mc outside of cpg islands than did the other two libraries. moreover, these sequences seem to be more methylated in day- <dig> compared to day- <dig> embryos . the long interspersed elements were proportionally more prevalent in the day- <dig> than in the day- <dig> libraries and this situation was more evident for the 5hmc marks .

functional mapping between methods
to study the distribution of identified loci according to gene functional units, the genome was divided into promoter, exon, intron and inter-gene regions based on known gene structure. gene promoter regions were defined arbitrarily as starting 5 kb upstream from the transcription initiation site. since the coverage and distribution of putative methylated sites throughout the genome was similar across developmental stages, the dataset of both day- <dig> and day- <dig> embryos were combined for each library preparation methodology. both epigenetic marks were found in every functional classification . the distributions of 5mc and 5hmc containing loci were quite similar across methods. the  library proportions of promoter, exon, intron and inter-gene regions were found significantly different from the whole-genome proportions of those same regions . also, 5mc sites isolated using me-rda seemed more prevalent in exons.

aall differences between genomic proportions and library proportions were found significant .

mark-specific and stage-specific transition
since methylation is involved primarily in embryogenesis and development, while hydroxymethylation is involved notably in differentiation, methylated sequences may change during embryonic lineage differentiation taking place between the blastocyst stage  and the beginning of the elongation stage . to measure this, we compared the location of identified putative methylated sites between blastocyst and elongation stages for each method . the absolute number of me-rda 5mc regions is reduced from day- <dig> to day- <dig>  but the elongated stage displays  <dig> specific new regions . the number of hme-rda regions also decreased slightly from days  <dig> to  <dig>  but day-12-specific new 5hmc regions still represented  <dig> % of total day- <dig> regions. conversely, the absolute number of help cocktail 5mc regions increased from day- <dig> to day- <dig> with the latter displaying  <dig>  specific new regions . moreover, if we compare the portion of common or specific regions of all methods , the portion of specific me-rda 5mc regions is the lowest  and is comparable to specific hme-rda regions portion , while the portion of specific help 5mc regions is noticeably higher . these observations show that the help cocktail method is likely an informative sensor of methylated transition sequences during elongation in bovine early embryos. the location of at least a quarter of 5hmc-containing sequences in different regions from 5mc illustrates a potential role of specific 5hmc regions during the blastocyst-to-elongation  transition, which could be independent of 5mc location.

q-pcr methylated and hydroxymethylated profiles
during the initial validation tests performed by non-quantitative pcr on putative methylated candidates from granulosa cells obtained from one round of me-rda protocol, 78% of the  <dig> candidates showed differential intensity profiles between tester and driver . for candidate embryonic sequences, subsets of selected repeated elements were targeted by q-pcr comparing the differences in amplification rates between aliquots of the same samples submitted to restriction digest either by mark-sensitive or insensitive enzymes  <cit>  . for all three methods , 74% of the  <dig> sequences tested were validated to be partially methylated or hydroxymethylated. for both rda based approaches combined , 77% of candidate sequences were found to be methylated or hydroxymethylated and for hme-rda, all of the six tested candidates were found to be hydroxymethylated. on the  <dig> subsets of repeated elements selected from me-rda and hme-rda that validated, eleven and six candidates targeted methylation and hydroxymethylation respectively . none of the 5mc mark candidates showed significant differences between day- <dig> and day- <dig> stages. amongst the six hydroxymethylation candidates, two loci containing satellite elements, btsat <dig> and btsat <dig>  were tested and found significantly different between day  <dig> and day  <dig> embryos . the 5hmc-containing btsat <dig> candidate displays multiple loci amongst the genome, whereas the btsat <dig> sequence includes the rgl <dig> gene locus . the hydroxymethylation of this btsat <dig> sequence was significantly decreased in the rlg <dig> locus of elongated embryos. the rlg <dig> locus is reported to be involved in the cellular response to dna damage and the maintenance of chromosomal integrity, both regulated by methylation  <cit> .

discussion
this epigenomic survey based on methyl-sensitive restriction was inspired by earlier studies like the help assay  <cit>  and unmethylated and methylated fraction enrichment strategies  <cit>  but also by improvements in next-generation-sequencing-based technologies  <cit>  and especially by the recently studied methylation mark 5hmc  <cit> .

while adapting me-rda and help protocols to high-throughput objectives, the combined 5mc and 5hmc profiling strategy addressed methodological challenges and resulted in several advantages. restriction-enzyme-based methods are usually used to enrich either the unmethylated or the hypermethylated fraction of gdna. since the help cocktail targets cpg-rich regions both inside and outside cpg islands with an estimated cpg dinucleotide coverage of 32%  <cit> , it overcomes the main disadvantage of the simple help  assay which offers significantly lower genomic coverage  <cit> . in this combined approach, the help cocktail method, which provides enrichment of the hypermethylated fraction, is the most informative protocol. the help cocktail library displays the greatest coverage of gene and inter-gene regions, while the other protocols  provided unique sets of complementary loci of interest, especially within satellite elements. the three protocols also display specific abilities. the tasi frequent cutter used in the help cocktail provides a fraction containing methyl-sensitive sites that escape gc site enrichment because of restriction site incompatibility. by including a subtractive amplification, me-rda and hme-rda can enrich rare fragments or sequences difficult to amplify because of fragment size or base content that would not have been enriched using a single ligation-mediated help pcr. moreover, me-rda preferentially targets exon sequences, in contrast with help and hme-rda protocols, which can be explained by the large number of cpg islands in exons. thus, the objective of discovering widely distributed candidate regions was achieved.

differing reports on the genomic locations of 5hmc can be explained by either tissue or method-specific differences. the hme-rda dataset indicated high levels of 5hmc-containing sequences in inter-gene locations . this was unexpected since the distribution of 5hmc in mouse embryonic stem cells  shows 30% inter-gene location  <cit> . nevertheless, a recent study on mouse pre-implantation embryos reported that highly methylated cpg islands are intra-gene, which can be explained by enhanced maintenance of methylation or resistance of non-imprinted sequences to demethylation  <cit> . moreover, a microarray-based study of individual mouse blastocysts showed that 90% of the most methylated loci overlap with exons  <cit> . since rda strategies are known to amplify hypermethylated sequences, this can explain the overrepresentation of inter-gene locations and the high representation of repeats in the me-rda and hme-rda libraries.

a crucial advantage of applying pcr-based combined methylation and hydroxymethylation profiling to embryo epigenomics is the ability to reduce the requirement of input dna by using optimized ligation and amplification. each of the three protocols requires about 200 ng of genomic dna, but improving pcr yield allowed successful representation starting with as little as 50 ng of dna corresponding to an average of  <dig> pooled blastocysts. none of the current methylation or hydroxymethylation profiling methods  can meet such constraints as they all require between  <dig> and 10 μg of starting dna. yet these approaches benefit from several advantages such as higher signal-to-noise ratio   <cit>  resulting in less false positives than in our restriction-based approach . contrary to the random dna fragmentation by sonication used within glib, our representation strategy is based on enzymatic restriction and yields predictable dna fragments. this does not prevent our method from achieving uniform coverage of the bovine genome , which met our objective of discovering and mapping new 5mc and 5hmc-containing sequences without any topological bias. in contrast with glib, our approach deliberately targets repetitive elements such as btsat <dig> and btast <dig> which are demonstrated by q-pcr validations to be candidates for transitory 5hmc marks during bovine embryogenesis.

repetitive sequences are largely represented in a method-specific manner with prevalence of satellites in me-rda libraries and long interspersed elements  in help libraries. repetitive sequences are also represented in a stage-specific manner, notably for the hme-rda library. previous studies using hpaii-methyl-sensitive rda show the ability of the subtractive method to target repetitive sequences in tumors  <cit> . an interesting study in mice reports that 66% of isolated hypomethylated sequences correspond to line- <dig>  ltr or sine sequences  <cit> . the lines were proportionally more prevalent in the day- <dig> than in the day- <dig> hme-rda libraries confirming very recent data in mice showing that line- <dig> display an important amount of 5hmc and are reprogrammed during preimplantation development that is before differentiation processes  <cit> . in addition, it seems that satellite sequences in particular could be considered as possible candidates to target methylation and hydroxymethylation changes when comparing day- <dig> to day- <dig> bovine embryos. a previous comparison of methylation levels of repetitive loci during bovine development revealed that satellites i and ii are hypo-methylated in blastocysts  <cit> , consistently with studies hypothesizing that satellite demethylation occurs very early in the germ cell lineage, prior to entry into meiosis  <cit> . given the hypothetical role of hydroxymethylation in oxidative demethylation, the increase in hydroxymethylation of bovine satellite sequences observed in hme-rda between day- <dig>  and day- <dig>  would be consistent with methylation removal associated with the differentiation of primordial germ cells in the early embryo genome which begins to happen in elongated bovine embryos  <cit> . furthermore, it was shown that satellite i methylation decreased significantly in the trophectoderm but not in the embryo in somatic cell nuclear transfer embryos in comparison to in vivo embryos at the elongation stage   <cit> . the slight enrichment of 5hmc in satellite sequences in our blastocyst embryos and its associated putative demethylation could therefore be an effect of in vitro conditions.

one possible explanation for 5hmc enrichment of specific loci in day- <dig> elongated embryos linked with putative demethylation could be the role of trophectoderm-specific methylation status. indeed, long terminal repeats  are significantly higher in hme-rda libraries, in particular at day- <dig> stage, indicating a 5hmc enrichment within retrotransposons between blastocyst and elongation stages . consistent with this is a description of a role for endogenous retrovirus in trophoblast differentiation and placental development  <cit> . to address further on the question of a specific role of the trophectoderm in the overall 5hmc enrichment observed within ltr at elongation stage, embryonic tissue dissection will be necessary.

another question of interest concerns the possibility of opposing 5mc and 5hmc marks. several reports support the claim that 5hmc action maintains or promotes gene expression in opposition to 5mc  <cit>  or represent a transition step and partially overcomes the silencing effect of 5mc  <cit> . representation of certain 5mc marks and 5hmc marks was therefore expected to differ between day- <dig> and day- <dig> embryos.

the assumption regarding the specific regulatory role of 5hmc in differentiation processes is consistent with recent reports indicating that 5hmc is associated with specific sequence composition, poised chromatin configuration and gene expression upon differentiation  <cit> . in fact, activation of lineage-specific loci can occur either via a postulated 5mc demethylation pathway or through recruitment of transcriptional regulators that specifically recognize 5hmc and become activated in response to differentiation signals. for example, acquisition of 5hmc in cell-specific distal regulatory regions is expected to activate enhancers and participate in selective activation of tissue-specific genes in neural and adipose tissues  <cit> . a connection between 5hmc and regulatory elements appears likely in our data, since 5hmc is enriched upstream and downstream of transcription start sites , while 5mc is enriched primarily downstream of tss  <cit> . we observed that 4% of the resulting unique 5hmc sites for both the day- <dig> and day- <dig> embryos were located in the region 5 kb upstream from tss indicating a possible regulatory role of 5hmc mark on its own.

more generally, our data raise questions about the role of 5hmc in the dynamic status of methylation inside the mammalian zygote during early developmental stages. an overall and differential loss of methylation happens in the first few days of development in mammals. in the paternal genome, demethylation occurs through an active enzymatic process, whereas the maternal genome apparently undergoes passive replication-dependant demethylation  <cit> . recent data showed that 5hmc accumulated in the paternal pronucleus while 5mc decreased, supporting the model of tet <dig> conversion of 5mc into 5hmc  <cit> . in mice, a second wave of demethylation in the maternal genome is normally completed by the time the embryo reaches the morula stage. then, from the morula stage until the blastocyst stage, an increase in de novo methylation takes place  <cit> . but most recently, a study published by smith and colleagues provides new insights into the two developmental transitions in dna methylation occuring between the sperm and the zygote and between the early inner cell mass and the post-implantation embryo  <cit> . they observe that methylation levels reflect a global subtle but gradual decrease in mice post-implantation embryos. consistently with our data, the most extreme changes are for sequences enriched for repeat elements: 18% of lines and 10% of ltr reduce significantly their methylation values. in our study, not only methylation levels at specific loci decrease, but also hydroxymethylation levels change indicating a role of 5hmc at specific repetitive sequences in the developmental transition around the period initiating foeto-maternal interactions. furthermore, methylcytosines are likely to be targeted for complete demethylation since some 5hmc levels decrease between blastocyst and elongation stages for specific loci. this suggests that a subsequent oxidation of 5hmc into 5fc could happen, possibly followed by decarboxylation into 5cac as recently hypothesized  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
numerous recent reports indicate the epigenetic topology of dna vary both following normal differentiation processes and in response to developmental constraints. by combining restriction-based strategies, we provide here an important amount of genomic data illustrating two interesting points: first, the use of optimized rda and help protocols in order to create two annotated maps identifying a total of  <dig>  putative methylated and hydroxymethylated cytosines in the bovine genome during embryogenesis; secondly, the analysis of the obtained data in the context of bovine early embryonic development.

thanks to a combined study of 5mc and 5hmc marks and the slower developmental kinetics of the bovine embryo compared to the mouse model, we were able to propose a complementary findings to those of smith et al.  <cit>  by showing that the unique regulatory phase of hypomethylation occurring during the blastocyst stage also lasts through differentiation . our data suggest that this hypomethylation status corresponds to a demethylation process with methylated cytosines at specific repeats  being converted to 5hmc during the blastocyst-elongation stage transition and likely to be targeted for complete demethylation.

the quality of our data is compatible with the design of an oligoset targeting these putative dna methylation sensitive loci which is the basis for the ongoing development of a dedicated microarray-based platform for the purpose of systematic querying of the status of 5mc/5hmc marks during early development when submitted to environmental stresses.

