BACKGROUND
the dna in cells of living organisms continually suffers endogenous and exogenous damage. for example, cytosine will sometimes spontaneously change into uracil because of the loss of an amino group, and uv-a rays found in sunlight at the surface of the earth cause dna single-strand breaks, just two of the many documented sources of dna damage  <cit> . endogenous damage is more frequent and largely unavoidable  <cit> . in response to the many types of damage that dna suffers, there are equally a myriad of methods to reverse the changes incurred. dna repair is believed to exist in any organism with metabolic activity, and recent evidence suggests that even ancient bacteria from as many as tens of thousands of years ago was capable of dna repair  <cit> . of the many forms of dna repair, nucleotide excision repair, or ner, is a critical repair system because of its ability to repair bulky lesions that consist of more than one nucleotide  <cit>  and its complexity in utilizing at least  <dig> different polypeptides  <cit> . another key mechanism is the mismatch repair system, which improves the error rate when copying dna from one mistake per  <dig> nucleotides to one mistake per  <dig> nucleotides  <cit> . however, there are some subtopics of dna repair, such as translesion dna synthesis , which are still at a primitive level of understanding  <cit> .

much of the knowledge on dna repair that has been accumulated is the result of biological experiments and clinical trials, and there exist only a few bioinformatics-based approaches to extract additional knowledge on dna repair. one such approach is the repair-funmap, a functional database of proteins of the human dna repair systems  <cit> , which leverages a portion of its knowledge on the list created by wood and his colleagues for annotation of human dna repair genes  <cit> . the list created by wood et al. provides accession numbers so that genes can be referenced electronically. only recently have a few other repair-related analyses appeared utilizing bioinformatics, such as to identify sites of phosphorlyation  <cit>  or study a particular gene  <cit> .

the two aforementioned databases are limited to knowledge based on human repair pathways, and are largely the result of manual observation. however, with an increasing number of genomes being sequenced, manual observation for dna repair patterns across all species is costly. for example, the japanese medaka fish has  <dig> functionally "known" proteins but  <dig>  proteins in its genome are still classified as "novel" in the march  <dig> version of the ensembl genome database  <cit> , where novel in this context means that they cannot be mapped to any species-specific entry in several well known protein annotation databases. ensembl's  <dig> estimate of a combined  <dig>  genes in the medaka genome, including genes with multiple protein transcripts, is in close agreement with other medaka documentation  <cit> . it would be useful to have a computational tool available to automatically identify potential dna repair proteins in new genomes, to support or suggest further review of existing annotations, and to additionally characterize the function of new repair proteins. we have created a unique web-based tool to do such tasks .

automated sequence analysis for determining the roles of proteins is not a new concept. there have been a variety of methods proposed, from simple to complex, for determining proteins of differing types. a simple method that uses only amino acid or dipeptide frequency was used to detect and classify histones  <cit> . specific sequence patterns or profiles resulted in a subcellular localization predictor that outperformed a homology-based method  <cit> . amino acid composition combined with periodicity is a technique competitive with other methods for predicting dna- and rna-binding proteins  <cit> .

we hypothesize that using machine learning can yield predictions of unannotated proteins that are involved in dna repair with high likelihood, and with improved reliability compared with existing and often-used homology searches. we further clarify that the objective of this paper is not to study any specific repair gene in a particular organism, but rather to establish that several general repair patterns exist in all organisms, to provide new computational tools for dna repair research, to use those tools to identify more proteins involved in repair, and to convey the computational complexity of repair protein prediction analogous to its real world complexity.

we use a series of conceptually simple data transformation techniques incorporating combinations of primary sequence, predicted secondary structure, and homology search information to create feature vectors for input to a support vector machine . we include homology information in our feature vectors since it is already established that homology search is useful for identification and classification of proteins . the transformation-based svm experimental results are compared with independent blast  <cit>  trials.

using the protein data bank  <cit>   and uniprot  <cit> , two identification experiments are performed to distinguish between proteins that contain the gene ontology  <cit>   categorizations "dna repair" and "nucleus" . since using blastclust would introduce a bias, we use the program cd-hit  <cit>  for generating data subsets of increasing dissimilarity. experiments are performed using originally obtained datasets as well as datasets clustered at 90%  and 50% sequence similarity, the latter similarity threshold used due to software limitations. the area under the roc curve  and the rate of true positives  allowing no false positives, two statistics often used in data-based inference , as well as true positive rates allowing maximums of 1% and 5% false positives are used as the statistical metrics to gauge our experimental results. we choose 1% and 5% false positive rates because statistical tests typically use type-i  error cutoff rates of 1% or 5% .

in the same fashion, we use the data transformations in dna repair protein classification experiments. for these experiments, we use the  <dig> go-based dna repair pathway classifications and extract proteins from uniprot which have such classifications. here, classification is the ability to distinguish between proteins belonging to a specific repair pathway and proteins not belonging to that repair pathway. finally, based on the results of the repair protein identification experiments, we use both the disciminators resulting from machine learning and the generative model from homology to scan for the presence of dna repair proteins in  <dig> vertebrate genomes available from ensembl.

RESULTS
repair protein identification
we emphasize our prediction performance metrics by showing roc curves in figures  <dig> and  <dig> only up to a maximum of 10% type-i error, adding faint vertical bars at the 1% and 5% type-i error levels for easy visualization. the faint diagonals in the figures are the customary random guess performance lines. in the figures, each method name indicates the types of information used in the classifier, the training/testing dataset creation method, and, except for blast, spectrum kernel and svm parameters used . all methods are listed in table  <dig> for quick reference.

a summary of the six data processing methods used to identify and classify dna repair proteins.

for experiments to identify repair proteins, figure  <dig> and table  <dig> respectively show the results of 5-fold cross-validation experiments using datasets extracted from pdb and clustered at 50% , 90% and 0%  similarity. examining figure  <dig>  the results indicate that blast cannot detect dna repair proteins without first making several mistakes, though the blast method exhibits a higher true positive rate at the 1% error rate for clustered data. contrastingly, the svm methods could all detect some portion of the dna repair dataset without allowing false positives. despite pre-experiment anticipation that inserting  prior knowledge into the feature vector would be successful , method pf typically is the least successful. the addition of secondary structure  considerably improves prediction results over using primary sequence information alone , as does the proposed feature vector transformation using primary sequence data and homology information . despite the reduction of training data by 60%, both of the one-versus-one-versus-rest methodologies described in the feature vector methods section provide higher performance than the one-versus-rest primary spectrum transformation. in particular, the svm combining primary structure, secondary structure, and homology information  provides the highest number of true positives when allowing no false positives to occur in clustered data. as can be seen in table  <dig>  when utilizing all of the original data in the pdb dataset, which would include multiple chains that may have identical or similar sequences, primary sequence data alone may be adequate to make an accurate dna repair decision, as method p can successfully detect 57%  of the dna repair dataset proteins before making a false decision. furthermore, allowing 1% type-i error, the primary structure method can find 76%  of the dna repair proteins. generally speaking, we found that the svm methods typically could complete detection of all proteins in the dna repair protein dataset with a lower false positive rate than that of blast . unfortunately, such false positive rates at 100% tpr using clustered data are unacceptable for any sort of inference application .


50%
the results  of dna repair protein identification experiments using proteins drawn from the protein data bank containing the dna repair gene ontology. "pos/neg" shows the respective numbers of repair proteins and nuclear non-repair proteins. column meanings are similar to figure  <dig>  for each sequence similarity dataset, the top performing method for each metric is underlined .

it is important to establish whether the different methodologies have a statistically significant difference  in terms of their performance, because results may contain variance based on the selection of the test and training datasets  <cit> . since we cannot assume that the auc scores or other metrics used in this paper are normally distributed  <cit>  , we resort to the non-parametric kruskal-wallis test  <cit>  to identify whether there is a statistically significant difference amongst the methods. as can be clearly understood from table  <dig> and additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  we eliminate the results of method pf when calculating the likelihood of classifier equality. for the unfiltered go-pdb dataset, we used the  <dig> sets of auc values from each fold of cross-validation and found a significant difference amongst the methods . the result means it is statistically very unlikely that all classifiers used in this paper are equivalent on average, and therefore, we perform additional pairwise comparison of methodologies in table  <dig>  for pairwise comparison, we use both the parametric t-test which assumes data is normally distributed and the non-parametric wilcoxon signed-rank test , and find that the conclusions are similar. combining the information from tables  <dig> and  <dig>  we can say that there is a statisically significant improvement when using methods p and ps to analyze go-based dna repair proteins in the unfiltered go-pdb database. results of kruskal-wallis tests for the remaining go-pdb and go-uniprot datasets are given in additional file  <dig>  including methodology pairwise comparisons.

using both the  t-test  and the  wilcoxon signed-rank test  on the original go-pdb dataset, the probability that each pair of classifiers produces the same auc score on average is listed. the results indicate that the various svm formulations are not significantly different statistically, though there is a statistical contrast to blast , and svm formulations including blast result in lower probabilities of producing results identical to non-homology feature vector formulations. bold values indicate the statistical difference is significant at the  <dig>  confidence level and we can reject the null hypothesis that the classifiers are equivalent on average.


50%
the results  of dna repair protein identification experiments using proteins drawn from uniprot containing the dna repair gene ontology.

repair protein classification
we performed classification experiments in the same manner as identification experiments by extracting proteins from the uniprot database which contain each of the gene ontology dna repair subtypes . tables  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> show the results of classification experiments for identification of proteins involved in double strand break repair , nucleotide excision repair , and regulation of the dna repair process . results of additional repair pathways are given in additional file  <dig>  each table shows the results of the top performing feature vector methodology  and blast, at the same sequence similarities as in identification experiments. the results further underscore the difficulty of the repair identification and classification problem, as no method is superior in all evaluation metrics.

experiments using double strand break repair  as the type of protein to identify. "pos/neg" shows the number of dsb repair-related and non-related proteins for a particular sequence similarity.

experiments using nucleotide excision repair  as the type of protein to identify. "pos/neg" shows the number of ner-related and non-related proteins for a particular sequence similarity.

experiments using "regulation of dna repair"  as the type of protein to identify. "pos/neg" shows the number of regulation-related and non-related proteins for a particular sequence similarity.

for dsb repair, inclusion of secondary structure produces the best classifier when not accepting false positives, regardless of sequence similarity. the power of homology search is evident when we allow a few false positives to occur, as blast produces the best true positive rates at 1% or 5% type-i error levels. method ps also produces good true positive rates when allowing a small number errors to occur. for ner, the repair pathway discussed in the introduction, blast is clearly the classification method of choice, producing top results in terms of all four metrics for most of the sequence similarity datasets we created. the only drawback to blast is that it suffers from a problem similar to the identification problem, where it often cannot detect ner proteins without first admitting a few false positives. svm methods p and ps fill that niche by detecting large portions of the ner dataset without making a wrong decision. for experiments classifying proteins related to regulation of the repair process, a combination of primary sequence, secondary structure, and homology produces the top auc scores as well as almost 100% true positive rates at 5% type-i error acceptance. experiments using only primary and secondary structure produce top tpr rates when allowing no false positives.

the classification results show how each method has its strengths and weaknesses. nucleotide excision repair, a critical repair system, is best detected through blast, whereas proteins related to regulation of the repair process are best found via svms including either secondary structure information, homology, or both. it is difficult to decide a superior technique for double strand break repair, because the superior method depends on the metric used. for future large-scale applications to scan and classify genomes, an expert in each repair pathway would be able to suggest the best criteria for optimal prediction.

genome scanning
as the first of three main objectives, we investigated a relationship between the size of a genome as reported by ensembl , and the number of dna repair proteins we detect in its resulting protein transcript. we chose the go-based pdb repair and non-repair datasets to use as our training data, because pdb data has been experimentally observed, and because the highest percentage of repair protein identification allowing no false positives to occur was obtained using the pdb dataset.

first, we scan a single genome divided into its known and novel protein transcripts using method p, method psh, and blast, and evaluate the number of potential repair proteins as a function of detection threshold . thresholds for analysis of results are chosen based on the go-pdb identification experiments: for method p, we select the thresholds  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively corresponding to  <dig> fp/ <dig> % tp and  <dig> % fp/ <dig> % tp; for blast we use the threshold 10- <dig> which resulted in  <dig> % fp/ <dig> % tp in identification experiments, and is often used as a threshold in other homology-based research . figure  <dig> shows a graphical result from scanning the cattle genome bos taurus, where only the novel and combined protein dataset scan results are shown. to overlay with svm results, e-value thresholds used with blast are adjusted to fit in the graph using the conversion

 f=l+log⁡∗msvm−msvmlog⁡−log⁡, 

where θb is the blast threshold used for evaluation, l is the coordinate of the left end of the graph, msvm is the maximum svm threshold used, msvm is the minimum svm threshold used, mblast is the maximum blast threshold used , and mblast is the minimum blast threshold used . as can be seen from the graph, the number of predicted repair proteins decreases exponentially as a function of the threshold, for both blast and method p. the inclusion of secondary structure information appears to induce a number of false positives, which is an unexpected result given the merits of secondary structure observed in identification and classification experiments. the result of the scan suggests that there are still a number of repair proteins to be experimentally observed and annotated into databases, because a number of proteins are detected in novel portions of the cattle genome at thresholds above  the thresholds stated at the beginning of this section which produce, if any, minimal false positives.

we apply the same process to the scanning of an additional  <dig> genomes in ensembl, and find that there is a similar pattern overall in most genomes, as seen in figure  <dig>  in the case of known human repair proteins, the method p threshold of  <dig>  corresponds to detection of  <dig> dna repair proteins, while the threshold of  <dig>  produces  <dig> detections. a blast threshold of 10- <dig> results in  <dig> detections. the result is consistent with identification experiments where the higher svm threshold produced a lower number of true positives with no false positives, and the minimally positive threshold produced relatively few false positives but with more true positives . more importantly, the blast and averaged svm results concur with experimental observation in which at least  <dig> dna repair proteins are known to exist in humans  <cit> . additional scanning of the novel human dataset yielded  <dig> potential proteins via svm and  <dig> potential proteins via blast , which is in agreement with the unknown status of existence in several human repair pathways  <cit> . this experiment interestingly resulted in clustering of humans, chimpanzees, and monkeys. at the threshold of  <dig> , the results also cluster together the four-legged species cattle, dog, frog, and rat.

to answer the question as to whether or not there exists a correlation between the size of a genome and the  number of repair proteins, in figure  <dig>  we plot the size of each of the  <dig> genomes against the resulting number of repair proteins, using methods p, ph, and blast. from our predictor, we additionally extracted the number of unique genes , to analyze the results in terms of both protein transcripts and originating genes. data is smoothened using bezier curves to convey general trends about the data. in figure  <dig> and its sub-plot, we tested thresholds corresponding to the basic decision nature of the technique , as well as thresholds  which produced few  or no  false positives in identification experiments.

from the figure, we can see a very small increase in the number of protein transcripts as the length of the genome grows, indicated by additional dotted linear approximations to the data. this trend is consistent through all three methods, though method p produces a result with a larger slope as a result of its inability to find proteins in several smaller genomes such as s. cerevisiae and drosophila melanogaster. the smaller figure located within figure  <dig> shows a plot of the genome size versus the number of unique genes, and results here suggest that the number of fundamental genes involved in dna repair is fairly consistent through many species, with a very minimal positive slope and some small degree of fluctuation among species of similar genome size. though we are not directly implying a linear relationship between the size of a genome and its number of repair genes/transcripts, the linear approximations all being positively sloped on the order of 10- <dig> suggest a non-negative and non-constant relationship, along with non-zero intercept values suggesting that there are some basic repair genes present in all organisms, a suggestion that is consistent with  <cit> . counting the known and unknown status of over  <dig> repair genes listed in  <cit>  which includes humans and four other species, and assuming that some portion yet not all unconfirmed gene statuses in  <cit>  will turn out to have repair genes, then these findings of a slow increase in repair genes/transcripts in relation to a genome size are consistent. for repair protein transcripts, we can think of our two thresholds as upper bounds  and lower bounds , and we estimate that the true nature of the number of protein transcripts is a slowly-increasing relationship lying somewhere in between the two bounds. datapoints in the outer plot of figure  <dig> again confirm the consistency of the result with evolution, as humans, chimpanzees, and monkeys result in points on the right side of the graph in the cluster above the curves, and animals such as hedgehogs, shrews, and armadillos are clustered together in the middle slightly below the curves.

we scanned previous versions of ensembl  to validate the consistency of our result, and found relatively little change in the number of predicted repair proteins. table  <dig> shows the correlation between the size of a genome and number of repair protein transcripts we predict it to contain. as shown in the table, the correlation is fairly strong, especially in the latest revision of the ensembl database used.

the correlation is based on scanning of  <dig> vetebrate genomes in ensembl using method p. scan results for a minimally positive threshold reflect the basic decision nature of the svm algorithm. a threshold of  <dig>  reflects the threshold needed to obtain a maximum true positive rate while allowing no false positives, and hence serves as a lower bound and reliable indicator of the positive correlation between genome size and number of repair proteins. ensembl versions  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> were released in february, april, and december  <dig>  respectively.

after combining predicted novel and known proteins in each genome, we investigated the extent to which multiple methods overlapped in their detections. using data from homo sapiens, mus musculus, bos taurus, gallus gallus, and drosophila melanogaster, sizes of overlapping protein identifier sets are given in table  <dig>  it is clear from the results that the inclusion of homology influences the method ph predictor, as the numbers of detected proteins are similar to blast, and overlaps are large. these results also indicate that despite the different approaches of method p and blast, several proteins exhibit multiple features that clearly distinguish them as dna repair-related. for example, the transcripts ensbtat <dig> and ensbtat <dig> in bos taurus, corresponding to dna polymerase beta and a dna lyase , produce high scores in both methods.

the table shows the overlap amongst the sets of protein transcript ids for proteins predicted to be involved in dna repair for five species. in the second through fourth columns, prot-x is the number of detected proteins per method x, and the fifth through seventh columns show the overlap between each pair of methods.

another interesting trend we found is shown in table  <dig>  the table shows the scanning methodology, scan threshold, total number of detected repair protein transcripts in both novel and known portions of all genomes, total number of unique genes, and the ratio of unique genes to transcripts. as mentioned in the methods section, it is known that a small number of genes are involved in multiple repair activities. the list created by wood et al.  <cit>  lists 86% of the genes to have a single repair function. our results, averaged over all  <dig> species and including method ps, estimate that 83%  of genes have a single repair function, which is in close agreement with wood et al.'s human documentation. the values of 86% and  <dig> ± 3% are also close to the ratio in the medaka fish mentioned in the introduction, as the medaka ratio of genes to transcripts is 80%.

the total number of detected protein transcripts and total number of resulting unique genes is given for each method using two thresholds derived from go-pdb identification experiments. the average of  <dig> % is in close agreement with findings in  <cit> .

we additionally analyzed the collection of datasets produced by method p to confirm to what extent they are similar in terms of their sequences. from the  <dig> transcripts produced , clustering down to 50% similarity using cd-hit resulted in  <dig> proteins. this diversity again confirms the challenge in building a single superior repair protein predictor. we then further took the , , and  clusters that we discussed above, and searched for the presence of identical proteins, where identical was thresholded as each of 100%, 99%, or 98% sequence similarity. the results in table  <dig> show that a number of repair proteins in the primate cluster and four-legged species cluster are completely identical, and that more than  <dig> repair proteins per cluster are over 98% similar. for the third cluster which includes a number of animals that live in desert-like environments, there are no overlaps in the known portions of detected repair proteins, though the total number of detected known proteins in this cluster is less than  <dig> for each of methods p, ph, and blast. in the case of novel proteins, a few overlaps are found for nearly-identical repair protein sequences. detailed overlap results for each of the species in the three clusters can be observed in additional file  <dig> 

using the clustering software cd-hit, the number of identical proteins  found in novel and known portions of multiple genomes is listed when thresholding "identical" as each of 100%, 99%, or 98% sequence similarity. the clusters are as follows:

cluster 1: human, chimpanzee, monkey

cluster 2: cattle, dog, frog, rat

cluster 3: hedgehog, armadillo, opossum, shrew

finding new candidates
we examined the outputs of our genome scans to identify what types of proteins were being detected, and as our second main objective, to use this information to ascertain how well they can identify novel repair candidates. a number of high scoring proteins from well-studied genomes are listed in table  <dig> and elaborated upon here. dna glycosylases, which are important in the ber pathway  <cit> , produced high scores and were found in multiple genome lists. the predictors also identified a number of dna polymerases  <cit> , as well as rad <dig> proteins which are critical to the homologous recombination pathway  <cit> . tdp <dig>  whose failure has been linked to neurodegenerative disease  <cit> , is a critical participant in repairing dna damage  <cit>  and is being investigated for its anticancer activity  <cit> .

examples of detections in homo sapiens and mus musculus for proteins known to be involved in dna repair and that are predicted via method p or blast. protein transcript identifiers are given in ensembl format.

these types of proteins all have high scores above the thresholds that produced no false positives in identification experiments, and next we focus on the high-scoring proteins existing in novel datasets. table  <dig> lists a handful of proteins that our predictor strongly suggests to be related to dna repair. we are hopeful that these results can be either confirmed or disconfirmed in future laboratory experiments. in additional file  <dig>  we include high-scoring candidates for all  <dig> genomes used in this report.

examples of method p high-scoring repair candidate proteins for several species are given. we list the organism, ensembl protein identifier, and chromosome location. a full list of candidates from all  <dig> genomes used in this report is available as additional file  <dig> 

web service
based on the high performance obtained using original datasets of known repair proteins, as our third and final objective, we have implemented a web service which uses the processing techniques in this report to predict whether or not a protein is dna repair related. the interactive dna repair prediction server, or intreped, is a free service for research use, and we hope that it can assist researchers around the world working on genomes which are either unannotated, newly sequenced, or under revision. though the human genome has largely been mapped out and those genes involved in dna repair in humans are mostly known  <cit> , there still exist many more genomes to be annotated, and this is where we believe intreped can be a valuable research tool.

the intreped web server is accessible from the "prediction servers" page at . the user simply inputs a series of fasta-format sequences. users have two options for processing: they can immediately obtain a result in their web browser using methods p, ph, and blast, or they can submit a request to a queue along with an e-mail address to return results, and analysis will additionally include use of secondary structure  which was shown to be effective in identification experiments. in table  <dig> we list the expected prediction accuracy of each methodology and how to intepret the results. an example of an e-mail response from intreped is shown in figure  <dig> 

metrics for interpreting the results produced by the intreped web server. for each of the five methods intreped employs, thresholds necessary for basic decision making and maximum tpr- <dig> rates are given. each method and threshold pair provides the true positive and false positive rate based on identification experiments.

if the protein is predicted to be dna repair related, an additional prediction using specialized per-pathway models occurs for classification, and resulting scores rank the repair protein's most likely functions.

intreped uses a rapid spectrum kernel implementation  to ensure quick prediction response and support large queries. the binary frequency kernel  is not used in intreped, as its performance in its current design is not warranted.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
when scanning genomes, the number of proteins predicted to be dna repair-related as a function of the prediction threshold follows an exponential distribution . despite the lower performance of method pf, its intuition is validated by this result. if the amino acid distribution of dna repair proteins was random, the resulting feature space would be uniformly populated, and we would be able to see a linear gradation in the number of predicted proteins as a function of prediction threshold. since this is not the case, we are led to believe that dna repair proteins are richer in some amino acids and tripeptides, and that we can rapidly segregate those proteins that do not have a similar distribution of tripeptides. for example, in the go-based pdb dataset that we created , the tripeptides lek, gae, and ark appear  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> times, respectively. in the go-uniprot dataset , the tripeptides ala, eal, and lle occur respectively  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> times. both datasets indicate that alanine, leucine, and glutamic acid are abundant in repair proteins. however, subsequences of length  <dig> or greater occurred with low frequency relative to the sizes of the datasets .

the size of a genome has been shown to have a high correlation with the number of repair protein transcripts. high pearson correlations  suggest that this approximation is reasonably accurate, and high spearman coefficients suggest that even if the true nature of the number of repair proteins as a function of genome size is not linear, it is well correlated to a non-decreasing function of genome size. since it is known that growth temperature affects metabolic network structure  <cit> , and dna repair is thought to exist in any organism with metabolic activity  <cit> , comparison of this study to a similar work using archea or bacteria would further clarify the relationship between evolution, environment, genome size, and repair ability.

it remains an open question whether or not there is one ideal prediction method that can adapt to all forms of repair. to this end, we have shown statistically that not all methods are equivalent, which suggests that it may be possible to build a better sequence-based predictor specifically for dna repair protein detection and recognition. we have not discussed the possibility that our source datasets used in classifier comparison and genome scanning may contain improper gene ontology labelings. as dietterich has pointed out, if some small percentage η of our source data is in fact mislabeled, then our results herein can be have no less than an error rate of η  <cit> , and the ideal classifier will remain elusive. therefore, though our datasets have been selected reasonably, it also remains an important goal in research to establish a "golden standard" dataset for dna repair protein prediction.

the methods presented herein are successful at recognizing and classifying dna repair proteins, but many extensions and biologically significant improvements are still possible. first, when the number of sequences available is small as in the case of the pdb identification dataset filtered to 50% similarity, higher spectrum kernels may not be as successful because of a lack of data combined with rbf kernels. this is evident by the fact that we performed an experiment using unfiltered pdb data and method p set to 4-spectrum, and found no improvement in results . hence filtered data would have an even more sparse representation that is less efficient, and therefore, it is worth pursuing a mathematical formulation for the optimal values of the primary and secondary spectrum kernels, as well as the rbf kernel parameter γ, since these values work as an interconnected system affecting prediction performance. when the feature space is sparse, the rbf kernel may indeed be less effective than small degree polynomial kernels . considering these factors, development of a customized kernel method for further improved identification and classification of repair proteins is a topic that will be pursued.

second, guided by the intuition of method pf, principal component analysis as a method for extracting the most significant polypeptides is likely to improve results. similar to the preceeding discussion, when the feature space is sparse because of a lack of data or a lack of frequently occurring features, a reduction in dimensionality would project the sparse space into a more clustered space, which could then be used by the often-used rbf kernel more effectively.

third, the use of sequence motifs in feature vectors would utilize expert knowledge and create better classifiers . in preliminary work, we performed multiple sequence alignments of dna polymerases, but were unable to find applicable results. another previous multiple alignment for analysis in dna repair has been shown to produce little overlap  <cit> . as a result, sequence motif classifiers for specific repair pathways are likely to be more successful when based on protein domains rather than on global sequence alignments. yet, creation of a bit string vector representing the presence or non-existence of specific domains is likely to be difficult to apply to detection, again because of sparse representation. it was shown in the results section that no particular method was superior for all classification results. hence, to build improved applications for repair protein annotation, it may be useful to build per-pathway servers that include per-pathway domains, and then create a general integrated meta-server which can incorporate many of the more specific but more accurate pathway servers. this "subserver-omniserver" approach is in use for subcellular localization prediction  <cit> , and may be useful in future analyses of repair research that are still not understood, such as proteins related to transmission of damage detection signals or dna infidelity tolerance   <cit> .

finally, incorporating the proposed relationship between genome size and repair ability in such a way that it can improve the accuracy of the intreped web server is a future work.

