BACKGROUND
depression is a common mental disorder that affects approximately  <dig> million people worldwide, and is considered one of the leading causes of disability. this disorder is associated with increased physical illness, decreased social functioning, and a high mortality rate, resulting in huge social and economic strain  <cit> . interestingly, there is a relatively large group of individuals who show remission from depression without treatment  <cit> . the rate of this spontaneous remission was high among depressed individuals who were on a waitlist for participation in a clinical study, or who served as a control in a clinical study: 23 % of adults were in remission within 3 months without formal treatment, 32 % were in remission within 6 months, and 53 % were in remission within 1 year  <cit> . although the proportions remitted are known to decrease as depression severity increases  <cit> , spontaneous remission from untreated depression remains an overlooked area of research.

many studies have reported that numerous regions of the brain are affected by depression, and that the symptoms of depression are associated with the dysregulation of distributed neural networks, encompassing cortical regions, rather than the functional breakdown of a single discrete brain region  <cit> . electroencephalographic  signals have been used in the analysis of functional connectivity in humans and animals . the recovery from aberrant eeg functional connectivity in neural networks in the brain is used as a biomarker of treatment outcome in depression . however, there have been no eeg studies concerning functional connectivity at the network level in the brain during spontaneous remission from depression.

in this study, we investigated functional connectivity by applying persistent brain network homology, a multi-scale network-modeling framework, to eeg data from eight cortical regions  of a chronic restraint stress -induced mouse model of depression  <cit> . the physical stress caused by chronic restraint is known to induce depression-like behaviors and neurochemical changes in rodents, and it has been shown that chronic treatment with antidepressants, such as fluoxetine, can reverse the depression-like phenotype of the crs model .

RESULTS
we found that crs-induced behavioral deficits spontaneously recovered during the post-crs period, which is consistent with a previous report  <cit> . the forced swimming test  for despair-like behavior and the open-field test for locomotor activity and anxiety were conducted at 1 week  and 3 weeks  following cessation of 4-week crs . in the fst, immobility in the crs1 w group increased compared to the control group , whereas the immobile time in the crs3w group  was consistent with the control group. in the open-field test, mice in the crs1w group moved a lesser distance , and spent less time in the center of the open-field box  than mice in the control group. however, mice in the crs3 w group moved a similar distance  , and spent a similar amount of time in the center of the box   than mice in the control group.fig.  <dig> spontaneous recovery of depression-related behaviors. a time schedule of experiments, including behavioral testing and eeg recording. w week. b in fst, the crs1w group  showed an increase in total immobility compared to the control  group, but the crs3w group  showed similar immobility to the control group. c, d in the open-field test, a decrease in the total distance moved and the time spent in the center area was observed in the crs1w group, but the crs3w group exhibited a normal level of locomotor activity. *p <  <dig> , one-way anova



eeg signals were recorded from the eight cortical regions of mice in the crs1w and crs3w groups  to analyze regional and network brain activity. to quantify the temporal linear relationship, a cross correlation was performed between each pair of cortical regions in the crs1w and crs3w groups . the crs1w group showed increased correlation coefficient values at all frequency bands in many different regions compared to the control group . however, although some of the differences in the alpha- and beta-frequency bands existed between the control and crs3w groups, all of the differences in the delta- and gamma-frequency bands that were observed between the control and crs1w groups could no longer be detected in the crs3w group . these results indicate that a portion of the disrupted functional connectivity seen in the crs1 w group returned to normal, 3 weeks following cessation of 4-week-crs.fig.  <dig> cross-correlation analysis. a drawing of a top view of the mouse brain indicating the electrode positions and names of the regions/nodes, and representative original traces of eeg recordings. b, c cross-correlation matrices  and statistical analyses  for each pairwise correlation at five frequency-ranges, for all groups. the colors in  represent the strength of connectivity. empty cells in  indicate no significant difference between the control  and crs1w  or crs3w  groups, whereas cells with  <dig> indicate a significant difference among groups. note the disappearance of the differences in the delta- and gamma-frequency bands between the control and crs3w groups. p <  <dig> , kruskal–wallis test



next, we used a multiscale network approach, persistent brain network homology, to investigate brain connectivity at the network level. single-linkage matrices, showing the predicted distance among the eight brain regions, were able to generate efficient separation of the brain subnetworks within each group . the crs1w group had decreased functional distance among many regions at different frequency bands compared to the control group, indicating increased functional connectivity in the crs1w group . the decreased distances in the theta-, alpha-, and beta-frequency bands in the crs1w group did not recover in the crs3w group. although the decreased distances seen in the delta-frequency band in the crs1w group recovered in the crs3w group, newly formed increases in functional connectivity among many different regions were seen in the delta-frequency band in the crs3w group compared to the control group. interestingly, the crs3w group displayed a huge restoration of the decreased distances in the gamma-frequency band .fig.  <dig> network findings in the gamma band using persistent brain network homology. a single-linkage matrices for the control, crs1w, and crs3w groups. the increased functional connectivity in the crs1w group, particularly between the somatosensory and frontal cortices, compared to the control group  was not evident in the crs3w group. b overlaid barcodes for each group. the crs1 w group  exhibited a lower final filtration value than the control group , indicating increased global connectivity. however, the network evolution in the crs3w group is seen to traverse to that of the control group, and a similar final filtration value was observed in the two groups . c dendrograms with hierarchical clustering of subnetworks. the colors of the lines represent the distance of each connected component to one final component in which all regions are connected together. decreased functional distance between somatosensory and frontal cortices are evident in the crs1w group, but not in the crs3w group. d brain connectivity maps at filtration values ε =  <dig>  and  <dig> . the color in the color bar represents the strength of functional distance. the subnetworks between the somatosensory and frontal cortices at ε =  <dig>  in the crs1w group disappeared in the crs3w group. at ε =  <dig> , the crs1w group showed decreased functional distance  between the somatosensory and frontal cortices, compared to the control group, and this was recovered in the crs3w group



we further examined the brain networks in the gamma-frequency band by generating barcodes for the evolution of networks and dendrograms for single-linkage hierarchical clustering, respectively. in the overlaid barcode , the control  and crs3w  groups showed a similar final filtration value , but the crs1w group  exhibited a lower final filtration value, indicating increased global connectivity. by constructing a dendrogram  and connectivity map , we were able to provide a visual representation of brain subnetwork change and recovery. interestingly, the subnetworks consisting of somatosensory and frontal cortices were formed at the lower filtration values  in the crs1 w group , consistent with the brain connectivity map, which featured a filtration value of ε =  <dig>  . however, the control and crs3 w groups did not show any subnetwork couplings at the same filtration-value ranges . in addition, at the filtration value of ε =  <dig> , in which all groups showed all connections among the eight cortical regions, the crs1w group exhibited increased strength of functional connectivity in the somatosensory and frontal cortices. however, the crs3w group demonstrated a similar strength of connectivity among those cortices as the control group , indicating a recovery in the strength of functional connectivity. we further confirmed the recovery of functional connectivity in the crs3 w group by analyzing another eeg epoch for stability .

discussion
to date, various animal models, including chronic restraint stress, corticosterone treatment, inescapable foot-shock stress, chronic social defeat stress, and chronic unpredictable mild stress, have been established and used for understanding of the pathophysiology of depression  <cit> . although not without limitations, certain depression-associated phenotypes can be reproduced independently and evaluated in mouse models. the crs-induced depression mouse model used in this study is known to reproduce human behaviors, such as despair, anhedonia, or helplessness, which are regarded as face validity and which can be reversed by antidepressant treatment . however, depression is a heterogeneous disorder of which the diagnostic criteria are partially subjective. factors that affect symptom severity, along with personal treatment preferences and barriers to treatment, could also affect remission. in addition, remission rates may depend on depression severity: rates among people with severe symptoms of depression are 20–30 % lower than mild or moderate symptoms of depression  <cit> . thus, we cannot generalize our findings to specific clinical impacts in depression patients. to enable translation of the results, further research on the persistent brain network homology of spontaneous remission form clinical depression is essential.

CONCLUSIONS
we were able to conclude that gamma oscillations in bilinear temporal correlations and multiscale brain networks are engaged in the spontaneous behavioral remission of depression-related behavior. of particular interest are the gamma oscillations associated with the functional network connectivity among somatosensory and frontal cortices . neurons participating in gamma oscillations synchronize their discharges with very high precision  <cit> . it has been observed that changes in gamma oscillations can give temporal integration, binding of salient stimulus features across different sensory cortices, increased spatial discreteness, and somatotopical specificity  <cit> . thus, gamma oscillations facilitate neuronal communication, and play a crucial role in cortical integration and perception/cognition  <cit> . to date, there has been no human study concerning eeg functional connectivity in relation to spontaneous behavioral remission from depression without treatment. indeed, this is the first study in animals of the functional brain network related to spontaneous behavioral remission from depression. our study may provide valuable insight into the pathophysiological mechanisms of depression.

