BACKGROUND
the pii family comprises homotrimeric proteins that have important roles in the control of the central metabolism in bacteria and plants, acting as transducers of the cellular nitrogen and carbon levels  <cit> . in many proteobacteria studied there is a pair of pii proteins, usually called glnb and glnk, and their function is to sense the cellular levels of nitrogen, carbon and energy by binding the effectors 2-oxoglutarate, atp and adp  <cit> . these signals are then relayed to target proteins through conformational changes triggered by interaction with the effectors. the proteobacterial pii proteins also undergo a cycle of uridylylation/deuridylylation catalyzed by the bifunctional glnd protein  <cit>  in response to the intracellular levels of nitrogen. these conformational and covalent state changes stimulate or inhibit interactions of pii with different cellular protein targets involved in nitrogen and carbon metabolism  <cit> .

pii proteins are key players in the regulation of nitrogen fixation in proteobacteria. in klebsiella pneumoniae and azotobacter vinelandii, glnk is required to regulate the activity of nifl, which inhibits nifa, the nif gene specific activator, under nitrogen-excess conditions  <cit> . in azospirillum brasilense and rhodospirillum rubrum glnb is necessary for the activation of nifa under nitrogen-limiting conditions  <cit> , whereas in rhodobacter capsulatus both pii proteins are necessary for the nh4+-dependent regulation of nifa activity  <cit> . in addition, pii proteins are also involved in the post-translational control of nitrogenase activity in r. rubrum  <cit>  and in a. brasilense through interaction with drat, drag and amtb  <cit> .

herbaspirillum seropedicae is a nitrogen-fixing β-proteobacterium isolated from the rhizosphere and tissues of several plants, including economically important species  <cit> . in this organism two pii-like coding genes were identified, glnb and glnk  <cit> . the glnb gene is monocistronic and its expression is constitutive  <cit> , whereas glnk is apparently co-transcribed with amtb and orf <dig>  which encode for an ammonium transporter and a membrane associated protein of unknown function, respectively  <cit> . recently orf <dig> was named nlma  since its product was detected in membrane extracts of h. seropedicae grown under nitrogen-limitation conditions  <cit> . the expression of the nlmaglnkamtb operon is dramatically increased under nitrogen-limiting conditions and is dependent on ntrc  <cit> . as in other proteobacteria, both pii proteins from h. seropedicae are targets of covalent modification by glnd  in response to the levels of ammonium ions  <cit> .

RESULTS
to analyze the role of glnk and glnb in the control of nitrogen fixation in h. seropedicae, glnb  and glnk  insertional mutants and a glnk in-frame deletion mutant strain  were constructed and their phenotypes analyzed under different physiological conditions. these mutant strains were able to grow using nitrate as sole nitrogen source .

the effect of glnb and glnk disruption on the ntrc-dependent expression of the nlmaglnkamtb operon  <cit>  was determined using chromosomal amtb::lacz transcriptional fusions of strains lnamtblacz, lnglnbamtblacz and lnglnkamtblacz. these strains were grown under n-limiting  or n-excess  conditions and assayed for β-galactosidase. the lnamtblacz strain grown under n-limiting conditions showed β-galactosidase activity  <dig> times higher than in high ammonium , confirming that nlmaglnkamtb is highly expressed under n-limiting conditions  <cit> . strains lnglnkamtblacz and lnglnbamtblacz revealed a similar pattern of amtb expression, indicating that the mutation of either glnk or glnb does not affect nlmaglnkamtb expression. since nlmaglnkamtb transcription is ntrc-dependent, these results suggest that glnb and glnk can substitute for each other in control of the ntrc/ntrb system in h. seropedicae. in agreement with this suggestion, ntrc  <cit>  and glnd  mutants strains of h. seropedicae are unable to grow on nitrate, whereas the glnb and glnk mutant strains can use nitrate as sole nitrogen source.

indicated strains of h. seropedicae were grown in the presence of glutamate or nh4cl. β-galactosidase activity was determined as described. values are the mean of at least three independent experiments ± standard deviation.

in escherichia coli both glnb and glnk are involved in the regulation of ntrc phosphorylation by ntrb, although glnb is more effective  <cit> . although several attempts were made, we failed to construct a double glnbglnk mutant suggesting that an essential role is shared by these proteins in h. seropedicae.

the effect of glnk or glnb mutation on nitrogenase activity of h. seropedicae was determined in cultures grown in nh4+-free semi-solid nfbhp medium . nitrogenase activity was reduced by approximately 95% in both glnk strains  indicating that glnk is required for nitrogenase activity in h. seropedicae. on the other hand, the glnb strain  showed activity similar to that of the wild-type. these results contrast with those reported by benelli et al  <cit>  who constructed a h. seropedicae glnb::tn5-20b mutant  that was unable to fix nitrogen. immunoblot assays did not detect glnk in the b12- <dig> strain , suggesting that a secondary recombination event may have happened in this strain resulting in loss of glnk not observed by benelli et al  <cit> .

the nitrogenase phenotype of the glnk mutants was complemented by plnoga  and also partially restored  by a plasmid expressing glnb under control of its own promoter  suggesting that a higher copy number of glnb can substitute for glnk under n-limitation. the lower nitrogenase activity of the glnk strains could be due to lack of nif expression or inhibition of nitrogenase. we therefore analyzed the effect of the glnk mutation on the ntrc-dependent nifa promoter  <cit>  and on the nifa-dependent nifb promoter of h. seropedicae  <cit>  by using plasmids carrying nifa::lacz  or nifb::lacz  fusions . the β-galactosidase activity was the same in both wild-type  and glnk  strains containing nifa::lacz, supporting the view that glnk is not strictly necessary for ntrc regulation in h. seropedicae in the presence of a functional glnb gene. on the other hand, expression of the nifb::lacz fusion was reduced 10-fold in the glnk mutant compared to the wild-type, indicating that glnk is required for nifb expression in h. seropedicae, even in the presence of wild type glnb. these results indicate that the lower nitrogenase activity in the glnk mutants was the result of lack of nif expression, most likely due to impaired nifa activity.

h. seropedicae strains carrying the indicated plasmids were grown in nfbhp medium supplemented with  <dig> mmol/l of nh4cl under air at 30°c. the cells were then centrifuged, resuspended in nfbhp  medium and de-repressed for  <dig> hours under  <dig> % oxygen. β-galactosidase was determined as described. values are averages of at least three independent experiments ± standard deviation

previous results showed that the n-terminal domain of h. seropedicae nifa is required for controlling its activity in response to nh4+, and that an n-truncated form of nifa is transcriptionally active, but not responsive to nh4+ levels  <cit> . thus, the nitrogenase activity was determined in the glnk mutants carrying pramm <dig> or plnΔnifa which express a full nifa and an n-truncated form of nifa, respectively . the nitrogenase activity of the glnk mutants was restored only by the n-truncated-nifa protein, reinforcing the indication that the nitrogenase negative phenotype of glnk strain is due to the presence of an inactive nifa.

nitrogenase activity is reversibly inhibited by addition of ammonium or energy depletion in several diazotrophs, a phenomenon called nitrogenase switch-off. the best studied process is the reversible nifh adp-ribosylation carried out by the drat and drag enzymes whose activities are controlled by processes involving pii proteins at least in some diazotrophs  <cit> . a pii protein has also been implicated in the control of nitrogenase by direct interaction with nifh in the methanogenic archaeon methanococcus maripaludis  <cit> . in h. seropedicae reversible adp-ribosylation of nifh by the drat/drag does not occur since dratg genes are absent  <cit>  . although the mechanism of nh4+-dependent nitrogenase control in this organism is not known, it is thought to be due to change in prevailing physiological conditions leading to nitrogenase inhibition. since the glnk mutant is nif-, we used strain lnglnkdel carrying plasmid plnΔnifa for the switch-off experiments. addition of low concentrations of nh4cl  to derepressed cells caused an inactivation of nitrogenase . wild-type and glnb strains retained less than 20% of initial nitrogenase activity  <dig> minutes after ammonium addition, which was restored to 60-70% of initial activity  <dig> minutes after ammonium addition. this effect does not involve protein synthesis since the presence of chloramphenicol or tetracycline had no effect on this behavior  <cit> . although nitrogenase of strain lnglnkdel/plnΔnifa was partially inhibited by ammonium addition, the strain retained about 50% of its initial activity, indicating only a partial nitrogenase switch-off . after addition of  <dig> mmol/l of nh4cl  the activity of the wild-type and glnb strains dropped sharply to less than 30% and did not recover even  <dig> minutes after ammonium addition. in contrast, 40% of the initial nitrogenase activity was still present in the glnk strain  <dig> minutes after ammonium addition and the decrease in nitrogenase activity was slower:  <dig> minutes after ammonium addition the wild-type had only 25% activity, whereas the glnk strain had about 65% of the original nitrogenase activity. these results indicate that glnk is involved in the nitrogenase inactivation by nh4+ in h. seropedicae, and that glnb cannot fully replace glnk in triggering nitrogenase switch-off. it is interesting to note that there was also a delay in nitrogenase reactivation in the glnk mutant , which may suggest that glnk is involved in both nitrogenase inactivation by nh4+ and re-activation upon nh4+ depletion.

recently results using a proteomic approach  <cit>  showed that h. seropedicae glnk is associated with the membrane at higher concentration immediately after addition of ammonium. this membrane association was shown to be amtb-dependent, as shown in several bacteria  <cit> . previous results also showed that an amtb mutant has a partial nh4+ switch off very similar to that shown by the glnk mutant <cit> . these results allow us to propose a model for the regulation of nitrogen fixation in h. seropedicae. under n-limiting conditions, ntrc-dependent promoters are activated leading to expression of nifa and nlmaglnkamtb genes. the status of fixed nitrogen is signaled to ntrc via the uridylylation state of either glnb or glnk. under a low ammonium and oxygen condition, nifa activates the expression of nif genes in a process which requires glnk, most probably in an uridylylated form. thus, under n-limiting conditions the nitrogenase complex is active, amtb is associated with the membrane, nlma is most probably in the periplasm and glnk is mainly located in the cytoplasm. when ammonium is added, deuridylylated glnk rapidly associates with the cell membrane by interacting with amtb to form the glnk-amtb complex which, in turn, signals to nitrogenase to switch-off by a yet unknown process.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our results show that both glnb and glnk proteins can regulate ntrc-dependent promoters in h. seropedicae. under physiological conditions, glnk is required for nifa activity control. glnk also controls the nitrogenase switch-off in response to nh4+ by a mechanism which most probably involves the formation of a membrane-bound glnk-amtb complex.

