BACKGROUND
a group of short single-stranded rnas, namely micrornas , has been widely investigated in this decade. with an average length of  <dig> nucleotides only, mirnas are not protein coding transcripts. instead, they fulfill the role of regulators of gene expression by complementarily binding to 3' untranslated regions  of target mrna transcripts  <cit> . according to existing biological evidence, the binding of mirnas on mrna can cause mrna degradation or suppression of translation, and may affect expression of up to one third of the protein coding genes in humans  <cit> . in cancers, the dysregulation of mirnas has been proven to be involved in oncogenesis , tumor progression  <cit> , and clinical outcomes, such as patient survival  <cit> . with advances in next-generation sequencing, a great number of novel mirnas have been identified and deposited in the public database mirbase  <cit> , increasing the complexity of mirna regulation.

recently, reports postulated and experimentally validated that mirnas can serve as an alternative layer of post-transcriptional gene-gene regulation, namely the competing endogenous rnas   <cit> . pairs of genes  fully or partially sharing common binding mirnas can establish crosstalk with each other through competition for a limited pool of the common mirnas . when expression level of one cerna rises  in cells, it attracts  the targeting mirnas away from  the other cernas, and in turn has protective  effects on expression of the other cerna partners. in other words, this postulation provides the scenario that genes can, facilitated by mirnas, regulate each other without direct interaction. through bioinformatic analysis and in vitro experiments on the tumor suppressor gene pten, previous studies suggested that cernas of pten, e.g., vapa and zeb <dig>  can possess tumor-suppressive properties by modulating  pten expression levels in a mirna-dependent while protein-coding independent manner  <cit> . through in silico analysis of glioblastoma gene expression datasets, our recent study further demonstrated that cerna regulation, while only accounting for a small portion of global gene regulation, plays an essential role in transient cellular responses to dynamic inter-cellular signals  <cit> . taken together, these observations have revealed that cerna regulation provides an alternative mechanism of gene regulation in essential cellular processes and functions. to address the optimal cellular conditions for cerna regulation, several recent studies used the mathematical mass-action simulation  <cit>  and cell line experiments  <cit>  to demonstrate the dependency of cerna regulation on the dosages  of both cernas and mirps, and number of mirna response elements, suggesting the dynamic and condition-specific properties of cerna regulation in vitro.

realizing that biological processes typically involve more complex mechanisms in vivo than in vitro, in the first part of this study we investigate the optimal conditions of cerna regulation in expression datasets derived from clinical samples. the optimal conditions may depend on the following essential factors: 1) size of mirna programs, 2) number of mirna program binding sites, 3) expression level of mirna programs, and 4) expression level of cernas. here we developed an analytic scheme for determining whether these factors affect strength of cerna regulation. by integrating four factors' effects, the biological functions governed by optimal cerna regulation can be elucidated. on the other hand, while pan-cancer genomic analysis has been widely utilized to reveal tumor-specific and distinct molecular signature to better understand cancer heterogeneity  <cit> , pan-cancer analysis of cerna regulation, to our knowledge, has not been systematically explored. collectively, the present study provides a systematic investigation of optimal conditions for cerna regulation, explores associated biological functions, and conducts pan-cancer analysis of cernas in four cancer types.

RESULTS
model overview and data preparation
the proposed study aims to comprehensively explore optimal conditions for cerna regulation, to investigate functions governed by cerna regulation, and to evaluate pan-cancer effects. we started by investigating how essential factors, such as the size of mirna programs, the number of mirna program binding sites, and expression levels of mirna programs and cernas affect the cerna regulation in tumor samples from glioblastoma multiforme  patients. here we chose gbm as the model cancer type because it is one of the most frequently studied cancers in investigating cerna regulation  <cit> . the analysis flowchart is illustrated in figure  <dig>  we analyzed  <dig> tumor sets with tumor-matched mrna and mirna expression profiles from tcga  <cit> . based on the definition of previous studies, we defined putative cerna pairs as two genes sharing any number of common predicted targeting mirnas. recruiting the prediction data from the targetscan algorithm  <cit> , we identified  <dig> , <dig> putative cerna pairs with least one common targeting mirna, comprising  <dig>  cernas . for each of the putative cerna pairs, the pairwise correlation coefficient of gene expression profiles was computed . varying size of mirna program, for example, generated multiple cumulative distribution functions  of correlation coefficients. we then performed the goodness-of-fit tests  among the cdfs to pinpoint whether or not the optimal conditions for intensified cerna regulation depend on the essential factors . here the intensified cerna regulation refers to the overall increased degree of coexpression of cerna pairs. upon identification of optimal conditions with respect to the four essential factors, we defined the optimal cerna pairs from the putative cernas, which satisfy all the four optimal conditions. we then performed functional annotation analysis to investigate biological processes and functions governed by optimal cerna regulation . to further address the cancer type-specific and independent effects, we evaluated pairwise coexpression of the optimal cerna pairs identified from gbm in other tcga cancer datasets, including 585-sample ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma   <cit> , 133-patient lung squamous cell carcinoma   <cit> , and 197-sample acute myeloid leukemia   <cit> . the comprehensive results from the functional annotation level and from the enrichment of signaling pathways were reported in later sections below.

increased size of mirna program and number of mirna program binding sites intensify cerna regulation in gbm
the size of mirna programs  among the  <dig> , <dig> putative cerna pairs ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  with quartiles of  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> . in order to dissect the association of size of mirps with cerna regulation, we divided the putative cerna pairs into  <dig> groups based on size of mirps,   <dig> , <dig> putative pairs < 25th-percentile,   <dig> , <dig> pairs within 25th- 50th percentiles,   <dig> , <dig> pairs within 50th-75th percentiles, and   <dig> , <dig> pairs ≥ 75th-percentile, and compared the distributions of correlation coefficients across groups. coexpression of cerna pairs was significantly elevated with increasing size of mirps  while correlation coefficients of  <dig> , <dig> non-cerna pairs followed approximately the null random distribution .

as defined in the methods section, the number of mirna program binding sites  was determined by summing up the total number of interacting sites of mirps on the corresponding pairs of cernas. among all the putative cerna pairs the #mirpbs fell in the range of 2- <dig>  . we grouped the putative cerna pairs based on the #mirpbs with identical criteria as used in analyzing size of mirna programs, resulting in  <dig> groups of  <dig> , <dig>   <dig> , <dig>   <dig> , <dig>  and  <dig> , <dig> putative cerna pairs. with the k-s tests, significant p-values between any two groups  indicate that the number of mirp binding sites is positively associated with cerna coexpression . taken together, our data demonstrate that increased numbers of common targeting mirnas as well as the abundance of binding sites intensify the strength of cerna regulation.

strength of cerna regulation is dependent on expression levels of mirna programs and cernas in gbm
we reasoned that cerna regulation might depend on expression levels of mirnas in mirps. to test this hypothesis, we split the putative cernas into  <dig> groups by the quartiles of expression levels of mirps , resulting in  <dig> , <dig> cerna pairs in each group. here the expression levels of mirps were calculated by simply averaging the expression levels of mirnas in mirps for each cerna pair. all of the four groups  showed significantly different distributions of correlation coefficients from non-cerna pairs and the q <dig> group showed the most right-shifted distribution function . among the four groups, remarkably, the putative cerna pairs with median mirp expression levels  exhibited higher correlation than ones belonging to q <dig> and q <dig> . this result was in agreement with the common assumption that both excessive abundance  and sparse availability  of mirna transcripts will reduce regulation.

we further investigated whether cerna expression levels play a crucial role in governing cerna regulation.  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  genes with mean expression levels across the samples falling in the range of 5- <dig>  35- <dig>  and 65- <dig> percentiles of all  <dig>  genes analyzed, respectively, were annotated as low , medium , and high  expression states. we note that in the analysis we eliminated the genes within the bottom or top 5% expression levels, which may be largely attributed to background or saturation noise. putative cerna pairs were then categorized based on expression states of their composed cernas . interestingly, the results revealed high involvement of expression levels of cernas in determining cerna regulation .  <dig> , <dig>  putative cerna pairs composed of two highly expressed genes showed significant coexpression  compared to other cerna pairs and non-cerna pairs . overall, the results suggest that cerna regulation is dependent on expression levels of both mirps and cernas. remarkably, our observation from analysis of clinical microarray data agrees with ala et al.'s data using a mathematical mass-action model in that optimal cellular conditions for cerna regulation depend on expression levels of mirna programs as well as cernas  <cit> .

the percentages were calculated with respect to the number of all putative cerna pairs .

intertwined signaling among optimal cernas is associated with essential cellular functions and disease pathways
observing that regulation strength is intensified in cerna pairs with a large size of mirp , large number of mirp binding sites , appropriate mirp expression levels , and high expression levels of both partner cernas , we then defined  <dig>  pairs of cernas satisfying all of the four optimal conditions as optimal cerna pairs. the optimal cerna pairs accounted for only  <dig> % of all putative cerna pairs, containing  <dig>  optimal cernas  of all  <dig>  cerna genes. additional file 4: table s <dig> includes list of the optimal cerna pairs and summary of optimal cernas. pairwise coexpression of the optimal cerna pairs led other cerna pairs and non-cernas by large margins . in order to dissect higher-order properties of inter-cerna signaling, we merged the identified optimal cerna pairs and constructed the optimal cerna regulatory network . on average each cerna directly interacted with up to ~ <dig> optimal cerna partners, suggestive of the complex signaling maintained by cerna regulation. connected to  <dig>  first-order neighbors cds <dig>  2) was found as the top hub cerna in the network, with the greatest number of first-order neighbors. many of the top  <dig> hub genes were previously reported to be associated with cancer , neurological diseases , hereditary disorders , or the function of cell death and survival  , table 2). notably, the well-studied prognosis biomarker in cancers, smad family member  <dig> , regulated up to  <dig>  optimal cernas and was ranked 12th in the hub cerna list. functional annotation analysis indicated that the  <dig>  optimal cernas played crucial roles in the biological functions of intracellular transport  and protein localization . figure 4c-d depicts complex intra-function cerna regulation within the two functions. for a more comprehensive overview of functional annotation, we utilized the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery   <cit>  to analyze the enriched clusters of gene ontology  biological process and molecular function terms. the top five clusters of functions were protein transport, protein catabolic process, vehicle-mediated transport, protein modification/ubiquitination, and regulation of translation . taken together, our data indicate that optimal cerna regulation is highly involved in diseases and maintenance of essential cellular functions.

a annotations were obtained from ingenuity pathway analysis .

a number of optimal cerna pairs/cernas with significant positive correlation coefficients in corresponding cancer dataset, b coefficients of variation of number of core cerna pairs/cernas among four cancer datasets.

pan-cancer analysis revealed dynamic cerna regulation among constitutive cernas
for further conferring similarity/dissimilarity of cerna regulation and functions among different cancer types, we analyzed pairwise correlation coefficients of the  <dig>  optimal cerna pairs in tcga datasets of gbm, ov, lusc, and laml. among the optimal cerna pairs,  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ,  <dig>  , and  <dig>   pairs  exhibited significantly positive correlation coefficients  in gbm, ov, lusc, and laml, respectively. notably, although numbers of significant regulating pairs changed immensely, the involved cernas were largely similar among cancer types:  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ,  <dig>  , and  <dig>   cernas  in four cancer types, with  <dig>  in common . for the most highly connected core cernas in each cancer, laml showed relatively distinctive results from the solid tumors, with  <dig> out of the  <dig>  laml hub core cernas appearing exclusively in laml . detailed lists of core cerna pairs are tabulated in additional file 5: table s <dig>  also, the four sets of core cernas shared highly identical enriched biological functions with the optimal cernas . among the five clusters of go terms associated with the optimal cernas, the number of intra-function core cerna pairs varied massively  while the number of comprising cernas remained relatively stable . the top  and the 4th  clusters were found with the largest changes in number of core cerna pairs and cernas, respectively . furthermore, our analyses revealed that, although massive re-wiring underlies cerna regulation among cancer types, the overall topology  of the core cerna networks was relatively stable, maintained mainly by a tiny subset of cerna regulating pairs with an extremely high degree of coexpression . incorporating these observations, we concluded that while the strength of cerna regulation is dynamic across cancer types, the essential biological functions governed by cerna regulation are stably retained.

discussion
besides the well-studied role of mirnas in directly regulating gene expression, emerging evidence postulates that cerna regulation is an alternative mechanism through which mirnas participate in gene regulation. regulation of cernas has been proved to govern essential biological functions in human development and diseases including cancer . while recent studies have proved the dynamicity of cerna regulation among cellular conditions based on in silico and in vitro experiments  <cit> , comprehensive investigation into the strength of in vivo cerna regulation remains largely unexplored. addressing this, in the present study we started by characterizing crucial factors in determination of optimal conditions using gene expression profiles derived from tumor specimens from tcga. our analyses indicated the dose effect of mirna programs; i.e., increased size of mirna programs as well as increased number of mirna program binding sites enhance the competing relationship among genes and thus elevate inter-cerna coexpression. furthermore, the expressional levels of both mirna programs and cernas affect cerna regulation and lead to statistically significant differences in distributions of correlation coefficients, suggestive of the existence of optimal molecular conditions in which cerna regulation prevails. intermediate expression levels of mirna programs allow efficient and effective competition, thus further optimize the power of cerna regulation; while varied expression levels of cernas exhibited divergent effects on cerna regulation. taken together, our analyses clearly demonstrated that cerna regulation highly depends on states of the essential factors and thus may involve complex and dynamic processes in vivo. incorporating the optimal conditions of cerna regulation, we identified the optimal cerna pairs and revealed the biological functions significantly associated with protein transport, protein catabolic processes, and regulation of translation. these functions are all of essential significance in regular cellular routines, indicative of the indispensable involvement of cerna regulation in vivo. recently, denzler et al. assessed the cerna effect in hepatocytes and liver using quantitative biological experiments  <cit> . our findings agree with their paper where it was concluded that cerna regulation is more likely to occur when both cernas are highly expressed or mirna binding sites are sufficient. interestingly, analyzing the unusually highly expressed mirna mir- <dig>  they showed that coexpression of mir- <dig> target genes was achieved specifically at extremely high target site abundance. our data further showed the dependence of cerna regulation on the essential factors and cancer types. taken together, we elucidated that cerna regulation is a complex and sophisticated mechanism in vivo, thus difficult to be observed under some cellular conditions. future biological studies may investigate it in detail and carry out essential clues to complex cerna regulation.

with the growing volume of dna microarray and next-generation sequencing samples, pan-cancer analysis has unveiled both common and unique characteristics of genomic aberrations  <cit> , expression profiles  <cit> , oncogenic micrornas  <cit> , and secretome  <cit>  across cancer types. this emerging research domain illuminates the tumor type-specific and independent molecular properties, and further contributes to enhanced understanding of tumorigenesis and progression. in this pioneer report, for better characterizing cerna in cancers, we extended the optimal cerna pairs identified from gbm to large datasets deposited in tcga, including ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma, lung squamous cell carcinoma, and acute myeloid leukemia datasets. our results demonstrated that cerna regulatory networks are massively rewired across cancer types. acute myeloid leukemia exhibited the most distinctive cerna pattern from other solid tumors. remarkably, although the strength and wiring of cerna regulation changed immensely, the recruitment of genes into the cerna regulatory network is highly stable among cancer types; i.e., the highly intertwined cerna regulatory relationship enables genes to be effectively regulated by some of their cerna partners regardless of perturbations to cellular conditions. this property of cerna regulation stabilizes intra-function regulation and thus facilitates maintenance of essential biological functions in cells. with the increasing number of molecular profiles of cancers, future analysis may extend the analysis to more cancer types and provide universal landscape of cerna regulation.

in the present study, for each of four factors we attempted with the quartiles and specific percentiles to partition the putative cernas into groups and compare inter-group distribution of correlation coefficients. for inferring more subtle changes in distribution of correlation coefficients, future work may use other methods that are capable of revealing local fluctuations of distribution functions. for defining putative cerna pairs, we employed prediction data from the mirna-target gene prediction algorithm of targetscan. targetscan is a widely used prediction algorithm that takes into consideration both sequence complementarity  and conservativity of binding sites. there are still a handful of prediction algorithms, such as pictar, based on genome-wide sequence alignment  <cit>  and mirbridge utilizing gene set enrichment analysis  <cit> . while different prediction methods, as well as species-specific targeting, define dissimilar mirna-target gene pairs, since our present report was aimed to investigate the systematic view of cerna regulation and its optimal conditions, out of simplicity we only employed the targetscan algorithm. indeed, cernas with larger number of targeting mirnas are expected to have more putative cerna partners, and thus account for a higher proportion of the  <dig> million putative cerna pairs. however, in the analysis of optimal conditions for each parameter, the calculation of correlation coefficients was based on "cerna pairs" instead of "cernas". furthermore, since targetscan is one of the algorithms with the highest prediction precision , in this study the putative cerna pairs were defined with high confidence, regardless of the numbers of their cerna partners. thus, we reason that differences in the number of cerna partners among genes would not cause major systematic biases to our analysis.

besides, here we adopted the biologically straightforward pearson correlation as a measure of gene-gene coexpression, other methods such as mutual information and polynomial regression may provide alternatives for modeling non-linear properties of mirp-modulated coexpression of cernas. in the report, out of simplicity we focused on "pairwise" relationship between cerna pairs. however, the competition for a set of mirnas may not be exclusively limited to pairs of cernas since a handful of cernas can compete, fully or partially, for common targeting mirnas. realizing that one mirna can target up to hundreds of mrnas in the genome-wide scale, taking all these factors into account will exponentially complicate the problem and thus require more complex mathematical models.

CONCLUSIONS
here we carried out a comprehensive investigation into optimal conditions for competing endogenous rna regulation, associated biological functions, and pan-cancer effects of cerna regulation. using tcga gbm microarray datasets, we demonstrated that regulation between cernas is dynamic, however the optimal conditions are quantifiable. the obtained optimal cerna regulatory network is associated with diseases pathways and essential cellular functions. pan-cancer analysis revealed that while strength of cerna regulation is dynamic across cancer types, the highly intertwined cerna signaling stably maintains the essential functions it governs. therefore, we expect the study presented here brings biological insights into the dynamicity and essential roles of cerna regulation.

