BACKGROUND
transcription in bacteria is initiated by the rna polymerase holoenzyme, which recognises specific sequence elements on the dna. this defines the transcription start site  and the direction of transcription. the exact sequence of the recognised elements is determined by which one of several exchangeable sigma-factors is part of the particular rna polymerase complex. for example, the most common “house-keeping” sigma-factor, named σ <dig> in escherichia coli and σa in staphylococcus aureus, recognises two elements centred approximately  <dig> and 35 bp upstream of the tss . some bacteria have many sigma factors, while only four are known in s. aureus: σa, σb, σh and σs, where the latter two are rarely  used under laboratory growth conditions  <cit> , whereas σb appears to be involved in stress response and virulence regulation  <cit> . the rna polymerase holoenzyme melts the double stranded dna from 11 nt upstream  to  <dig> bases downstream  of the tss , and the single-stranded dna can then be used as template for the addition of tri-phosphorylated ribonucleotides. this initiation starts mainly at a specific position, but sometimes “wobbles” one or two bases up- or downstream . the first ribonucleotide retains the tri-phosphorylation, whereas the energy from the αp-βp bond in subsequent ribonucleotides is used to elongate the rna chain.

the dna sequences around tsss have long been recognised as crucial for gene regulation in bacteria  <cit> . pinpointing the tss of an rna permits the identification of potential binding sites for transcriptional regulators, which often bind to inverted or direct dna repeats to block the rna polymerase, and moreover, the sigma-factor that specifies the promoter region can frequently be identified via the sequences of the factor-specific recognition motif. these regulatory signals are highly informative for understanding how the expression levels of an mrna are regulated, and what factors may lead to increasing or decreasing transcription.

many bacteria of our environment - or even the normal human microbial flora - can transition from natural co-habitants to invading pathogens when the opportunity presents itself. such a shift implies a change in expression profile, and a large number of studies over the years have focussed on understanding factors contributing to the transcriptional regulation needed to initiate a novel life-style. tsss of virulence factors have therefore been painstakingly mapped, one by one , in order to identify where transcriptional regulators might bind. additionally, since co-transcription often results in co-regulation, several efforts have attempted to chart operon-structures on a global scale . in the last two decades it has furthermore been recognised that 5' untranslated regions  frequently form secondary structures that can inhibit or promote translation of the downstream open reading frames . moreover, they can form simple hairpin structures that block 5' exoribonuclease digestion of the rna, or consist of elaborate riboswitches that sense the level of a metabolite and either terminate transcription or sequester the ribosome binding site   <cit> .

in order to locate the tss  of an rna, it was until recently necessary to examine each transcript individually, using either s <dig> protection, primer extension or a 5' race method . one of the latter techniques consists of converting the 5' tri-phosphate of the rna to a mono-phosphate, using tobacco acid pyrophosphatase, whereupon a synthetic rna oligo can be ligated to the newly generated mono-phosphorylated 5'-end. reverse transcription pcr can then be performed using a primer specific for the transcript of interest and a primer specific for the synthetic oligo. the resulting pcr product is then cloned and sequenced, and the exact 5'-end of the original rna molecule can be identified as the first nucleotide after the sequence of the synthetic rna oligo. with the advent of high-throughput sequencing, differential rna-seq  was developed to simultaneously map all tsss in the transcriptome. briefly, the total rna is split into two pools, one of which is treated with terminator exonuclease, which exclusively digests rna with a mono-phosphorylated 5'-end, and both pools are then treated with tobacco acid pyrophosphatase and are ligated to a synthetic rna oligo. libraries are prepared separately for both rna pools, and are sequenced with a high-throughput rna sequencing protocol   <cit> . the exonucleolytic treatment enriches one pool for tri-phosphorylated rna, i.e. primary transcripts, which are immune to terminator exonuclease, and the relative difference in sequencing coverage between the two pools permits specifically designed software to identify the nucleotide that constitutes the tri-phosphorylated 5’-end of the transcript.

here we present tss-emote , a variation of the drna-seq method, which equally identifies tsss on a global scale, but in a manner that is independent of the length and 3’-end phosphorylation status of the rna, and which incorporates a molecular identification sequence to remove amplification bias inherent in pcr-reactions. we use tss-emote to identify tsss of staphylococcus aureus, where the validity of the method is verified, and in three additional opportunistic bacterial pathogens: enterobacter aerogenes, acinetobacter baumannii and staphylococcus epidermidis.

RESULTS
mapping of tsss
to establish and validate our protocol for experimental determination of tsss, we started out using the community acquired staphylococcus aureus strain mw <dig>  <cit> , grown in rpmi medium  at 37 °c. rna was isolated from exponentially growing cultures  whereupon the transcription start specific - exact mapping of transcriptome ends  protocol  was used to experimentally determine the exact 5'-ends of the rna and which of these 5'-ends were tri-phosphorylated. briefly, the rna is digested with the 5’-3’ exoribonuclease xrn <dig>  which specifically degrades rna with mono-phosphorylated 5'-ends but leaves tri-phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated rna intact . the rna is mixed with a synthetic rna oligo  and then split into two pools: pool “+rpph”, where both t <dig> rna ligase  <dig> and the rna 5’ pyrophosphohydrolase rpph enzymes are added, and pool “-rpph” where rpph is left out . rpph is able to remove the gamma and beta phosphates from rna with a tri-phosphorylated 5'-end or m7gdp from capped eukaryal rna  <cit> , converting the rna to a mono-phosphorylated species allowing the 5’end to be used further. reverse transcription is then performed on both pools, using a semi-random primer  that initiates at close-to-random positions along the rna, and adds a “reverse” illumina sequencing adaptor to the 5’-end of the cdna . then a pcr reaction with primers that are specific for the rp <dig> oligo and the “reverse” illumina adaptor, is used to amplify the cdna that originate from ligation products and add a “forward” illumina adaptor sequence in extension to the rp6-sequence . the pcr reaction products are then size-selected on a gel . at this point in the protocol, the dna contains illumina adaptors at both ends, barcodes, as well as the rp <dig> oligo sequence, which adds up to 149 bp. the 300 bp lower limit that is size-selected, therefore correspond to a 151 nt theoretical minimum length of the original tri-phosphorylated rna. the gel-extracted pcr products are then sequenced from the “forward” direction in an illumina hiseq  <dig> machine , and each valid read will have an rp <dig> sequence, followed by the first 20 nt of the original 5'-end of the rna that was ligated to the rp <dig> oligo. these 20 nt can then be mapped to the genome of the organism, thus indicating the exact base that corresponds to the native 5'-end of the rna . as in the previously reported emote protocol  <cit> , the rp <dig> oligo was synthesised with a unique molecular identifier , a stretch of  <dig> randomly incorporated bases , which permits the distinction between illumina reads arising from a single ligation event that has been amplified by the pcr step, and reads arising from multiple ligation events . this is achieved by comparing all illumina reads with identical mapping sequences , and counting the number of non-identical umis, since different umi sequences must arise from separate ligation events . we therefore use the number of these umis, i.e. the number of observed independent ligation events, for further calculations.fig.  <dig> tss-emote flowchart. the tss-emote assay consists of a wet-lab library preparation  and in silico analyses . an asterisk continually marks the original 5’-base of tri-phosphorylated rna . a total rna is purified, and digested with xrn <dig> 5’-exonuclease, which removes the vast majority of 5’ mono-phosphorylated rna from the sample . b and c the xrn <dig> treated rna is mixed with large excess of a synthetic rna oligo , and split into two pools. both pools receive t <dig> rna ligase, but only the “+rpph” pool is co-treated with rpph, an enzyme that converts 5’ tri-phosphorylated ends to mono-phosphorylated ends, thus allowing the ligase to use them as substrates. d and e after the ligation reaction, a semi-random primer is used to reverse-transcribe the rna and simultaneously add a  <dig>  illumina adapter . this results in cdna with a  <dig>  illumina adaptor  at the 5’-end and if the template rna was ligated to an rp <dig> oligo, then the cdna will also have a complementary sequence to rp <dig> at the 3’-end . f pcr is used to specifically amplify cdnas that carry the  <dig>  illumina adaptor and crp <dig> sequences. this step moreover adds a  <dig>  illumina adaptor  and a sample-specific 4-base emote barcode  to index the molecules . the barcode of the -rpph pool will designate molecules where the xrn <dig> treatments has been incomplete, and this information is incorporated into the in silico analysis . g the barcoded dna from various samples  can be mixed, and loaded directly into an illumina hiseq machine. millions of 50 nt sequences are obtained, each of which will span the emote barcode, both known and random sections of the rp <dig> oligo , and it will reveal the first 20 nt of the native 5’-end of the ligated rna molecule. these 20 nt are sufficient to map the vast majority of 5’-ends to a unique position on the small genomes of the bacteria in this study. however, longer illumina reads  can be used if the tsss are in repeated regions or if large-genome organisms, such as humans, are being examined. h the in silico pipeline input consists of stranded rna-seq reads for one or multiple biological replicates in fastq format. each replicate includes a fastq for the -rpph pool and another for the + rpph pool. i the fastq files go through emote-conv software  <cit>  that parses the reads, aligns them to the genome, and perform the quantification. thus, for each genomic position we obtain the number of reads whose first nucleotide align at this genomic position, and on which strand it maps. the counts are further corrected for pcr biases by looking at the unique molecular identifiers  sequences available in the unaligned part of the emote read. j quantification counts obtained for + rpph and -rpph pools are compared through a beta-binomial model that tests whether the identified 5’ ends in the + rpph pool is significantly enriched over the identified 5’ ends in the -rpph pool at a given position. the process results in a p-value that reflects our confidence in the genomic position to be enriched in the + rpph pool of the biological replicate. k the p-values of all the biological replicates are combined into a single p-value with fisher’s method. l and m to correct the p-values for multiple testing across all genomic positions, the false discovery rate  is evaluated and only those with a fdr ≤  <dig>  are considered to be tsss. note also that for the fdr is only calculated for genomic positions with at least  <dig> detected ligation-events in at least one of the + rpph pools . n the tsss then enter an annotation process that retrieve their surrounding sequence and downstream orfs. tsss separated by less than 5 bp are clustered together. finally, to draw a global picture of operon structures, an independent detection of transcription terminators is operated with the software transtermhp  <cit> . o sequence of the rna oligo rp <dig> and a typical illumina sequencing read from a tss-emote experiment. the recognition sequence serves as priming site for the pcr in panel f. umi: the randomly incorporated nucleotides in the rp <dig> oligo that serves to whether illumina reads with identical mapping sequences originate from separate ligation events. cs: control sequence. eb: emote barcode to index the illumina reads. an asterisk indicates the 5’ nucleotide of the original rna molecule




t <dig> rna ligase  <dig> can only use 5' mono-phosphorylated rna as substrate for ligation, and – assuming that the xrn <dig> digestion was complete – it is therefore only in the “+rpph” pool that ligation can take place. however, certain secondary structures resulting in recessed 5'-ends will protect rna from xrn <dig> digestion . the “-rpph” pool therefore serves to determine the background level of ligation, and avoid false positives. for a given position on the genome, a large number of reads from pool “+rpph” that map to the position is thus indicative of a tss, but only if the same position exhibits a low  number of reads in the corresponding “-rpph” pool. a beta-binomial statistical test was employed in order to provide a consistent comparison between corresponding + rpph and -rpph datasets, and determine whether the number of reads mapping at a given position on the genome in the “+rpph” pool is significantly higher than the number of reads obtained in the “-rpph” pool. whenever this was the case, with a false discovery rate  below  <dig> , then the position was designated as a tss.

identifying clusters of tsss and selecting a single representative tss per promoter
using the criteria described above,  <dig> tss positions were identified on the genome of s. aureus mw <dig> in rpmi medium at 37 °c . of these,  <dig> tsss were at isolated positions, whereas  <dig> tsss were within 5 nt of another tss and clearly grouped into  <dig> clusters that each presumably arose from the same promoter due to “wobble” of the rna polymerase initiation. the alternative tss nucleotides are usually immediately adjacent to each other, but can be up to three bases apart  <cit> . the clustering of tsss was carried out by grouping all tss which were less than 6 bp apart , and in a few very rare cases, this led to long spread-out clusters , when a tss would be detected in between two other tss which were more than 5 bp apart , and in these cases it is of course highly improbable that all tsss in a cluster originate from the same promoter.table  <dig> overview of detected tsss

s. aureus
a. baumannii
s. epidermidis
e. aerogenes



in order to proceed with the analyses of the promoters, the 5’-utrs as well as expression levels, it was necessary to obtain a single representative tss  per promoter, to avoid the same “wobbly” promoter counting multiple times in the statistics. to begin with, the  <dig> isolated tsss  were automatically designated as rtsss, and for tsss detected within the  <dig> clusters, each tss position was compared to its neighbours and the tss with the lowest p-value in each cluster was chosen as the rtss position . to ensure that this method of choosing the rtsss was justified, all tsss where a perfect tataat - <dig> element consensus sequence could be identified were extracted. within this data-set of  <dig> tsss, the distances between the rtsss and their corresponding - <dig> elements were plotted, and compared to the equivalent distances for isolated tsss. the most frequent distance from the - <dig> element was in both cases 7 nt , which also is the distance that was recently shown for e. coli  <cit> , and we therefore conclude that the p-value is a good indicator for selecting a representative tss for a given promoter.fig.  <dig> distances of perfect tataat - <dig> elements to tss, and the relation between cluster-size and level of gene expression. a cartoon of the transcription initiation complex bound to a promoter, with three potential tsss. the rtss  is indicated in blue. b distances from the σa - <dig> elements to tss clusters with a single detected tss. in order to avoid ambiguity, only tss clusters that have the perfect σa tataat - <dig> element consensus sequence are included. c distances from the σa - <dig> elements to the rtss in tss clusters with more than one detected tsss. as in panel b, only perfect tataat elements are included. d higher expression levels increase the chances of detecting alternative tsss for a promoter. expression level from each tss cluster  was estimated by taking the average number of reads in the rnaseq data that map inside a 300 nt window immediately downstream of each rtss. rpm indicates reads per million. shapiro-wilk test was carried out to confirm normal distribution , and students t-test was used to determine that expression was higher from tss clusters with wobble . the number of clusters with  <dig> tsss was too low to perform a meaningful statistical analysis




from the  <dig> identified tss clusters,  <dig> clusters had  <dig> to  <dig> tsss, whereas the remaining  <dig> clusters showed more than five tsss . to examine whether the number of tsss in a cluster was correlated to expression level of the rna, total stranded rna sequencing  was performed on the same rna samples used for the tss-emote assay. the  <dig> clusters with five or less detected tsss, were grouped according to the number of tsss in the clusters, and the rnaseq read-count that mapped within a window of 300 nt downstream of each rtss was plotted. as can be seen in fig. 2d, the level of rna did indeed increase significantly with the number of tsss in the clusters, which indicates that the majority of rnas are transcribed from “wobbly” promoters, but that the minor tsss often are below detection level for transcripts with lower abundance.

evaluation of the tss mapping
the danger of using global methods  is that it is difficult to evaluate the success- or failure-rate, when the output becomes so large that it is unfeasible to verify everything by hand. in order to evaluate the correctness of the detected tsss, three main strategies were chosen: i) a search for features that are known to be biologically important for tsss, ii) comparison to tsss identified previously in other studies, and iii) a global verification that the tsss are located in a correct genomic region to be the 5’-ends of rna molecules.

the major factor in choosing a specific position on the genome to initiate transcription is the binding of a sigma-factor to the dna, with each sigma-factor exhibiting its own sequence preference. it was possible to locate a σa consensus sequence  five to nine nts upstream of 94 % of the rtsss . 22 % of the rtsss  were perfect tataat, with 47 %  and 25 %  of the rtsss exhibiting a single and two mismatches, respectively . moreover, a logo-plot with all the sequences surrounding detected rtsss revealed a clear - <dig> element as well as a preference for t at the - <dig> position and a purine as the first nucleotide of the rna , a feature which has been recognised for a long time  <cit> .fig.  <dig> genomic context of the rtsss. a the genomic sequence surrounding each of the  <dig> detected rtsss  were used to generate a logo-plot , without any attempt at alignment of motifs. the - <dig> element is clearly visible, even without any attempt to align the promoter sequences to optimize the similarity, however, the - <dig> element is almost indistinguishable, both because it is less conserved than the - <dig> element, but also because the distance to the tss is highly variable, causing the signal to dissipate. b logo-plot of the rtsss where no σa - <dig> element could be identified, as difined by more than  <dig> mismatches to the tataat consensus sequence. the logo-plot was generated as described for panel a. c plot showing cumulative percentage of the distance to the nearest  downstream orf for each rtss




the remaining 6 % of detected promoters generally corresponded well to the s. aureus σb binding site, and a logo-plot combining all of them exhibited a similar consensus to the b. subtilis consensus sequence “gtttww 12– <dig> gggwaw”  <cit>   as well as to the small subset of σb-dependent s. aureus tsss which were mapped previously  <cit>  . furthermore, many of the σb-dependent s. aureus genes previously identified by microarray  <cit>  were downstream of one of the 6 % rtsss with no tataat - <dig> element .

in addition to being downstream of a potential sigma-factor binding site, most tsss are expected, from a functional point of view, to be immediately upstream of, and on the same strand as, annotated open reading frames , although many ncrnas and pervasive anti-sense transcripts are found in s. aureus  <cit> . comparing the detected rtss positions to the annotated genome gives a median distance to the nearest downstream annotated start codon  of 94 nt , with 64 % of the rtss at less than 200 bp from a downstream annotated orf, and only 13 % with a distance of more than 1000 bp .

the ligation event in the emote protocol  guarantees that a detected position is a 5’-end of an rna molecules, but not necessarily a tss, since it potentially could be a cleavage in the middle of an rna  <cit> . therefore, the next step was to verify that the tss clusters detected with the tss-emote protocol do indeed correspond to the original extreme 5’-ends of rna molecules. to do this, the sequence coverage from the “standard”  rnaseq data was determined from 50 nt upstream to 250 nt downstream of each of the rtsss. averaging these data across all  <dig> rtsss clearly show an increase in rna levels at the rtss positions, strongly suggesting that they mark the 5’-ends of rnas . interestingly, we observe a slight shift of about 10 nt, between the rtsss and the increase in coverage, which underlines that the truseq rna sequencing protocol  does not preserve the native 5’-end of the rna. to generate the second stranded cdna, the truseq protocol first cleaves the rna with rnase h, whereupon dna polymerase i uses one or more of the resulting rna fragments as primer to synthesise the second strand , and finally the 3’ overhang  is removed to generate blunt-ended double stranded dna. the relatively sharp increase in coverage seen around +10 nt in fig.  <dig>  indicates that this length is either the minimal length of rna fragment that rnase h can generate or that it is the minimal length of rna that can be used as primer for the second-strand dna synthesis step. in either case, irrespective of the ~10 nt shift, the dramatic over-all difference in rnaseq coverage between the regions upstream and downstream of the rtsss positions , is consistent with a correct tss identification in a majority of the  <dig> cases.fig.  <dig> rnaseq coverage is low upstream of the rtsss and a ~10 nt shift illustrates the loss of 5’-end information in a standard rnaseq protocol. the rnaseq coverage, from illumina truseq stranded rna sequencing, was determined for each nucleotide in a region from 50 nt upstream  to 250 nt downstream  of each of the  <dig> rtsss identified for s. aureus. the median rnaseq coverage from the two biological replicates is shown in red and blue. the dotted lines correspond to the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively. a grey dotted line indicates the superimposed positions of the  <dig> rtsss, and a black bracket indicates the ~10 nt shift between coverage in the truseq protocol and the exact 5’-mapping of the tss-emote. the traces of rnaseq coverage for each of the  <dig> rtsss is shown in additional file 2: figure s1




do the identified tss correspond to previously identified tsss?
by searching the literature extensively, we could identify  <dig> individual and precisely mapped tsss in s. aureus, by either primers extension or 5’-race . we were able to detect  <dig> of these  <dig> tsss exactly as they were described. taking into account that primer extension can be slightly imprecise due to inconsistencies in reverse transcriptase reaction, we allowed up to 5 nt discrepancy from the tss-emote data and were thereby able to increase the number of re-detected tsss by  <dig>  when tsss found for alternative growth-conditions  were taken into account, then this number went as high as  <dig> out of  <dig>  the remaining  <dig> undetected sites are only expressed under specific growth conditions or in certain strains , and it is thus not surprising that we were unable to re-detect these .

tss clusters with six or more tsss
as discussed above, most transcription start sites described so far are clustered at a single position or are a few nucleotides apart. interestingly, our analysis revealed  <dig> clusters with six or more tsss . a single cluster even extended to  <dig> tsss, each of which within 5 nt of its neighbour, spanning a region of 48 bp on the genome. the appearance of these ≥ <dig> tss clusters is rare and we have not identified anything in their genomic contexts that links them , and it is therefore difficult to draw any definite conclusions about what causes them. possible explanations could be overlapping promoters or promiscuous sigma-factor binding sites, influenced in their binding by local dna topology  <cit> . it is interesting to note that among these large clusters, eight of them are highly expressed , two drive the expression of phenol soluble modulins  <cit> , and in two clusters it appears that there is an overlap of σa and σb recognition sites, which will naturally spread the tsss over a wider range .

alternative growth conditions reveal additional tsss
not all transcripts are synthetized at any given growth condition. therefore, in order to obtain a list of tsss as complete as possible, s. aureus cells were cultured under three alternative growth conditions, in addition to the 37 °c rpmi medium that was used initially: mueller-hinton medium  at 37 °c, at 30 °c and on agar plates. the alternative growth conditions permitted the identification of as many as  <dig> additional tss clusters , several of which corresponded to sites that had previously been experimentally mapped by other laboratories, but which could not be identified in the tss-emote data from s. aureus grown in rpmi medium . for each of the four growth conditions, it was possible to identify tss clusters that were unique to a particular data-set, and we presume that these tsss correspond to transcripts that are only present at detectable levels when the cells experience a particular environment.

operon prediction based on tsss
genes involved in a given pathway or function are often arranged in operons with one common promoter. the tss data that has been obtained with the tss-emote assay identifies these promoters , and thus defines the beginning of the operons. in contrast to tsss, bacterial transcription terminator signals are relatively easily identifiable by bioinformatics analyses of the genome sequence , and a number of tools have been developed for this purpose. in order to generate predicted operon maps, we have here chosen the transtermhp software  <cit>  to define the termination sites, and combined this with the tss-emote information and gene annotations from ncbi . a few highlights from the generated operon table  are shown in fig.  <dig>  for example, the separate transcription of the spx and trfa genes, with multiple tsss for each gene, that has previously been detected by northern blotting without detailed mapping   <cit> . furthermore, the tss of the t-box riboswitch which has previously been shown to attenuate the vals transcript could be detected  <cit> , with the additional information that the downstream folc gene appears to be co-regulated by this riboswitch and its own promoters . additionally, many highly abundant transcripts are expressed from multiple promoters, with up to four of them for rrna operons , and several examples of dual regulation of a single operon by both σa and σb promoters .fig.  <dig> examples of gene loci and operon predictions. the double-lines indicate the genomic dna. rtsss are indicated as bent black arrows, with genomic positions, and rna as thin black arrows. orfs are shown as light grey arrows. transcriptional terminators predicted by transtermhp  <cit>  are indicated by stylised hairpins. the nucleotide position of each key element is also shown. a layout of the spx and trfa locus, with multiple tsss for each orf . b the vals-folc operon. expression of the valine-trna ligase  is tightly controlled by a t-box riboswitch in its 5’-utr  that is transcribed from a position 350 nt upstream of the orf  <cit> . the transcript continues into the downstream folc gene, which seems to be dually controlled by both the t-box riboswitch and by its own promoters at positions  <dig> and  <dig>  c an example of the beginning of ribosomal rna operon, where multiple promoters  permit high transcription. only the first gene of the operon  is shown as a dark grey line. d example of an operon where separate σa and σbpromoters contribute to expression 




the application of tss-emote to other organisms
the tss-emote protocol was developed and optimised for use with s. aureus. however, in order to demonstrate the general utility of tss-emote, three additional pathogenic bacteria were chosen for tss mapping. staphylococcus epidermidis was chosen because it is a close relative of s. aureus, and shares many of its genomic features. the remaining two pathogens, acinetobacter baumannii and enterobacter aerogenes, are in contrast distantly related γ-proteobacteria that are also important pathogens .

while many tss were identified in all examined organisms , it is clear that the efficiency of detection varied between the four transcriptomes, and we were notably only able to identify  <dig> tsss in e. aerogenes. we have three potential explanations  for this: i) in the rich laboratory medium used for growing e. aerogenes , only a small sub-set of the transcriptome is expressed ii) it is also possible that the high g + c content  of the e. aerogenes genome, leads to secondary structures that prevent the ligation step of the tss-emote protocol. however, this does seem a somewhat unlikely explanation, since we have successfully performed a related emote protocol on rna from caulobacter crescentus, which has a g + c content of 67 %  <cit> , and the g + c content is therefore probably not a major obstacle for the ligation step. iii) a more intriguing possibility is that e. aerogenes maintains a high ratio of its mrna in 5’-mono-phosphorylated rather than tri-phosphorylated form, which would prevent all of the various tss determination methods from being efficient. since e. aerogenes does not encode the tri-phosphorylation-inhibited 5’ to 3’ exoribonucleases rnase j1/j <dig>  which is found in both s. epidermidis and s. aureus  <cit> , it should be possible to maintain such an mrna population. this possibility might also account for the relatively low number of detected tsss in a. baumannii, which equally lacks rnase j.

nevertheless, the confidence level for the detected tss remain high for all organisms, not only due to the calculated p-values, but also due to the fact that each tss corresponds to at least five independently observed ligation events, and because the tsss are distributed correctly with respect to the annotated orfs . moreover, we could establish that the tss-emote assay is highly reproducible , by comparing the data of biological replicates for all our strains and growth conditions. specifically, we compared the number of umis in the + rpph data-sets  as a measure for expression levels from the individual tsss, and found a high correlation between the biological replicates, especially when the signal intensity was higher than five  .fig.  <dig> rtsss in a. baumannii, s. epidermidis and e. aerogenes. a distances from the rtsss to the start codon of the nearest downstream annotated orfs. b logo-plots of the promoter regions of the rtsss reveal clear σa/σ <dig> recognition sequences in all examined organisms . dotted lines indicate the beginning of the rna sequences, and the nucleotide position relative to the rtss is shown below




finally, a closer look at the promoter sequences in the three additional organisms revealed a similar pattern to what was seen in the analyses of s. aureus tss-emote data. logo-plots of the promoter sequences exhibited clear - <dig> elements for σa/σ <dig> recognition and preference for purines at the + <dig> position. furthermore, pyrimidines are highly enriched at the - <dig> position, with t being more common in a + t rich s. epidermidis .

CONCLUSIONS
a number of techniques have been developed over the years to map the 5’-ends of individual rna species, and with the recent arrival of high-throughput sequencing, a few methods have emerged that simultaneously map the transcription start sites on a large scale. the tss-emote method presented here allows the identification of transcription start sites and promoters similar to the drna-seq method. the three main strengths of the method are the absolutely precise mapping of the tsss , the possibility for a quantitative evaluation of each tss position thanks to the specially designed barcodes, and finally that all needed equipment for the wet-lab protocol can be found in a standard laboratory, all enzymes are available from standard suppliers, and each rna sample only costs about $ <dig> to prepare and sequence. the method can easily be applied to different bacteria and, because it allows quantification of transcription start sites via the umis, it is an ideal tool to compare different growth conditions of a given bacterium. it is our conviction that the data presented here will be highly useful for the scientific communities that study s. aureus, s. epidermidis, a. baumannii and e. aerogenes. in addition, the tsss and operons defined by tss-emote will be highly useful as training sets for large-scale in silico operon prediction efforts such as the door <dig> database of prokaryotic operons, where experimental input data improves accuracy significantly  <cit> . as a consequence of the above-mentioned advantages of tss-emote, we expect that in the near future, many prokaryotes as well as eukaryotes will be examined by tss-emote to answer the many biological questions that tss analyses can illuminate.

