BACKGROUND
in the silkworm, bombyx mori, females are heterogametic  whereas males are homogametic   <cit> . genetic studies have shown that at least one copy of the w chromosome is sufficient for determining femaleness, irrespective of z chromosome copy number, suggesting that the w chromosome is a strong female-determinant in the silkworm  <cit> . therefore, it was presumed that the w chromosome likely encodes a female-determining gene so-called fem. however, not even a single protein-coding gene has been identified from the w chromosome. instead, it was found that the silkworm w chromosome contains numerous transposable elements, their remnants, and simple repeats  <cit> . these make it difficult to obtain a long contig sequence of the w chromosome, and thus the complete sequence of the w chromosome remains to be resolved.

recently, we uncovered an intriguing facet of the silkworm w chromosome-the w chromosome is a source of female-enriched piwi-interacting rnas   <cit> . piwi proteins and piwi-interacting rnas are at the heart of transposon silencing system in animal gonads  <cit> . pirnas are 23- <dig> nucleotide-long small rnas that can act as sequence-specific guides for piwi proteins. mutations in pirna pathway proteins lead to de-silencing of transposons and result in severe developmental defects in germ line cells  <cit> . with the aid of pirna deep-sequencing and careful analyses, we identified a number of transposons and associated pirnas originating from the sex-determining region of the w chromosome  <cit> . the role of female-enriched pirnas remains enigmatic.

doublesex  gene is an evolutionarily conserved transcription factor that mediates the somatic sex determination pathway  <cit> . b. mori dsx  is alternatively spliced in a sex-dependent manner, yielding male-specific bmdsx or female-specific bmdsx . bmdsxf is a functional switch at the bottom of sex determination pathway in the silkworm  <cit> . b. mori p-element somatic inhibitor  and igf-ii mrna binding protein  contribute to sex-specific splicing of bmdsx mrnas  <cit> .

the kg line is a mutant line that shows various degrees of female masculinization features, such as formation of chitin-like structures in the external genitalia  <cit> . it has been genetically shown that masculinization is caused by a mutation in the kg w chromosome. one of the most prominent phenotypes in masculinized females is the aberrant splicing of bmdsx mrnas. masculinized female tissues, including ovarian tissues, express both female- and male-type bmdsx mrnas, indicating that the mutation in the kg w chromosome interferes with the somatic sex determination pathway. although this remarkable phenotype is unique to the silkworm kg line the molecular nature of kg w chromosome is largely unknown. here, we investigated expression profiles of testis-specific genes, pirnas, and transposons in the kg ovaries. our results revealed that the mutation in the kg w chromosome caused misexpression of testis-specific genes, reduction of a set of pirnas, and overexpression of transposons in the kg ovaries.

RESULTS
genetic analyses of the kg line
the kg line had been maintained by continuous sib-crosses as is the case for other silkworm mutants. unexpectedly, continuous sib-crosses between kg females and males over several generations weakened masculinized phenotypes : figure 1a and table 1). crossing a kg female of weakened masculinization with a wt male again produced severely masculinized females . crosses using a wt female and a  male did not produce masculinized females , confirming that the mutation resides in the kg w chromosome. these results indicated that masculinized phenotypes of the kg line were unstable to be genetically maintained.

the numbers of masculinized females and males from four generations are indicated.

all g <dig> females exhibited masculinized phenotypes

our results suggested that the mutation in the kg w chromosome became suppressed during sib-crosses. we envision that masculinized phenotypes depend on interaction between the mutated w chromosome and normal autosomes/z chromosomes. for example, a masculinizing factor is located on autosomes/z chromosomes while the w chromosome harbors an anti-masculinization factor, which might be mutated in the kg w chromosome. thus, the results of sib-cross experiments can be explained by incompatibility between a masculinizing and anti-masculinization factors of the wt and the original kg line, respectively. natural selection against the severe kg phenotypes may attribute to the diminishing masculinization as well.

several w chromosome-specific rapd makers are available for the silkworm w chromosome  <cit> . we utilized these markers to understand the structure of kg w chromosome. as shown in figure 1b, when compared to the wt w chromosome, the kg w chromosome retained  <dig> rapd markers surveyed, indicating that the kg w chromosome does not have a large deletion, unlike is observed in the w chromosome of sex-limited yellow-cocoon strain  <cit> .

kg ovaries misexpressed a number of testis-specific genes
to understand the molecular nature of the masculinized phenotypes observed in the kg line, we focussed on the masculinized ovaries. to obtain females showing severe masculinization, we used individuals generated by  female × wt male. for simplicity, these are described as the kg females/males or the kg line in this manuscript .

we at first investigated the splicing pattern of bmdsx mrnas. we confirmed that, as reported in fujii et al.   <cit> , the kg ovaries expressed both male- and female-type bmdsx mrnas, suggesting that the kg ovaries contained both female- and male-type cells . at this point, we cannot exclude the possibility that a mutated single cell expressed both types of bmdsx mrnas.

to determine if the mutated kg w chromosome affects expression of testis-specific genes, we examined the abundance of several testis-specific mrnas via quantitative pcr . for this analysis, we focused on previously reported testis-specific genes  <cit> . our results demonstrated that, when compared to the wt ovaries, several testis-specific genes were overexpressed in the kg ovaries . the expression levels of these genes in the kg ovaries were still less abundant than those in the kg testes. the expression levels were quite similar between wt and kg testes. these data indicated that the mutation in the kg w chromosome disrupted sex-specific transcriptome in the kg ovaries. at this point, we cannot determine if misexpressions of these testis-specific genes are simply dependent on heterogeneous bmdsx expression in the kg ovaries.

reduction of female-enriched pirnas in the kg ovaries
we previously reported that the silkworm w chromosome is a source of female-enriched pirnas  <cit> . with the aid of our guidelines, we can deduce genomic origins of transposons based on pirna expression data-pirnas derived from the w chromosome are expressed more abundantly in the ovary than in the testis. thus, pirna expression data from the kg ovaries are likely to be useful to understand the molecular nature of kg w chromosome. to this end, we constructed, sequenced, and analyzed pirna libraries from kg ovaries of the three individuals generated by  female × wt male. cloned reads were mapped to the silkworm genome to infer a sequencing depth for normalization. we focused on pirnas mapped to  <dig> well-annotated transposons.

in the wt ovary, transposon pirnas are enriched for u at the 5' ends , and antisense pirnas are more abundant than sense pirnas   <cit> . these biases were unaltered in the kg ovaries, suggesting that the mutation does not affect general properties of ovarian pirnas .

the percentages of pirnas with 1u in total transposon pirnas are indicated

the ratios between sense and antisense transposon pirnas are indicated

the standard deviations  are shown in parentheses

next, we catalogued expression levels of sense and antisense transposon pirnas. for this analysis,  <dig> transposons, to which more than  <dig> reads per million  ovarian pirnas mapped, were used. we found that a set of sense and antisense transposon pirnas including female-enriched pirnas showed a significant reduction in the kg ovaries . when focused on female-enriched pirnas deriving from the sex-determining region in the w chromosome  <cit> , kendo, bm <dig>  and taguchi pirnas were significantly decreased in the kg ovaries . in contrast, although trest <dig> pirnas are enriched in the sex-determining region  <cit> , they were unaltered by the mutation in the kg w chromosome. moreover, pakurin female-enriched pirnas, which are not enriched in the sex-determining region  <cit> , exhibited a significant reduction in the kg ovaries . taken altogether, the mutation in the kg w chromosome affected expression levels of a specific set of pirnas including female-enriched pirnas, but this was not restricted to pirnas deriving from the sex-determining region. disruption of female-enriched pirna expressions could simply be attributed to an indirect consequence of male-like gene expression profiles established in the kg ovaries. alternatively, considering that the mutation resides in the kg w chromosome, reduction of female-enriched pirnas might be directly caused by the mutation in the kg w chromosome. unfortunately, the unavailability of the entire w chromosome sequence and the lack of crossover in silkworm females make it impossible to determine the exact nature of mutation in the kg w chromosome.

overexpression of transposons in the kg ovaries
because we identified abnormal female-enriched pirna expression, we set out to investigate the expression profile of several transposons . we detected higher expression of transposon rnas in the kg ovaries than in the wt ovaries. transposon rnas were more highly expressed in the wt testes than in the wt ovaries. expression levels were comparable  or even higher  in the kg ovaries than in the kg testes. these cases were different from the cases for testis-specific genes, whose expressions were higher in the wt and kg testes than in the kg ovaries . thus, it is likely that the observed overexpression of transposons could be caused by two independent phenomena: masculinization and transposon de-silencing. we suggest that the mutation in the kg w chromosome caused transposon de-silencing in the kg ovaries. previous studies have demonstrated that pirna reductions are not always coincident with corresponding transposon de-silencing  <cit> . consistent with this, we observed pirna reduction for kendo but not for sart <dig> while both elements were overexpressed in the kg ovaries. thus, it is still unclear whether reduction of female-enriched pirnas is a direct cause for transposon de-silencing.

CONCLUSIONS
here we thoroughly analyzed an intriguing silkworm mutant called the kg line, whose mutated w chromosome causes severe female masculinization. our genetic analyses showed that masculinization became suppressed during the course of sib-crosses over generations, but became reactivated when crossing a kg female with a wt male. these data indicated an interaction between the w chromosome and autosomes/z chromosomes regarding masculinized phenotypes. interestingly, the kg female ovaries misexpressed testis-specific genes. expression levels of these testis-specific genes in the kg ovaries were higher than in the wt ovaries but less than in the wt testes. comprehensive pirna profiling revealed that a set of female-enriched pirnas including those deriving from the sex-determining regions was reduced in the kg ovaries. accordingly, we detected transposon de-silencing in the kg ovaries. our current study suggests a possible link between the sex differentiation pathway and the pirna pathway in the silkworm.

