BACKGROUND
ngf, the prototype member of the neurotrophin protein family, is translated as a pre-pro-protein, processed by furin protease in the trans-golgi network or by extracellular proteases, to give rise to mature ngf  <cit> . besides its suggested roles in the regulation of neurotrophin secretion  <cit>  and as an intramolecular chaperone for the folding of mature ngf  <cit> , the precursor prongf was found to display independent biological activities  <cit> , different from those of its mature ngf counterpart, mediated by distinct, and somewhat complementary, receptor binding properties. in particular, prongf binding with higher affinity to p75ntr  <cit>  is increased by the presence of sortilin, a specific receptor for pro-neurotrophins  <cit> . our recent finding demonstrates that ngf and prongf activate distinct transcriptional signatures in target cells, highlighting their different bioactivities  <cit> . however, the relevant question whether the concomitant presence of prongf and ngf affects the ngf transcriptional response has not been addressed yet. the interest in such analysis derives from a number of observations, in both physiological and pathological conditions.

first, prongf and ngf coexist in vivo <cit> . during ageing, prongf increases in rat cortex and hippocampus, whereas ngf gradually decreases in the cortex. second, in pathological conditions, such as prodromal and, more significantly, end-stage alzheimer’s disease, the levels of prongf in the brain increase  <cit> . these alterations are suggested to play a role in the reduced brain plasticity and in the cognitive decline observed during ageing and neurodegeneration  <cit> . the balance between prongf and ngf levels and signalling in the brain is thus a key determinant for brain homeostasis, with its disruption possibly leading to neurodegeneration  <cit> . we have previously characterized the distinct properties of prongf and ngf signalling by gene expression microarray in pc <dig> cells and identified two subsets of differentially expressed genes that could be ascribed to a “pure prongf” and a “pure ngf” signalling, respectively  <cit> . this initial characterization of the transcriptional signature of prongf in pc <dig> cells confirmed that the mature and the precursor ngf proteins are biologically different, showing a different transcriptional signature. in order to understand the prongf specific modulatory effect on ngf induced transcriptional activity and to test any influence of prongf on “pure ngf” expression fingerprinting, pc <dig> cells were treated with a mixture of both recombinant proteins, in different stoichiometric ratios. thus, we analysed the expression level of candidate genes, mainly selected among well-known ngf-induced genes  <cit> . a specific “prongf effect” on ngf-induced gene expression was identified. interestingly, a group of differentially expressed genes  shows two opposite trends 30 minutes after the single ngf or prongf treatment. moreover, when both neurotrophins are added, the coexistence of prongf and ngf induces a “novel effect, peculiar to the mixture”, not induced by the single ligand addition.

RESULTS
experimental design and analysis overview
the expression of sixty-five genes was analysed, by qreal-time pcr, in pc <dig> cells treated with only ngf, only prongf or a mixture with both for different times , as schematized in additional file  <dig>  the set of genes was selected because of their well characterized response to ngf  <cit> , or because they are involved in prongf processing   <cit> , or in modulating survival/apoptosis choices and differentiation programs. the functional interconnection between the selected genes was evaluated by means of the string database , a public repository of experimentally known and computationally predicted protein-protein interactions. the interaction network  shows that the genes are very sparsely connected and are thus independent, except for genes encoding for some transcription factors, early activated by ngf . data analysis was carried out on the expression levels, after treatment with prongf-only , ngf-only  or prongf/ngf mixtures .

early effects of prongf and ngf on gene expression
we recently showed that prongf and ngf activate largely distinct transcriptional programs after 60 minutes of incubation  <cit> : in this work we extend the investigation to shorter time intervals. we characterized the gene expression profile of the chosen subset of genes in pc <dig> cells treated with prongf  or ngf  for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 60 minutes. genes were grouped on the basis of their differential responses to prongf or ngf alone . it is noteworthy that already at 5 minutes the modulation of a number of mrnas can be observed. this suggests a possible regulation at the translational level.

we identified two groups of genes mainly responding to prongf  or ngf only , as reported in figure 2a, . as for the latter group, data show that prongf is much slower in the induction of some iegs, such as fosl <dig>  egr <dig>  egr <dig> <cit>  induced by ngf very early on . prongf induces a modest increase of the expression of these mrnas only at 60 minutes . at this time point, our previous analysis  <cit>  had shown that the induction of these genes is much stronger in response to ngf than to prongf. on the other hand, group i displays, at 30 minutes, an up-regulated response to prongf  compared to that to ngf , which is weakly down-regulated. interestingly, the trend for this group of genes is inverted after 1 hour of treatment, when the response to prongf is reduced, and ngf shows an up-regulatory effect on the same genes, even larger than that displayed by prongf . the histogram in figure 2b summarizes the responses to ngf or prongf and shows that, at 30 minutes, the group i genes display a large up-regulation by prongf, and a weak down-regulation by ngf. the histogram also shows that higher doses of prongf  anticipate the up-regulated response observed at 30 minutes for the group i genes, differentially modulated by prongf, displaying an earlier activity response  compared to the lower prongf dose. as for the group ii genes, the time point of 15 minutes highlights an overall opposite action of ngf, compared to the higher dose of prongf. log <dig> fold change of the pure prongf or ngf responses at the different time points analysed is reported in additional file  <dig> .

the equimolar prongf/ngf mixture induces changes in pc <dig> cells that neither singly produces
regarding the question whether and how the coexistence of ngf and prongf would influence the response of either ligand, we demonstrate that the prongf/ngf equimolar mixture  shows coherent gene expression profiles at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 60 minutes, without major differences at the different time-points analysed . the prongf/ngf equimolar mixture seems to partially neutralize the specific effects of the prongf or ngf individual treatments, showing a weaker overall response, compared to the individual contributions of ngf and prongf alone . figure  <dig> shows the average |log <dig> fold change| and the average standard deviation of samples treated with ngf , prongf  and the equimolar mixture . the equimolar mixture shows a weaker response in group i genes, as underlined also by a much smaller standard deviation, hence a reduced variability across time. hierarchical clustering of samples in response to different prongf/ngf treatments was computed . first, cluster analyses confirmed the earlier response to prongf compared to the ngf one. the branching diagram represents a hierarchical tree of categories  based on degree of similarity in the expression response. different treatments showing similar expression response are closer in the tree; the distance is proportional to inter-samples dissimilarity. the chosen metric  takes into account both the shape of profiles and the expression levels, compared to the commonly used “centered pearson” correlation. the diagram in figure  <dig> highlights the low degree of similarity between the ngf and prongf responses at 30 minutes, whereas the ngf response is closest to the prongf one at 60 minutes, with a high degree of similarity. moreover, treatments with ngf, both pure and in mixtures, cluster together while prongf is farther in the tree, supporting the first conclusion of a different gene activation pattern by prongf compared to ngf.

time courses of responses
to evaluate how the responses to prongf alone or to an equimolar mixture of ngf and prongf differ from the ngf response, the similarity between the responses at different times were computed with a correlation coefficient . the time-course of the gene expression profiles at  <dig> time points  in  <dig> experimental conditions  was analysed and compared, as shown in figure  <dig>  in the graphical representation, each subplot corresponds to the average expression responses for a group of genes that shows a homogeneous response pattern. in pc <dig> cells exposed to a mixture of 10 ng/ml ngf plus 20 ng/ml prongf , response patterns are defined as “mixture-specific responses” peculiar to the mixture, and different from the profile observed after the addition of ngf or prongf alone. a group of expression response patterns is identified, that mimics the trend observed after the single addition of ngf, defined as “ngf-like”. prongf-like responses are not observed, upon mixture treatment with 1: <dig> ratio . several examples, indicated as “no response” in figure  <dig>  are shown, after addition of the prongf/ngf equimolar mixture. such observation suggests a potential mutual antagonist role of prongf and ngf in the equimolar range, such that each ligand cancels and counteracts the response to the other, confirming the overall result described in figure  <dig>  where the equimolar mixture of ngf and prongf induces a reduced modulation for some of the analysed genes.

effects of increasing the prongf concentration in the prongf/ngf mixture
we analysed the behaviour of individual genes, in response to treatments with ngf or prongf alone  or with mixtures of ngf and prongf, either at equal stoichiometry or with increasing amount of prongf . the interest in evaluating the expression responses to increasing doses of prongf derives from in vivo data, showing the coexistence of both prongf and ngf  <cit>  and the increased prongf levels in pathological conditions  <cit> . therefore, the modulatory effect of prongf on genes known to be ngf-responders is an interesting and relevant issue, particularly at early time points , when limited proteolysis of prongf has the chance to occur. expression patterns for induced genes were clustered according to two parameters: i) response to individual ngf or prongf ligands  and ii) response to the prongf/ngf mixture .

at the 5 minutes time point, the following categories of expression patterns were identified :

a) response to ngf or prongf alone: similar. response to mixtures: mixture-specific, depending on the prongf/ngf ratio; two representative groups of response profiles were identified .

b) in the first group , the response to ngf is higher than the response to prongf alone, in the second  it reverses. the response to the prongf/ngf mixture is more similar to the response to prongf alone . c) response to ngf or prongf alone: different. response to ngf alone: lower  or greater  than to prongf. response to mixtures: closer to ngf ; this appears to be the least represented category. d) response to ngf or prongf alone: different. response to ngf alone: lower  or greater  than to prongf. response to mixtures: mixture specific, depending on the prongf/ngf ratio. a similar analysis was performed at 15 minutes, and groups of expression patterns were classified, according to the same criteria : a) response to ngf or prongf alone: similar. response to mixtures: mixture-specific, depending on the prongf/ngf ratio; two clusters of response profiles are shown, the second showing a saturation effect with prongf/ngf increasing ratio. b) response to ngf or prongf alone: different. response to prongf/ngf mixtures: similar to prongf. c) response to ngf or prongf alone: different. response to mixtures: similar to ngf. d) response to ngf or prongf alone: different. response to mixtures: mixture-specific, depending on the prongf/ngf ratio. compared to the 5 minutes data sample , two response patterns are not represented in the 15 minutes dataset .

at 5 minutes , the responses to ngf or prongf alone differ frequently; in those cases, the response to mixtures is variable, either similar to prongf or ngf-responses, or peculiar to the prongf/ngf mixture . at 15 minutes , when the responses to ngf or prongf alone differ, most frequently represented genes show a mixture-specific response, different from the ngf- or prongf-responses. moreover, increasing the amount of prongf in the mixture  does not always produce a linear dose–response outcome in the expression pattern of the genes under consideration. indeed, the response is often reverted, at the highest prongf concentration .

to support the concept that ngf and prongf mixture behaves differently from either ngf or prongf alone, we analysed the morphological changes triggered by the addition of 10 ng/ml ngf, 20 ng/ml prongf or an equimolar mixture of both molecules . differentiated pc <dig> were analysed on the basis of the neurite mean length for each type of treatment. under our experimental conditions, neurite length assessment showed that, after 5 days of treatment, the prongf/ngf 20/10 ng/ml group of genes exhibit a significant increase in the neurite mean length accounting for a 41% and 52% change , with respect to the 10 ng/ml ngf, or 20 ng/ml prongf. the increase in the mean neurite length indicates a different response of the prongf/ngf treated group compared to the single treatments.

discussion
the role of prongf is controversial, and both neurotrophic and apoptotic activities have been reported for recombinant prongf. it has been shown that prongf can also be neurotrophic, regardless of mutations or tags, and no matter how it is purified or in which system it is expressed. however, although prongf is neurotrophic for primary sympathetic neurons and for pc <dig> cells, it is reported to be apoptotic for unprimed pc <dig> cells  <cit> . furthermore, prongf has been reported to promote apoptosis via its interaction with p75ntr and sortilin receptor  <cit> . both prongf and mature ngf exhibited neurotrophic activity on pc <dig> cells, while the pro-domain itself promotes cell death  <cit> . ngf and prongf co-exist in vivo <cit> . one might therefore expect that the prongf/ngf mixture modulates the downstream effect of either neurotrophin form, in ways depending on their ratio, and distinct from ngf and prongf alone. however, it is not known whether and how the concomitant presence of prongf affects cell responses to ngf.

our data refer to the pc <dig> cells system and to mrnas expression read-out as a response signature. this experimental system was chosen, together with the gene expression read-out, as a well defined system, for investigating the complex question of the functional consequences of signalling by mixtures of ngf/prongf, in comparison to signalling by pure prongf or pure ngf. we expect that prongf/ngf mixtures might modulate the downstream responses, depending on their ratio, in ways distinct from those affected by ngf or prongf alone, also in different systems than pc <dig> cells. it remains however to be ascertained whether and how the distinct signalling behaviours of the ngf/prongf mixture, here demonstrated, also apply to neuronal cells. thus, we have analysed by qreal-time pcr the expression of a set of genes, in pc <dig> cells treated for short times with prongf, ngf or with a mixture of the two proteins. the emphasis on short times was to minimize the chance of processing of prongf by cellular proteases in the culture medium, which is known to occur at times longer than a few hours  <cit> .

from our results, we conclude that there are a significant number of cases where prongf has a prevalent effect over ngf. this effect is time dependent, as well as dependent on the relative concentration of the two proteins. distinct prongf-specific effects on ngf-induced gene expressions were identified. it should be pointed out that we do not imply to put forward a functional interpretation of the gene expression changes observed. rather, we take the gene expression patterns as a fingerprinting read-out of possible actions of prongf/ngf mixtures, as compared to those regulated by ngf or prongf alone. most of the selected genes are essentially functionally unrelated  and any correlated behaviour, observed in the pc <dig> cellular model, could be attributed to the specific treatment.

taking into account single additions, among the selected panel of genes, about 50% of group i shows an opposite trend in the single ngf or prongf treatments at 30 minutes. higher doses of prongf anticipate at 15 minutes the prongf up-regulated response, observed at 30 minutes for that group of genes. this suggests there may be a prongf-induced dose-dependent effect on early signalling. hierarchical clustering of samples highlights this low degree of similarity between the ngf and prongf responses at 30 minutes. when ngf and prongf were added simultaneously, the effect of the mixture on gene expression was often different from the effect of the single ligands added separately. although some ngf-like responses were observed for the mixture , in many cases the mixture behaved differently. in particular, in the case of an equimolar mixture of prongf and ngf, synergic, additive or mutually antagonizing effects were observed for different mrnas. we can therefore identify a non-linear “prongf effect” interfering with the ngf-induced gene expression.

increased prongf levels are observed during human ageing and pathological conditions  <cit> . this prompted us to analyse the effect of increasing prongf concentration in the prongf/ngf mixture. different patterns of expression responses were obtained. at 5 minutes, the responses to ngf or prongf alone are often different; in those cases, the response to mixtures shows a variable pattern, either similar to prongf-response or to ngf-response or peculiar to the mixture, whereas at 15 minutes, the most represented group of genes shows a mixture-specific response. moreover, the response is not always linear with the increasing amount of prongf, being often reverted at the highest concentration. we conclude that the prongf/ngf mixture shows a mixture-specific signature, that at these early time points  is not necessarily only transcriptional, but may involve translational regulation  <cit> . this aspect warrants to be further investigated. our data support the hypothesis that the relative concentration of ngf and prongf might be of importance for the biological outcome of the two proteins, in physiological and/or pathological conditions and suggests that the prongf/ngf balance is a sensitive point of regulation in the homeostasis of the system. we have recently described a transgenic mouse model expressing a form of prongf resistant to furin cleavage  <cit> , showing that different expression levels of ngf and prongf produce neurodegeneration phenotypes of different strength in transgenic lines derived from different founders  <cit> . the relative ngf and prongf availability has been reported to regulate innervation density in postnatal superior cervical ganglion  neurons: sub-saturating concentrations of prongf and ngf act synergically to promote neurite growth, whereas the additive effect is not observed at saturating concentration. conversely, lack of synergic effect was observed in trigeminal neurons, highlighting that subsets of ngf-responsive neurons have distinctive responses to ngf and prongf  <cit> . our data show that the mixture of prongf and ngf acts differently, depending on the prongf/ngf ratio, highlighting that conflict, synergism and/or cancellation occur when both ngf and prongf downstream pathways are similarly activated through different receptors. the biochemical site of this conflict or synergism is currently unknown, and most likely involves interactions at the level of the signalling pathways, starting from the receptor level and determining distinct downstream functional consequences. in any case, the interactions between the ngf and prongf signalling pathways, when concomitantly activated, can be described as if the prongf/ngf mixture functionally behaves as a “new ligand”, distinct from either ngf or prongf alone.

CONCLUSIONS
the regulation of prongf and ngf relative concentrations might be a highly relevant parameter governing the final fate of a target cell, between differentiation, maintenance of a differentiated phenotype, survival or death. different prongf/ngf mixtures exert a fine tuning of distinct receptors binding and thus their differential signalling. in this complex scenario, we have discovered, under well defined experimental conditions, that the prongf/ngf ratio induces a specific response, up-regulating or down-regulating some genes, differently than the individual prongf or ngf ligands alone. thus, we show that the prongf/ngf mixture induces gene expression changes in pc <dig> cells that neither singly produces. this opens the possibility that in vivo a similar functional interaction between ngf and prongf signalling may be operative.

the main conclusion is that prongf is clearly modulating ngf gene expression and novel effects, peculiar to the mixture, are detected. the data support the idea that the relative prongf/ngf concentration might specifically contribute to different biological activities, both in physiological and pathological conditions. further studies will include blocking ngf receptors with specific antibodies to dissect the pathways involved and the receptor and signalling specificity, downstream of the prongf/ngf mixture.

