BACKGROUND
successful development relies heavily on parental contribution over and above the
direct effect of maternal and paternal genes. for example, maternal effect genes,
which have been particularly well studied in drosophila melanogaster, are
involved in setting up; 1) the location of the germ plasm and subsequent germ cell
line development in the offspring  <cit>  and, 2) a basic framework of positional information, which is interpreted
by the embryo’s own genetic program  <cit> . furthermore, insect embryos rely on nutrients for growth derived from
the mother in the form of yolk deposited in the egg  <cit> . the investigation of insect egg production  is thus not
only crucial in understanding reproductive, and consequently fitness variation  <cit> , it is also a popular model system for studying epigenetic programming  <cit> , the apoptotic pathway  <cit> , stem cell behaviour  <cit> , cell cycle regulation  <cit>  and developmental patterning mechanisms in general  <cit> .

research into the physiological mechanisms underlying insect oogenesis and egg
provisioning has a rich history  <cit> , particularly in moths and butterflies   <cit> . however, to date sufficiently detailed developmental genetic data to
allow us to comprehensively understand the gene regulatory mechanisms underlying
oogenesis and maternal effect gene expression controlling early embryogenesis only
really exist for the model organism d. melanogaster <cit> . developmental genetic studies focussing on species other than d.
melanogaster provide us with the opportunity to investigate how the gene
regulatory networks  underlying insect oogenesis might have evolved  <cit> .

maternal effects can have consequences that extend well beyond embryonic or juvenile
development, affecting offspring fertility and longevity  <cit> . the exact nature of the maternal effects and thus the contribution of a
female to the phenotype  of her offspring are not static, however, but
to a large extent depend on her own internal state, resource availability  <cit>  and in general the environmental conditions she experienced during her
life   <cit> . as such maternal effects constitute a form of non-genetic transmission
of environmental conditions across generations. this means that elements of the
regulatory states from the oogenesis grn of a mother can be passed on to the next
generation. there is thus a developmental framework in place with mothers having the
possibility to influence the fecundity and survival of their offspring in response
to their own environment, thereby providing an alternative system of inheritance
with profound consequences for phenotypic evolution  <cit> . however, much of life history theory has been developed without regard
to the actual developmental genetic basis of the variation in the traits being
investigated, such as reproductive output and maternal effects  <cit> . what has been lacking is a powerful model system to study the
developmental genetics of insect reproduction in an evolutionary ecological context  <cit> . lepidoptera are ideal candidates to undertake such ecological
evolutionary developmental  studies given the vast amount of
physiological data on oogenesis  <cit> , as well as very detailed information, for butterflies in particular, on
reproductive variability in relation to environmental variability  <cit> .

recently, valuable functional genomic tools have been developed for butterflies  <cit> ; for example, for melitaea cinxia to study life history
variation  <cit> , bicyclus anynana to study wing colour patterning  <cit> , the monarch butterfly danaus plexippus to study long-distance
migration  <cit> , heliconius species to study mimicry  <cit>  and for both erynnis propertius and papilio zelicaon to
study variability among populations in response to environmental heterogeneity and
climate change  <cit> . the information that has been missing so far in butterflies is a
detailed description of the ovarian transcriptome, including maternal regulation of
patterning the embryo along its axes and mrna contributed maternally to eggs. in
fact, in lepidoptera, there is a distinct lack of such developmental studies; only
in the silkmoth bombyx mori have a number of recent studies on candidate
genes in maternal regulation of early embryogenesis  been undertaken  <cit> .

the speckled wood butterfly pararge aegeria , a temperate zone species,
is a popular model species for evolutionary ecology studies, for example on
plasticity in female reproduction  <cit> . female p. aegeria mate soon after emergence and usually mate
only once  <cit> . at eclosion they have no or just a few  <cit>  mature oocytes and if mated on the day of emergence, usually they start
ovipositing  <dig> hrs later on the third day of their life  <cit> . in female p. aegeria resources for reproduction are, to a
significant degree, obtained during the larval stage and there is little opportunity
to obtain more nitrogenous resources for reproduction through adult feeding  <cit>  or nuptial gifts. like many other butterflies  <cit> , p. aegeria has meroistic ovaries with  <dig> ovarioles. each
ovariole consists of a germarium , previtellogenic primary
oocytes, vitellogenic eggs and mature chorionated eggs  <cit>  . a total of seven nurse cells
transfer maternal proteins, and mrna of maternal effect genes into developing
oocytes, whilst the somatic follicle cells surrounding the oocyte are involved in
choriogenesis and vitellogenesis, as well as oocyte patterning  <cit> .
pararge aegeria.  female p.
aegeria laying an egg.  complete meroistic p.
aegeria ovary, consisting of a total of  <dig> ovarioles. two times 4
ovarioles are attached to each other in the germarium region. ovary in photo
is still attached to the oviduct and part of the ovipositor. only the
ovaries were used for sequencing in this study.  detail of
previtellogenic eggs, with nurse and follicle cells visible.

in this paper, we present a comprehensive study of the genes expressed during
oogenesis for the butterfly p. aegeria, using de novo
transcriptome sequencing and qpcr. given the wealth of data on reproductive
physiology in lepidoptera, the genes implicated in hormonal control of reproduction
will be investigated in particular detail in this study. furthermore, as a first
step in determining the conserved and divergent elements of the butterfly oogenesis
grn , we investigated which of the genes known to play an essential role in
d. melanogaster or b. mori oogenesis were also transcribed by
p. aegeria.

although the number of ovarioles differs among d. melanogaster, p.
aegeria and b. mori, these species have similar organisation of
their meroistic ovaries, making for an ideal comparison. furthermore, within
lepidoptera, the silkmoth b. mori and butterflies  belong to the more derived division ditrysia within the infraorder
heteroneura and thus are likely to share developmental characteristics  <cit> . many aspects of maternal regulation of early d. melanogaster
embryogenesis can be explained by the fact that it is a long germ band insect  <cit> . within the order of lepidoptera there is a transition from a short germ
in the more ancestral species to something more similar to long germ in the more
derived species, such as those belonging to ditrysia  <cit> . this fact, again, makes for an interesting comparison between the three
species.

we describe particular features of the p. aegeria ovarian transcriptome that
were revealed during assembly and annotation, including orthologs of genes involved
in several major conserved signaling pathways, maternal regulation of early
embryogenesis, vitellogenesis and choriogenesis. we observed that p.
aegeria differed most significantly from d. melanogaster  in terms of stem cell maintenance in the germarium, egf
signalling in establishing oocyte polarity along anterior-posterior  and
dorsal-ventral , and the signalling mechanisms used at the termini of the
oocyte. furthermore, we observed a high proportion of apparently unique sequences in
the transcriptome, and we discuss how future exploration of the function and
expression patterns of these unique sequences will undoubtedly provide valuable
insights into the evolution of insect oogenesis.

RESULTS
the main aim of this study was to identify the genes expressed in the ovaries
involved in oocyte formation, establishing oocyte polarities and the rna transcripts
transferred into the eggs by the mother, which either regulate early embryogenesis
or are needed during early embryogenesis. drosophila melanogaster is
arguably the best studied insect species in terms of ovarian gene expression and
maternal effect gene function. additional file  <dig> contains
an extensively referenced list of the key essential oogenesis genes. flybase  <cit>  and silkbase  <cit>  were used as a starting point to conduct the comprehensive literature
search. the vast majority of papers thus mainly concern the model species d.
melanogaster and b. mori. furthermore, for d.
melanogaster genes, a high-throughput developmental time series database
was consulted for fpkm  -based gene expression levels  <cit>  , as well as an in-situ database for maternal
transcript contribution to the oocyte  <cit> . the oogenesis genes discussed in this paper have been classified into
functional groupings and were identified predominantly from d. melanogaster
studies . studies on d.
melanogaster oogenesis are too numerous to list exhaustively, but key
relevant papers  have been cited to enable the reader to
explore the role of each particular gene during oogenesis further. it should of
course be noted that quite a number of genes are expressed in different functional
contexts during oogenesis, such as genes encoding the components of various
signalling pathways or a gene such as cornichon, which is involved in
setting up both ap and dv axis polarity as well as oocyte nucleus localisation in
d. melanogaster <cit> . such genes only occur once in additional file  <dig> and the tables presented in this paper, but the references to and
discussion of such genes will highlight their pleiotropic functions.

annotation and verification of expression by means of qpcr
pararge aegeria egg and ovary rna was sequenced using illumina short
read rna-seq technology. of the  <dig> contigs,  <dig> contigs were of sufficient
quality and length to be annotated  with 30%,
possibly novel or highly divergent, remaining uncharacterised . the presence or absence of p. aegeria orthologs in the
transcriptome data of  <dig> essential oogenesis genes listed in additional file
 <dig> was verified manually;  <dig> were found, which is
 <dig> %. a total of  <dig> genes out of the  <dig> had been identified in d.
melanogaster studies. pararge aegeria expressed  <dig> of these,
which is  <dig> %. a further  <dig> genes were found to be expressed for which
functionality during oogenesis can be inferred, but which have not been verified
experimentally. specific genes will be discussed elsewhere in this paper. a
large number of these genes are not only transcribed during oogenesis to produce
an oocyte, but maternal transcripts were also found to be present in the oocyte
itself . exceptions include genes encoding chorion proteins as well as
yolk and associated proteins. large amounts of transcripts of these genes are
found in the ovaries only . a number of contigs appeared to have
relatively high transcript abundance  in the oocytes compared to the ovaries, suggesting that these
transcripts are important as maternal effect transcripts incorporated into the
oocytes in relatively large concentrations . an example of this is the gene
encoding a signal transducing adaptor molecule , which in d.
melanogaster is expressed throughout oogenesis  <cit> , but of which transcripts are detected in very high levels in early
embryogenesis  <cit> . on the basis of the go terms, the  <dig> gene orthologs appear to be
representative of the annotated genes in the transcriptome as a whole
.

transcript abundance  in the pararge
aegeria ovarian/oocyte transcriptome . the first column is a measure of
which transcripts were most abundant in the ovaries compared to
those present as maternal transcripts in the oocytes. these are
genes highly expressed in the ovaries, but with few to no maternal
transcripts in the oocyte. the genes listed in column  <dig> have
relatively high fpkm values in the oocytes compared to the ovaries,
indicating large concentrations of transcripts . the third column lists the genes
most transcribed during p. aegeria oogenesis. columns list
the gene top  <dig>  from high to low.
orthologs of essential oogenesis genes listed in additional file  <dig> has been manually verified. the gene ontologies
 of genes that were present were determined by blast2go and go terms
were subsequently condensed using the generic go slim subset. the
histogram details the number of pararge aegeria manually
verified contigs  for each go term. fpkm estimates were used to compare the
levels of transcripts found in the ovaries and as maternal transcripts
in the egg. using a log <dig> fold change threshold of  <dig>  genes were
classified in the histogram as present in similar amounts in the egg and
ovarian transcriptome , used predominantly
during oogenesis to make an egg, but not or hardly used as a maternal
transcript , or highly concentrated in the egg
as maternal transcripts .

a total of  <dig> sequences have been submitted. the sequences are
classified below according to their location , completeness and annotation status . characteristics of the contigs are listed, such as average
size of the contig, coding sequence and the 3’ and 5’
utrs .
succesfully annotated genes in the total transcriptome were determined
by blast2go and go terms were subsequently condensed using the generic
go slim subset. the histogram details the number of pararge
aegeria contigs  for each go term. fpkm estimates were used
to compare the levels of transcripts found in the ovaries and as
maternal transcripts in the egg. using a log <dig> fold change threshold of
 <dig>  genes were classified in the histogram as present in similar amounts
in the egg and ovarian transcriptome ,
used predominantly during oogenesis to make an egg, but not or hardly
used as a maternal transcript , or highly
concentrated in the egg as maternal transcripts .

for of a subset of  <dig> genes, sampled across the functional groups identified in
additional file  <dig>  the expression in the ovarioles and
the presence of transcripts in the oocyte were confirmed further by means of
rt-qpcr. these genes were: argonaute  <dig> , caudal
, decapentaplegic ,
egalitarian , exuperantia ,
fragile x mental retardation  <dig> , nanos-like
, nanos-m , nanos-o
, ornithine decarboxylase antizyme ,
anterior open , par- <dig>  piwi,
chorion b-zip transcription factor , staufen
, vitellogenin receptor yolkless 
and vitellogenin . two further genes, which
have not been explicitly studied in the context of oogenesis , were investigated: embryonic
lethal abnormal vision  and minibrain
. furthermore,  <dig> housekeeping genes were selected to be used
as reference genes: rna polymerase ii  <dig> kd subunit
, tata binding protein  and
zwischenferment  .

the qpcr results were used to confirm the presence of expression as well as the
levels of expression  in the transcriptome
dataset .
transcripts of vitellogenin were not transferred into the oocytes and very few
dpp transcripts were transferred into the egg . all of the other oogenesis genes investigated by means
of qpcr were included as maternal effect gene transcripts in the oocytes . specific qpcr results will be
discussed in the remainder of the paper.

discussion
germ-line and ovarian stem cells
in d. melanogaster three major signalling pathways play a significant
role in cystoblast differentiation, and the maintenance and division of
germ-line and ovarian stem cells; tgf-beta, wnt and hedgehog signalling  <cit> . components of all three signalling pathways have been identified for
p. aegeria . however, it is not clear, to what extent these
signalling pathways are essential in the lepidopteran germarium, as they were
not identified as such in b. mori using sage analyses  <cit> . rather than signalling, for example, a previously unidentified
non-coding rna appears to regulate cystoblast differentiation in b.
mori <cit> .
genes of interest. data above the midline  indicate a relatively high number of transcripts in the
oocyte compared with the ovary. boxes represent the interquartile range.
whiskers represent the minimum and maximum observations. note
vtg/vg transcripts were not found in the
oocyte.
cells

shifted; wnt inhibitory factor  <dig> precursor
skinny hedgehog; hedgehog acyltransferase; cg32281
roadkill; similar to speckle-type poz
rap-1a; enhancer of faf; similar to bombyx mori
fused; similar to serine/threonine kinase
sans fille; u <dig> small nuclear ribonucleoprotein a;
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature as functioning early for the maintenance and division of
germ-line and ovarian somatic stem cells. presence , possible
presence  or absence  of orthologous transcripts in the
pararge aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

the tgf-beta ligands glass bottom boat  and dpp
were expressed in p. aegeria ovarioles . the type i tgf-beta receptors used were
thickveins  and an activin type  <dig> receptor similar to
baboon  , the latter of which is present
in the d. melanogaster oocyte as a maternal transcript necessary for
early embryogenesis  <cit> . no evidence, however, could be found for an ortholog of activin type
i receptor saxophone  . no ortholog of the activin type ii receptor
punt  was found, although pacg <dig> was found to be a
type ii bmp receptor . the p.
aegeria transcriptome contained orthologs of two smad family genes;
mothers against dpp  and smad on x
, but not of medea nor of the anti-smad
daughters against decapentaplegic , which have been
shown to be of importance in d. melanogaster germline stemcell
maintenance  <cit> . furthermore, the negative regulator of dpp signalling
dullard  was found to be expressed in p.
aegeria ovaries. in d. melanogaster this gene plays a role in
wing vein formation  <cit> , and although it has been found to be maternally deposited  <cit> , its role in oogenesis has not been verified. another negative
regulator of dpp signalling, brinker , which plays a role
in eggshell patterning in d. melanogaster <cit> , was also expressed by p. aegeria. in d. melanogaster,
bag of marbles  interacts with dpp signalling to regulate
stem cell maintenance and differentiation in the germarium  <cit> . however, bam is a drosophila unique gene and is
not found in p. aegeria.

during oogenesis p. aegeria females express two wnt receptors, which
show orthology to frizzled- <dig> and frizzled- <dig> .
furthermore, they express the wnt receptor l43ea ,
which plays a role in d. melanogaster vitellogenesis  <cit> , as well as dishevelled , which is part of the
wnt receptor complex . other
components of the wnt pathway expressed include armadillo
, pangolin , groucho
, axin , sugarless
, legless , pygopus
 and shaggy , as well as
wntless . maternal transcripts of each of these genes
were found in the oocyte , with the
exception of sgl. asymmetric localisation of maternal axn rna
has been shown to be involved in ap formation in tribolium castaneum <cit> . rather interestingly, the ligand wingless  was
not found in the assembled transcriptome . however,  <dig> ovary and  <dig> oocyte
raw rna-seq reads mapped against the complete wg cds from our
unpublished p. aegeria genome . in d.
melanogaster, transcripts of wg are not found in the oocyte  <cit>  and although wnt signaling has been established as present during
oogenesis  <cit> , expression levels of wg are extremely low  <cit> , making it hard to detect the transcripts. it is clear that in p.
aegeria there is strong maternal contribution to zygotic wnt signaling
, but whether wnt signaling plays a
role during oogenesis needs to be further investigated.

abnormal spindle 
javelin-like ;
capulet; act up, bcdna:ld <dig>  cg5061
bombyx mori cdc <dig> small effector 2-like protein
rac1; ras-related c <dig> botulinum toxin substrate 1
specifically rac <dig> associated protein; fmr1-interacting
engulfment and cell motility protein; ced-12
chickadee 
focal adhesion kinase-like; fak56
membrane-associated protein hem ;
similar to membrane-associated protein gex-3
pemphigoid antigen  <dig> ; microtubule-actin
dishevelled associated activator of morphogenesis-1
karst 
guanylyl cyclase at 76c; receptor-type guanylate
similar to kelch domain containing 4
wiskott-aldrich syndrome protein family member 2; wasp
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature as important in cytoskeleton and actomyosin contractile
ring assembly. presence  or absence  of orthologous
transcripts in the pararge aegeria transcriptome is
indicated.

no ortholog of drosophila wnt <dig>  was
found , which in d. melanogaster is
involved in regulating cell movement during ovarian morphogenesis  <cit> . finally, transcripts of an ortholog of shifted
 were present both in the ovary and oocyte in p.
aegeria . this gene encodes an egf-like protein acting as a wnt
inhibitory factor  <dig>  which in d. melanogaster stabilises hedgehog
signalling and transcripts of which are deposited in the oocyte  <cit> . hedgehog  itself, as well as components of the
pathway including smoothened , fused
, suppressor of fused , and cubitus
interruptus  were all found to be expressed and maternal
transcripts of all were present in the oocyte . both costa  and the receptor
patched  were not expressed during oogenesis by
p. aegeria . although ptc protein has been detected in the
d. melanogaster germarium  <cit> , detecting ptc transcripts may prove more difficult because
ptc appears to be transcribed in very low amounts  <cit> , and it is possible that this is why ptc transcripts were
also not found in p. aegeria. as has been observed for wnt signalling,
there is a maternal contribution to zygotic hh signalling, but presently it is
not clear whether this signalling pathway plays a significant role during p.
aegeria oogenesis.

cytoskeleton and actomyosin contractile ring assembly
orthologs of the vast majority of genes that have been described as affecting the
cytoskeleton and actomyosin contractile ring during d. melanogaster
oogenesis were expressed in p. aegeria . one of the genes not found is ovarian tumor
, which plays a crucial role during d. melanogaster
oogenesis. otu is involved in cytoskeletal formation, cyst formation in
germ-line cells, nurse cell chromosome dispersion and gurken
 mrna localisation  <cit> . for  <dig> genes no p. aegeria orthologs could be found in the
dataset . for a number of these, this is not
surprising, as in general it has proven to be difficult to find orthologs
outside the genus drosophila; for example dicephalic
, mushroom body defect , hold
up  and stand still .

pararge aegeria females were found to express e-cadherin
. e-cadherin-dependent adhesion
underlies the positioning of the oocyte at the posterior of the cyst, which in
turn plays a role in establishing the ap polarity in d. melanogaster
during very early oogenesis  <cit> .

oocyte determination  and formation of the
anterior-posterior polarity during the early stages of oogenesis
three genes have been described in the literature as important in d.
melanogaster follicle ring canal formation; visgun
, nasrat n) and scraps
 <cit> . only fsn was not transcribed by p. aegeria
females . fusomes, regions of
spectrin-rich cytoplasm, are essential in d. melanogaster to establish
a system of directional transport between cystocytes underpinning oocyte
determination and subsequent oocyte polarity  <cit> . the majority of genes that are expressed early in d.
melanogaster oogenesis regulating the formation of the fusome  were
also transcribed by p. aegeria, as well as the genes involved in
establishing initial ap polarity, including par- <dig> and
egalitarian  . par- <dig> in particular is essential in d.
melanogaster for both oocyte determination and for establishing ap
polarity through its effects on the organisation of the microtubule cytoskeleton
in conjunction with a number of other proteins  <cit> . among the proteins with which par- <dig> interacts in establishing ap
polarity are bazooka , bicaudal d , lkb1/par <dig>  egl,
14-3-3epsilon, and dynein proteins . the genes encoding these proteins were all expressed
by p. aegeria . transcripts of both
par- <dig> and egl were also present in the oocyte
.

transitional endoplasmic reticulum atpase; ter94
egalitarian; 3'-5' exonuclease domain-like-containing
egghead; zeste-white 4;
ankyrin; similar to ankyrin  <dig> /unc44;
protein kinase a; camp-dependent protein kinase 1; dc <dig> 
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 3; similar
to dual specificity mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase ; dual specificity
protein tyrosine phosphatase 10d
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature acting early in the egg for oocyte determination
 and formation of the anterior-posterior
 axis. presence  or absence  of orthologous transcripts in
the pararge aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

soon after the posterior localisation of the oocyte in the d.
melanogaster cyst, egf signalling takes place in the posterior between
the oocyte  and the overlying follicle cells   <cit> , further consolidating ap polarity. orthologs of the fast-evolving
grk are difficult to find outside the genus drosophila <cit> . two genes encoding egf ligands and likely to be paralogs of
grk, spitz  and keren
, are involved in the regulation of border cell migration in
d. melanogaster <cit> . a single spi/krn-like egf ligand has been found in
the genomes of n. vitripennis and t. castaneum, and has been
argued to be functionally similar to grk in dv patterning in these
species  <cit> . pararge aegeria females expressed an ortholog of this
single spi/krn-like egf ligand, with the sequence displaying
significant similarity to harpegnathos saltator spi . large
amounts of these transcripts were detected in the p. aegeria oocyte
, suggesting a significant role for
its use during early embryogenesis as observed in d. melanogaster <cit> . given the expression of a spi/krn in p.
aegeria and the significance of egf signalling in insect oogenesis in
general, and establishing oocyte polarity in particular  <cit> , it is very surprising that only weak evidence was found for
expression of egfr, the gene encoding the egf receptor, in p.
aegeria ovaries . none of the
contigs in our de novo assembly could be clearly identified as an
egfr transcript. however,  <dig> raw rna-seq reads did map against the
complete efgr cds from our unpublished p. aegeria genome
. intriguingly, all of the raw reads that mapped successfully came
from the ovariole transcriptome, not the oocyte transcriptome, consistent with
the importance of egf signalling during oogenesis itself. transcript levels of
egfr are low to moderate in d. melanogaster ovaries  <cit> , and thus there is always the possibility, as was suggested for the
absence of ptc transcripts in our study, that p. aegeria egfr
transcript levels were not high enough to be accurately detected. however, it is
intriguing that as for a number of other components of the egf pathway involved
in dv patterning in d. melanogaster, p. aegeria also did not
transcribe, for example, rho during oogenesis . spatial restriction dorsally of rhomboid
, encoding a ligand-processing protease in the egfr pathway,
is necessary in d. melanogaster both for dv axis formation as well as
for correct patterning of the eggshell  <cit>  .
although further study is required, at present it thus seems that egf signalling
either does not play a significant role in p. aegeria during oogenesis
or a highly divergent one. this will be discussed further in the next
section.

hepatocyte growth factor regulated tyrosine kinase
cg3249; homologous to akap149
gamma-secretase subunit aph-1; anterior pharynx
defective 1; presenilin-stabilization factor
cut; similar to ccaat displacement
protein; similar to homeobox protein cut
metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 10
dodo; similar to bombyx mori rotamase pin1
zinc finger and btb domain-containing protein weak
homology to broad-complex core protein isoforms  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> 
pointed; similar to protein c-ets1
discs lost; tight junction pdz protein patj
leukocyte-antigen-related-like; tyrosine-protein
slow border cells; homologous to bombyx
exchange protein; weakly similar to denn
beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 2
beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 1
ca/calmodulin-responsive adenylate cyclase;
ovarian serine protease encoding nudel
vein 
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature acting in follicle cells early and late and promoting
their motility such as border cell migration . presence , possible presence  or
absence  of orthologous transcripts in the pararge
aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

genes acting early in the ovariole to establish dorsal-ventral polarity and
genes promoting follicle cell motility such as border cell migration
quite a number of genes involved in establishing dv polarity in the oocyte are
also important for choriogenesis and dorsal appendage formation in d.
melanogaster . apart from aforementioned grk, pipe was also not
expressed by p. aegeria. pipe plays an essential role in establishing
dv polarity in d. melanogaster oocytes, with its expression being
confined to ventral follicle cells as a result of localised egf signalling  <cit> . recently, however, it has been proposed that pipe is not
necessary in a number of insect species studied  <cit>  and even in d. melanogaster there appears to be a second
mechanism in establishing dv  <cit>  that may involve delayed induction by graded maternal dpp signalling
in the perivitelline space  <cit> . whatever the mechanism employed by lepidoptera, it is clear from
b. mori research that the factors determining dv polarity are
associated with the egg cortex  <cit> .

despite significant differences found in expression patterns of genes involved in
egf signalling in a number of insects, this pathway has been argued to be the
ancient mechanism for establishing dv polarity in insect eggs  <cit> . transcription factors that have been discussed as mediators of egf
signalling include pointed , aop and
capicua   <cit> . only the latter two were expressed by p. aegeria and
present as maternal transcripts, but whether they play a role in establishing dv
polarity remains to be investigated . the ets transcription factor aop also plays a role in border cell
migration and does not receive input exclusively from egf, but from a number of
signalling pathways including notch  <cit> . all components of the notch signalling pathway were expressed in the
ovarioles, with only notch  itself not being present as
maternal transcripts in the oocyte . maternal n transcripts are also
not found in d. melanogaster.

mirror; iroquois-class homeodomain protein irx
similar to bombyx mori heterogeneous nuclear
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature acting early in the egg to establish dorsal-ventral 
polarity. presence  or absence  of orthologous transcripts in
the pararge aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

the notch pathway interacts with the egf pathway in establishing oocyte polarity
in d. melanogaster, in particular through its effects on follicle cell
differentiation at both termini of the oocyte  <cit> . as has been established in this study, there is only weak evidence
at present for the use of the egf pathway during p. aegeria oogenesis,
and it is striking that the iroquois-class homeodomain protein mirror is not
expressed by p. aegeria . this
protein appears essential in d. melanogaster in integrating egf and
notch signalling in follicle differentiation and thus establishing ap and dv
polarity  <cit> . apart from the egf pathway, notch interacts with a number of other
proteins in patterning the follicle cells surrounding the oocyte, including
toucan and daughterless . these were expressed by p. aegeria , suggesting that the notch pathway is essential for
correct patterning of the follicle cells and possibly oocyte polarity, but in
p. aegeria it may not require an interaction with the egf pathway.
further studies are required to establish whether butterflies have dispensed
with egf signalling and localised pipe expression in establishing
oocyte polarity and instead rely on, for example, the notch and dpp pathway.

anterior and posterior system genes
the lepidopteran bombyx mori displays features of both short and long
germ band type insects, in which orthodenticle  and
cad maternal mrna are localised to establish the embryonic ap-axis  <cit> . both were expressed during p. aegeria oogenesis
 and indeed were present as mrna in the
oocytes . bicoid  is
drosophila-specific and although no ortholog was found to be
expressed, the genes that are involved in bcd localisation were,
including exu and stau, but not swallow
 . as observed in d. melanogaster,
transcripts for both exu and stau were also present in
significant amounts in p. aegeria oocytes   <cit> . the use of bcd in translational repression of cad
is unique to drosophila. it is very likely that the ancestral mechanism
for translational repression of cad is by means of the kh-domain
containing protein encoded for by mex- <dig> <cit> . pararge aegeria females expressed an ortholog of
mex- <dig> . furthermore, in d.
melanogaster, bcd interacts with genes such as bicoid interacting
protein  <dig> , eif4e, larp <dig>  polya
binding protein  and ago <dig> in order to repress
cad translation  <cit> . all of these were found to be expressed in p. aegeria, and
similarly to d. melanogaster <cit> , present as maternal transcripts in the oocytes .

bombyx mori eukaryotic initiation factor 4e-2
genes in anterior-posterior axis specification, identified from a
wide variety of insects. presence  or absence  of orthologous
transcripts in the pararge aegeria transcriptome is
indicated.

nanos; nanos-like 
arrest 
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4aiii
barentsz; eif4aiii binding protein; weak localizer
moesin-like; dmoesin 
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4e
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein i
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2α
melanogaster extended synaptotagmin 2
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature involved in posterior pole specification. presence  or
absence  of orthologous transcripts in the pararge
aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

drosophila melanogaster includes maternal hunchback
 transcripts into the egg, the protein of which will form an ap
gradient during early embryogenesis and cooperate with bcd to specify the
anterior of the embryo, whilst being repressed at the posterior by nos  <cit> . although there is variation between insect species as to whether
maternal hb rna or protein is transferred to the egg, as well as in the
significance of the maternal contribution to the hb gradient for ap patterning,
the transcription of hb during oogenesis appears conserved  <cit> . for example, although only zygotic hb is necessary for ap patterning
in the grasshopper schistocerca americana embryo, maternal hb
transcripts appear to be involved in distinguishing embryonic from
extra-embryonic cells along the ap axis, whilst in d. melanogaster
maternal and zygotic hb are redundant for ap patterning of the embryo  <cit> . in b. mori, the hb transcripts detected appear to
be transcribed by the zygote, not the mother  <cit> . pararge aegeria also did not express hb during
oogenesis , suggesting that lepidoptera, or
at least ditrysia, may have dispensed with a maternal contribution to the hb
gradient in the embryo.

nanos is involved in both the differentiation of the germ plasm and
posterior patterning in d. melanogaster <cit> , although these two functions can be mechanistically uncoupled  <cit> . lepidopteran primordial germ cells  develop in a midventral
position and in the germ disk after blastoderm formation, not posteriorly before
the blastoderm is formed as in d. melanogaster <cit> . it is therefore unlikely in lepidoptera that the genes involved in
setting up the embryonic posterior will interact with and be dependent on the
genes involved in the localisation of germline determinants, as shown to occur
in d. melanogaster <cit> . bombyx mori contains a number of nos paralogs
),
which indeed appear to have divided up these functions  <cit> . although it has been argued that b. mori does not have a
germ plasm, the location of maternal b. mori nos-o transcripts in the
embryo seems to correspond with where the pgcs will form  <cit> . these nos paralogs, with the exception of nos-p,
are expressed during oogenesis in both b. mori and p. aegeria,
with maternal transcripts detectable in p. aegeria eggs
  <cit> . nanos-p is primarily zygotically expressed during
embryogenesis in b. mori and may be implicated in stabilising the
embryonic ap-axis  <cit> . the nos paralogs have also been found in the monarch
butterfly  genome  <cit>  and phylogenetic analysis of nos sequences shows
nos-p to be quite different from the other paralogs , suggesting it may have a different functional
role.

translational repression of d. melanogaster nos rna is accomplished
during oogenesis by proteins encoded by glorund  and in the early
embryo by smaug   <cit> . transcripts of both are found in d. melanogaster oocytes  <cit> . a p. aegeria ortholog of smg was found, which was
present as rna in the oocyte, but not of glo . furthermore, smg
protein bound to the nos 3’ utr recruits the deadenylation
complex ccr4-not in d. melanogaster <cit> . rapid deadenylation leads to decay of nos rna, which is
essential in establishing the ap gradient of nos rna  <cit> . although it has been argued above that lepidoptera in all likelihood
do not use nos paralogs during oogenesis in establishing the posterior,
p. aegeria does express all the genes that encode proteins that
form this complex, despite the absence of an obvious ortholog for
twin/ccr <dig> . in d.
melanogaster it is the germ plasm protein oskar  that prevents
rapid deadenylation at the posterior pole, establishing nos as a
posterior defining gene  <cit> . ditrysia appear not to possess an osk ortholog  <cit> , which could be another reason why the identified nos
paralogs may not being involved in ap axis formation during oogenesis. indeed,
p. aegeria also does not possess an ortholog of osk
.

germ plasm, polar granules, nuage and p-bodies
although a germ plasm type structure has been identified cytologically in the
moth pectinophora gossypiella <cit> , it is not clear whether lepidoptera possess a proper germ plasm as
they lack osk, which has been argued to have been co-opted as the
essential gene in germ plasm formation in holometabolous insects  <cit> . pararge aegeria may not possess an osk ortholog,
but it does express two genes, which in d. melanogaster silence
osk translationally during oogenesis; bruno <cit>  and cup <cit>  . it should be noted, however, that these genes are
expressed in a number of functional contexts during oogenesis in d.
melanogaster . as part of the germ plasm, oskar induces polar
 granule formation and in doing so interacts with a number of genes
that characterise these polar granules, in particular tudor
, vasa  and valois
  <cit> . only valois  could not be found in the p.
aegeria transcriptome .

capsuléen; arginine n-methyltransferase 5
aubergine 
tudor; similar to tudor domain containing
ovarian nuage and pirna pathway genes identified mainly from the
drosophila melanogaster literature. presence  or
absence  of orthologous transcripts in the pararge
aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

both the ovarian nuage, an electron-dense perinuclear structure found
predominantly in nurse cells  <cit> , and polar granules are characterised by a number of the same genes,
including tud, vas and vls . the nuage appears not only to play a role in
protecting germline cells against the expression of selfish genetic elements in
the majority of animals, but also in establishing the polar granules in d.
melanogaster <cit> . it is therefore not surprising that piwi proteins and their bound
piwi-interacting rnas  have been identified as important for both nuage
and polar granule formation  <cit> . many of these genes encode tudor-domain containing proteins and seem
to evolve rapidly making it difficult to find orthologs outside
drosophila; e.g. vreteno , brother of
yb  and sister of yb   <cit> . indeed, no orthologs of these genes could be found in the p.
aegeria transcriptome . other
genes encoding tudor-domain containing proteins seem more conserved, such as
tdrd <dig>  tejas , tdrd <dig> and
spindle e/homeless   <cit>  and these were expressed by p. aegeria . what is interesting about tdrd <dig> is that it
shares the ost-hth/lotus functional domain with osk <cit> . it is likely that this domain is involved in rna binding and thus
for regulating mrna translation and/or localisation in germ cell development  <cit> .

there are three genes that encode piwi proteins; piwi,
aubergine  and argonaute  <dig>   <cit> . all three were expressed during oogenesis by p. aegeria
. piwi also plays an
essential role in the d. melanogaster germarium and is thus involved in
the establishment, maintainance and renewal of germline stem cells  <cit> . furthermore, mutations in d. melanogaster pirna
 pathway genes often disrupt the axes of the developing
oocyte, through their effects on the microtubule cytoskeleton; for example
maelstrom , zucchini  and
squash  affect dv polarity  <cit> . the latter two also interact with aub in d.
melanogaster in silencing osk translation during oogenesis  <cit> . similarly, the rnai pathway gene armitage 
affects axis formation and is involved in osk translational silencing
in d. melanogaster <cit> . neither zuc nor squ was found in the p.
aegeria transcriptome, but mael and armi were
.

ovarian processing bodies  are aggregates of translationally
inactive ribonucleoproteins . in d. melanogaster these can be
found in nurse cells, but also appear to be involved in compartmentalisation of
mrna decay and translation repression, for example of osk <cit> . with the exception of edc4/ge- <dig> and pacman
, genes that encode the essential components of p-bodies were
expressed in p. aegeria . rna of p-body components, for example
dcp <dig>  are also transferred to oocytes during d.
melanogaster oogenesis and are necessary for early embryogenesis  <cit> . this was also observed in p. aegeria .

smg <dig> homolog, nonsense mediated mrna decay
regulator of nonsense transcripts 1; nonsense mrna
reducing factor 1; up-frameshift suppressor 1
similar to upf <dig> regulator of nonsense transcripts
similar to bombyx mori upf <dig> regulator of nonsense
ovarian processing bodies genes identified mainly from the
drosophila melanogaster literature. presence  or
absence  of orthologous transcripts in the pararge
aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

once the germ plasm has been established at the posterior in d.
melanogaster, a number of  maternal-effect genes are
essential in germline formation during early embryogenesis .
pararge aegeria females do express similar genes to the fruit fly,
including genes associated traditionally with d. melanogaster pole
plasm, such as arrest/bruno  and imp <cit> . however, there are some notable exceptions, the most significant of
which are germ cell-less  and polar granule
component  .
these genes are essential in d. melanogaster, but there are no known
pgc orthologs outside the genus drosophila. although
orthologs can be found for gcl even in vertebrates, none can be found
in genomic databases for the lepidoptera, including the new data presented here.
the gene wunen  is involved in germ cell migration in
d. melanogaster embryos . pararge aegeria females also include
wun transcripts in the oocyte .

genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature involved in germ plasm  formation - control of endocytosis in
germline and germline viability. presence  or absence  of
orthologous transcripts in the pararge aegeria
transcriptome is indicated.

terribly reduced optic lobes; perlecan; zeste-white
tbc <dig> domain family member 1; weakly similar to
type iii alcohol dehydrogenase; iron-containing
germ cell guidance factor wunen; phosphatidate
receptor for activated protein kinase c rack 1
shuttle craft; transcriptional repressor nf-x1
dorsal ; embryonic polarity protein dorsal
darkener of apricot; dual specificity protein kinase
clipper; cleavage and polyadenylation specific factor
absent md neurons and olfactory sensilla
clip-domain serine protease subfamily b
éclair; transmembrane emp <dig> protein transport
to serine protease  <dig> ; clip-domain
baiser; transmembrane trafficking protein
drosophila melanogaster calpain-a
bancal;  heterogeneous nuclear
oalpha 47a; guanine nucleotide-binding protein g
subunit alpha; g protein alpha subunit go
diadenosine tetraphosphatase; similar to
bis-tetraphosphatase
dopa decarboxylase; aromatic-l-amino-acid
suppressor of hairless; j kappa-recombination
transcription termination factor lodestar; horka
raspberry; inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase
drosophila no on or off transient a
peanut; similar to septin 7
septin and tuftelin interacting protein; elongator
complex protein 2; septin interacting protein 1
kurz; similar to atp-dependent rna helicase
female sterile  ketel; karyopherin beta 1; importin
cas/cse <dig> segregation protein; export karyopherin
cg5543; similar to wd repeat-containing 70
importin alpha 2; karyopherin α2; pendulin
oxidoreductase acyl carrier protein
kinesin-like protein at 61f; urchin; kinesin-like
cask ortholog; calmodulin-dependent kinase
histone acetyltransferase kat2b; histone
acetyltransferase pcaf; general control of amino acid
s-adenosyl-methyl transferase mraw; cg14683
c-terminal binding protein; hairy-interacting
protein; similar to 2-hydroxyacid
furin 1; similar to convertase
subtilisin/kexin; similar to furin-like
windbeutel; thioredoxin-like motif containing gene
maternal transcripts; maternal effect genes identified mainly from
the drosophila melanogaster literature encoding various
types of proteins, including enzymes, needed for early embryogenesis
and germ cell formation. presence  or absence  of orthologous
transcripts in the pararge aegeria transcriptome is
indicated.

maternal transcripts involved in regulating early embryogenesis –
dorsal-ventral patterning of the embryo and early neurogenesis
drosophila melanogaster uses an elaborate network of genes to pattern
the dv axis during embryogenesis on the basis of the oocyte polarity established
during oogenesis .
as discussed elsewhere in this paper, the two genes essential for establishing
dv polarity in d. melanogaster oocytes, grk and pipe
, were absent from the p. aegeria transcriptome. the genes
that are subsequently involved in establishing the ventral side of the d.
melanogaster embryo are co-opted from the toll innate immune defense
pathway . a similar cascade has been described in t. castaneum, but
at present it is not known whether it is restricted to the ventral perivitelline
space  <cit> . this protease cascade and associated  genes were also
expressed in p. aegeria, but at present it is unclear in which
functional context they are used. these genes include; windbeutel
, nudel , gastrulation
defective , snake , easter
, spn27a, spz, tube 
and pelle  . no orthologs for the zinc-finger gene
weckle  have yet been found outside
drosophila, and wek was also not found in p.
aegeria . in d.
melanogaster, toll receptor protein accumulates during the embryonic
syncytial stage prior to nuclear migration, and is activated ventrally as the
result of a serine/protease cascade . the toll-like receptor expressed by p.
aegeria during oogenesis was found to be an ortholog of 18
wheeler , rather than toll 
. in
d. melanogaster 18w is involved in dorsal appendage formation and
follicle cell migration  <cit> , and dv patterning  <cit> . while p. aegeria eggs do not have dorsal appendages,
18w may be involved in dv patterning. in d. melanogaster
18w expression in relation to eggshell patterning, and thus dv
polarity, is dependent on input from dpp and egf signalling pathways  <cit> . as discussed elsewhere in the paper, there is not much evidence for
egf signalling in p. aegeria oogenesis, but there is for dpp signalling
. furthermore, analyses
of toll receptors have shown that b. mori tl and 18w sequences
were more similar to each other, than to d. melanogaster toll <cit> . it thus remains to be investigated exactly which functional role
18w fulfils during oogenesis in lepidoptera.

pararge aegeria did express cactus  and
dorsal  . dorsal
protein is distributed evenly in a d. melanogaster embryo, but a
gradient in the uptake of dorsal protein into the nucleus  is essential for subsequent dv patterning in the d. melanogaster
embryo. dorsal protein activates some genes, whilst repressing others along the
dv axis  <cit> . while there are some differences in detail, the gene regulatory
network underlying embryonic dv patterning is largely conserved in all insects  <cit> . the dorsal protein represses dpp ventrally and the protein
encoded by grainyhead  acts as
co-repressor  <cit> . rna of grh is deposited maternally into the oocyte to be
translated and used ventrally during embryogenesis  <cit> . repression of dpp by a dorsal gradient does not, however,
occur in t. casteneum <cit> . a high concentration of dpp will eventually be restricted to the
dorsal side of the d. melanogaster embryo and its concentration is
further restricted ventro-laterally by short gastrulation , which in d.
melanogaster may also be maternally provided  <cit> . rather interestingly, this antagonistic interaction between dpp and
sog may already be employed during oogenesis for the establishment of dv
polarity in the oocyte  <cit> . the vrille  gene encodes a bzip transcription
factor that interacts in d. melanogaster with dpp signalling, acting as
dominant maternal enhancers of embryonic dv patterning defects caused by
ea and dpp mutations  <cit> . two p <dig> proteins encoded by eclair  and
baiser  are essential for the activity of maternal
tkv, a type i dpp receptor  <cit> . pararge aegeria females did transfer maternal transcripts
of grh, dpp, tkv, eca, bai and vri into the oocyte,
but did not express sog maternally .

drosophila melanogaster females express a group of genes called the
yema genes  during oogenesis,
with most of them displaying strict maternal expression. this may be of
importance in the development of the central nervous system of the embryo  <cit> . however, the exact functional roles of the yema genes are
not known and there are no orthologs outside drosophila <cit> . no orthologs were found for these genes in the p. aegeria
transcriptome . pararge aegeria females did, however, express
a number of other genes that are implicated in embryonic brain development or in
general in the nervous system; e.g. neuralized ,
elav, brainiac , fmr <dig>  brain
tumor , mnb, and terribly reduced optic
lobes  . of these, mnb and elav have not been
explicitly studied in the context of oogenesis . although maternal transcripts of these genes
may play a role in embryonic neural development in d. melanogaster,
these genes appear to be important in establishing polarity of the oocyte and
its differentiation during oogenesis . the expressions of three of these were further
investigated by means of qpcr: elav, fmr <dig> and the
serine/protease encoding mnb . to date, of these three, only fmr <dig> has been described as
present in d. melanogaster oocytes, but elav, fmr1
and mnb were all found in p. aegeria oocytes
  <cit> . compared to the ovaries, the amount of elav and
fmr <dig> transcripts in the oocytes was quite low , suggesting they are important during oogenesis. whether these
genes play a role of significance in establishing oocyte polarity in p.
aegeria needs to be investigated.

terminal genes
the torso receptor tyrosine kinase  pathway has been implicated in a number
of different processes during d. melanogaster oogenesis, including
vitelline membrane  biogenesis  <cit>  and in particular terminal region specification  <cit> . the maternal-effect gene torso  encodes a
receptor whose ligand is most probably encoded for by trunk
. furthermore, the protein encoded by torsolike
 plays a role upstream of trk in activating the tor
receptor in a localised manner, and is thought to be essential for terminal
specification  <cit> . although both tor and tsl are involved in terminal
specification in t. castaneum, different tissues are patterned and
torso signalling plays a role in defining the posterior growth zone during
embryogenesis in this short germband insect  <cit> . torso signalling is by no means the default mechanism for terminal
specification, as the honey bee  has the gene
tsl, but not tor and trk in its genome  <cit> . the honey bee seems to rely on other mechanisms for terminal
specification  <cit> . pararge aegeria does not express clear orthologs of either
tor or trk during oogenesis, but does express tsl
. bombyx mori does have a rtk
in its genome , which shows similarity to torso, as well
as to tie-like and cad96ca. pararge aegeria did not
express tie-like , but did express
cad96ca .
this transcript was not present in oocytes and was found only in the ovarioles
. furthermore, a tblastn of the
putative b. mori tor against the p. aegeria transcriptome
showed that transcript pacg <dig>  was similar , although it had
greater similarity to the receptor tyrosine kinase fps85d than to
tor. this transcript is present in both p. aegeria oocytes
and ovarioles, but its role in oogenesis has not been described in the
literature. it is clear that p. aegeria uses rtk signalling during
oogenesis and that the sequences of its ligands and receptors have diverged from
those of other insects. however, at present it is unclear in which functional
context rtk signalling takes place.

corkscrew; similar to protein tyrosine
female sterile  homeotic; fragile-chorion membrane
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature involved in terminal specification. presence  or
absence  of orthologous transcripts in the pararge
aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

chromatin regulation during oogenesis, dna replication, general transcription
and maternal regulation of zygotic transcription in general
in general, the genes that encode proteins involved in chromatin remodelling, dna
replication and transcription are highly conserved across insects and often
across the metazoa in general . a large number of these genes have been studied specifically
in the context of oogenesis in d. melanogaster . pararge aegeria
was found to express orthologs of a number of these genes . the
genes not expressed by p. aegeria seem to either have no clear insect
orthologs outside drosophila, or no such orthologs have been reported
in lepidoptera, such as b. mori. genes not expressed by p.
aegeria, but for which lepidopteran orthologs exist include tata
box binding protein-related factor  <dig> , sex combs on
midleg , and arginine methyltransferase  <dig> and
 <dig> . the gene
scm is a member of the polycomb group  and
similar to d. melanogaster polyhomeotic  gene. both play
versatile and important roles in d. melanogaster oogenesis,
particularly in ovarian follicle formation  <cit> . pararge aegeria females did express and transfer orthologs
of other pcg genes into the oocyte. these include the polycomb repressive
complex  <dig>  genes sex combs extra ,
polycomb , posterior sex combs
, the prc <dig> genes extra sex combs ,
enhancer of zeste ) and the polycomb related genes
enhancer of polycomb ) and additional sex
combs  . recently these genes have also been identified in b. mori
embryogenesis  <cit> . these genes encode proteins that regulate dna and histone
methylation patterns and general chromatin remodelling. however, they also
appear to be important specifically during oogenesis and embryogenesis and may
be implicated in transferring gene regulatory states from one generation to the
next, being regarded as candidate genes in epigenetic processes  <cit> , with possible involvement in transgenerational effects in relation
to environmental heterogeneity.

dna polymerase α 180kd; dna polymerase alpha
rna polymerase ii transcriptional coactivator single
high mobility group protein; structure specific
recognition protein. fact complex subunit ssrp1
similar to drosophila melanogaster high mobility group
protein d; similar to bombyx mori high mobility
lysine-specific histone demethylase 1; suppressor of
variegation 3– <dig> 3-3;
histone methyltransferase 4–20; suppressor of
drosophila melanogaster suppressor of variegation
mutagen-sensitive 205; rev3-like
eukaryotic translation initiation factor  <dig> gamma
suppressor of variegation 2–10; protein inhibitor
of activated stat 2-10; pias; zimp;
drosophila replication factor c subunit 3
trithorax-like 3;
brahma; swi/snf-related matrix-associated
actin-dependent regulator of chromatin subfamily a
marcal1; swi/snf-related matrix-associated
actin-dependent regulator of chromatin subfamily a
snf5-related 1; swi/snf-related matrix-associated
actin-dependent regulator of chromatin subfamily b
brg- <dig> associated factor; swi/snf-related
matrix-associated actin-dependent regulator of chromatin
subfamily d member 1; brahma associated protein
dalao; brahma-associated protein 111kd; swi/snf-related
matrix-associated actin-dependent regulator of chromatin
etl <dig> homologue; swi/snf-related matrix-associated
actin-dependent regulator of chromatin subfamily a
sex combs extra; similar to e3
ubiquitin-protein ligase ring <dig> 
lethal  73ah; similar to polycomb group ring
activating transcription factor; homologous to
bombyx activating transcription factor of
cyclic-amp response element binding protein
creb binding protein; similar to nejire
similar to retinoblastoma binding protein 6
no child left behind; similar to wd repeat
arginine methyltransferase 1; arginine
arginine methyltransferase 2; arginine
arginine methyltransferase 3; arginine
arginine methyltransferase 4; histone-arginine
arginine methyltransferase 6; arginine
arginine methyltransferase 7; arginine
arginine methyltransferase 8; arginine
arginine methyltransferase 9; arginine
bj <dig> protein; homolog of regulator of chromatin
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature involved in regulation of chromatin structure during
oogenesis, dna replication, general transcription and maternal
regulation of zygotic transcription in general. presence  or
absence  of orthologous transcripts in the pararge
aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

genes influencing the cell cycle regulators of mitosis and meiosis
a large number of genes that regulate mitosis have been studied in a reproductive
context in d. melanogaster. these genes are not only involved in stem
cell maintenance and differentiation in the germarium, but also in relation to
endocycling in nurse cells and selective amplication of genes  important in oocyte production . as before, the genes that were not expressed
by p. aegeria in a mitotic context seemed either to have no clear
insect orthologs outside drosophila, or no such orthologs have been
reported in lepidoptera such as b. mori . among these are dacapo ,
matrimony , microcephalin 
and chiffon  . the full list of genes in table 16
contains a large number of cyclins, which regulate cyclin dependent kinases
. orthologs of two common cyclins could not be found in the p.
aegeria transcriptome: cyclin e and j .

archipelago; wd repeat domain containing 7
coiled coil domain containing protein 25
breast cancer  <dig>  early onset homolog
cyclin-dependent kinase 1; cell division cycle 2
cyclin-dependent kinase  <dig> homolog; cdc2-related
cyclin-dependent kinase subunit 30a
homologous to spry domain-containing socs box protein 4
cyclin-dependent kinase subunit 85a
inducer of meiosis 4; mta <dig> homologue
always early; a lin <dig> homolog
morula 
the myb-muvb complex subunit lin-52
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature that influence the cell cycle - regulators of mitosis
 and
meiosis. presence  or absence  of orthologous transcripts in
the pararge aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

the cell cycle becomes arrested in meiotic prophase i in the majority of
metazoans oocytes. this is initiated during the first stages of oogenesis in
region  <dig> of the d. melanogaster germarium  <cit> . the intriguing fact is that the gene bruno is not only
essential in regulating the translation of a number of genes during oocyte
differentiation, but it also appears to be involved in regulating the silencing
of cdk <dig> activity in order to achieve primary meiotic arrest  <cit> . it should be noted that oocyte ap and dv polarity is established
during primary meiotic arrest and only once the oocyte is properly patterned by
stage  <dig> is this arrest broken  <cit> . as indicated before, bruno was expressed by p.
aegeria females .

meiosis during butterfly and moth oogenesis is characterised by the absence of
crossing over and the formation of chiasmata  <cit> . cytological studies have established that female lepidoptera may
form synaptonemal complexes  in early meiotic prophase i, but no
recombination nodules  are formed subsequently. instead, a structure called
elimination chromatin is formed  <cit> . usually chiasmata are formed from retained pieces of the sc in which
a rn is, or has been, present  <cit> . the formation of the chiasmata takes place in the cell destined to
become the oocyte in the d. melanogaster germarium  <cit> . four genes appear essential in d. melanogaster for sc
formation and thus possibly chiasmata formation: crossover suppressor on 2
of manheim m); crossover suppressor on  <dig> of
gowen g); corona  and
nipped-b . no genes specific for rn alone could be identified on flybase  <cit> . pararge aegeria females only express nipped-b
, which is involved in a number of cellular processes in d.
melanogaster including mitosis  <cit> . it is also the only one of the four sc genes for which orthologs
outside drosophila can be identified. rather interestingly, a large
proportion of the genes involved in d. melanogaster meiotic chromosome
cohesion and segregation also appeared to be drosophila or diptera
specific and were not identified in the p. aegeria transcriptome. these
include grauzone , corona ,
orientation disrupter  and mei-s332
. a number of genes are, however, highly conserved and
orthologs have been found in lepidoptera as males do display crossing-over  <cit> . these include both mei-w <dig> and mei- <dig> but in
particular includes the essential meiotic checkpoint gene pch2
. female p.
aegeria did not express any of these genes . the p.
aegeria oogenesis transcriptome described here is thus in accordance
with the previous observations made during cytological studies on female
lepidoptera  <cit> .

vitellogenesis and lipid storage
not only is cell cycle regulation coordinated with oocyte differentiation in
d. melanogaster <cit> , but also with resource provisioning of the oocyte  <cit> . the gene greatwall , for example, is both
essential in d. melanogaster for maternal provisioning of the egg
during vitellogenesis and to ensure secondary meiotic arrest by stage  <dig> of
oogenesis in metaphase i  <cit> . it is a highly conserved gene in metazoa and p. aegeria
females did express this gene during oogenesis . furthermore,
gwl  interacts with polo kinase
 in mitotic regulation particularly during early
embryogenesis, and is maternally provided . transcripts of both were detected in p.
aegeria oocytes .

vitellogenesis during insect oogenesis is characterised by the accumulation in
the developing oocytes of large lipid transfer proteins , such as vitellogenin  and apolipophorins   <cit> . predominantly, lltps are produced in the fat bodies and secreted
into the hemolymph  <cit> , but not all yolk proteins are extraovarian  <cit> . follicle cells not only allow extraovarian yolk protein to reach the
oocytes, they also produce significant amounts of lltps themselves in a number
of insect species, including d. melanogaster <cit> . vitellogenic behaviour of follicle cells is under hormonal control  <cit> . lltps are transported into the oocytes via clathrin-dependent
endocytosis mediated by the receptors vgr  and lpr  <cit> . nurse cells transport yl/vgr rna into previtellogenic
oocytes, thus preparing the oocyte for vtg uptake  <cit> . pararge aegeria females expressed not only vtg/vg,
apolp-iii, apolp, their receptors yl/vgr
and lpr, but also the genes described in d. melanogaster
vitellogenic endocytosis . these genes include clathrin heavy and light
chain , sec <dig>  sec <dig> 
garnet  and jagunal 
.

apolipophorin precursor; drosophila cg11064
arylphorin ; sex-specific storage-protein
vitellogenin , vitellin light chain rare isoform, vitellin
heavy chain rare isoform and vitellin heavy chain )
60s ribosomal protein l10; qm protein homolog
resistance to juvenile hormone; methoprene-tolerant
defective in the avoidance of repellents dare;
ecdysone-induced protein 75b 
homologous to bombyx mori c-cbl-associated protein 
similar to bombyx mori egg-specific protein
calmodulin-binding protein ; weak
hormone receptor 3; drosophila hormone receptor-like in
hepatocyte nuclear factor  <dig> isoform a
hepatocyte nuclear factor  <dig> isoform b
juvenile hormone esterase binding protein; weak
homologous to bombyx juvenile hormone epoxide
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster and
bombyx mori literature involved in vitellogenesis,
lipid storage, ovarian maturation and hormonal regulation of
oogenesis. presence  or absence  of orthologous transcripts in
the pararge aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

the major yolk proteins, such as vitellogenins, share sequence similarities with
lipases. although not catalytically active, the vitellogenin region with
sequence similarity to lipases is argued to be involved in steroid hormone
binding, thus providing a possibility for a direct interaction with the hormones
that regulate their production  <cit> . for example, maternal ecdysteroids are bound as
ecdysteroid-phosphates to the vtg cleaved product vitellin  in yolk granules
in b. mori and released as ecdysteroids during yolk uptake in the
embryo as a result of dephosphorylation by ecdysteroid-phosphate phosphatase  <cit> . pararge aegeria did express eppase
. furthermore, a significant component
of yolk in a b. mori egg is the ovarian egg-specific protein esp, a
minor yolk protein  <cit> . the gene encoding esp is intriguing, as convincing orthologs for
minor yolk proteins outside the moths galleria mellonella  and samia cynthia  had not been found  <cit> . more recently, however, a further two sequences with strong sequence
similarity to g. mellonella yolk protein  <dig> have been discovered in
d. plexippus and plodia interpunctella, whilst
esp does show significant sequence similarity with genes encoding
the kk- <dig> binding proteins in antheraea moth species  <cit>  . sharing the same
abhydrolase lipase region, the kk- <dig> binding proteins and the minor yolk
proteins also show strong sequence similarity to lipases identified in species
such as d. melanogaster, in particular lipase- <dig> and 3
  <cit> . lepidoptera may have evolved to use paralogs of these genes in yolk
formation. rather interestingly, although not functioning
as a yolk protein, lip- <dig>  but not lip- <dig>  is expressed in
vitellogenic follicles in d. melanogaster <cit> . an orthologs of lip- <dig>  and possibly lip- <dig> , was expressed by p. aegeria, whilst no clear
ortholog of a minor yolk protein was found .

cathepsin l-like cysteine protease; bombyx cysteine
cathepsin b; cathepsin b-like cysteine proteinase
cathepsin f-like cysteine protease; cg12163
vacuolar proton atpase; vacuolar h+ atpase subunit
maternal effect genes, identified mainly from the drosophila
melanogaster and bombyx mori literature, involved
in facilitating yolk consumption by the developing embryos. presence
 or absence  of orthologous transcripts in the pararge
aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

among the most highly transcribed genes in p. aegeria ovarioles is an
ortholog of the slime mold physarum polycephalum gene
spherulin-2a. no transcripts were found for this gene in eggs
. lepidopteran orthologs of the protein encoded by this gene
have been shown to function as a subunit yp <dig> of follicular epithelium yolk
protein produced by follicle cells  <cit> .

yolk is a food source for the developing embryo and a number of genes encoding
cathepsins and vacuolar proton atp-ases are maternally expressed during
oogenesis to facilitate yolk uptake in the embryos . pararge aegeria females were found
to express all described yolk uptake genes, with the exception of the acid
phosphatase  <dig> gene  .

physiology of oogenesis
reproductive output depends on female nutritional status which not only affects
the rate and duration of oogenesis significantly, but also whether
previtellogenic egg chambers will enter the vitellogenic stage or apoptose  <cit> . two signalling systems are involved; insulin and hormone signalling  <cit> . in d. melanogaster, for example, absence of the insulin
receptor substrate  chico precludes vitellogenesis, whilst a sharp increase
in 20-hydroxy-ecdysone  relative to juvenile hormone  results in
apoptosis of the egg chamber before vitellogenesis is initiated or completed  <cit> . although the two signalling systems operate simultaneously and
interact, both have been shown to be able to independently terminate egg chamber
progression before vitellogenesis takes place in d. melanogaster <cit> . furthermore, the lepidoptera express a set of unique genes encoding
insulin-like peptides, the bombyxins   <cit> . the bbx genes are expressed predominantly in the brain, but
some may also be expressed in ovaries  <cit> . moths, in particular b. mori, possess a large number of
bbx-like genes in their genome  <cit> , but the genome of the butterfly d. plexippus appears to
have only three such genes  <cit> . orthologs of  <dig> of these  <dig>  were transcribed in p. aegeria ovarioles,
whilst a third partial irs transcript showed more sequence similarity to
chico than to any bbx-like gene . the
insulin-like receptor  was also expressed by p.
aegeria during oogenesis . furthermore, p. aegeria
expressed a large number of downstream target genes of insulin signalling
including genes encoding the serine/threonine protein kinase akt, the various
protein phosphatase 2a subunits  and the lipid storage
droplet proteins  <dig> and  <dig> . please refer to table  <dig> and references in additional file  <dig> for additional details.

apart from nutritional status, environmental factors such as temperature can
affect hormone concentrations, providing a possibility for environmental control
of reproductive output  <cit> . the interplay between 20e and jh is dynamic and complex, as both 20e
and jh also play a role in regulating choriogenesis  <cit> . both hormones have a range of pleiotropic effects during oogenesis
and their exact developmental role is not only titre related, but also dependent
on the dynamic spatio-temporal expression patterns of the receptors and
modulators of hormone signalling  <cit> .

there has been extensive investigation of jh signalling  <cit> , but the signal transduction pathway, including the jh receptor,
remains poorly understood  <cit> . the most likely candidate gene for the jh receptor proposed to date
is the basic helix–loop–helix /per-arnt-sim  domain gene
methoprene-tolerant   <cit> . it may form a homodimer, or possibly may form a jh-dependent
transcriptionally active complex with another member of the bhlh-pas family. the
most likely candidate for the complex is the steroid co-activator ncoa-1/p160
fisc, encoded by the gene taiman  in d.
melanogaster <cit> . the tai gene was originally discovered as a gene that was
expressed in follicle cells in the functional context of border cell migration
and was described as an ecdysone co-receptor .
pararge aegeria females expressed both met and
tai . an ortholog for tai
 can also been found in the genome of d. plexippus <cit> .

not much is known about which genes are transcriptionally regulated by the jh
activated receptor complex  <cit> . the gene kruppel-homolog  <dig>  has been
described as a jh response gene, inhibiting 20e induced broad
 expression in d. melanogaster, but not in the
specific context of oogenesis  <cit> . both khr <dig> and br were expressed by p.
aegeria females .
furthermore, jh may either directly or indirectly upregulate ornithine
decarboxylase , which regulates polyamine biosynthesis
and appears to be essential for vitellogenesis  <cit> . both odc and its antagonist gutfeeling
, also a mitotic cell-cycle regulator, were expressed in
p. aegeria. maternal transcripts of odc and oda
were found in eggs .

in order to regulate the precise amount of jh in both hemolymph and organs, two
sets of enzymes are involved in jh degradation; the jh epoxide hydrolases
 and the jh esterases   <cit> . jhes function predominantly in the hemolymph and degradation is
reversible, whilst jhehs regulate the amount of jh in organs and degradation is
irreversible  <cit> . apart from jheh, five recently discovered jheh-like protein genes
have been characterised in b. mori <cit>  and in addition to jheh, p. aegeria expressed
orthologs of three of these; jheh-lp <dig>  jheh-lp <dig> and
jheh-lp <dig> . with the exception of jheh-lp <dig> 
moderate amounts of transcripts of jhehs were found in the eggs . the females did not express a clear ortholog
of jhe, but did express an ortholog of a gene encoding an intracellular
binding protein of jhe presumed to be involved in its transport . significant amounts of maternal
jhebp transcripts were found in p. aegeria eggs
.

juvenile hormone itself may be bound by jh binding proteins  to enable
immobilisation, regulate degradation or enable transport  <cit> . four complete jhbp cdss were identified in p.
aegeria ovaries; jhbp, cytosolic jhbp
, hemolymph jhbp  and a sequence
showing strong orthology to takeout  identified in d.
melanogaster as involved in jh binding . transcripts of both cjhbp and to were
transferred to the eggs by p. aegeria . given that jh itself can be transferred maternally into eggs
in lepidoptera, it has been argued that jh binding proteins such as cjhbp will
protect the developing embryo against the teratogenic effects of any excess jh
transferred from the mother  <cit> .

there is a significant amount of life-history variation among insects and
consequently in the relative importance of 20e and jh on oogenesis  <cit> , even within lepidoptera  <cit> . lepidoptera have been categorised into four  groups
based on the hormones used to initiate vitellogenesis, choriogenesis and thus
the timing of mature egg production  <cit> . nymphalids, like p. aegeria, have been argued to
best match the criteria for group  <dig>  <cit>  where jh is the essential gonadotropic hormone. juvenile hormone in
this group is necessary for: a) synthesis of vtg in the fat body and possibly
the ovary ; b) inducing patency of
ovarioles; c) uptake of vtg by the oocyte  and d) choriogenesis by
the follicle cells. whilst 20e modulates jh signalling in nymphalids, it plays a
more significant role in vitellogenesis and choriogenesis regulation in b.
mori and d. melanogaster <cit> .

ecdysone signalling, including its target genes, is in general better understood
than jh signalling  <cit> . bombyx mori appears to be capable of producing ecdysteroids
in the ovaries  <cit> , as does d. melanogaster <cit> . drosophila melanogaster expresses start <dig> during
oogenesis in significant amounts in nurse cells, most likely in response to
ecdysone signalling. the cholesterol transporter start <dig> may in turn facilitate
ecdysteroid production from cholesterol-based precursors  <cit> . another gene expressed in the nurse cells essential during d.
melanogaster cholesterol conversion in the ovaries is defective in
the avoidance of repellents , which encodes an adrenodoxin
reductase  <cit> . furthermore, in d. melanogaster the sgt <dig> protein homolog
ecdysoneless  and disembodied 
have been described as essential for ecdysone, both for functionality and its
production in the ovaries  <cit> . maternal transcripts of d. melanogaster start <dig> are
hypothesised to be deposited into the egg to facilitate ecdysteroid signalling
in the developing embryo  <cit> . rather intriguingly p. aegeria females did not express
dib, but did express ecd, start <dig>  and dare. we
observed the transfer of transcripts of all three genes into the oocytes
. start <dig> has been implicated in ecdysteroid synthesis in the
prothoracic gland in b. mori <cit> . further investigation is needed to determine whether ecdysteroids
can be produced in p. aegeria ovaries and if the transfer of maternal
start <dig> and dare transcripts is involved in ecdysteroid
signalling in early embryos. in common with the majority of insects  <cit> , p. aegeria females did express ecdysone receptor
 and its partner ultraspiracle  in b. mori) in the
ovaries . although jh may be the
gonadotropic hormone in p. aegeria, it is clear from the expression
results presented here that 20e signalling does play a significant role in
vitellogenesis and that there may be maternal regulation of ecdysteroid
signalling in early embryos.

among the so-called early genes in the hierarchy of genes up-regulated in
response to activation of ecr in b. mori ovaries are the orphan nuclear
receptor genes hr <dig> and e <dig>  the
transcription factor gene e <dig> and the broad-complex gene br-c <cit> . the genes encoding the two receptors hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a
and 4b  are up-regulated with a delay in b. mori and
their expression increases during vitellogenesis  <cit> . with the exception of e <dig>  all of these genes were
expressed in p. aegeria . in
b. mori hr <dig> regulates the expression of esp during
vitellogenesis, and it regulates the expression of gatabeta  during choriogenesis  <cit> . as discussed before, p. aegeria females did not express
esp, but did express the related gene lip-3
. furthermore, they also expressed
gatabeta .

weak homology to bombyx mori vitelline membrane
bombyx mori vitelline membrane protein 90
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster and
bombyx mori literature involved in eggshell formation;
vitelline membrane formation and choriogenesis. presence  or
absence  of orthologous transcripts in the pararge
aegeria transcriptome is indicated. see additional file
 <dig> for details on lepidopteran chorion
genes.

vitelline membrane formation and choriogenesis
vitellogenesis and choriogenesis are carefully coordinated, primarily by hormone
signalling. the vitelline membrane  is formed
halfway through vitellogenesis  <cit> , for which rtk signalling is necessary as discussed elsewhere in this
paper. the formation of the vitelline membrane is of significance in maternal
regulation of embryonic ap and dv patterning, as some maternal factors become
localised in the perivitelline space in d. melanogaster and interact
with localised factors inside the oocyte  <cit> . this also appears to be the case in b. mori <cit> , although the genes involved remain uncharacterised. as discussed
before, ndl protein  is expressed in all follicle cells and is essential for dv
patterning of the embryo in d. melanogaster <cit> . ndl is an unusual protein in that not only is its structure
reminiscent of an extracellular matrix protein, but that it also has a
catalytically active serine/protease domain  <cit> . as such, it is involved in both vitelline membrane formation as well
as acting as the basis of the serine/protease cascade ventrally, essential for
the maternally regulated dv patterning of the d. melanogaster embryo  <cit> . pararge aegeria females expressed ndl and as in
d. melanogaster, no transcripts were found in the oocyte
. it remains to be seen whether ndl plays a similar dual role in
p. aegeria.

insect vitelline membrane protein  genes show tremendous sequence diversity.
for example, no clear orthologs can be found for d. melanogaster vmp
genes outside the genus drosophila. the best-characterised vmp
gene in lepidoptera is vmp <dig> <cit> , for which orthologs can be found in both moths and butterflies and
which was also expressed in p. aegeria ovarioles. once again, no
transcripts were found in the oocyte .

after the follicle cells have secreted proteins to form the vitelline membrane,
endocycling takes place in d. melanogaster and clusters of chorion
genes are selectively amplified or expressed at very high levels  <cit> . perhaps rather surprisingly, p. aegeria did not express an
ortholog of g1/s specific cyce, which in d. melanogaster is
essential for chorion gene amplification and endocycling in general . there is a possibility that
lepidoptera do not selectively amplify the chorion genes prior to the onset of
choriogenesis, as no evidence was found for this in b. mori <cit> . however, nurse cells do become polyploid during b. mori
oogenesis  <cit> . pararge aegeria females did express the g1/s specific genes
cycc and cycd, as well as the s-phase regulators
e2f <dig> and dp .

choriogenesis as a whole is coordinated by genes such as chorion
peroxidase  in d. melanogaster <cit> , which was also expressed by p. aegeria . furthermore, apart from aforementioned gatabeta, a
number of specific transcription factors are involved in the critical regulation
of the spatio-temporal expression patterns of the various chorion genes in the
later stages of oogenesis in lepidoptera. all chorion genes in b. mori
have multiple cis-regulatory binding sites for ccaat/enhancer binding
protein  transcription factors and their expression levels are c/ebp
concentration dependent  <cit> . the d. melanogaster ortholog of c/ebp is slbo,
which is also expressed in follicle cells though predominantly involved in
border cell migration . high mobility group protein a  is essential for b.
mori choriogenesis as it induces chorion gene promoter bending and
recruits c/ebp and gatabeta  <cit> . pararge aegeria expressed c/ebp , its negative regulator tribbles  and
hmga , but it is not known in which
functional context slbo is used. another transcription factor for which
cis-regulatory binding sites have been identified for chorion
genes, in both d. melanogaster and b. mori, is the
c2h <dig> zinc finger protein chorion factor  <dig>   <cit> . furthermore, a chorion-specific b-zip transcription factor  has
been described in b. mori <cit>  and orthologs can be found in butterfly genomes, such as that of
d. plexippus <cit> . however, the exact function of cbz during choriogenesis has not been
characterised. both cf <dig> and cbz were transcribed by p.
aegeria, with transcripts of the latter rather intriguingly found to be
present in the oocyte .

chorion protein  genes evolve possibly even faster than vitelline membrane
protein genes  <cit>  and sequence similarity between d. melanogaster cp genes
with those identified in lepidoptera, including p. aegeria, is very low
indeed . the infraorder heteroneura, to which b.
mori and butterflies belong, possess unique helicoidal lamellar
chorions, which may provide additional strength  <cit> . furthermore, the two species for which chorion genes have been
characterised and studied in some detail, lymantria dispar and b.
mori, have an extensively derived chorion in which the helicoidal
lamellar framework is modified by expansion and densification  <cit> . expression patterns of these chorion genes are also dynamically very
complex. gene families in lepidoptera encoding the structural chorion proteins
are characterised by numerous gene duplications, occasional subsequent gene
loss, gene conversion, and in general rapid sequence divergence  <cit> . as a result, determining orthology between individual chorion genes
of different species is very difficult and chorion protein phylogenetic trees
are characterised by species-specific clusters  of genes  <cit> . automatic annotation of butterfly chorion genes in the d.
plexippus genome and from our p. aegeria ovarian transcriptome
was performed on the basis of the most significant blast hit to available moth
chorion gene sequences . it is very doubtful, however, that
true orthology has been uncovered in this way, as chorion genes within a species
tend to be more similar to each other than to those found in other species. the
phylogenetic tree of lepidopteran chorion genes in additional file  <dig> shows distinct clustering between moths and butterflies
for each of the chorion gene families. pararge aegeria chorion genes
were highly transcribed during oogenesis . as well as expressing these
chorion gene families, bombyx mori expresses a gene encoding protein 80
, which forms part of the eggshell and is produced by the follicle cells  <cit> . bmep <dig> is also highly transcribed during p. aegeria
oogenesis .

apoptosis and autophagy
programmed cell death is an essential process during oogenesis in d.
melanogaster and b. mori, with nurse and follicle cells
undergoing apoptosis as oogenesis progresses, while complete egg chambers may
apoptose in response to environmentally induced hormonal signals such as
starvation  <cit> . often, apoptosis and autophagy operate synergistally  <cit>  and are to some extent integrated in d. melanogaster
ovaries, where the effector caspase dcp- <dig> and the inhibitor of apoptosis protein
bir-superfamily domain protein bruce 
regulate both autophagy and starvation-induced cell death  <cit> . recently, all apoptosis-related genes have been characterised in
b. mori, and the results of the study by zhang and co-workers
showed that most of these genes are highly conserved  <cit> . furthermore they demonstrated that a number of gene duplications
have occurred in the lepidoptera  <cit> . many of the known genes involved in autophagy and apoptosis have
been studied in a reproductive context in d. melanogaster  and the majority of these were
expressed during oogenesis by p. aegeria . in particular, p. aegeria expressed buffy,
three orthologs of bruce 
and the lepidopteran ortholog of d. melanogaster dcp <dig> 
caspase- <dig> .

homologous to bruce and bombyx bir-superfamily domain
bir-superfamily domain protein - inhibitor of apoptosis
bir-superfamily domain protein - inhibitor of apoptosis
ubiquitin conjugation enzyme e2; bendless
b-cell lymphoma protein  <dig>  protein - buffy
autophagy-specific gene 1; serine/threonine-protein
cell cycle and apoptosis regulatory protein 1
translationally controlled tumour protein
weak homology to ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme e <dig> d4
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature involved in regulation of growth during oogenesis
. presence  or
absence  of orthologous transcripts in the pararge
aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

general growth regulators 
hippo is a highly conserved serine-threonine kinase 3-like signalling protein
. it is essential for regulating tissue size and growth  <cit> . hippo signalling interacts with various other cellular processes in
this functional context, including programmed cell death and cell cycling  <cit> . hippo signalling is, however, required in a wide variety of
developmental contexts, not just tissue growth  <cit> . in d. melanogaster oogenesis, for example, it is essential
for establishing ap polarity in the oocyte as it regulates the expression of the
downstream effector of notch signalling, the gene hindsight/pebbled
, which is required for posterior follicle cell maturation  <cit> . orthologs of all the hippo signalling related genes  have been
identified as being essential in d. melanogaster oogenesis  and were transcribed by p.
aegeria, with possibly two exceptions: merlin  and mob as tumor suppressor  . merlin/erm <dig> is a
member of the band  <dig>  protein superfamily and is characterised by a highly
conserved ferm  domain involved in
crosslinking the cell membrane and the actin cytoskeleton and so is thus
important in localising proteins  <cit> . pararge aegeria expressed a highly similar gene,
erm <dig> , which in p.
aegeria shows a highly significant sequence similarity to erm2
. in d. melanogaster erm <dig> is
important for osk localisation  <cit> , but clearly it cannot function in this way in p. aegeria,
which lacks osk. likewise, p. aegeria appeared to express paralogs that
are significantly similar to mob1; mob <dig> and mob4-like
 . the latter is most likely the lepidopteran ortholog of
d. melanogaster mob <dig> 

preimplantation protein; mps one binder kinase
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature involved in regulation of growth during oogenesis
. presence  or absence  of
orthologous transcripts in the pararge aegeria
transcriptome is indicated.

heat shock proteins and their control of protein abundance during
oogenesis
heat shock proteins  provide a possible mechanism for environmental control
of development in ovaries and as maternal effects. the transcription of genes
encoding hsps, or molecular chaperones in general, is not only regulated in
response to various environmental factors , but is also
essential during many developmental processes, including oogenesis. it is
thought that hsps are important for both developmental buffering and
differentiation  <cit> .
the functional contexts in which hsps operate are incredibly varied  <cit> . in d. melanogaster, for example, hsp60c is essential in
organising and maintaining cytoskeletal and cell adhesion components and thus
for establishing ap and dv oocyte polarity  <cit> , whilst hsp <dig> affects border cell migration through its effects on
the actin cytoskeleton  <cit> . a large number of genes encoding hsps and related proteins have been
described in a functional context during d. melanogaster oogenesis
 and orthologs of all
of these were transcribed during p. aegeria ovarioles, often very
abundantly 
.

similar to heat shock factor a <dig> 
similar to heat shock factor b 
similar to heat shock factor c 
heat shock factor binding protein 1-like; cg5446
 <dig>  kda heat shock protein 
 heat shock protein 1; similar to
drosophila lethal  essential for life and
 - heat
shock protein  <dig> ; similar to drosophila
similar to drosophila glycoprotein 93; heat shock
 - heat
shock protein  <dig> ; similar to drosophila
 - heat
shock protein  <dig> ; similar to drosophila
 - heat
shock protein  <dig> ; similar to drosophila
 - heat
shock protein  <dig> ; similar to drosophila
heat shock cognate protein 70–4; heat shock
genes encoding heat shock proteins  and their control of protein abundance during oogenesis
identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature. presence  or absence  of orthologous transcripts
in the pararge aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

ribosomal machinery needed for increased ovarian protein synthesis and early
embryogenesis
genes encoding ribosomal proteins, rrna and other proteins involved in
translation  are among the most highly transcribed genes during
metazoan oogenesis, as large amounts of the translation machinery are needed
both during oogenesis and by the developing embryo  <cit> . just like hsps, specific ribosomal proteins have been studied in a
wide variety of functional contexts during d. melanogaster oogenesis
and early embryogenesis . ribosomal genes were also among the most highly transcribed in
p. aegeria oogenesis .

immune defense and wolbachia infection
orthologs of the majority of the genes identified from the literature as being
involved in immune response during oogenesis were also found to be expressed by
p. aegeria and present as maternal transcripts in the oocytes
. apart from the aforementioned
toll innate immune defense pathway, which may have been co-opted for dv
patterning of the embryo , these include a
large number of genes encoding serpins .
drosophila melanogaster spn27a , has been implicated in dv axis
formation  <cit> .

4; similar to manduca sexta hemolymph
11; similar to manduca sexta serine
homology to bombyx serpin- <dig> and drosophila
homology to bombyx serpin- <dig> and drosophila
homology to bombyx serpin- <dig> and drosophila
homology to bombyx serpin- <dig> and drosophila
homology to bombyx serpin- <dig> and drosophila
nf-kappa-b p <dig> subunit isoform  <dig> or 2; weakly
similar to drosophila melanogaster relish
homology to bombyx serpin- <dig> and drosophila
homology to bombyx serpin- <dig> and drosophila
homology to bombyx serpin- <dig> and drosophila
homology to bombyx serpin- <dig> and drosophila
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature involved in immune defense during oogenesis. presence 
or absence  of orthologous transcripts in the pararge
aegeria transcriptome is indicated.

the facultative reproductive parasite wolbachia sp. is an
endocytosymbiont in many arthropod species affecting oogenesis in a multitude of
ways and the bacterium is maternally transmitted  <cit> . in d. mauritiana, wolbachia increases egg production by
affecting the maintenance and division of germ-line stem cells  <cit> , while in the wasp asobara tabida, wolbachia
confers a reproductive advantage to the females by properly regulating apoptosis
during oogenesis via its regulation of iron metabolism and ferritin
expression  <cit> . however, in d. melanogaster highly infected females suffer
from a range of oogenesis defects mediated via grk signalling  <cit> . pararge aegeria females were also found to be infected with
wolbachia, but how this affects oogenesis in this species is at
present not known. however, we did observe that the gene encoding an ortholog of
the ferritin  <dig> light chain protein  was amongst the most highly
transcribed genes during p. aegeria oogenesis , but at present it is
unknown whether this effect is due to wolbachia or whether elevated
expression levels are a normal part of female p. aegeria
reproduction.

egg activation, ovulation, gene regulation in oviduct upon mating and
maternal effect genes involved in fertilisation
as discussed elsewhere in this paper, after vitellogenesis both the d.
melanogaster and the lepidopteran oocyte are in a secondary meiotic
arrest in metaphase i  <cit> . unlike in lepidoptera  <cit> , egg activation in d. melanogaster is not triggered by the
act of fertilisation, but due to the mechanical pressure experienced by the
oocyte when moving from the ovary into the small and tight oviducts  <cit> . egg activation involves eggshell modifications, resumption of
meiosis, translation and subsequent degradation of maternal mrnas, and
cytoskeletal changes  <cit> . a small number of genes have been described as important in d.
melanogaster in the latter stages of oogenesis in the general
functional context of egg activation . orthologs for only around half of these were found in
the p. aegeria transcriptome ,
which may indicate observed differences in the mechanism of egg activation
between the lepidoptera and d. melanogaster. among the genes found in
the p. aegeria transcriptome is wispy m19/wisp)
. in d. melanogaster it is a
maternal effect gene, encoding a gld- <dig> family protein with polynucleotide
adenylyltransferase activity and is essential for the oocyte-to-embryo
transition  <cit> . the d. melanogaster wisp protein is required for poly
tail elongation of bcd, toll, and tor transcripts
upon egg activation. it is thus important for proper patterning of the embryo  <cit> , but is also required to maintain a high level of active 
mitogen-activated protein kinases  <cit> . given that p. aegeria females did not express
bcd and tor, it remains to be investigated whether wisp is
of any importance in patterning of the embryo.

cathepsin l-like cysteine protease; bombyx cysteine
cathepsin b; cathepsin b-like cysteine proteinase
cathepsin f-like cysteine protease; cg12163
vacuolar proton atpase; vacuolar h+ atpase subunit
genes identified mainly from the drosophila melanogaster
literature involved in egg activation, ovulation, gene regulation in
oviduct upon mating and maternal effect genes involved in
fertilisation. presence  or absence  of orthologous
transcripts in the pararge aegeria transcriptome is
indicated.

CONCLUSIONS
a large proportion of the genes currently described in the literature as being
essential during insect oogenesis 
were transcribed by p. aegeria and transcripts were transferred to the
oocytes. as this was an ovarian transcriptome study, the precise functional context
in which these genes were transcribed has not been identified. differences in the
functional context in which particular genes are expressed are to be expected
compared to model organisms such as d. melanogaster and even b.
mori. what is perhaps more revealing, however, is the absence of certain
transcripts in the database, in particular where these transcripts concern paradigms
of maternal regulation for various aspects of early insect embryogenesis  <cit> . pararge aegeria differed most significantly from d.
melanogaster , both in terms of
stem cell maintenance or differentiation in the germarium and in establishing  polarity along ap, dv and at the termini of the oocyte. in particular,
although pararge aegeria females expressed an ortholog of a
spi/krn-like egf ligand and possibly its receptor, many
components of the egf pathway involved in patterning of the axes in d.
melanogaster embryos, as well as pipe and
mirror, were not expressed. this may either suggest that there is not much
evidence for a significant role of egf signalling in establishing p.
aegeria oocyte polarity, or that its functional role and genes involved is
divergent from other insects. this requires further study, as well as the functional
role and significance of dpp and notch signalling in this context.

although the more derived species such as b. mori within the ditrysia are
argued to be long germ band-like  <cit> , it is more appropriate to describe them as intermediate germ band  <cit> , as they have a very unusual preblastoderm stage. like d.
melanogaster, cleavage in b. mori and the butterfly pieris
rapae is superficial but nuclear migration to the periphery of the oocyte
and subsequent cellularisation occurs in an anterior to posterior gradient, after
which they display long germ band characteristics  <cit> . it is very likely that this has a bearing on maternal effect gene
expression regulating axes patterning after oocyte polarity has been established
during the pre-vitellogenic stages in ditrysia compared to d. melanogaster,
and this could be reflected in the gene expression data presented in this study
. although progress has been
made in investigating b. mori embryonic patterning  <cit> , how polarity is established during oogenesis in ditrysia and in the
lepidoptera as a whole is not known. this needs further investigation, and p.
aegeria may prove an ideal model these future studies.

unfortunately, maternal effect gene expression and regulation have received
significantly less research attention in lepidoptera compared to vitellogenesis,
choriogenesis and reproductive physiology  <cit> . this is reflected in the discussion of the results in this paper.
although the latter aspects of oogenesis are well suited to studies of reproductive
output under a variety of environmental conditions, many of the genes discussed in
this study highlight the interconnectedness of all stages during oogenesis, for
example eggshell production and oocyte polarity. furthermore, key candidate genes
that have the potential to play an important role in transgenerational maternal
effects have been identified. among these are genes encoding heat shock proteins and
proteins involved in chromatin remodelling.

this study has taken a much-needed first step in determining the conserved and
divergent elements of the butterfly oogenesis grn  and establishes p. aegeria as an eco-evo-devo model
system for the study of butterfly oogenesis. in order to fully unscramble butterfly
oogenesis, an investigation of the spatio-temporal expression patterns of the genes
discussed in this study, as well as establishment of their function, is required.
further studies are also required to establish the function and expression patterns
of the uncharacterised contigs identified in this study, which make up 30% of the
total contigs found, and are undoubtedly composed of genes that are of high
importance in butterfly oogenesis.

