BACKGROUND
in eukaryotes, the expression state of a given gene is controlled by one or more enhancers. enhancers are not spatially restricted to the region proximal to the gene’s transcription start site but can be located anywhere, including in introns or exons of distal genes. the spatial and temporal pattern of activity of an enhancer is controlled by the type of epigenetic modifications attached to it, and by the combinatorial binding of transcription factors to specific binding sites in the enhancer’s sequence  <cit> .

the sequences of many enhancers are under selection in vertebrates  <cit> . based on this observation, genomic scans for noncoding regions characterized by low rates of sequence divergence among different species have been used to identify evolutionarily conserved enhancers. this strategy has been most successfully applied to highly distant species   <cit> , but it has also been applied within closely related species . however, conservation of a noncoding sequence is not highly correlated with enhancer activity. some highly conserved noncoding sequences are not associated with any obvious functional activity  <cit> , and many experimentally verified enhancers are weakly or not conserved between distant species , indicating that conservation of a specific sequence, to the extent that it can be detected by phylogenetic methods  <cit> , is not a requirement for enhancer activity.

stabilizing selection can explain why the function of some enhancers is conserved in related species while their sequences are not. ludwig et al. showed that the sequence of the even-skipped stripe  <dig> enhancer was not conserved in two drosophila species because of transcription factor binding site  turnover, but that the activity pattern of the enhancer was restrained to the same stripe and developmental stage in both species  <cit> . similar results have been noted for other enhancers in drosophila melanogaster , and for the endo <dig> promoter in sea urchins  <cit> . in vertebrates, syntenic sequences of ret in human and pufferfish lacked any sequence homology but exhibited similar gene regulatory activities in a zebrafish enhancer assay  <cit> . in these studies, compensatory mutations and the rearrangement of tfbss were an important source of sequence divergence.

it has been argued that only sequences that are shown to be under some type of selection can be claimed to be functional with any degree of confidence  <cit> . this criterion will miss enhancers such as those described in the previous paragraph: the ancestral function of these enhancers has been conserved but their sequences have become unalignable  <cit> . the observation that the function of an enhancer, rather than its sequence, may be the main factor under selection suggests that related species have the potential to share many enhancers of similar function but divergent sequence; this type of enhancers would be invisible to genomic approaches based on sequence conservation.

here we present a strategy for the systematic identification of evolutionarily related enhancers that have a conserved activity but divergent sequences. we searched for sequences that were conserved within groups of closely related species but not alignable between groups of more distant species, and that were associated with an epigenetic mark of enhancer activity. to facilitate inferring orthology between non-alignable sequences, we focused on enhancers found within orthologous introns of three groups of distant vertebrate species. we show that a subset of these non-conserved enhancers have homologous activities in a zebrafish transgenic enhancer assay. the conserved expression patterns driven by these enhancers are likely to be associated with short transcription factor-binding motifs present in the divergent sequences. we have identified numerous potential enhancers with divergent sequences but a conserved activity; these results indicate that selection on function, rather than sequence, may be a common mode of enhancer evolution. these enhancers might help shed light on the factors driving the evolution of gene regulatory sequences and developing models of enhancer evolution.

RESULTS
identification of evolutionarily conserved regions
the goal of this study was to identify enhancers that have similar spatiotemporal patterns of expression in related species, and that are likely to be derived from a common ancestral enhancer but have lost detectable sequence conservation. we developed a procedure to identify sequences in three distantly related species  that are  potential regulatory sequences,  orthologous, and  not conserved between the species. since lack of sequence conservation prevents establishing orthology by alignment, we limited our search to intronic sequences whose orthology was established by aligning their bracketing exons. we used a combination of comparative genomics and epigenomics to search for potential enhancers within this set of orthologous introns, following the steps illustrated in fig.  <dig> and described in methods.fig.  <dig> scheme of the analysis of orthologous introns bracketed by the orthologous exons in the rodent/rabbit and fish evolutionary groups of genomes. conserved sequences  are compared, and highly similar a <dig> and a <dig> removed from the analysis. sequences b and c are selected for experimental validation



as the first step of the procedure outlined above, we selected three groups of species  based on the following criteria:  each species has a high-quality genome assembly;  the species within each group are characterized by a level of sequence divergence that is suitable for the identification of candidate enhancers by comparative genomics  <cit> ;  the groups are distantly related to each other: their genomes have low sequence similarity but are alignable at the exon level. we generated multiple alignments of the genomes of the species within each group using vista  <cit> , and identified exons that are orthologous between all the three groups. we used the refseq annotations  <cit>  of a representative species from each group and the human genome  as common reference. since the refseq annotations of chicken and zebrafish are incomplete, we identified additional orthologous exon pairs by projecting the human annotation on the other species’ genome and confirming the orthology of the projected exons by inspecting the sequence alignment of the projected exons in the representative species. we then identified pairs of adjacent orthologous exons , and used these pairs to define sets of orthologous introns between each of the species ; the results of this analysis are shown in table  <dig>  finally, we identified a subset of  <dig>  orthologous introns shared by mouse, chicken and zebrafish . only these introns were used in the subsequent analyses.table  <dig> genome assemblies used in this study

reference genomes for each of the four groups are listed first



we used sequence conservation to identify candidate enhancer sequences within the orthologous intron set defined in table  <dig>  we obtained ecrs genome-wide by running phastcons on the multiple whole-genome alignments of the members of the rodent, bird, and fish groups , and selected the subset that maps to the set of  <dig>  orthologous introns described in the previous paragraph . in order to retain only ecrs that are not conserved between groups, we discarded the ecrs that were conserved between at least two of the three groups of species . since the last filter leaves some introns devoid of ecrs in at least one of the groups, we retained the orthologous introns that contained one or more ecr in each group . these ecrs showed a univocal correspondence in only a few introns across the three groups. most orthologous introns contained a different number of ecrs in each group; due to the lack of sequence conservation between these regions, we could not establish a precise one-to-one orthology between ecrs in orthologous rodent-bird-fish introns; we will refer to these ecrs as “syntenic ecrs”.table  <dig> rodent-bird-fish comparison




to obtain further support for potential enhancer activity, we determined which of the ecrs identified by the comparative genomic procedure described above overlapped with h3k4me <dig> annotations but not with h3k4me <dig> annotations. h3k4me <dig> is a histone modification mark associated with distal regulatory regions  <cit> , while h3k4me <dig> is associated with promoter activity  <cit> ; genome-wide data are available for both histone marks in the mouse  <cit>  and zebrafish  <cit> , but are not available for bird species. the lack of histone mark data for bird reduces the power of our analysis to identify; concordant for h3k4me <dig> binding from three distant species would improve the confidence that our computational pipeline identified functional enhancers. the sequences of  <dig> rodent ecrs and  <dig> fish ecrs that overlapped with h3k4me <dig> annotations but not h3k4me <dig> annotations were considered the candidate enhancers . the proportion of ecrs associated with h3k4me <dig> may be lower for fish because histone modification data were obtained only from whole embryos at  <dig> h post fertilization , rather than from multiple tissues and developmental time points as for the mouse.

experimental validation of computationally predicted enhancers
the candidate enhancers located in orthologous segments of the genome may be derived from a common ancestral sequence and may thus have maintained a similar spatial and/or temporal pattern of enhancer activity. to test this possibility, we selected  <dig> zebrafish and mouse ecrs among the syntenic rodent-bird-fish intronic ecrs from table  <dig> and subjected them to an enhancer assay in zebrafish . we selected ecrs located in introns that contained up to two ecrs  and within genes expressed during early development .

we first tested the  <dig> zebrafish ecrs. each ecr was pcr-amplified from the zebrafish genome, cloned into a reporter vector containing an e1b minimal promoter upstream of gfp, and injected into zebrafish embryos to detect enhancer activity  <cit> . of the  <dig> zebrafish regions tested,  <dig>  showed consistent enhancer activity in multiple tissues at either  <dig> or  <dig> hpf .table  <dig> zebrafish and mouse predicted enhancers subjected to experimental validation


3
tail bud , eye , heart 
chr9: <dig> ,708– <dig> ,704
not tested

5
epidermis 
chr19: <dig> ,614– <dig> ,241
not tested

6

7

10

11

12
tissues in bold  show consistent enhancer activity between the mouse and zebrafish syntenic enhancers at the indicated time point . each construct was injected in at least  <dig> embryos; the proportion of fish alive and expressing in a given tissue is shown in additional file 2: table s1

fig.  <dig> expression data in for positive zebrafish  and mouse  ecr constructs in transgenic zebrafish. the x-axis shows tissues with positive expression in at least one construct; the y-axis shows the number of fish expressing a construct in a given tissue , reported as the proportion of fish alive at  <dig> hpf  and  <dig> hpf . the identity of each construct is shown in the top right corner of each chart. the expression of the mouse ecr syntenic to zebrafish ecrs  <dig> and  <dig> is reported in both charts

fig.  <dig> expression patterns driven by zebrafish and mouse syntenic ecrs with homologous activity in a zebrafish transgenic enhancer assay. ecrs are identified by the number at the bottom left of each panel, their genomic coordinates are in table  <dig>  expression patterns were recorded at  <dig> hpf  or  <dig> hpf  and detected by gfp expression . labels indicate tissues in which homologous mouse and zebrafish sequences show consistent patterns of gfp expression . ecr 6: constructs from both species drive strong expression in several epidermal cells; the zebrafish construct also drives expression in the otic vesicle , weak staining at the periphery of the vesicle is visible with the mouse construct . ecr 7: the mouse construct drives expression in the olfactory bulb, but expression by the zebrafish construct is restricted to the olfactory epithelium ; constructs from both species drive expression in large neurons in the hindbrain of. ecr  <dig> and 11: one ecr is present in the mouse, and two ecrs are present in the orthologous zebrafish intron; constructs from both species drive clear expression in somitic muscle cells. ecr12: constructs from both species drive clear expression in several epidermal cells. abbreviations – e: epidermis; ov: otic vesicle; oe: olfactory epithelium; ob: olfactory bulb; hb: hindbrain; sm: somitic muscle



we then asked if the mouse ecrs from introns orthologous to those containing the  <dig> positive zebrafish enhancers also have enhancer activity, and if their activity patterns overlap with the patterns observed in the corresponding zebrafish enhancers. we pcr-amplified  <dig> mouse ecrs corresponding to  <dig> of the zebrafish enhancers : two zebrafish enhancers  were syntenic to a single mouse ecr; each of four zebrafish ecrs  were syntenic to two mouse ecrs; and the mouse ecrs syntenic the zebrafish ecrs in regions  <dig> and  <dig> were not tested because of difficulties in obtaining the pcr products. the mouse ecrs were cloned in the same zebrafish reporter vector used for the zebrafish constructs, and injected into zebrafish . we used zebrafish to test mouse ecrs in order to compare the expression patterns obtained from the mouse and zebrafish ecrs using the same assay system; also, zebrafish has been successfully used to test mammalian enhancer sequences  <cit> . seven mouse ecrs  did not show enhancer activity at either  <dig> or  <dig> hpf. three mouse ecrs  showed enhancer activity in the zebrafish assay but in tissues or at a time point different from those observed in their syntenic zebrafish ecrs. finally, four mouse ecrs  showed spatial and temporal enhancer activity patterns that overlapped with the patterns observed in their corresponding zebrafish ecrs .

all ecrs with consistent spatio-temporal expression patterns also showed expression in tissues that were detected in constructs from one but not the other species . also, consistent spatial patterns were overlapping but not always identical. ecr  <dig> showed expression in epithelial cells and the otic vesicle, but in the mouse construct expression was limited to the periphery of the otic vesicle while it is visible throughout the otic vesicle in the zebrafish construct. ecr  <dig> showed expression in hindbrain neurons, but the zebrafish and mouse constructs were detected in different neurons; the mouse ecr  <dig> construct also drives diffuse expression in the olfactory bulb, but expression form the zebrafish construct is restricted to the olfactory epithelium, which is the sensory component of the olfactory bulb. zebrafish ecrs  <dig> and  <dig> were syntenic to a single mouse ecr; they both drove expression in multiple tissue, with somitic muscle being the only common one; somitic muscle is also consistent with the expression driven by the syntenic mouse construct. ecr  <dig> showed strong and consistent expression in epithelial cells. these subtle differences in spatial expression patterns could reflect a degree of subfunctionalization of these enhancers, or the inability of the zebrafish expression system to read with complete accuracy regulatory information carried in mouse sequence.

functionally homologous enhancers share transcription factor binding motifs
the common expression patterns observed in the sets of syntenic enhancers suggest that they share functional elements, but their lack of sequence conservation prevents the use of standard sequence-based methods for the identification of such elements. we used blast to identify short sequence alignments with a perfect match of at least  <dig> nucleotides in the zebrafish, mouse, and human sequences of the five sets of syntenic enhancers defined in table  <dig>   the five ecr contained different numbers of perfect match n-mers : ecr <dig>   <dig> n-mers; ecr <dig>   <dig> n-mers; ecr <dig>   <dig> n-mers; ecr <dig>   <dig> n-mers; ecr <dig>   <dig> n-mers. the probability that a set of three identical heptamers is identical by chance is  <dig> , that is, 4– <dig> n-mers are expected to be identical by chance – the functionality of these motifs relies on ultimate functional verification, but these data provide guidance to the location of the likely functional motifs.

we identified tfbs in the sets of perfect-match n-mers by searching the jaspar  <cit>  and uniprobe  <cit>  databases using tomtom  <cit> . several n-mer sets contained tfbs with e ≤  <dig>  . the arrangement of these tfbs along the sequence of a ecr differs among zebrafish, mouse and human , consistent with the lack of sequence conservation noted at these ecrs. most of the tfbs are specific to a single ecr, but it is interesting to note that zebrafish ecr <dig> and ecr <dig>  which are syntenic to a single ecr in the mouse and drive the same expression pattern in the reporter assay , share two tfbss with highly significant e-value .fig.  <dig> transcription factor binding sites detected in the five syntenic ecrs. a-e: each panel shows the five motifs with most significant e-value in the given ecr, and the sequence of the n-mer, identical in the zebrafish, mouse, and human sequence of the ecr, from which the motif was identified. the name of the transcription factor binding to a motif is shown above the motif, and the sequence of the motif is shown for the strand on which the n-mer was found. the arrangement of the motifs along the zebrafish , mouse , and human  sequences is shown at the bottom of each panel . motifs are color-coded according the legend at the bottom of the figure; motifs shown above and below the reference line are identified on the forward and reverse strands, respectively



discussion
we described the systematic identification and validation of functionally syntenic enhancers with divergent sequences in three groups of vertebrate species - rodent, bird and fish. we have devised a comparative genomic strategy to identify enhancers that are likely to be derived from the same ancestral sequence but do not share sequence conservation. we identified  <dig> sets of syntenic and functionally homologous zebrafish and mouse ecrs: these enhancers were able to drive overlapping spatiotemporal patterns of expression in a zebrafish reporter construct, but lacked detectable sequence conservation.

this functional homology could be derived from stabilizing selection on extant sequences derived from the same ancestral sequence, or from convergent evolution of enhancers derived from ancestrally unrelated sequences. our data does not allow ruling out the second possibility, but we think that it is unlikely: convergent enhancers may evolve anywhere in the proximity of their target genes and would not be expected to be found systematically within the same introns. another possibility is that the lack of conservation that we observed at the functionally homologous enhancers is due to incomplete genome assemblies or to the algorithms we used for sequence alignment and the identification of conservation. more complete genome assemblies, or improved and more sensitive algorithms, might detect sequence conservation at these enhancers; while we cannot rule out this possibility, our results were obtained with the best assemblies and computational tools available at the time. the lack of observed sequence homology prevents a direct determination of orthology of the enhancers we found in the orthologous introns , but our finding of functional homology between syntenic enhancers suggests that we were able to systematically identify enhancers whose sequences are not conserved among distant groups of vertebrate species, but are likely to be derived from a common ancestral sequence under the action of stabilizing selection. testing of larger numbers of orthologous intronic enhancers may provide further support for this hypothesis.

what drives the homologous expression patterns of these enhancers? the most obvious hypothesis is that the orthologous enhancers, in spite of their lack of sequence similarity, share common short, functional blocks that are arranged in a different linear order in mouse and zebrafish, in a manner similar to that previously observed in drosophila and sea urchin enhancers  <cit> . our analysis revealed several transcription factor-binding motifs present in the zebrafish, mouse and human sequences of the syntenic enhancers. these motifs are arranged in a different order within the syntenic zebrafish, mouse, and human sequences of a given ecr, consistent with the notion that order of tfbss can rearrange within an enhancer while maintaining the enhancer’s function. functional validation of these binding sites will require substantial functional dissection, which could be possible with massively parallel reporter assays  <cit> . we note that zebrafish ecrs  <dig> and  <dig>  which are syntenic to the same mouse ecr and drive the same reporter expression pattern, share the binding sites for smad <dig> and bach1::mafk; both transcription factors belong to the tfg- β signaling pathway and are involved in cell proliferation and differentiation  <cit>  and might be responsible for the shared enhancer activity of ecrs  <dig> and  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that selection on function, rather than sequence, may be a common mode of enhancer evolution and should be used as evidence for functionality of a noncoding sequence. our method was restricted to introns to facilitate the implication of orthology  <cit> ; it can be further expanded to other noncoding sequences such as intergenic intervals if orthology can be established accurately. this new class of active enhancers can significantly expand the collection of known functional elements in the human genome. characterization of the functional building blocks of these enhancers and of the patterns of rearrangement that are compatible with the maintenance of enhancer activity will assist in the general understanding of how cis-regulatory elements function and evolve.

