BACKGROUND
pseudomonas syringae pv. phaseolicola is a pathogenic bacterium, that produces a disease in beans  known as "halo blight". this disease affects both leaves and pods, and is responsible for major field crop losses in temperate areas. disease symptoms are typically water-soaked lesions surrounded by a chlorotic zone or halo. this halo is due to the action of a non-host specific toxin known as phaseolotoxin , which is the major virulence factor of the pathogen and a key component in the development of the disease  <cit> . phaseolotoxin acts as a reversible inhibitor of the enzyme ornithine carbamoyltransferase  that catalyzes the conversion of ornithine to citruline in the arginine biosynthesis pathway  <cit> . the consequence of octase inhibition is blockage of arginine biosynthesis resulting in death of host cells. the production of phaseolotoxin by p. syringae pv. phaseolicola is regulated by temperature, being optimally produced at 18°c-20°c, while at 28°c  the toxin is not detected  <cit> . nevertheless, other factors such as plant signals and carbon sources have also been suggested as inducers of phaseolotoxin synthesis  <cit> .

our group reported the sequence of a chromosomal region of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig>  which contains genes involved in phaseolotoxin synthesis. this region, known as the "pht cluster", includes  <dig> genes organized in five transcriptional units: two monocistronic, argk and phtl, and three polycistronic, a large operon from phta to phtk, with an internal promoter capable of driving expression of phtd to phtk and a third operon that includes genes from phtm to phtv  <cit> . the function of argk, desi, amta and phtu is known, while the function of the remaining genes remains uncertain  <cit> . the pht cluster is also present in other phaseolotoxin-producing pathovars, including p. syringae pv. actinidiae  and in a single strain of p. syringae pv. syringae cfbp <dig>  although in the latter the cluster organization is poorly conserved  <cit> . different evidence has suggested that the pht cluster was acquired in these pathovars by horizontal gene transfer, most likely from a gram positive bacterium  <cit> . however, whether this cluster contains all the elements necessary for phaseolotoxin production is still unknown.

analysis of gene expression within the pht cluster showed that most of the genes are transcribed at high levels at 18°c with a basal level of expression at 28°c, which agrees with the observed temperature-dependent pattern of phaseolotoxin synthesis, with the exception of phtl, which was expressed at both temperatures  <cit> . the mechanism by which p. syringae pv. phaseolicola regulates the expression of these genes in relation to temperature is poorly understood. analysis of the promoter regions identified in the pht cluster showed that the divergent promoters for argk and phta contain canonic sequences of σ70-type promoters, while the promoter regions for phtd, phtl and phtm did not show similarity to consensus sequences for bacterial sigma factors. however, a common mechanism of transcriptional regulation for phtd and phtm has been suggested due to the presence of conserved regions in the promoters of these operons. furthermore, analysis of transcriptional fusions of the pht cluster promoter regions suggest that temperature regulation occurs at the transcriptional level since maximal transcriptional activity occurs at 18°c and is significantly lower at 28°c  <cit> .

in bacteria, transcriptional regulation is commonly mediated by regulatory proteins that control gene expression in response to internal metabolic changes or external signals such as temperature, ph, and carbon source  <cit> . previous reports proposed that argk regulation is under negative control mediated by a repressor protein present at 28°c, although the identity of this regulatory protein has not been elucidated  <cit> . similarly, a regulatory function for the phtl protein has been suggested based on the lack of phtm operon expression in a phtl- background, although this still requires experimental confirmation  <cit> . despite our knowledge of the effect of low temperature on phaseolotoxin synthesis, the regulatory mechanisms that control toxin production remain poorly understood. so far it is not known whether all the genes involved in the regulation of phaseolotoxin synthesis are located within the pht cluster, or whether there are any other genes outside the pht cluster involved in this process. in the latter case, it would be interesting to know whether any regulatory gene found outside the pht cluster is specifically required for phaseolotoxin synthesis, or whether the synthesis of the toxin has adapted its expression to the regulatory mechanisms of the bacteria during horizontal gene transfer. for these reasons, this study was undertaken with the objective of identifying regulatory proteins that could participate in the regulation of genes for phaseolotoxin synthesis, with a focus on the regulation of the phtd operon.

RESULTS
the promoter region of the phtd operon contains a binding site for a putative regulatory protein
the phtd operon includes eight genes from phtd to phtk, whose expression can be driven either from the promoter upstream of phtd, or from read-through from the phta promoter located upstream . the transcription initiation site for the phtd operon was determined to be  <dig> bp upstream of the probable initiation codon, and analysis of this promoter region did not show any similarity with binding sites reported for bacterial sigma factors  <cit> . therefore, in order to identify putative transcriptional regulators of the phtd operon, we performed mobility shift assays to analyze the presence of dna-binding proteins in crude extracts of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig>  a  <dig> bp radiolabeled dna fragment , spanning positions - <dig> to + <dig> relative to the transcription start site of the phtd operon was used as probe . radiolabeled pphtd fragment was incubated with cellular protein extracts from p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig> grown at 28°c and 18°c under appropriate binding conditions. mobility shift assays showed that the fragment was able to form a specific dna-protein complex with a protein found in extracts of cells grown at 18°c . likewise, the same retarded mobility complex was obtained with extracts from cultures grown at 28°c, indicating that the presence of the interacting protein is independent of temperature .

to determine the specificity and localization of the observed protein-dna complex, mobility shift assays were carried out using different pphtd fragments as unlabeled competitors . these assays showed that the retarded band was effectively competed by the full-length probe  and by fragments b, c, d and i, thus indicating that the observed protein-dna interaction is located in a  <dig> bp region that spans positions - <dig> to - <dig>  relative to the phtd operon transcription start site . although shorter length probes  were used in gel shift competition assays, these were unable to compete the dna-protein complex . incubation of crude cell extracts with specific or non-specific dna probes also showed that the dna-protein binding is specific and is localized in the above-mentioned position . these results suggested that a putative transcription factor of the phtd operon is present in p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig> during growth at both temperatures.

the putative transcription factor of the phtd operon is encoded outside of the pht cluster
in general, genes that participate in the synthesis of phytotoxins are grouped together in a particular chromosomal region, within which are encoded both structural genes and regulatory proteins involved in the process  <cit> . however, in the case of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola it is unknown whether all genes necessary for the synthesis and regulation of phaseolotoxin are found within the pht cluster. we performed a bioinformatic analysis for each of the predicted orfs of the pht cluster, in a search for dna binding motifs using the pfam database   <cit> . according to this analysis, no dna binding motif was found in the pht gene cluster .

in order to assess whether the putative transcription factor of the phtd operon as revealed through the mobility shift analysis was encoded outside or within the pht region, gel-shift assays were performed using crudes extracts from p. syringae pv. phaseolicola strain cly <dig>  a non-toxigenic strain lacking the pht cluster and p. syringae pv. tomato dc <dig>  grown at 18°c and 28°c in m <dig> minimal medium. incubation of the radiolabeled pphtd fragment with crude protein extracts of the above mentioned strains demonstrated the presence of a retarded mobility complex similar to that obtained with protein extracts of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig> . mobility shift competition assays with specific and non-specific probes indicated that the observed dna-protein binding was specific for the pphtd region . these results indicated that the putative transcription factor binding upstream of phtd was encoded by a gene located outside of pht region that is shared with other pathovars and thus is not specific for phaseolotoxin synthesis, and also that its presence is independent of temperature. therefore, these results suggest that upon transfer of the pht cluster horizontally, the regulation of phaseolotoxin synthesis adapted to pre-existing regulatory mechanisms of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig> 

a dna sequence upstream of the phtd operon contains a putative binding site for the ihf protein
once the binding site for the putative phtd regulatory protein had been delimited to a  <dig> bp region and it was determined that this protein was encoded outside the pht cluster, we evaluated the presence of putative cis-acting elements within the phtd promoter region using a transcription factor search program   <cit> . sequence analysis revealed the presence of a potential binding site for the dna-binding/bending protein ihf. this sequence was located at positions - <dig> to - <dig>  relative to the start of phtd transcription, and showed similarity to the consensus ihf binding site proposed by kur et al.  <cit>  .

members of the dnabii family  interact with the pphtd fragment
ihf is a member of the dnabii dna-binding protein family, which includes hu  and ihf proteins  <cit> . the ihf protein has been reported to regulate the expression of several genes, some of which are involved in virulence factor synthesis  <cit> . to assess whether ihf might interact with the phtd promoter region, and whether it was involved in the formation of the complex observed in gel mobility shift assays, we performed supershift assays. supershift assays were carried out using a polyclonal antibody directed against dna-binding proteins of the dnabii family . the addition of the antibody generated a supershifted complex when compared with a negative control, where no antibody was added . on the other hand, when the probe was incubated with the anti-dnab-ii antibody without protein extract, neither shifted nor supershifted band was observed, ruling out nonspecific antibody-probe interactions. furthermore, no supershifted band was revealed when unrelated antibodies were evaluated, again validating the specificity of the antibody used . these assays indicated that members of the dnab-ii family  are involved in the protein-dna complex that forms at the phtd promoter region. finally, to provide additional confirmation that ihf or hu contributed to the gel mobility shift results, we performed shift-western experiments, in which shifted bands were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and incubated with anti-dnabii family protein antibodies. incubation with antibodies yielded one band at a position identical to that of the shifted band , supporting the presence of a dnab-ii family dna-binding protein  in the complex identified by gel mobility assays.

ihf protein interacts with the phtd operon promoter region
to determine the identity of the protein observed in gel shift assays, we analyzed crude protein extracts of e. coli single mutants having, deletions in the genes coding for the alpha and beta subunits of ihf and hu proteins by gel mobility shift assays. the bacterial strains were grown in lb at 37°c until the cells reached the early stationary phase, when ihf levels are reported to increase and even small amounts of hu protein are observed  <cit> . incubation of the pphtd probe with crude extracts from e. coli strains k <dig> wild type, hupa-, and hupb-, showed a retardation signal similar to that obtained with extracts of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig>  indicating that mutations in genes encoding hu protein subunits have no effect on the presence of the putative phtd regulatory protein. however, when crude extracts of e. coli mutants ihfa- and ihfb- were assayed, no retarded signal was observed . these results strongly suggest that the protein involved in the dna-protein complex is ihf. to validate these results, two types of additional experiments were performed: 1) mobility shift competition assays using the algd promoter region and 2) mobility shift assays with a complemented e. coli ihfa- strain.

previously, it was reported that the promoter region of the algd gene in p. aeruginosa contains a functional binding site for the ihf protein  <cit> . this site has also been found in the promoter region of the orthologous gene in p. syringae pv. phaseolicola 1448a. for that reason, we decided to use the promoter region of the algd gene of 1448a, which contains a putative ihf binding site, as a competitor in gel shift assays. the results showed that the retarded mobility signal progressively decreased, compared to the dna-protein complex, indicating that increasing concentrations of competitor dna titrated the protein. however, when the promoter region of the same gene without the putative ihf binding site was used as a competitor, the retarded signal intensity was not altered . additionally, a second experiment was conducted where the p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig> ihf alpha subunit gene was cloned in the pcr4-topo vector, creating the plasmid ppihfa, which was then introduced into the e. coli ihfa- mutant. crude extracts of the complemented e. coli strain were used in mobility shift assays to analyze the binding activity of the pphtd fragment. mobility shift assays showed the presence of a retarded signal similar to that obtained with our p. syringae pv. phaseolicola strain, indicating that the presence of the ihfa gene in trans is capable of restoring the formation of the dna-protein complex . finally, strong evidence concerning the identity of the pphtd binding protein was obtained through gel shift assays using ihf protein purified from e. coli, which showed the presence of a retarded signal whose position was identical to that formed with the protein present in extracts of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig> . these results unambiguously demonstrate that the ihf protein interacts with the phtd promoter region and is probably involved in regulation of this operon.

the ihf protein exerts a negative effect on the expression of the phtd operon in e. coli
to assess the participation of the ihf protein in regulating phtd operon expression, a transcriptional fusion of the phtd promoter was made to the gfp reporter gene creating the pjlag plasmid with the intention of evaluating the expression from this construct in an ihf- background of our p. syringae pv. phaseolicola strain. however, despite the fact that several strategies were attempted to obtain mutations in the subunits of the p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig> ihf protein, these mutants could not be obtained. nevertheless, because the amino acid sequences of the p. syringae pv. phaseolicola ihfa and ihfb proteins are 86% and 73% identical to the e. coli ihfa and ihfb proteins respectively , and since previous reports demonstrated that the e. coli ihf protein can functionally replace the ihf protein of some pseudomonas and viceversa  <cit> , we decided to perform the assays with the ihfa- mutant strain of e. coli. we examined the expression of the phtd::gfp transcriptional fusion  in wild type e. coli k <dig> and ihfa- mutant backgrounds. the expression of phtd::gfp was increased in the ihfa- background, in comparison to the expression observed in the wild type e. coli k <dig> strain. on other hand, when the expression of the phtd::gfp transcriptional fusion was examined in the ihfa- mutant complemented with the ihfa gene of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig>  we observed a clear reduction in fluorescence levels, suggesting a decrease in gene expression . however, to investigate the possibility that the decrease in phtd promoter expression was related to the decrease in growth rate observed in this strain, possibly due to over-expression of the ihfa gene, we evaluated the expression of the phtd::gfp fusion in the ihfa- mutant transformed with the pcr 4-topo vector . the results of these experiments showed that the decrease in the growth rate was possibly due to the presence of an additional plasmid and not to the presence of the ihfa gene, which excludes a possible toxic effect. likewise, the results showed that the decrease in the expression observed from the phtd::gfp fusion in the complemented ihfa- mutant was, due solely to the presence of the ihfa gene in trans, and not to the observed decrease in growth . these results indicate that the ihf protein negatively regulates expression of the phtd operon in e. coli.

mutations in the putative ihf binding site affect the dna-protein interaction
since the ihf site found in the phtd operon promoter region has 83% similarity with the reported consensus sequence, we evaluated the role of this sequence on the dna-protein interaction. to this end,  <dig> bp synthetic oligonucleotides corresponding to the minimum binding region for ihf were designed with mutations at bases previously reported to be necessary for ihf protein binding. the selected mutations were based upon those previously shown to severely affect ihf binding  <cit> . two mutant probes were analyzed. mutant probe  <dig>  has changes in the da-dt rich upstream region as well as changes of c to a and g to t of the consensus sequence. gel mobility shift assays with mutant probe  <dig> clearly show a dramatic decrease in the amount of retarded signal  as compared to the amount of signal obtained with the wild type probe . these results indicate that the changes introduced in this probe decrease the pphtd-ihf interaction. likewise, gel mobility shift assays with mutant probe  <dig> , which also includes mutations in the ttr region of the consensus sequence, showed a clear decrease in the retarded signal as compared to the control  . these results demonstrate the role of this sequence in ihf protein binding.

discussion
phaseolotoxin is an important virulence factor of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola, whose synthesis involves genes in the pht cluster. the expression of these genes is higher at 18°c than at 28°c, which is consistent with conditions of phaseolotoxin synthesis  <cit> . so far, the regulatory mechanism involved in the production of this phytotoxin has not been elucidated, and the only known fact is the effect of low temperatures on its synthesis  <cit> . in the present work we initiated study of the regulatory pathway involved in phaseolotoxin synthesis in p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig> by focusing on the control of phtd operon expression. in this study we report the binding of the ihf protein to the phtd promoter region and a possible role for this protein in controlling the expression of this operon.

mobility shift assays using the region upstream of the phtd operon as a probe showed the formation of a dna-protein complex that clearly indicates the presence of a binding site for a regulatory protein within this region. these data also indicate that the presence of this protein is independent of temperature, as it was found in crude extracts obtained at both 28°c and 18°c. the minimal region necessary for the binding of this protein was defined by competition assays to be a region of  <dig> bp, a size greater than that reported for most dna-binding proteins, which are typically 20- <dig> bp  <cit> . this result suggests that the dna-protein interaction observed in phtd not only depends on the recognition of specific sequences but also depends on specific dna structures that can only form in the  <dig> bp fragment. a similar requirement has been reported for some regulatory proteins, such as h-ns, which requires a curved dna structure for its binding  <cit> .

the assays with p. syringae pv. phaseolicola strain cly <dig>  and p. syringae pv. tomato dc <dig> , show a retardation signal identical to that obtained with our working strain, indicating that the protein binding to the phtd promoter region is encoded outside of the pht cluster and is not exclusive to the phaseolicola pathovar, given its presence in other pathovars, futher suggesting that this protein could be a global regulator. these results validate the bioinformatic prediction that did not reveal a dna-binding motif for any predicted pht cluster orf, suggesting that none of these proteins encode a dna-binding protein, although evidence in some cases suggests a regulatory role for the product of some genes found within the pht cluster  <cit> . our findings resemble previous reports in p. syringae pv. syringae, in which the syr-syp gene clusters involved in syringomycin  and syringopeptin  synthesis, are regulated by the sala and gacs/gaca proteins, which are localized outside of this region and also present in other pathovars. however, the regulation of these phytotoxins also depends on regulatory proteins present in the syr-syp region  <cit> .

an approximation for the identity of the phtd binding protein was obtained by supershift and shift-western assays, which indicated that dna-binding proteins of the dnabii family  are involved in the formation of the protein-dna complex observed in the phtd promoter region. these results are consistent with the bioinformatic analysis, which revealed the presence of a potential binding site for the ihf protein, at position - <dig> to - <dig>  relative to the start of phtd transcription.

finally, the identity of the phtd binding protein was determined by mobility shift assays using e. coli strains mutated in each of the genes encoding subunits of hu and ihf proteins. the absence of retardation signal in ihfa- and ihfb- mutants clearly indicates a role for these proteins in the formation of the dna-protein complex, thus demonstrating that ihf protein binds to the phtd promoter region. further evidence for the binding of ihf to this region was provided by cell extracts from a complemented e. coli ihfa- strain, in which the retarded signal was restored by the presence of the p. syringae pv. phaseolicola ihfa gene acting in trans. finally, mobility shift assays using purified ihf protein confirmed that the protein binding the phtd promoter region was ihf.

ihf is a small basic dna-binding protein conserved in gram-negative bacteria that belongs to the class of so-called nucleoid associated proteins   <cit> . the ihf protein consists of two heterologous subunits, ihfα and ihfβ which are encoded in different transcription units by the homologous ihfa  and ihfb  genes, respectively. both subunits also share significant homology with the subunits of the hu protein, a nonspecific dna binding protein that also belongs to the same protein family. unlike the hu protein, the ihf protein recognizes a specific consensus sequence: wcarnwnnttr , which introduces a bend of 180° into the dna, centered at the 5'end of the 5'-wwwcar-3' element in the binding site  <cit> . in addition, 5'-proximal bases with high da-dt content, are also thought to be required for binding of this protein at some sites  <cit> . the ihf-binding sequence predicted upstream of the phtd region is 83% identical to the reported consensus sequence, and only two changes  are observed in the 3'-end. in addition, an a-t rich region is found upstream of this sequence, strongly suggesting a role for these sequences in the binding of the ihf protein. mobility shift assays with mutant probes clearly demonstrated a role for these residues in the pphtd-ihf interaction. similarly, our proposal for the requirement of a change in the dna structure for ihf binding to the phtd operon is somewhat supported by various reports which demonstrate that besides the interaction with consensus sequences, the ihf protein requires a curved dna structure for binding  <cit> .

the ihf protein contributes in an important way to the function of a wide variety of macromolecular processes in bacteria and is recognized as a global regulation factor in the transcription of many genes. ihf can alter gene expression in a number of ways, including positive and negative effects on transcription, and its role as a regulator of virulence gene expression has increasingly been determined  <cit> . the role of ihf protein in regulating phtd operon expression was examined through the analysis of a phtd::gfp transcriptional fusion in an e. coli k <dig> ihfa- mutant background, which clearly showed higher transcriptional activity than that observed in the wild type background. this activity significantly decreases when the ihfa- mutant strain is complemented in trans with the ihfa gene of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig>  suggesting that the ihf protein has a negative effect on the expression of the phtd operon in e. coli. because some reports have demonstrated that the e. coli ihf protein can functionally replace ihf proteins of some pseudomonas species, and since this protein is not modulated by interactions with inducer or co-repressor molecules, as are most transcription factors  <cit> , we propose that the ihf protein also exerts a negative effect on p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig> phtd operon expression.

ihf has been shown to act as a negative regulator through several mechanisms. in some cases, ihf seems to act as a classical repressor by binding to dna within the rna polymerase recognition site and excluding the polymerase from the promoter. ihf may also act indirectly as a repressor, collaborating with a gene-specific repressor or obstructing the binding of an activator. alternatively, ihf can repress transcription in concert with other nucleoid proteins and global or gene-specific transcriptional regulators to create a higher-order nucleoprotein complex that forms an inhibitory promoter architecture  <cit> . the way in which ihf could act to repress the phtd operon is unknown, although according to the position of the predicted ihf binding site , its role as a classical repressor may be dismissed. the fact that the expression of phtd::gfp transcriptional fusion is not completely depressed, despite the presence of ihf on a multiple copy plasmid, suggests the participation of other regulatory proteins with which the ihf protein may interact to regulate phtd operon expression.

on other hand, a common mechanism for transcriptional regulation of phtd and phtm, due to the presence of conserved regions in promoters of these genes has been suggested  <cit> , however the bioinformatic analysis did not reveal ihf binding sites in the phtm promoter region. in addition, mobility shift competition assays showed that this region is unable to compete the retarded signal in phtd, indicating that the ihf protein does not bind to the upstream region of phtm .

several lines of evidence have postulated that the genes of the pht cluster form a genomic island , which was acquired by horizontal gene transfer from a gram positive bacterium  <cit> . based on our findings, we propose that the regulation of this gene cluster , became integrated into the global regulatory mechanism of the host-bacterium p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig>  after the horizontal transfer event. this phenomenon of foreign dna integration into the regulatory pathway of the host cell has been reported in other organisms and several examples of horizontally acquired genes that are regulated by global proteins exist in the literature. in salmonella, genes within the spi- <dig> pathogenicity island, which is thought to have originated outside the enteric bacteria, are positively regulated by the nucleoid protein fis. similarly, the virulence regulon in vibrio cholerae, which is a mosaic of ancestral and horizontally acquired genes, uses the h-ns global regulator as a transcriptional repressor; as does enteropathogenic e. coli, where the h-ns protein represses the virulence genes in the lee pathogenicity island   <cit> . the role of the ihf protein in the regulation of transferred genes has also been reported, with this protein positively regulating the virulence genes tcp  and ct  in v. cholerae, alleviating h-ns repression. similarly the ihf protein directly activates the expression of genes in the lee pai in enteropathogenic e. coli  <cit> . it seems that the integration of foreign dna into the global regulatory mechanisms of host bacterium is not unusual. some authors suggest that this event allows the host cells to control the expression of transferred genes thus avoiding unregulated expression that could have harmful consequences besides having a high energy cost  <cit> . based on our results, we suggest that in p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig>  the control of some genes of the pht cluster is dependent on the ihf protein.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we demonstrated that the regulatory protein ihf binds to the promoter region of the phtd operon, most likely exerting a negative control on expression of this operon. this is the first regulatory protein reported as part of the regulation system of phaseolotoxin synthesis in p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig>  which suggests that regulation of gene expression within the pht cluster has integrated into the global regulatory mechanisms. however, it is still necessary to dissect in detail the regulatory mechanism of the ihf protein and identify other regulators that will enable us to elucidate the regulatory pathway for phaseolotoxin production in p. syringae pv. phaseolicola nps <dig> 

