BACKGROUND
salamanders  are known to have a wide variety of courtship dances that males use to persuade females into mating. these displays often go together with the admission of pheromones from sexual dimorphic glands that develop during the breeding season  <cit> . for example, in many terrestrial reproducing lungless salamanders , the mental gland hypertrophies during the mating season  <cit> . the secretions of this gland are either delivered through olfactory stimulation by slapping the females’ nostrils , or transdermally by scratching the females’ dorsum   <cit> . in aquatically reproducing newts , males of several species develop sexually dimorphic glands in their cloaca, known as the dorsal cloacal glandsa, which in some species extent into the pleuroperitoneal coeloem . these glands are highly derived skin glands that are covering the caudal portion of the cloaca  <cit> . during courtship, newts open their cloaca to secrete pheromones, and some species additionally tail-fan towards the female for an optimal delivery  <cit> . in both plethodontids and salamandrids, proteins of the sodefrin precursor-like factor  system have been identified as pheromones in the male sexually dimorphic glands. in the plethodontid desmognathus ocoee, behavioural experiments have shown that a fraction containing spf proteins was able to reduce the duration of courtship  <cit> . in newts, it was shown that a single spf-isoform was able to induce female following behaviour, which is one of the necessary prerequisites for successful insemination  <cit> . whatever the exact manifestation, it seems that spf is a pheromone system that has been able to influence female receptivity in a wide range of salamanders, probably since early urodelan evolution  <cit> .

at first sight, specific glands and associated courtship strategies seem to be tied to particular evolutionary lineages. indeed, studies in terrestrial plethodontids have mainly focussed on pheromone delivery using the mental gland  <cit> , while studies in aquatically reproducing salamandrids  have concentrated on pheromones that are produced by the male dorsal glands  <cit> . however, although tail-fanning of pheromones from the cloaca is the most obvious courtship strategy in newts, males of some species also have subtle head glands which they rub against the female’s nostrils during courtship. although such behaviour can be found in a wide variety of newts   <cit> , few pheromones have been characterized from male head glands in salamandrids.

the red-spotted newt  is a common salamandrid of north america for which various behavioural studies have indicated the use of chemical intra-specific communication  <cit> . males of this species possess acinar cheek glands of which the epithelial cells enlarge during the breeding season  <cit> . these so-called genial glands  are considered to be autapomorphic for the genus notophthalmus, and are present in both sexes in n. viridescens, although much less developed in females  <cit> . males of this species display an amplectic embrace during which they rub their cheeks against the females’ snout, while additionally tail-waving towards her   <cit> . the use of two distinct glands is likely to reflect the male’s dual strategy of pheromone delivery to persuade the female into courtship. however, while the cloacal glands of this species are known to express a wide spf diversity  <cit> , few precursors have been identified from the cheek glands  <cit>  and knowledge on their diversity remains limited.figure  <dig> 
courtship display in
n. viridescens
. males are coloured in grey, females in white.  the male approaches the female and, if she is responsive, performs a hula-dance in front of her.  if the female is not responsive, the male performs an amplectic embrace using his hindlimbs, whereby he first rubs or presses his cheek against the female’s snout and subsequently starts tail waving. these behaviours are often further interchanged during courtship, indicating alternating utilization of cloacal and cheek glands.  a successful courtship ends with the male releasing the female from amplexus and dropping a sperm package, which the female picks up with her cloaca. see  <cit>  for a more detailed description. figure modified from  <cit> .



here we combined transcriptomics and molecular phylogenetics to study the evolutionary diversity of spf precursors in the cheek glands of the red-spotted newt. we screened and compared presence and abundance of spf transcripts of both males and females, and compared this to the cloacal region, skin, gonads and liver. finally, we constructed a phylogenetic tree to situate the diversity of notophthalmus viridescens spf transcripts within known salamander spf-precursors.

RESULTS
male cheek glands express high amounts of spf
although spf can be expressed in various tissues  <cit> , pheromone-producing glands in salamanders generally express a substantially higher spf precursor diversity than tissues that do not have such a role  <cit> . to predict a possible pheromone function for the male cheek gland, we first explored the diversity of spf precursors in this gland, and compared it to six other tissues from sexually active animals. to have a representative screening, we used eleven primer combinations that together amplify a wide range of precursors . each of these primer combinations amplified spf precursors from cdna of the male cheek gland in a concentration that is comparable with, or higher than that of the male cloacal glands . in contrast, only light or no gel electrophoresis bands were observed for pcr products of cdna that was generated from equal rna starting concentrations of other tissues .figure  <dig> 
expression of sodefrin precursor factor. asterisks show the male breeding glands.  pcr-amplification of spf precursors in the male cheek and cloaca, female cheek and cloaca, and male skin, gonads and liver, using  <dig> different primer combinations. the primer combinations are cross-referenced in additional file  <dig>  for combinations 2– <dig> and 9– <dig>  comparable results were obtained and only one representative gel is shown. the elongation factor 1-alpha gene  was used as control.  number of recovered spf transcripts in breeding glands and other tissues of notophthalmus viridescens.



to further investigate spf transcript diversity, we sequenced  <dig> clones per successfully amplified pcr product. to correct for potential pcr errors, we grouped the obtained sequences in contigs of 99% identity. this resulted in  <dig> unique transcripts for this species  , of which  <dig> are expressed in multiple tissues . comparative alignment of the spf precursors  indicated that exon skipping and alternative splicing add to the observed transcript diversity, a phenomenon that is also seen in the mental gland of plethodontids and the dorsal glands of salamandrids  <cit> . we recovered  <dig> spf transcripts from the male cheek glands, a diversity that is comparable to spf expression in the cloacal glands of males , but higher than the spf diversity in other tissues investigated . together, these results indicate that spf expression is high in both male breeding glands and suggest that males, in addition to pheromone transmission by tail-fanning, can transfer spf protein pheromones to the female by rubbing their cheek gland directly onto her nostrils.

because race-pcr can amplify products that are present in low concentrations, our approach cannot estimate the expression level of individual spf precursors, and the relative contribution of each precursor in the cheek and cloacal glands therefore remains unknown. if spf expression in both glands would turn out to be similar, the dual gland use with different delivery modes would not only transfer a higher quantity of spf to the female than a single gland, but would also result in a more efficient transmission at different stages in the courtship process. alternatively, it is also possible that different repertoires or significantly different ratios of spf proteins are used, and that they induce different courtship responses in females. indeed, the male initially starts cheek rubbing before he starts tail fanning, and subsequently alternates these behaviours  <cit> . a behavioural study with pheromone extracts from the cloacal and cheek glands of notophthalmus viridescens indicated that females showed a significantly higher preference  for cloacal secretions than for cheek secretions  <cit> . conversely, pre-exposure to male cheek secretions accelerated initial female responses, while pre-exposure to male cloacal secretions did not show this effect, suggesting that both secretions contain a different chemical content  <cit> . yet, these studies did not link their observations to spf, and further expression analyses and behavioural testing will be necessary to unravel the exact contribution of spf pheromones in the two glands during male courtship.

our analyses also detected spf expression in the skin, but to a lesser extent than in the male breeding glands . since dorsal cloacal glands are highly derived skin glands  <cit> , continuous expression of spf throughout the skin may have provided a pre-existing basis for favouring areas of elevated expression in glands that evolved in association with new courtship strategies. possibly for the same reason, we also found spf in a reduced quantity in the female cheek glands of n. viridescens. these glands have a similar structure and secretory activity as that of males, but there is no known behaviour that suggests the use of female pheromones during courtship  <cit> .

phylogenetic analyses reveal highly divergent spf precursors in n. viridescens
although some urodelan families reproduce by external fertilization, most extant salamanders have internal fertilization, in which the female picks up the male spermatophore with her cloaca without copulation. the use of spf has so far been demonstrated in two salamander families   <cit>  that represent the basal divergence in the clade of internally fertilizing salamanders, at about  <dig>  million years ago    <cit> , and these courtship pheromones are therefore likely present in many species of this group  <cit> . however, the genes that produce the spf protein pheromones started to diverge already in the late palaeozoic, well before the diversification of the internally fertilizing salamanders  <cit> . to investigate the evolutionary diversity of spf precursors in n. viridescens in this context, we combined the mature coding sequence of a representative set of  <dig> sequences of this species with precursor sequences available on genbank for salamandrids   <cit> , ambystomatids  <cit>  and plethodontids  <cit>  in phylogenetic analyses . two phospholipase a <dig> inhibitors  frog sequences were chosen as outgroup  <cit> . alignment resulted in a data matrix of  <dig> characters for  <dig> terminals. maximum likelihood analyses were done under the jtt + g + i model, as assigned by prottest, and yielded eight trees of equal likelihood . the likelihood trees are consistent with supported nodes in the bayesian consensus phylogram. all trees show that n. viridescens spf precursors form four well-supported clades , differing only in phylogenetic placement of individual clones within these clades. speciation-duplication analyses in notung  <cit>  identified each of the nodes that represent a divergence between n. viridescens spf clades  as gene duplication events. the earliest split  corresponds to a duplication that happened early in urodelan evolution, and was estimated a late palaeozic event  <cit> . two other duplications  predate the origin of the internally fertilizing clade  and the onset of newt diversification , respectively. as a consequence, our tree indicates that n. viridescens expresses a combination of isoforms that stem from four highly diverged evolutionary lineages of spf variants.figure  <dig> 
bayesian consensus phylogram for spf protein diversification
. precursor numbers are cross-referenced in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  squares on the branches indicate bayesian posterior probabilities  equal to or higher than  <dig>  in combination with ml bootstrap support equal to or higher than  <dig>  circles indicate support for bpp alone. the support for four clades of n. viridescens precursor sequences  is indicated in red. nodes  <dig> to  <dig> indicate gene duplications that mark the divergence of these spf clades. node  <dig> represents the speciation event salamandridae-plethodontidae, and node  <dig> shows the onset of newt diversification. blue dots show spf protein sequences that have been identified as courtship pheromones  <cit> .



a recent study on spf pheromones identified two conserved cysteine patterns in protein sequences of the palmate newt lissotriton helveticus , and showed that these spf forms diverged early in urodelan evolution  <cit>  . furthermore, analyses of spf in courtship water indicated that representatives of each of these proteins are secreted side-by-side by tail-fanning palmate newts  <cit>  . our phylogenetic analyses here show that three of our n. viridescens precursor clades are sister to a clade that contains known palmate newt sequences. however, we also find an additional clade of ten spf precursors  for which no other urodelan representatives have been described so far. these transcripts possess a high signal peptide similarity  with spf sequences of the n. viridescens clade  <dig> precursors , but the mature protein is very different, and has a distinct cysteine pattern . our phylogenetic analyses suggest that these spf precursors originated from a gene duplication that happened early in spf evolution and that n. viridescens males thus express an array of anciently duplicated spf genes. further comparison of the levels of expression of the precursors in each of these clades will be necessary to understand their relative contribution in male courtship. furthermore, the study of the repertoire, expression level and phylogenetic placement of spf proteins in externally fertilizing salamanders will provide valuable information on pheromone use throughout salamander evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
although not every precursor necessarily codes for a functional pheromone, the wide spf diversity in the male cheek gland of n. viridescens suggests that this family of proteins serves a pheromone function during cheek rubbing in this species. our phylogenetic analyses show that n. viridescens expresses a combination of isoforms that stem from four highly diverged evolutionary lineages of spf variants, that together form the basis for a broad diversity of spf precursors in the breeding glands. spf pheromone application via other glands than the cloacal glands may be more widespread in salamandridae than currently assumed.

