BACKGROUND
confocal laser scanning microscopy  has become a standard imaging technique in molecular biology because it offers subcellular and three-dimensional spatial resolution, high temporal resolution, and the ability to resolve several fluorescent events simultaneously using multiple excitation lasers  <cit> . however, single-photon excitation used in clsm results in broad exposure to high energy uv and visible excitation sources in the specimen above the focus plane, which can reduce the viability of photosensitive, living samples  <cit> . multiphoton microscopy  has gained popularity because it offers decreased phototoxicity and increased sample viability while preserving the four-dimensional image resolution of clsm due to its nonlinear excitation profile, which enables excitation predominantly at the focal point on the excitation plane  <cit> . mpm has also gained popularity for deep tissue imaging because the infrared  light used to generate multiphoton excitation is scattered to a lesser extent in biological samples than higher energy visible or uv light  <cit> .

however, clsm still remains the most widely used technique for multi-color imaging because single-photon absorption peaks of common biological fluorophores are relatively narrow and usually non-overlapping. this characteristic makes it easy to differentially excite a set of spectrally distinct fluorophores in a given sample by simply incorporating standard excitation laser lines for multi-color clsm. in contrast, two-photon absorption  spectra of common biological fluorophores are characterized by broad, overlapping absorption peaks that can result in off-peak excitation, thereby creating signal ambiguity  <cit> . therefore, although mpm offers many advantages over clsm, it has not replaced clsm for multi-color measurements that are critical to most fields of biology.

the most popular multi-color mpm takes advantage of the broad, overlapping tpa peaks by selecting a single intermediate wavelength of excitation to excite multiple fluorophores simultaneously  <cit> . however, unlike clsm, this multi-color mpm method often requires off-peak excitation of each fluorophore in order to excite all fluorophores in a given sample simultaneously, thereby decreasing the excitation efficiency and making excitation unequal over the given set of fluorophores  <cit> . in addition, finding the optimal intermediate wavelength for a given pair of fluorophores can be laborious and ultimately depends on the conditions of the experiment,  <cit>  which makes it difficult to adopt a standard that can be used by other laboratories. furthermore, adequate separation of the emission signal from multiple fluorophores often relies on the implementation of either very narrow variable band-pass filters , which can significantly attenuate the true signal, or spectral scanning, which requires significantly longer exposure times  <cit> . these methods are not only expensive, but also reduce sample viability because of the increased excitation power or increased exposure times that are required to achieve sufficient, unambiguous signal in each emission channel.

we predicted that it should be possible to optimize an imaging system for dual color mpm image collection using multiple excitation wavelengths, similar to most standard clsm systems. we tested common commercial antibody-linked fluorescent dyes for their two-photon excitation profiles and designed an imaging system to achieve high spectral separation of selected red and green fluorescent probes. we describe a novel multiple-excitation mpm  system that is easily tunable for different pairs of fluorophores under different imaging conditions. here we differentiate me-mpm from single-excitation mpm , the current standard in the field. me-mpm demonstrated comparable temporal resolution, improved signal-to-noise ratios, and improved spectral separation of pairs of fluorophores without the use of vbfs or increased excitation power. in photosensitive living tissue, me-mpm reduced the time required to set up optimal imaging parameters, leading to faster set up time and reduced exposure to light radiation before acquisition. we believe that this will allow for enhanced viability in photosensitive tissues as well as reduced photobleaching during imaging set up.

RESULTS
multi-excitation mpm platform
we designed an me-mpm platform to direct two separate tunable excitation lasers into either of two confocal microscopes. me-mpm was conducted on an upright olympus confocal point scanning system equipped with fluoview  <dig> software  or an inverted olympus spectral deconvolution confocal point scanning system equipped with variable band-pass filters  and fluoview  <dig> software  using spectra physics mai tai broad-band  and mai tai high-power  two-photon excitation sources . this design allowed us to direct the light path to either an upright or an inverted stage without altering the optical setup between experiments.

the two excitation beams were independently modulated and were converged using a beam combiner and then directed into the microscope scan heads. the timing of the two excitation sources was random and two-pulse imaging may induce unexpected state-transitions,  <cit>  which is not addressed here. in order to direct 100% of each excitation laser to only one microscope, we adjusted the polarization of the laser light coming from each excitation source using the first set of half-wave plates , such that only one beam exited the following nicol prism. once set, the first set of half-wave plates  remained fixed over the entire image acquisition period. we controlled the intensity of each excitation laser independently by adjusting the polarization of each excitation beam using a second half-wave plate  before it entered the beam combiner, which attenuates the laser based on its polarization. this second set of half-wave plates  was used to optimize the excitation of green or red fluorophores in the sample independently. since the two excitation lasers exited the beam combiner orthogonal to each other, we controlled the ratio of green-to-red excitation light intensity using a third set of half-wave plates  before directing the excitation light through a second fixed nicol prism. this third set of half-wave plates  was used to optimize the signal-to-noise in the green and red emission channels. a more detailed description of the optical path is described in additional file  <dig>  the power of excitation light achieved at the sample was measured from  <dig> nm to  <dig> nm . this design allowed us to carry out both me-mpm and se-mpm on either the upright or the inverted stage without modifying the optical table.

two-photon absorption  spectra were collected for green and red dyes as well as for fluorescent proteins that are commonly used for imaging epitopes in fixed cells  to identify non-overlapping regions of maximum absorption for each probe. both fitc and egfp exhibited local maxima in absorption between  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm, at which point alexa fluor  <dig> and dsredii exhibited lower absorption. therefore, light at  <dig> nm was used in me-mpm experiments to excite green-fluorescing dyes and proteins. dsredii exhibited a local maximum at  <dig> and alexa fluor  <dig> exhibited a local maximum at  <dig> nm, at which point the green-fluorescing dyes exhibited vanishing absorption. however, the ir excitation lasers in this setup were only tunable only up to  <dig> nm. therefore,  <dig> nm was used to excite red-fluorescing dyes and proteins using the me-mpm system, at which point green-fluorescing dyes exhibited very weak absorption. se-mpm was performed at an empirically determined intermediate wavelength based on the fluorophores in the sample.

spectral separation in whole cells
to test whether me-mpm increased the spectral resolution of two fluorophores in a sample compared to se-mpm, we imaged combined pools of 293t cells expressing either cytoplasmic humanized renilla gfp  or dsredii. three dimensional z-stacks were collected on the fv <dig> inverted confocal microscope using clsm at  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm, me-mpm at  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm, and se-mpm at  <dig> nm, which we empirically found to be the optimal intermediate excitation wavelength and which was also verified spectroscopically  for this pair of fluorophores . me-mpm at  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm achieved comparable spectral separation of the green and red emitting fluorophores as sequential clsm at  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm . under identical acquisition settings, we blocked one of the lasers at a time to verify that only one fluorophore was excited by each excitation source in me-mpm. this excitation separation was comparable with what was achieved using sequential clsm .

under identical vbf settings, se-mpm at  <dig> nm achieved similar signal intensity as me-mpm but showed increased cross-excitation and false-positive bleed-through in the emission channels, thereby adding ambiguity to the final image . when the vbf settings were further narrowed to better separate green and red signals in the emission channels, a notable amount of signal was lost in both the red and green emission channels, resulting in poor image quality . therefore, me-mpm demonstrated better spectral separation and higher signal-to-noise ratios over se-mpm for green- and red-fluorescent proteins.

spectral resolution of subcellular structures
to test whether me-mpm could also be used to improve spectral separation in subcellular structures, we imaged cos <dig> cells that were immunostained for tubulin  and actin . three dimensional z-stacks were collected on the fv <dig> upright microscope using simultaneous clsm at  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm, me-mpm at  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm, and se-mpm at  <dig> nm, which we empirically found to be the optimal intermediate excitation wavelength and which also roughly corresponds to the intersection point of the tpa spectra  for this pair of fluorophores . we believe that the optimal intermediate excitation wavelength is blue shifted slightly compared to the 293t imaging experiments because higher energy was required to resolve the finer microtubule structures. simultaneous clsm and me-mpm images exhibited comparable signal resolution in the green and red emission channels  and both showed slight bleed-through of green fluorescence signal in the red emission channel . cross-excitation of alexa fluor  <dig> by the green excitation source in me-mpm was predicted based on its tpa spectrum , but was dim compared to the true red and green signal intensities .

using se-mpm at  <dig> nm, green signal was much more intense than red signal, thereby masking the signal in the red channel . in the se-mpm images, there was notable bleed-through of green signal into the red emission channel that was as intense as the true red signal in the sample. unequal signal intensity and bleed-through have been reported previously for se-mpm  <cit> . therefore, me-mpm enhanced the spectral separation of green and red fluorescing probes in finer subcellular structures over se-mpm and was comparable to simultaneous clsm.

a further limitation of se-mpm that came up frequently in our measurements was the lengthy processes involved in optimizing the intermediate excitation wavelength for a given set of fluorophores in a sample. for each pair of fluorophores, finding the optimal intermediate excitation wavelength is a laborious process and often requires the use of finely tuned vbfs to optimize fluorescence emission separation as well as access to the entire set of fluorescent small molecules or proteins in order to design a pair that can be used for a given sample  <cit> . we found that even after an optimal wavelength had been identified for a given pair of fluorophores, this wavelength ultimately depended on the concentration and expression levels of each fluorophore in the sample, as was noted for the 293t and cos <dig> cell experiments. the me-mpm system allowed us to quickly adjust the half-wave plates in the optical path to achieve equal fluorescence signal intensity with minimal bleed-through for green and red dyes. therefore, it was simple to optimize imaging conditions regardless of expression levels and fluorescence intensity of the two fluorophores in the sample, much like the level of control in sequential clsm.

multi-color time-lapse imaging in photosensitive samples
clsm has not been sufficient to perform long time-lapse imaging experiments in living, photosensitive tissues because it requires repeated broad exposure of the specimen to high energy uv and visible excitation light  <cit> . previously, we have noted considerable phototoxicity in acute brain slices over  <dig> hours of fluorescence imaging using standard clsm systems . to test the application of our me-mpm system for multi-color time-lapse imaging of photosensitive cells, acute tissue slices were prepared from an embryonic brain in which cells had been dual-labeled with hrgfp and dsredii via in utero electroporation  <cit> .

we adapted the standard single color electroporation by separating two single color electroporations by one day, thereby generating two distinct groups of fluorescing cells expressing only one of the two fluorescent proteins within the cortex. a key feature of this application is that all such electroporated cells can be traced as they migrate toward the cortex in subsequent days by fluorescence mpm  <cit> . migration of green and red populations of neurons within the mouse cortex of e <dig> brain slices was imaged by collecting 3d z-stacks every  <dig> minutes for  <dig> hours using me-mpm at  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm on the fv <dig> upright microscope . we chose to excite dsredii at  <dig> nm instead of  <dig> nm because the ir laser power was more stable at this shorter wavelength, which was crucial for longer time-lapse experiments.

time-lapse images from an acute brain section imaged using me-mpm revealed no apparent cross-excitation or bleed-through in the emission channels , and all cells could easily be identified as expressing one of the two fluorescent proteins . representative green- and red-fluorescing cells in the imaging plane were traced over a 12-hour imaging window , and movement was represented using vector diagrams . both green and red fluorescing neurons migrated radially in the field of view for all  <dig> hours of image collection, indicating minimal phototoxicity in the sample. additionally, after  <dig> hours, there was no observable decrease in fluorescence signal intensity or photo-induced cell death. therefore, me-mpm provided increased viability in photosensitive cells compared to clsm without sacrificing signal-to-noise levels or spectral separation. whether this would hold true in other photosensitive systems has yet to be determined.

for comparison, an adjacent acute brain section of the cortex was imaged using a single, intermediate excitation wavelength at  <dig> nm, which we empirically found to be the optimal intermediate excitation wavelength . the excitation power and exposure times were adjusted to achieve comparable red signal intensity as me-mpm  so that image quality and tissue viability could be directly compared. se-mpm images had observable cross-excitation and false positive bleed-through of green fluorescence signal in the red channel . in addition, green fluorescence signal was more intense than red fluorescence signal, which slightly masked the red signal in the image series. similar to me-mpm, there was no observable decrease in fluorescence signal intensity over the  <dig> hours of data collection.

se-mpm is the gold standard for imaging multiple fluorophores with two-photon excitation. we noted that neurons moved at least the same if not greater distances under me-mpm, suggesting that this new method allows for increased signal-to-noise ratios and decreased false positive emission bleed-through without sacrificing cell viability. we speculate that neurons exhibited enhanced movement when imaged under me-mpm due to faster experimental set up time and reduced exposure to excitation light before time-lapse imaging began. in the me-mpm setup, we could simply tune each excitation source independently to optimally excite each fluorophore, similar to what is done in clsm. however, as we noted earlier, the se-mpm setup required systematic evaluation of excitation at several intermediate wavelengths to find the optimal wavelength to excite both fluorophores relatively equally without evoking false positive bleed-through signal, and this led to slower experimental set up times and increased exposure to excitation light before the time-lapse imaging could begin. in addition, the optimal intermediate wavelength was not easily predictable because it varied between experiments based on the relative concentration levels and expression patterns for each fluorophore. further experiments should be performed to elucidate whether me-mpm imaging leads to reduced photo-toxicity in standard paradigms using time-lapse imaging in live cells.

there are a number of modifications that could improve the current me-mpm design to further enhance spectral separation and signal-to-noise levels. presently only 50% of the combined available power from the two excitation sources could be directed to the sample due to the design of the beam combiner, which orients the beams to be anti-parallel upon exiting. this limitation was most notable when attempting to visualize fine subcellular structures at high magnification . the available power at the sample could be increased by replacing the beam combiner with an excitation dichroic mirror, capable of passing light below  <dig> nm and reflecting light above  <dig> nm, at the intersection of the two beams in the routing path. this modification in the light path would allow for a greater power range at the sample from the excitation sources.

the system could also be improved by using excitation lasers with a broader wavelength range. in this report the wavelength used to excite dsredii and alexa fluor  <dig> was between  <dig> nm and  <dig> nm. however, some red-emitting fluorophores have peak excitation above  <dig> nm . longer excitation wavelengths would increase the signal-to-noise levels in the red emission channel and could decrease the amount of light absorbed by green dyes, thereby further enhancing spectral separation. additionally, we predict that spectral separation and signal-to-noise could be further improved in the time-lapse imaging experiment using an excitation source that is more stable at  <dig> nm for long periods of data collection. alternatively, shorter excitation pulses could also be used to improve excitation efficiency, decreasing the need for longer wavelength excitation.

we believe that me-mpm could also be adapted for two-photon fret experiments that require very high temporal resolution and signal separation. such a system would be ideally designed with an electronic shuttering mechanism for sequential wavelength excitation rather than simultaneous excitation in order to effectively quantify donor and acceptor excitation within a given fret pair. in addition, an me-mpm configuration could be constructed with a delay stage to synchronize excitation pulses within the sample to measure fluorescence lifetime in the sample.

a potential drawback of this system is that it remains susceptible to chromatic aberration, which could make it difficult to maintain identical focal points of the two colors. however there was no observable difference in the foal plane of the green and red signal in our system . if this problem does present itself in other imaging systems, microscope objectives are now available to correct for chromatic aberration up to  <dig> nm, much like this problem was solved in multi-laser clsm. a second potential drawback of this system compared with se-mpm is the cost of the second ir excitation source. however, prices for ir excitation sources are continuingly dropping as the popularity of mpm increases,  <cit>  further lowering the cost of the setup. in order to increase functionality in our design, 100% of either excitation source can be directed at either microscope independently, providing two independent se-mpm setups when me-mpm is not needed. an optimized price point could provide researchers with a simple and efficient method to study in vivo molecular dynamics without compromising tissue viability or image quality.

CONCLUSIONS
it has been a challenge to resolve two distinct fluorescence signals simultaneously using se-mpm, thereby making mpm a less popular choice for multi-color imaging despite the many well-known advantages of mpm over clsm. here, we have investigated the feasibility of me-mpm, a simple adaptation of the standard se-mpm system to allow for two separate sources of excitation that are optimized based on the tpa spectra for pairs of fluorescent molecules. the advantages of me-mpm over se-mpm were threefold. first, this technique allowed for the selection of optimal excitation wavelengths for each fluorophore that minimally excited the other, thereby enhancing signal-to-noise ratios compared to images collected using se-mpm . second, the implementation of half-wave plates and fixed nicol prisms allowed us to easily adjust the intensity of excitation illumination from each ir laser source separately to achieve standard illumination of both fluorophores by bringing only the brightest point in the imaging field to saturation in each channel. this level of control, similar to that of clsm, enhanced the spectral separation of the two fluorophores compared to se-mpm and did not require the use of vbfs . by comparison, in se-mpm, these adjustments to normalize signal intensity for optimal imaging conditions are simply not possible without further narrowing the vbfs, which requires compensatory increased exposure to excitation light. finally, live cells imaged under me-mpm remained viable after a 12-hour time-lapse experiment, suggesting that this new method allows for increased signal-to-noise ratios and decreased false positive emission bleed-through without sacrificing cell viability .

in the future, with optimized spectral separation, the me-mpm system could be used to more rapidly design pairs of fluorescence probes for multi-color two-photon imaging, such as cfp/yfp or gfp/dsred for clsm. similar to the tremendous gain in popularity of clsm after the introduction of multi-color imaging, we anticipate that me-mpm will further increase the popularity of mpm.

