BACKGROUND
green algae are a group of photosynthetic organisms that are more closely related to land plants than to other major eukaryotic groups  <cit> . a number of micro-green-algal species are suitable for biofuel production, and the lipid content of these algae increases significantly under various stress conditions  <cit> . for example, in the green algal model chlamydomonas reinhardtii, lipid droplets rich in triacylglycerol  form after nitrogen  deprivation  <cit> . other stress conditions, such as salt stress and sulfur deprivation, also lead to increased tag content in c. reinhardtii  <cit> . in addition, stress response and subsequent lipid accumulation exhibit tremendous diversity in green algae  <cit> . for example, in response to n deficiency several green algae showed substantial differences in the tradeoff between growth and lipid content, the lipid accumulation time-course, and the stress level required to stimulate lipid formation  <cit> . thus, a better understanding of the mechanistic details of stress response in green algae will not only contribute to our knowledge about adaptation to stressful environments but also will have the potential to improve microalgal biofuel production.

to better understand how green algae respond to stress on a genomic level, we focused on the retention and loss of gene family members. this is because gene duplications lead to raw materials for evolution to act on  <cit>  and they are a common feature of most eukaryotic species  <cit> . genes involved in stress response tend to be retained in various eukaryotes  <cit> . thus a thorough look at the retention and loss patterns among green algal gene families may provide a new evolutionary perspective on stress response in green algal lineage. in general, the majority of gene duplicates are rapidly lost following the duplication events, but a significant number of duplicates are retained  <cit> , contributing to organismal and regulatory complexity  <cit> . gene retention occurs in a lineage-specific manner in a wide range of organisms  <cit>  and a significant functional bias exists. in fungi, stress-related genes tend to undergo many duplications and losses  <cit> . similarly, in arabidopsis thaliana, stress responsive genes tend be retained  <cit>  but also tend to be pseudogenized  <cit> . in a study of duplicates in yeasts, nematode, fruit fly, and a. thaliana, genes involved in response to environmental stress are prone to be retained in a lineage-specific manner  <cit> . there is not yet a global study summarizing the gene gain and loss patterns of known gene families in green algae. in addition, it is not known if duplicate retention is correlated with their stress responsiveness in green algae.

after duplication, gene duplicates may acquire a novel function that contributes to adaptation  <cit> . such neo-functionalization can be an important source of inter-specific differences in stress response that could lay the foundation for diversity in stress-induced oil production in algae. an earlier study in a. thaliana showed that, although the predominant fate of gene duplicate was retention or loss of stress response, in around 6% of the cases there was evidence of stress response gain  <cit> . examining evolution in gene expression among duplicates could thus further elucidate how gene duplication and subsequent functional innovation shaped the gene repertoire involved in stress response, and likely contributed to the diversity in stress response in green algae. there is no global study on functional evolution of duplicate genes in green algae.

in this study, we integrated genomic and transcriptomic data to find out how gene families and gene expression have evolved in the green algal lineage in the context of stress. we first examined the variation of domain family composition in nine green algal species compared to land plants. then we investigated how gene gain and loss events occurred in the green algal lineage and examined the functional bias in retained duplicates in c. reinhardtii using phylogenetic approaches. we also examined the pseudogenization of gene duplicates and their functional bias. finally, we characterized the evolution of gene expression after duplication events to find out how gene function evolved in the context of stress response. our study reveals the evolutionary trajectory of stress responsive gene families in the green algal lineage, and because lipid production is sharply induced by stress  <cit> , our results could help pinpointing candidate genes for further study on lipid metabolism.

RESULTS
variation in domain family sizes among land plants and green algae
our goal here was to define the overall gain and loss of duplicates in gene families over the course of green algal evolution by using protein domains to define gene families. gene families can be defined in two ways. in an earlier study, a protein sequence similarity based approach was used to identify protein families using full length protein sequences in green algae  <cit> . here, we used another approach by defining a family as proteins having the same domain, using the pfam database  <cit> ; protein domains are well-defined regions of a protein that can perform a specific function and form a structural unit  <cit> . this approach was adopted because the sequence similarity approach could group non-homologous genes/regions into the same family . on the other hand, our approach only includes proteins with known domains. on average  <dig> % green algal genes have one or more recognized domains, ranging from 56% to 76% among different species, while land plants have slightly higher percentage . this could reflect the fact that overall green algae are less well studied than land plants and might have unknown algal-specific domains. it could also indicate a discrepancy in structural  annotation quality between different green algal species. given that genes with known domains are regarded as gene models with higher confidence  <cit> , using protein domains to establish family alleviates the structural annotation quality issue.figure  <dig> 
domain families in green algae and land plants. . the coverage of pfam domain annotation in green algal  and land plant  genomes. x axis indicates the numbers of genes in each species, and y axis indicates the proportion of genes with ≥ <dig> domains. . correlation of domain family size profiles among green algae and land plants. the color scale indicates the range of pearson’s correlation coefficient  of domain family sizes between two species. refer to methods for abbreviations.



among  <dig>  domain families found in nine green algae and eight land plants ,  <dig>   are shared between green algae and land plants,  <dig>  are green alga specific, and  <dig>  are land plant specific. as expected, more closely related species tend to have more highly correlated domain family sizes and there are clearly two distinct clusters, one for green algae and the other for land plants . nonetheless, there is large variation in family sizes among green algal species. this is likely the results of lineage-specific gene gain and loss events. thus we next asked how lineage-specific gene gains and losses have contributed to the extant domain family sizes in the green algal lineage.

gene gains and losses throughout green algal lineage
the variation in domain family sizes among green algae suggests extensive lineage-specific evolution of gene families. to find out how gene gain and loss events over time have shaped the domain family size differences among green algal species, we conducted a phylogenetic analysis on domain families present in green algae. to address the concern for gene annotation quality in green algae, we examined the current annotation and found that only a small number of recognizable protein domains are represented in intergenic regions . therefore, we used domain sequences in annotated genes for further analysis. domain sequences from two land plants, a. thaliana and physcomitrella patens, were included as outgroups. among  <dig>  domain families containing green algal genes,  <dig>  with at least four sequences in green algae and the two land plants were further analyzed and a phylogenetic tree was built for each domain family. after reconciliation of the domain trees with a species tree  <cit> , orthologous groups  among the green algal and the land plant species were established for inferring gene gain and loss events . we have also generated another species tree based on 18 s rrna sequences  and the two trees are largely similar, except in the ostreococcus lineage. this ambiguity is likely due to the short branch length in this lineage that is difficult to resolve. this tree-based approach is shown to be consistent with similarity-based approach to identify ogs in land plants  <cit> . overall, gene gain and loss events were frequent in every branch of the phylogenetic tree . interestingly, in the green algal lineage, gene loss occurred more frequently than gene gain on every branch, suggesting extensive net gene loss since the green algae-land plant common ancestor.figure  <dig> 
gene gains and losses across land plants and green algae. blue and red bars indicate number of the gene gain and loss events on each branch, respectively. species names and numbers of annotated genes with domain in each species are shown on the right. branch  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> indicate four different time periods in the c. reinhardtii lineage evolution. refer to methods for full species names.



another reason for an excess of loss events could be because there were errors in phylogenetic inferences. to ascertain that our phylogenetic inference of orthologous groups was robust, we conducted two tests. first, we randomly picked  <dig>  gene families for bootstrap studies. among  <dig>  branches,  <dig> % have a bootstrap value of ≥ 80% . we found that  <dig> % of the volvocales branches  have a bootstrap value of ≥ 80% but only  <dig> % in the ostreococcus branches . our results showed that branch lengths are positively correlated with bootstrap values  . second, we examined  <dig> domain families with only one copy in each of the  <dig> green algal and  <dig> land plant species assuming that this group of domain families has not undergone gene gain and loss. thus, their gene trees should be identical to the species tree in topology. because the alternative scenario is possible  in these families, this is a conservative estimate of the orthology inference accuracy. our results showed a varying degree of consistency in branching between gene trees and the species tree on different branches on the species tree, ranging from  <dig> % to  <dig> % . longer branches on the species tree, indicating greater evolutionary distance, correspond with higher consistency with gene trees. we should emphasize that in branches with high consistency, for example the branch leading to the split of micromonas and ostreococcus with 84% consistent trees, the gene loss to gene gain ratio was comparable to that in branches with low consistency, indicating that green algae have experienced extensive gene loss.

several other observations are consistent with the extensive gene loss phenomenon we have inferred in green algal species. first, a substantial number of gene families were lost on lineages leading to c. reinhardtii and o. lucimarinus after the split from land plants  <cit> . second, in ostreococcus, downsizing of many gene families and gene losses were observed  <cit> . third, a comparative analysis including micromonas and ostreococcus revealed that the common ancestor of mamiellales had already experienced genome reduction  <cit> . therefore, although lineage-specific gene gains took place, the lineage-specific losses contributed more significantly to the species-specific gene repertoire in green algae.

pseudogenes in green algae
we found that genes are frequently lost throughout the green algal lineage. some of the lost genes may still be present in the genome in the form of pseudogenes. pseudogenes are defined as defunct genomic regions that are fragments of functional genes some with in-frame stops and/or frameshifts. to investigate pseudogenes in green algal genomes, we identified them using a modified pipeline  <cit> . a total of  <dig>  pseudogenes were identified in all nine green algal species. in general, pseudogenes are less abundant in green algae than in land plants, even when normalized against genome sizes or total number of genes . among green algae and plants, the number of pseudogenes increases as the genome size and number of genes increase . larger domain families also tend to have more pseudogenes in green algae , although the correlation is weak . this is possibly due to their small genome sizes and evolutionary pressure towards a more compact genome  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
pseudogene counts in green algae and land plants. . pseudogenes counts in total, per mb genome, and per  <dig> genes in green algae and land plants. . number of pseudogenes and genome sizes in green algae  and land plants . . number of pseudogenes and genes in green algae and plants. . number of genes and pseudogenes in each domain family in green algae. 



functions of retained c. reinhardtii genes duplicated after the c. reinhardtii-v. carteri split
although gene losses appear to be more frequent, there are abundant retained duplicates throughout the green algal lineage. however, it is not clear if there is a functional bias among retained duplicates. to determine such a bias, we focused on c. reinhardtii since it is a green algal model organism with a relatively well-annotated gene set  <cit> . after annotating the c. reinhardtii proteome with go categories based on sequence similarity ,  <dig>  of  <dig>  proteins  are in ≥ <dig> go categories. during reconciliation of domain and species trees, the branches in the species tree where duplications took place were inferred as well. thus we can examine functional biases of retained duplicates in each of the branches leading to c. reinhardtii. this information allows us to ask if functions of retained genes were consistent over the course of c. reinhardtii evolution. focusing on the c. reinhardtii lineage after its split from the v. carteri lineage,  <dig>  duplication events  took place in the c. reinhardtii lineage. among  <dig> categories enriched in retained duplicates, they can be classified into the following three types.

the first type of functional categories belong to those involved in stress response , similar to land plants and several other eukaryotes  <cit> . this result is further corroborated by the results from stress expression datasets , suggesting that these retained duplicates might have contributed to the species-specific stress response in green algae. one example is the heat shock protein hsp <dig> family : three duplication events took place in c. reinhardtii after the split from v. carteri, creating four c. reinhardtii-specific duplicates that are responsive to stress . the second type of retained duplicate enriched categories is transport including ion, phosphate, and transmembrane transport. one potential explanation is that functional divergence among duplicated transport genes allowed the regulation, affinity, and subcellular location of transporters to be fine tuned. for example, the potassium transporter family  in c. reinhardtii experienced five duplication events after the split from v. carteri and resulted in six c. reinhardtii-specific duplicates, all of which are responsive to stress . these duplicates might have contributed to the species-specificity of ion transport and stress response in c. reinhardtii. in other green algal species, one example of such fine-tuning is the nitrate and ammonium transporters in micromonas  <cit> ; however, it is not limited to nutrient management: channelrhodopsins, ion-channels involved in light perception and phototaxis, are also found to be diverse even within the chlamydomonas genus  <cit> . the third type of enriched categories is signaling. for example, nine retained duplicates are involved in the synthesis of cyclic nucleotides that are secondary messengers important for the regulation of flagella  <cit>  and generally for the activation of ion channels  <cit> . other examples of enriched signaling categories include protein phosphorylation and signal transduction . nucleosome assembly could also be involved in signaling as nucleosome is proposed to be a signaling module in addition to its function of dna packaging  <cit> . together, these enrichments indicate duplicates involved in complex environmental interactions and signaling systems tend to be retained, potentially because duplicates in these categories provide the capacity for responding to new environments and for new routes of regulation.figure  <dig> 
functions and stress responsiveness of retained duplicates in the
c. reinhardtii
lineage.  functions of retained duplicates. columns indicate four phylogenetic branches as in figure  <dig> with the most recent on the far right. rows indicate go biological processes terms with over or under-represented numbers of retained duplicate genes in at least one branch. values shown are -log <dig> for over-represented and log <dig> for under-represented categories, respectively.  stress responsiveness of retained duplicates. stress conditions shown are n , s , cu , fe , co <dig> , oxidative , and all . values shown are -log <dig> for over-representation and log <dig> for under-representation. branches are the same as .



consistency of functional biases over the course of c. reinhardtii evolution
the above discussion was on the c. reinhardtii lineage after its split from the v. carteri lineage. in the process of green algal evolution, some duplicates may be preferentially retained throughout while others may be period-specific due to the ever-changing environment. in addition, different kinds of genes may have different longevities thus resulting in differences in enriched categories over time. to distinguish these possibilities, the timing of duplication of each retained gene was pinpointed to an internal or external branch that led to c. reinhardtii. the functions of ancestral genes at the time of duplication were assumed to be the same as those of their descendants. first we focus on categories that are branch specific. the branches are numbered as in figures  <dig> and 4a. stress response is enriched in just branch  <dig>  while nucleosome assembly is enriched in  <dig> and  <dig>  the expansion of stress related gene families in just the youngest branch may be because environmental condition would constantly change in the evolutionary history of the c. reinhardtii lineage. thus previously retained duplicates conferring selective advantage may not be adaptive due to exposure of green algae to ever-changing environments.

in contrast to stress, we found that signaling categories are consistently enriched for retained duplicates over time. further, retained duplicates in branch  <dig> and  <dig> tend to play markedly similar roles as branch  <dig>  particularly those in ion transport, signaling and cyclic nucleotide synthesis. retained duplicates in branch  <dig> were associated with several types of light response and signal transduction. . this result suggests that gene families involved in signaling and to a lesser degree transport are constantly expanded in a lineage-specific manner, and more generally indicates consistent innovation in interaction with the environment. further, these enrichments are consistent with other eukaryotes  <cit> . three categories involved in double fertilization, pollen tube growth, and embryo development are not relevant to the single-cellular c. reinhardtii. they are likely annotated by the sequence similarity to plant proteins by blast2go  <cit> . to test the robustness of our results, we tested the go enrichment in the subset of domain families with ≥ 75% genes of a family only having one domain. the go categories enriched in c. reinhardtii retained duplicates are similar to the results of all domain families . this illustrates that our results achieved using domain families instead of gene families are robust.

functional categories enriched in conserved genes and genes associated with pseudogenes
in addition to retained duplicates, we defined “conserved genes” as those with the same copy number  in green algal species. the categories enriched in conserved genes in c. reinhardtii were few and largely involved in housekeeping functions, including go terms such as translation and two other ribosome-related terms. other terms enriched in conserved genes included tetrapyrrole synthesis, and photosystem i reaction center . in addition to functional bias in retention and conservation, we would also like to examine functional bias in pseudogenization. to find out if there is such bias, we tested go enrichment in genes associated with pseudogenes, defined as genes that are the closest relatives  to pseudogenized duplicates. stress response was the only enriched biological process we found in genes associated with pseudogenes, indicating that, in addition to their high rate of retention, these genes have frequently undergone gene loss, a finding similar to a pseudogene study in a. thaliana  <cit> . this coupling between a high birth as well as high death rate is likely because genes involved in responding to specific stress conditions could become unnecessary when that condition does not persist.

retained duplicates and their stress responsiveness
multiple stress conditions lead to increased oil content in microalgae  <cit> . in addition, we showed that stress response categories were enriched in retained duplicates in the c. reinhardtii lineage. however, go annotation in c. reinhardtii is established solely based on computational approaches and has only  <dig> % of genes annotated. to address these issues, we asked if retained genes tend to be stress responsive compared to singletons under six conditions: deficiency in n, sulfur, iron, copper, and co <dig>  and oxidative stress  <cit> . in all stress conditions except sulfur deprivation, stress responsiveness tends to be over-represented among retained genes , . when combining all six rna-seq datasets and defining stress responsiveness of a gene as being responsive in ≥ <dig> conditions, retained duplicates still tend to be stress responsive . this result corroborates our conclusion that retained duplicates tend to be in the stress response functional categories.

according to functional category analysis, stress response was not enriched among retained duplicates except in branch  <dig>  which is the most recent branch . consistent with this finding, analysis of stress expression data also revealed that retained genes tend to be stress responsive in more conditions if they were duplicated more recently , with  <dig> conditions in branch  <dig> and gradually declining to none in branch  <dig>  this is also consistent with our finding that the closest relatives of pseudogenes tend to be involved in stress response, again reinforcing the idea that, although stress response genes tend to be retained at a higher rate compared to genome average, they tend to be more short-lived.

stress response evolution post duplication in the c. reinhardtii lineage
retained duplicates tend to be stress responsive , suggesting that gene duplication might provide a source for innovations in response to stress. this possibility then leads to the question how often innovation, defined as gain of stress responsiveness from a non-responsive ancestral gene, occurred in green algae. to answer this question, we first integrated phylogenetic data and stress related expression datasets to infer the ancestral response state . with ancestral states, the gain and loss events of duplicated genes can then be distinguished  <cit> . stress response states are defined as u , d , and n . only the ancestral nodes leading immediately to extant genes were included in our analysis to avoid complications from predicting responses in nested branches  <cit> .

we define four “evolutionary events”  based on a comparison of stress response states between an extant gene and its most immediate ancestral gene node for each of the six stress conditions. we found that  <dig>  comparisons  were relevant because they involved either extant and/or ancestral stress responsive genes. among the six stress conditions, the median number of events involving retention of the ancestral stress response is 48% . we also found that 35% were response loss events . meanwhile, comparatively fewer events  involved functional gain  and even fewer events  involved functional switch  . to find out if younger duplicates tend to retain their ancestral response state, we analyzed the relative frequencies of all four stress response evolution scenarios against time, using synonymous substitution rate  as a proxy for time . regardless of the ks value, it is generally true that the rates of stress response evolution scenarios are retention > loss > gain > > switch. however, the relative abundance of each scenario changed over time . rate of retention in bins with smaller ks  is higher than in bins with larger ks . when 0 ≤ ks ≤  <dig> , the rate of retention decreased from  <dig> % to  <dig> % , and it remains relatively stable afterwards . on the contrary, rate of loss in bins with smaller ks  is lower than in bins with larger ks . the rate of loss increased from  <dig> % to  <dig> % when 0 ≤ ks ≤  <dig> , and remains relatively stable after that . these results show that younger duplicate genes tend to retain the ancestral stress response state, similar to a. thaliana  <cit> . the rate of functional gain peaked at ks =  <dig> , and decreased thereafter, as similar pattern was observed in a. thaliana  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
stress response evolution scenarios of
c. reinhardtii
duplicates compared to their ancestral genes. . there are four scenarios as indicated on the far left column. the ancestral state column shows the reconstructed ancestral response state and the extant state column shows the extant gene response state. ‘u’, ‘d’, and ‘n’ indicate up-regulated, down-regulated, and not-regulated under a stress condition, respectively. on the right, the preponderance  of each scenario for a given stress condition is shown. the percent of each scenario for six conditions are summarized in a boxplot for each ancestral-extant combination. . stress response evolution among c. reinhardtii paralogs using ks as a proxy for time. x-axis indicates ks values, and y-axis indicates the relative frequency of each stress evolution scenario. . stress response retention. . loss. . gain. . switch.



nonetheless, compared to the results of a similar study in a. thaliana  <cit> , c. reinhardtii has comparable rates in response retention, loss, and switch, but a much higher rate of functional gain . note that we examined only six abiotic conditions in c. reinhardtii compared to the  <dig> conditions encompassing biotic and abiotic stress environments in the a. thaliana study  <cit> . considering that the relative abundance of the evolutionary scenarios is similar across divergent conditions  <cit> , having more data will likely not contribute to significant changes in the gain rate estimate in either direction. we should also emphasize that, regardless of the ks value, c. reinhardtii consistently has a higher rate of functional gain  when compared to a. thaliana  <cit> . taken together, our findings indicate that innovation occurs more often in c. reinhardtii than in a. thaliana in the context of stress response. the excess gain events could be due to the fact that c. reinhardtii is a single cellular organism and has a shorter life cycle while encountering more diverse environmental conditions, as one would expect that a shorter life cycle would lead to a higher number of mutations per unit time compared to species with a longer generation time, thus providing more raw material for adaptation to occur upon.

CONCLUSIONS
our analysis of gene family evolution, functional evolution and pseudogenization in the green algal lineage complement previous studies in other eukaryotes, reinforcing that the association between lineage-specific evolution and stress response is a common feature of eukaryotes. this association is likely due to the selective pressure under ever-changing environment. in this scenario, stress gene duplicates were frequently under positive selection. in addition, the high rate of innovation in acquiring abilities to respond to stress in c. reinhardtii duplicates contributes to a highly diverse stress responsive gene repertoire that can potentially be adaptive.

the model organism c. reinhardtii is used to study the mechanism of stress response in green algae although it is not a direct candidate for biofuel production  <cit> . as the general metabolic changes under stress might be similar across divergent micro-algal species  <cit> , the particular genes involved in stress response could be quite different as they are shaped by lineage-specific family expansion and subsequent gain-of-function events. such species-specificity cannot be deciphered when focusing on one model organism. therefore, in addition to focusing on the well-established model organism of c. reinhardtii to discover the general biology of stress response in green algae, it is necessary to investigate diverse green algal species to discover their uniqueness in stress response, towards the ultimate goal of finding the perfect alga for biofuel production.

