BACKGROUND
the methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus mth <dig> gene, which encodes the homologue of the shwachman-bodian-diamond syndrome  protein, is located in the predicted exosome superoperon  <cit> . the sbds proteins are highly conserved  in archaea and eukaryota  <cit> . mutations of the human sbds gene are associated with the condition known as shwachman-diamond syndrome , an autosomal recessive disorder with clinical features including hematological and skeletal abnormalities and also exocrine pancreatic insufficiency . the most common mutations associated with sds include the polypeptide chain truncation k62x caused by the introduction of an in-frame stop codon  and a donor splicing site mutation, 258+2t → c, which causes premature truncation of the encoded protein by frameshift . in addition, several point mutations across the entire sequence of the protein are also associated with sds  <cit> 

experiments with ylr022c , the yeast homologue of the sbds protein, have shown that its mutations c31w, l71p and i87s affect the protein stability  <cit> . sdo <dig> is a non-essential protein  <cit>  present in the cytoplasm, nucleus and nucleolus of the cell  <cit> , which is required for g <dig> cell cycle progression  <cit> . this protein has been found to interact with  <dig> different proteins by yeast two-hybrid screening, tandem affinity purification  and biochemical studies. the set of identified interaction partners include proteins involved in rrna processing, ribosomal biogenesis, rna transport, as well as exoribonucleases and two serine/threonine protein kinases  <cit> . however, different methods pointed to different interacting partners of sdo <dig>  and none of the hits were retrieved by more than one study. recently, sdo <dig> has been shown to contribute to the export of pre-60s ribosomal particles to the cytoplasm by facilitating the release and recycling of the nucleolar shuttling factor tif <dig> from the cytoplasmic pre-60s ribosomes  <cit> . a role in ribosomal biogenesis is further supported by the observed interaction of human sbds with nucleophosmin  and nip <dig>  <cit> .

other studies have suggested that sbds proteins might be involved in rna metabolism. this hypothesis is supported by both its genomic context and by experimental evidence. in particular, the archaeal sbds orthologues are located in a superoperon that encodes, among others, several proteins of the exosome particle, a conserved multiprotein complex involved in rna processing and degradation in eukaryotes and archaea  <cit> . furthermore, the sbds orthologues in the plants arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa contain an extended c-terminal region with putative rna-binding domains, namely u1-type zinc fingers  <cit> .

hitherto, the only structural information on sbds proteins is based on two virtually identical x-ray structures of an archaeal orthologue of sbds from archaeoglobus fulgidus   <cit> . these studies showed that the sbds protein contains three domains. the n-terminal fysh domain  displays an α/β topology with a novel fold, the middle domain  has a three-helix bundle fold, and the c-terminal domain  exhibits a ferredoxin-like fold that is commonly found in proteins with various functions, including numerous rna binding proteins. although the protein has an extended tripartite architecture, the extent of its conformational variability was not fully apparent from these structural studies, and its electrostatic or rna-binding properties have not been characterized either.

here we address these issues by determining the x-ray structure and probing the rna and protein-binding capabilities of the sbds orthologue from the archaeon m. thermautotrophicus . we show that sbds proteins are highly flexible and can readjust the relative positions of their n-terminal and c-terminal domains in relation to the middle domain. we also present the results of affinity chromatography and selex experiments aimed at identifying protein and rna molecules that interact with the mthsbds. these data show that the mthsbds protein can interact with several ribosomal proteins and suggest that it does not interact with a specific rna sequence. finally, we discuss the potential functional implications of the flexibility, the shape and the surface charge distribution of mthsbds.

RESULTS
structure description
we obtained crystals of the full-length mthsbds protein  belonging to the p <dig> space group. the x-ray data were collected to a resolution of  <dig>  Å and the structure was refined to a final r factor of  <dig> %  . there are two molecules per asymmetric unit  resulting in a specific volume  of  <dig>  Å3/da and a solvent content of  <dig> %. the model contains residues 1– <dig>  except for residues 33– <dig> of the second molecule  for which there is no clear electron density . the polypeptide chain folds into three domains: domain i ; domain ii  and domain iii . domain i, also called fysh domain  contains a highly twisted, five-stranded antiparallel β-sheet and four a-helices, all positioned at one side of the sheet. the second domain has a winged helix-turn-helix fold composed of a three-helix, right-handed twisted bundle and a small β-sheet that consists of two or three strands, depending on the stringency of the criteria used for the analysis of the secondary structure. this sheet is shorter than the three or four-stranded β-sheets found in other winged helix-turn-helix domains. finally, the third domain of mthsbds protein has the classical ferredoxin-like fold. although the overall fold of the mthsbds protein is identical to that of afsbds , there are significant differences in the relative positioning of the three domains .

1values in parenthesis are for the highest resolution shell.

2the value of the merging r factor between equivalent measurements of the same reflection, r = ΣhklΣj|ihkl, j - <ihkl>|/ΣhklΣj ihkl, j.

3crystallographic r-factor, r = Σ ||fo| - |fc||/Σ |fo|.

4r.m.s. deviation from the standard values are given with target values in parentheses.

in the crystal, molecule b makes extensive interactions with its copy related by crystallographic symmetry. the two molecules have a significant contact area, with ~ <dig> Å <dig> per molecule buried in intermolecular contacts. contacts include  <dig> direct hydrogen bonds. four of these bonds are formed between main-chain atoms of the exposed edges of the c-terminal domain β- <dig> strands, namely between two pairs of residues k <dig> and r <dig>  besides a number of van der waals interactions, up to six plausible ionic interactions contribute to this interface, the most favorable of them between r <dig> and e <dig>  these extensive intermolecular contacts suggested that the sbds protein might exist as a dimer. however, sedimentation equilibrium data for the mthsbds protein showed the presence of only the monomeric form in solution . moreover, no dimer has been observed for any of the available structures of afsbds, which show different crystal packings. it is also worth noting that only half of the molecules in the crystal of mthsbds, that is, only molecule b, engage in this interaction. thus, we conclude that the biological unit of mthsbds protein is a monomer.

structural flexibility of the mthsbds protein
the presence of two independent molecules in the asymmetric unit provides an opportunity to compare their structures. surprisingly, there is a substantial difference between their conformations, resulting in an overall r.m.s. difference of  <dig>  Å between the backbone atoms . this is significantly greater than the backbone r.m.s. differences calculated for the three domains separately, which are  <dig>  Å ,  <dig>  Å  and  <dig>  Å . indeed, the high overall r.m.s.d. between the two molecules is due to nearly pure rotations about the hinge regions that can be defined in the boundaries between these domains. thus, keeping the central domains of the two molecules superimposed, the observed rotations for domains i and iii are ~13° and ~29°, respectively . interestingly, such substantial conformational adjustments do not lead to major changes in the overall dimensions of the mthsbds protein.

comparison of the mthsbds and afsbds proteins
the mthsbds protein shares 50% and 25% sequence identities with its a. fulgidus and human orthologues, respectively. a structure-based sequence alignment of mthsbds and afsbds protein domains shows that domains i and ii are more conserved than domain iii . a similar pattern of conservation is observed in the alignment of all members of the sbds family, as defined by , with overall sequence similarities of 33%, 30% and 14% , respectively, for domains i, ii and iii .

comparison of the two independent copies of mthsbds present in the asymmetric unit with the available structures of afsbds demonstrates differences in the relative orientation of the three domains . the main-chain r.m.s. difference between the full-length proteins mthsbds  and afsbds  is  <dig>  Å. again, superposition of individual domains results in lower main-chain r.m.s. differences:  <dig>  Å ,  <dig>  Å  and  <dig>  Å . these figures correspond to comparison of mthsbds with , but similar differences are found when comparison is made with the  structure . thus, hereafter our discussion will be based on comparisons between mthsbds and the  structure.

we analyzed the changes in the relative orientations of domains i and iii with respect to domain ii between mthsbds  and afsbds. when the central domains of the two molecules are superimposed, the observed rotations for domains i and iii are ~16° and ~23°, respectively. the directions of the rotation axes are not coincident with those found between the two copies of mthsbds in the asymmetric unit, indicating that apart from rotational rearrangement, the individual domains may undergo limited translational adjustment. nevertheless, the hinge regions between the domains are the same. this observation is thus consistent with the domain rotations found for the two molecules of mthsbds present in the asymmetric unit.

mthsbds interacts with ribosomal proteins
to gain insight into the function of mthsbds, we carried out a series of affinity chromatography experiments. cell lysates from m. thermautotrophicus were digested with nucleases and loaded onto mthsbds-coupled nhs-activated affinity columns. the bound proteins were then eluted at acidic ph. the eluted proteins were separated in sds-polyacrylamide gels, silver stained and the specific bands excised and examined by mass spectrometry . analysis of the mass spectrometric data, carried out with the mascot software, gave five significant hits to three proteins, which were identified as the large ribosomal subunit components l <dig>  l <dig> and l <dig> .

the results of the search of the ncbi non-redundant database using combined ms-ms/ms data obtained by maldi-tof/tof mass spectrometry. proteins were excised from gels after sds-page of fractions eluted from a column carrying immobilised mthsbds.

1confidence interval

mthsbds does not bind to specific rna sequences
in order to identify any sequence-specific interactions with rna ligands, an in vitro selection experiment was performed with a degenerate library of approximately  <dig> sequences. after  <dig> rounds of robotic selection carried out as previously described  <cit> , the aptamer pool was subjected to a mobility shift assay. this resulted in the appearance of a shifted rna species in a protein concentration-dependent manner, at mthsbds concentrations higher than ~ <dig> μm . however, a similar shift at ~ <dig> μm mthsbds was also seen when the experiment was repeated using the naïve starting pool of rna. this suggests that the selections did not lead to any improvement in rna-binding affinity, consistent with the conclusion the bound rna pools contained no strong conserved sequence motifs . likewise, comparison of the predicted secondary structures of the enriched rna sequences failed to detect any significant folding similarity. these data are consistent with mthsbds not binding rna in a sequence-specific way. notwithstanding, we tested binding of mthsbds protein to one individual aptamer present in the final pool of selected rna segments. the individual aptamer selected contained the closest sequence to a consensus  . we used a 30-base poly rna as a control. neither electrophoretic mobility shift assays nor surface plasmon resonance experiments detected significant interactions with these rnas . taken together, these experiments indicate, within the limits of the selex method, that mthsbds protein does not bind to a specific sequence of rna.

discussion
similarities and differences in the surface properties of archaeal and eukaryotic fysh domains
amino acid substitutions of several conserved residues in the n-terminal fysh domain of human sbds have been linked with the sds condition  <cit>  suggesting that this domain plays an important physiological role. indeed, the fysh domain has the most conserved sequence among archaeal and eukaryotic sbds proteins  resulting in similar features being exposed on its surface. however, the archaeal fysh domains are somewhat shorter and have fewer conserved residues than their eukaryotic counterparts .

one side of the fysh domain contains multiple asp and glu residues, generating a large surface area with an overall negative charge . most of the amino acids contributing to this surface area are highly conserved among archaeal and eukaryotic sbds proteins , in particular, e <dig>  d <dig>  e <dig>  d <dig> and d <dig>  indeed, this domain has an overall acidic pi in archaeal proteins . interestingly, despite the conservation of these negatively charged residues, fysh domains of eukaryotic sbds proteins usually display an overall positive charge . this is due, on the one hand, to the presence of a series of basic amino acids, up to six of them among the first  <dig> residues of the eukaryotic fysh domain, which are not conserved in the archaeal sequences. on the other hand, archaeal sbds proteins show a higher content in acidic amino acids . if, as expected, the overall architecture of the domain is preserved in eukaryotes, their characteristic basic residues would be clustered at the surface opposite to the negatively charged area defined by the ubiquitously conserved acidic residues. this would result in a remarkable polarity of the domain that is much less pronounced in archaea . for example, mthsbds includes only three positively charged residues in this region, namely r <dig>  r <dig> and k <dig>  the polarity in the surface charge distribution suggests that the two sides of the fysh domain could be functionally important, possibly involving protein-protein interactions at the negatively charged surface and interactions with the nucleic acid phosphate backbone via the positively charged area. the functional importance of one of the positively charged residues, the universally conserved r <dig>  is compatible with the detection of a r → q substitution at this position  in sds patients  <cit> .

the different charge distribution observed in the archaeal fysh domains hints at the possibility that eukaryotic and archaeal sbds proteins might have evolved to play somewhat different cellular roles. it is therefore not surprising that yeast complementation assays have revealed that fysh domains are interspecies exchangeable among eukaryotes, but not between archaea and eukarya  <cit> . alternatively, it is also possible that sbds proteins and their partners have co-evolved to display different surface properties despite functional conservation.

domains ii and iii have ubiquitous folds compatible with different functions
according to dali  <cit>  and ssm  <cit> , the three-helix bundle of domain ii is similar to the fold of uba-like domains and to c-terminal domain domain iii of the holliday-junction binding protein ruva . however, the similarity is restricted to the three a-helices and does not extend to the small β-sheet that is present in domain ii of mthsbds. although the function of uba  domains is not fully understood, they seem to be involved in protein-protein recognition via a hydrophobic patch on their surface  <cit> . in ruva, domain iii does not have any direct interaction with dna nor does it contribute to dna recognition. instead, it might play a role in the atp-dependent branch migration through direct contacts with ruvb. none of the proteins with high similarity scores to domain ii of mthsbds seems to bind dna via the three-helical bundle. however, the surface properties of domain ii of sbds suggest its possible involvement in direct interactions with nucleic acids. unlike domain iii of ruva that has an overall negative charge  or the hydrophobic uba domains, the central domain of archaeal and eukaryotic sbds proteins has a positive overall charge . the basic pi ensues from several arginine residues, namely r <dig> and r <dig> in mthsbds, which are conserved in both archaea and eukaryotes. these residues could be involved in interactions with nucleic acids . another arginine, the non-conserved r <dig>  appears to preserve the correct positioning of helices a <dig> and a <dig> in domain ii via ionic interactions with e <dig> and e <dig> 

domain iii of mthsbds has the ferredoxin-like fold that is found in many rna-binding proteins and is most similar to the domain v of the ef-g and ef- <dig> proteins according to an ssm search  <cit> . rna-binding proteins with such a fold usually bind the cognate nucleic acid molecules at the surface of their four-stranded β-sheet  <cit> . however, the sequence identity between domain iii of mthsbds and the most structurally similar rna-binding domains is relatively low  and, more importantly, the functionally important rna-binding residues are not conserved in the mthsbds . the sequence alignment of sbds proteins from different organisms  reveals that residues which have their side chains exposed at the surface of domain iii are the least conserved, even among the sbds proteins from closely related organisms. the variability of the surface residues suggests that domain iii is not likely to be involved in specific interactions. nevertheless, this domain appears to possess an important function. indeed, a yeast complementation analysis showed that, although deletion of domain iii did not abrogate growth  <cit> , it led to quantitative growth defects  <cit> . the functional importance of this domain is further supported by the identification of sds patients with the point mutation r175w  <cit> . although the exact effect of this substitution is unknown, inspection of the structure shows that it could cause a major change in the fold of the domain iii and hence alter its shape. another substitution associated with sds, r218stop, would result in a shorter polypeptide  <cit> , affecting the overall size of domain iii. taken together, the data indicate that while the nature of the residues at the surface of domain iii is not critical for the proper function of the protein, this domain plays an important structural role, which depends on its overall shape and size. in this respect, the exposed edges of domain iii β-sheet, which are lined up by main chain atoms of β-strands β <dig> and β <dig>  may play a role in interaction. on the one hand, strand β <dig> carries the eew motif, which appears to be the most conserved sequence feature among domains iii of the sbds molecules from different species . on the other hand, the potential for strand β <dig> to engage in interactions is demonstrated by its contacts with the equivalent β-strand of a symmetric mthsbds molecule in the crystal. though this interaction would not be sufficient for the formation of an sbds dimer in solution, mthsbds might bind to a possible partner via this kind of β-β interaction.

sbds proteins are intrinsically flexible
our finding that the two molecules of mthsbds observed independently in the crystal adopt somewhat different conformations, which in turn differ from that adopted by afsbds, prompted us to further investigate possible conformational changes by normal mode analysis calculations using the elnémo server  <cit> . the low energy normal modes generally describe the most collective movements of a protein. moreover, when the structure of a protein is known in two different conformations, comparison of the observed conformational differences with the results of normal mode analysis may identify which particular modes contribute most significantly to conformational changes.

we found that three non-trivial, low frequency modes described more than 70% of the observed conformational change between molecules a and b in the crystal structure of mthsbds . the largest contribution results from mode  <dig>  which on its own contributes to 28% of the motions. moreover, three among the first  <dig> non-trivial modes are sufficient to describe 64% of the conformational change between mthsbds molecule a and afsbds. in this case, a single mode  contributes more than 40% to the inferred motion. indeed, perturbation of the structure of mthsbds molecule a along mode  <dig> causes the fysh and c-terminal domains to rotate with respect to the central domain . such rotational adjustments are in agreement with the observed conformational differences between the a and b molecules of mthsbds and the molecule of afsbds . furthermore, such movements also agree with the directions of the principal axes of libration  calculated by tlsanl  <cit>  following the refinement of mthsbds structure using the translation-libration-screw  approximation, with each of the three domains of the two molecules treated as independent tls groups.

taken together, these observations indicate that sbds proteins are intrinsically flexible and that displacement along a few normal modes could be sufficient to bring about large, possibly, functionally relevant structural transitions.

the intrinsic flexibility of the mthsbds could help explain why the apparently strong dimer present in the crystal  is not found in solution. under these circumstances, the formation of the dimer would be entropically disfavored.

mthsbds, like other sbds proteins, might interact with ribosomes
in the absence of a detailed understanding of the functions of sbds proteins, we can only speculate about the potential roles of the structural rearrangements that we have demonstrated that these proteins might undergo. in this regard, we can gain some insight by considering the possible interaction partners of sbds proteins. the three proteins interacting with mthsbds protein that were identified in the present study by affinity chromatography are all from the large ribosomal subunit. these data give further support to an earlier study where the yeast sbds protein  co-purified with components of the 60s ribosomal particle  <cit> . the data are also consistent with the recent discovery that sdo <dig> is involved in the maturation of the pre-60s large ribosomal subunit  <cit> .

since cell lysates were digested with rnase prior to their loading onto the affinity columns, ribosomal proteins would be exposed to mthsbds either as separate rna-free proteins or as smaller protein-protein complexes. therefore, the binding of these proteins to mthsbds should be informative about the putative interacting surfaces between the mthsbds and the ribosome. within the large ribosomal subunit, the three interacting components of mth <dig> protein, namely the l <dig>  l <dig> and l <dig>  do not interact directly with each other . each of these proteins has a significant amount of solvent exposed surface, making interactions with external factors a physical possibility. l <dig> interacts solely with the 23s rrna and is separated from the main body of the particle. l <dig> is the largest protein component of the large ribosomal subunit and is found close to l <dig>  interestingly, l <dig> closely associates with another ribosomal protein l37ae, which, like mthsbds protein, is encoded within the exosome superoperon. structural observations described above indicate that interactions between mthsbds and these proteins, or their neighbors in the ribosome, could be assisted by the extended structure and flexibility of the sbds proteins that allows adjustments in the relative position and orientation of individual domains.

in this context, it may be interesting to note that the size and shape of the mthsbds protein are remarkably similar to those of trna. indeed, one arm of the l-shaped mthsbds protein is ~ <dig> Å long comprising domain i and part of domain ii. the length of the second arm, formed by the rest of domain ii and domain iii, is ~ <dig> Å. furthermore, a number of negatively charged patches, especially in domains i and ii of mthsbds, match the negatively charged phosphates on the surface of a trna molecule . however, several positively charged residues on the surface of mthsbds have no match on the surface of trna. further experiments should address the question of whether these similarities play a role or not on mthsbds function.

CONCLUSIONS
we have determined the x-ray structure of the sbds protein from methanothermobacter thermautotropicus . structural observations reveal the intrinsic flexibility of sbds proteins, a feature that we hypothesize to have direct implications for their functions. in keeping with previous results published for other sbds homologs, we found, by means of affinity chromatography capture, that mthsbds can interact with ribosomal proteins whereas rna-selex experiments suggest it does not interact specifically with rna. involvement of the mthsbds protein in the function and/or maturation of the translation machinery is possible, as previously suggested for sbds proteins from other organisms  <cit> . we propose that the flexibility of sbds molecules might allow them to adjust their functionally important interactions with the similarly flexible ribosome to fulfill their function.

