BACKGROUND
next generation sequencing  technology breakthroughs have allowed us to define the
transcriptomic landscape for cancers and other diseases  <cit> . rna-sequencing  is information-rich; it enables researchers to
investigate a variety of genomic features, such as gene expression, characterization of
novel transcripts, alternative splice sites, single nucleotide variants , fusion
transcripts, long non-coding rnas, small insertions, and small deletions. multiple
alignment software packages are available for read alignment, quality control methods,
gene expression and transcript quantification methods for rna-seq  <cit> . however, the majority of the rna-seq bioinformatics methods are focused only
on the analysis of a few genomic features for downstream analysis  <cit> . at present there is no comprehensive rna-seq workflow that can simply be
installed and used for multiple genomic feature analysis. at the mayo clinic, we have
developed map-rseq - a comprehensive computational workflow, to align, assess and report
multiple genomic features from paired-end rna-seq data efficiently with a quick
turnaround time. we have tested a variety of tools and methods to accurately estimate
genomic features from rna-seq data. best performing publically available bioinformatics
tools along with parameter optimization were included in our workflow. as needed we have
integrated in-house methods or tools to fill in the gaps. we have thoroughly
investigated and compared the available tools and have optimized parameters to make the
workflow run seamlessly for both virtual machine and cluster environments. our software
has been tested with paired-end sequencing reads from all illumina platforms. thus far,
we have processed  <dig>  mayo clinic samples using the map-rseq workflow. the map-rseq
research reports for rna-seq data have enabled mayo clinic researchers and clinicians to
exchange datasets and findings. standardizing the workflow has allowed us to build a
system that enables us to investigate across multiple studies within the mayo clinic.
map-rseq is a production application that allows researchers with minimal expertise in
linux or windows to install, analyze and interpret rna-seq data.

implementation
map-rseq uses a variety of freely available bioinformatics tools along with in-house
developed methods using perl, python, r, and java. map-rseq is available in two
versions. the first version is single threaded and runs on a virtual machine . the
vm version is straightforward to install. the second version is multi-threaded and is
designed to run on a cluster environment.

virtual machine
virtual machine version of map-rseq is available for download at the following url  <cit> . this includes a sample dataset, references ,
and the complete map-rseq workflow pre-installed. virtual box software  needs to be installed in the host system. the system also needs to meet
the following requirements: at least 4gb of physical memory, and at least 10gb of
available disk. although our sample data is only from human chromosome  <dig>  this
virtual machine can be extended to the entire human reference genome or to other
species. however this requires allocating more memory  than may be available
on a typical desktop system and building the index references files for the species
of interest.

tables   <dig> and  <dig> shows the install
and run time metrics of map-rseq in virtual machine and linux environments
respectively. for table   <dig>  we downloaded the breast
cancer cell line data from cghub  <cit>  and randomly chose  <dig> million reads to run through the quickstart vm. it
took 6 hours for the map-rseq workflow to complete. it did not exceed the 4gb
memory limit, but did rely heavily on the swap space provided; making it run slower
than if it would have had more physical memory available. job profiling indicates
that the system could have used 11gb of memory for such a sample.

sun grid engine
map-rseq requires four processing cores with a total of 16gb ram to get optimal
performance. it also requires 8gb of storage space for tools and reference file
installation. for map-rseq execution the following packages such as java version
 <dig> .0_ <dig> or higher, perl version  <dig> . <dig> or higher, python version  <dig>  or higher,
python-dev, cython, numpy and scipy, gcc and g++ , zlib, zlib-devel, ncurses,
ncurses-devel, r, libgd2-xpm, and mailx need to be preinstalled and referenced in the
environment path. it does also require having additional storage space for analysing
input data and writing output files. map-rseq uses bioinformatics tools such as
bedtools  <cit> , ucsc blat  <cit> , bowtie  <cit> , circos  <cit> , fastqc  <cit> , gatk  <cit> , htseq  <cit> , picard tools  <cit> , rseqqc  <cit> , samtools  <cit> , and tophat  <cit> . our user manual and readme files provide detailed information of the
dependencies, bioinformatics tools and parameters for map-rseq. the application
requires configuration, such as run, tool and sample information files, as described
in the user manual.

table   <dig> shows the processing time of the workflow across
different sequencing read depths. time was recorded from a server with  <dig> quad core
intel xeon  <dig>  ghz processors and  <dig> gbs of shared memory using centos  <dig>  for
a sample with  <dig> million reads, map-rseq completes in less than 2 hours. for
samples with  <dig> million to  <dig> million reads, map-rseq completes in 12- <dig> hours
depending on the hardware used.

RESULTS
ngs technology has been outpacing bioinformatics. map-rseq is a comprehensive
simple-to-use solution for analysis of rna-sequencing data. we have used both simulated
and real datasets to optimize parameters of the tools included in the map-rseq workflow.
the high-level design of map-rseq is shown in figure   <dig> 
map-rseq consists of the six major modules such as alignment of reads, quality
assessment of sequence reads, gene expression and exon expression counts, expressed snvs
from rna-seq, fusion transcript detection, summarization of data and final report.
map-rseq workflow for processing rna-seq data.

reads are aligned by tophat  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  against the human reference genome build  using
the bowtie <dig> aligner option. bowtie is a fast memory efficient, short sequence aligner  <cit> . the remaining unaligned reads from bowtie are used by tophat to find splice
junctions and fusions. at the end of the alignment step, map-rseq generates binary
alignment  and junction bed files for further processing. the workflow uses the
rseqc software  <cit>  to estimate distance between paired-end reads, evaluate sequencing depth for
alternate splicing events, determine rate of duplicate reads, and calculate coverage of
reads across genes as shown in the example report file . the summary statistics and plots generated by map-rseq workflow are used
for further quality assessments. the example map-rseq result set  from a rna-sequencing run can be downloaded from the map-rseq homepage  <cit> .
of map-rseq output file.

several research and clinical projects  <cit>  at mayo clinic have applied map-rseq workflow for obtaining gene expression,
single nucleotide variants and fusion transcripts for a variety of cancer and disease
related studies. currently there are multiple ongoing projects or clinical trial studies
for which we generate both rna-sequencing and exome sequencing datasets at the mayo
clinic sequencing core. we have developed our rna-seq and dna-seq workflows such that
sequencing data can be directly supplied to the pipelines with less manual intervention.
analysis of the next generation sequencing datasets along with phenotype data enable
further understanding of the genomic landscape to better diagnose and treat
patients.

gene expression and exon expression read counts
a gene expression count is defined as the sum of reads in exons for the gene whereas
an exon expression count is defined as the sum of reads in a particular exon of a
gene. gene expression counts in map-rseq pipeline can be obtained using htseq  <cit>  software  or featurecounts  <cit>  software. the gene annotation files were obtained from the cufflinks
website  <cit> . exon expression counts are obtained using the intersectbed function from
the bedtools suite  <cit> .

map-rseq gene expression counts module was validated using a synthetic dataset for
which rna-seq reads were simulated using the beers software - a computational method
that generates paired-end rna-sequencing reads for illumina platform  <cit> . the parameters used for beers to generate simulated data are: total
reads =  <dig> million reads, hg <dig> annotation from refseq, read
length =  <dig> bases, base error =  <dig>  and substitution
rate =  <dig> . simulated reads were aligned and mapped using the map-rseq
workflow. the mapped reads were then input into htseq for gene expression counts.
genes with fewer than  <dig> reads were excluded from the analysis. a correlation of
r =  <dig>  was observed between the reads per kilobase per million 
simulated gene counts and the counts reported by map-rseq, as shown in figure 
 <dig>  for simulated data , table   <dig> summarizes various statistics reported by the map-rseq workflow
regarding the alignment of reads to transcriptome and junctions, gene and exon
abundance as well as number of snvs identified and annotated using gatk. an example
of map-rseq gene counts table, exon counts table, and normalized counts  along
with annotations for each run are shown in figure   <dig> 
simulated by beers. map-rseq uses the htseq software to classify reads
to genomic features. the intersection nonempty mode of htseq was applied and
the query-name sorted alignment  file along with the reference gtf file
obtained from beers were provided as input files to htseq for accurate
assignment of paired-end reads to genomic features. comparison of the gene
counts  obtained from map-rseq with counts for respective genes simulated
by beers yielded a pearson correlation of  <dig> . the genomic regions where gene
expression reported by htseq did not completely correlate with simulated
expression are due to ambiguous reads or due the fact that either mate of the
paired-end read mapped to a different genomic feature, thus categorizing the
read as ambiguous by htseq.
of the gene and exon expression counts from the output reports of map-rseq.

differential expression
each sample is associated to a phenotype, such as tumor, normal, treated, control,
etc and that meta-data needs to be obtained to form groups for differential
expression analysis. to remove any outlier samples, it is required to perform
detailed quality control checks prior to gene expression analysis. there are a
variety of software packages that are used for differential expression analysis using
rna-seq gene expression data  <cit> . several studies have been published comparing the differential expression
methods and concluded that there are substantial differences in terms of sensitivity
and specificity among the methods  <cit> . we have chosen edger software  <cit>  from r statistical package for gene expression analysis. in our source
code for map-rseq pipeline, we have perl, r scripts and instructions that can be used
post map-rseq run for differential expression analysis.

expressed snvs  from rna-seq
after filtering out multiple mapped and fusion reads, the map-rseq calls snvs using
unifiedgenotyper v. <dig> . <dig> and variantrecalibrator from genome analysis toolkit 
with the alignment files generated by tophat. the unifiedgenotyper from gatk is a
single nucleotide variant  and indel caller developed by the broad institute  <cit> . snvs are further annotated by the variant quality score recalibration
 method. the annotated snvs are further filtered based on read quality ,
coverage , strand bias , and positional bias  to identify
true variants.a  <dig> genome sample  with both exome and rna-seq data was
used to validate the snv calling module of map-rseq workflow. a concordance rate of
 <dig> % was observed between the map-rseq snv calls and the exome sequencing variant
calls for na <dig>  figure   <dig> shows a screenshot of the
map-rseq variant calling file. confident variant calls from map-rseq workflow at high
and low read depths of sequencing are shown in figure  6a
and 6b respectively.
snv data representation from map-rseq runs.
screenshot representation of snv regions for the  <dig> genome sample na07347
a) at high read depths called in rna when compared to exome/dna data
and b) at low read depth called in rna when compared to exome/dna
data.

fusion transcript detection
the tophat-fusion algorithm identifies fusion transcripts accurately  <cit> . map-rseq uses the tophat-fusion algorithm and provides a list of
expressed fusion transcripts. in addition to the output from tophat-fusion, we have
implemented modules to visualize fusion transcripts using circos plots  <cit> . fusion transcript candidates are reported and summarized by map-rseq. as
shown in figure   <dig>  intra and inter fusion transcripts
along with annotations are provided for each sample by the workflow. a circos plot is
generated to visualize fusion transcripts across an entire rna-seq run . map-rseq also generates
5′–3′ fusion spanning sequence for pcr validation of fusion
transcripts identified. these primer sequences can be selected by researchers to
validate the fusion transcripts.
transcripts output file from map-rseq workflow.

summarization of data and final report
the workflow generates two main reports for end users: 1) summary report for all
samples in a run with links to detailed reports and six qc visualizations per sample
2) final data report folder consists of exon, gene, fusion and expressed snv files
with annotations for further statistical and bioinformatics analysis.

a screenshot of an example report from map-rseq is shown in figure   <dig>  a complete form of the report is presented in the additional
file provided . detailed
descriptions of the samples processed by map-rseq along with the study design and
experiment details are reported by the workflow. results are summarized for each
sample in the report. detailed quality control information, links to gene expression
counts, exon counts, variant files, fusion transcript information and various
visualization plots are also reported.

CONCLUSIONS
map-rseq is a comprehensive simple-to-use application. map-rseq reports alignment
statistics, in-depth quality control statistics, gene counts, exon counts, fusion
transcripts, and snvs per sample. the output from the workflow can be plugged into other
software or packages for subsequent downstream bioinformatics analysis. several research
and clinical projects at the mayo clinic have used the gene expression, snvs and fusion
transcripts reports from the map-rseq workflow for a wide range of cancers and other
disease-related studies. in future, we plan to extend our workflow such that alternate
splicing transcripts and non-coding rnas can also be obtained.

availability and requirements
project name: map-rseq

project home page:
http://bioinformaticstools.mayo.edu/research/maprseq/

operating system: linux or vm

programming language: perl, python, java, r and bash

other requirements: none

license: open source

any restrictions to use by non-academics: none

competing interests
the authors declare they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
krk , jpk, aet, ya conceived of the project, krk, aan, jb, jid, do, mb, xt, sb, sm, hs,
aet, ya, and jpk designed the project, krk, aan, jb, jid, do, mb, jn, xt, sb, jd, sm
evaluated software capabilities, krk, aan, jb, jid, do, mb, jn, xt, sb, jid, sm and
provided feedback on website implementation. krk, aan, jb, jid, do, mb, jn, xt, sb, jid
implemented the project. krk, aan, jb, do, mb, wrote the manuscript. all authors read
and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
summary report from the map-rseq workflow. complete report in html
format which summarizes the study design, alignment and expression statistics
per sample, links to pre- and post-qc plots as well as to the resulting files
on gene and exon expression, fusion transcripts and snvs identified per
sample.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work is supported by the mayo clinic center for individualized medicine .
krk is supported by cim and eveleigh family career development award. we acknowledge
jason reisz from appistry, jason weirather, bruce eckloff and chris kolbert for their
constructive suggestions and feedback during the implementation of this workflow.

funding
these studies were supported in part by funds from the center for individualized
medicine, eveleigh family foundation , and the mayo foundation. additional
support was obtained from pharmacogenomics research network  and breast
cancer spore career development award . the funders had no role in study
design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.
