BACKGROUND
maternally inherited endosymbiont bacteria of arthropods received considerable attention owing to their ability to shape their hosts' reproductive biology and consequently their ecology and evolution  <cit> . the strategies adopted by these microorganisms to increase their fitness are surprisingly diverse and involve the induction of parthenogenesis, killing of male offspring, feminization of genetic males and cytoplasmic incompatibility, wherein, in its simplest form, the development of an uninfected egg is inhibited if inseminated by sperm of an infected male  <cit> .

recently, several molecular screening studies demonstrated that the degree of arthropod infection is considerably higher than previously thought  <cit>  and that even up to 66% of arthropod species are thought to be infected  <cit> . despite the discovery of their widespread occurrence within arthropods, knowledge about the extent to which they may alter their hosts' reproduction is lagging behind. even for some large taxonomic groups, such as the order of spiders , conclusive evidence is at present lacking. nevertheless, some spider species exhibit reproductive phenotypes similar to those expected under endosymbiont infection such as parthenogenesis and primary sex ratio distortion in social as well as solitary species . in particular for solitary species, primary sex ratio distortion is commonly expected to result from reproductive manipulation by endosymbionts as fisher's sex-allocation theory generally predicts that an equal sex ratio is the only evolutionary stable outcome from the host's perspective. moreover, the prevalence and diversity of endosymbiont bacteria in spiders is among the highest within the arthropods and up to five different endosymbionts capable of manipulating their hosts' reproductive biology have been found in several spider families: wolbachia, rickettsia, cardinium, arsenophonus and spiroplasma  <cit> .

causal relationships between endosymbiont infection and sex ratio distortion in spiders are up till now only suggested by a difference in their prevalence between males and females  <cit>  or by an indirect relationship  <cit> . yet, as many other factors beside endosymbionts might cause sex ratio distortion  <cit> , multiple lines of evidence such as maternal inheritance of sex ratio variation, use of different antibiotics that target an array of different bacterial families and a direct relationship between endosymbiont presence and sex ratio effect are necessary to disentangle the impact of each endosymbiont on the produced sex ratio  <cit> .

in this study, we report on sex ratio variation in the solitary spider oedothorax gibbosus . this small dwarf spider has a palearctic distribution and occurs exclusively in damp habitats such as marshes and wet forests, where they reside in grass tussocks and patches of moss situated close to the water. besides the observation that the species exhibits a clear male dimorphism with alternative mating strategies  <cit> , previous research showed primary sex ratio distortion with an excess of females  <cit> . here, we explore the potential role of endosymbionts in inducing this sex ratio variation by  unraveling the inheritance pattern of the sex ratio trait,  relating the presence of several endosymbiont bacteria with sex ratio variation and  investigating whether an equal sex ratio can be restored by antibiotic treatments.

RESULTS
 maternal inheritance of sex ratio variation
previous studies showed that sex ratio in o. gibbosus is significantly female distorted, but varies considerably among clutches  <cit> . if this observed sex ratio distortion is caused by maternally inherited endosymbiont bacteria, only daughters should inherit the sex ratio trait.

by means of an animal model  applied to our extensive pedigree data, the variance in sex ratio among females that is not attributed to sampling error is decomposed into a maternally inherited part , which only incorporates this part of the sex ratio variation that is transmitted to their daughters, and a residual part  that estimates the remaining variation. possible causes of σe <dig> to deviate from zero include non-random variation in sex ratio among dams, for instance due to loss of the bacterium, genetic variation in resistance, direct paternal effects or other causes of sex ratio variation.

the average sex ratio equalled  <dig>   and is hence significantly lower than  <dig> , but showed considerable variation among clutches . posterior densities of both variance components show that the largest source of sex ratio variation consists of the maternally inherited part. as this variance is much higher than zero , this is evidence that the observed sex ratio variation in this species is strongly maternally inherited. however, a smaller but still highly significant residual sex ratio variation  was observed , indicating that not all sex ratio variation in this species is maternally inherited and that other factors of minor magnitude are additionally responsible for the among female variation.

the clutch sex ratio was significantly related with the size of the clutch , with the proportion of sons being significantly lower in smaller clutches .

 endosymbiont identification and prevalence
single individuals, sampled at two independent populations, tested positive for up to three different endosymbionts capable of altering host reproduction i.e. wolbachia, cardinium and rickettsia. for wolbachia, both sets of primers  gave consistent results. sequences of both genes could be read unambiguously and no among individual variation was observed within the obtained wsp and wolbachia specific 16s sequences . this suggests that a single wolbachia strain is present in infected individuals. blast searches for both genes returned the highest matches with available wolbachia sequences . for wsp, the obtained sequence clustered within supergroup g , which according to rowley et al  <cit>  primarily comprises wolbachia endosymbionts of spiders. the recognition of this supergroup as a monophyletic clade has however recently been debated  <cit> . sequences were most closely related with wsp sequences found in the spiders diaea circumlita  and hylyphantes graminicola , the nematode angiostrongylus cantonensis  and the mosquito malaya genurostris  . for 16s, the sequence could not be classified unambiguously into one of the supergroups as defined in lo et al  <cit>  and was most closely related to the wolbachia 16s sequence found in the spider tetragnatha montana . similarly, sequences for rickettsia and cardinium were easily readable and showed no variation . the citrate partial sequence of rickettsia clustered within a monophyletic group that consists almost exclusively of rickettsia sequences obtained from other spiders . the phylogenetic position of the cardinium sequence could not be positioned with high support among one of the other endosymbiont cardinium sequences available at genbank . for spiroplasma, only a few faint bands were visible after electrophoresis. however, sequencing and blast searches revealed that these were false positives and due to amplification of the bacteria acidovorax.

approximately half of the individuals were infected with wolbachia with 44%  of the females and 57%  of the males of the damvallei testing positive. for the walenbos population 42%  of the females and 64%  of the males showed wolbachia infection. there was no difference between the sexes in infection frequency for both populations  and no difference in infection frequency between populations . prevalence of rickettsia and cardinium was fixed in the two investigated populations.

 relationship between endosymbiont infection and sex ratio
as virtually no variation in infection frequency was observed for cardinium and rickettsia, female infection with these endosymbionts is unlikely to explain the maternal sex ratio variation. however, for wolbachia, infection status of the female had a significant effect on tertiary sex ratio , wherein infected females produced a significantly distorted sex ratio  while uninfected females produced a sex ratio that was not significantly different from  <dig>  . the population a female originated from did not have a significant effect on the sex ratio  and the effect of the wolbachia infection was not different between both populations . within infection groups, no significant variation among females could be detected 

 antibiotics treatment
sex ratio produced by females differed significantly among treatments . while females of the control group produced a significantly distorted sex ratio , tetracycline treated females produced an even amount of males and females . although females treated with penicillin also produced a more even sex ratio compared to the control treatment , there was no significant difference compared to the sex ratio of both control and the tetracycline treated females . although a single maternal line was used for the experiment, there was still significant variation among females .

antibiotic treatment significantly influenced the number of hatched offspring of the first clutch . there was no significant difference in number of hatched offspring between control spiders  and penicillin treated spiders . however a higher number of offspring from females treated with tetracycline  hatched compared to the penicillin treatment  but not compared to the control treatment .

discussion
results of our three independent experiments are consistent with the hypothesis that sex ratio variation in the solitary dwarf spider oedothorax gibbosus is caused by reproductive manipulations by endosymbiont bacteria. first, as these bacteria are exclusively transmitted from mother to offspring by means of her eggs, daughters of sex ratio distorted females are expected to produce female distorted clutches as well. in line with this, our pedigree analysis shows that up to 70% of the sex ratio variation among females that is not attributed to sampling error is maternally inherited. second, pcr-assays showed that oedothorax gibbosus is infected with at least three different endosymbionts known to potentially affect reproductive behavior in arthropods namely: wolbachia, rickettsia and cardinium. out of these, wolbachia certainly affects sex ratio in our study species; infected females produced a significantly female biased sex ratio compared to the even sex ratio of wolbachia uninfected females. third, the sex ratio manipulation by endosymbiont bacteria is further confirmed by treating distorted females of bacteria with the antibiotic tetracycline, which restored the production of equal amounts of males and females. since juvenile survival was in general sufficiently high  and all female clutches were found for clutches with 100% juvenile survival, it is unlikely that differential juvenile mortality rates of males and females can account for the observed sex ratio bias. the combination of these results unequivocally demonstrates that, among other potentially distorting endosymbionts, wolbachia is able to manipulate sex ratio in spiders. this represents to our knowledge the first clear evidence of a causal relationship between endosymbiont infection and its manipulative effect on host reproduction in spiders.

several studies confirm the prevalence of several endosymbiont bacteria in the araneae order, but convincing evidence of their effects on the hosts' reproductive biology is currently lacking. as argued by weeks et al.  <cit> , the establishment of multiple lines of evidence are a prerequisite to confirm the manipulative effect exhibited by these microorganisms. previously, one such connection has been suggested by gunnarsson et al.  <cit>  who found an effect of female size on female post-copulatory position, which in turn affects brood sex ratio in pityohyphantes phrygianus. this effect is altered by an interaction of the wolbachia infection status of the male and infected female size which makes the observed effect indirect and subject to female control. duron et al.  <cit>  suggested manipulative effects by reporting a sex biased prevalence of wolbachia in the spiders tetragnatha montana and meta mengei. it remains however unknown whether sex ratio distortion is present in those species.

identifying the phylogenetic position of the wolbachia strain of oedothorax gibbosus might help to further explore the incidence of reproductive manipulations by wolbachia in spiders. based on the wsp sequences, the strain present in our study species is situated within supergroup g, previously reported by rowley et al.  <cit>  to be spider specific and has highest similarities with the strains found in the spider genera diaea and dysdera. these genera are known to exhibit primary sex ratio distortion  and parthenogenesis induction . the classification of these sequences into a monophyletic distinct clade g is however not well supported, not only as it is merely based on a single gene, but additionally because it has been suggested to represent a recombinant of the supergroup a and b wsp sequences  <cit> . for 16s, unambiguous classification into one of the existing supergroups could not be supported, but it is most closely related to the sequences found in the spider tetragnatha montana. remarkably, this was also one of the two species out of the  <dig> spiders species tested by duron et al.  <cit>  where a manipulative effect of wolbachia was suggested based on a higher prevalence in females compared to males.

notwithstanding, whilst wolbachia obviously plays an important role in the reproductive biology of o. gibbosus, our findings also point out that there is no simple one-to-one relationship between infection status and sex ratio distortion. first, if wolbachia infection status alone was responsible for sex ratio variation, all among female variation would be expected to be inherited maternally. our pedigree analysis in contrast revealed that a smaller though significant part of the among female variation is not strictly inherited from mother to daughters. although the most straightforward explanation would be an imperfect transmission of the bacterium towards offspring, pcr screening demonstrated for a subset of the data that infected females  only produced infected offspring , indicating very high transmission efficiencies. paternal effects, whether caused by meiotic drive, i.e. the unequal production of male and female producing sperm  <cit> , or suppression of the manipulative effect by nuclear genes  <cit>  are therefore more plausible mechanisms. second, paternal effects are also suggested from the antibiotics treatment experiment; although a single maternal line was used there is still significant variation among females within the control treatment, which could be explained by the fact that females were mated with different males. variation in wolbachia titer, potentially induced by wolbachia specific bacteriophages, may also substantially affect the expression of the manipulative effect  <cit> . it remains however at present less understood which factors determine wolbachia concentrations in arthropods  <cit> . third, a relative large proportion of males are still infected with wolbachia, indicating an imperfect manipulative effect or the presence of resistance genes in both populations. wolbachia infection of field captured individuals even suggests a higher prevalence in males compared to females, although this can be most probably attributed to sampling error. indeed, given that the observed prevalence averaged over both populations equals  <dig> , and that the observed sex ratio of infected females averages  <dig> , the estimated proportion of individuals that are male and infected  equals * =  <dig> . likewise, the proportion of individuals that are male and uninfected  equals * =  <dig> . hence, the estimated proportion of infected males equals  <dig> / =  <dig> . an exact binomial test however reveals that the observation of  <dig> infected males out of  <dig> males tested is not sufficient to reject the hypothesis that only 37% of the males are infected .

multiple species of endosymbionts were found to infect the same individual, which creates the opportunity for interaction effects to occur. our use of several antibiotics that target different endosymbiont species allows to investigate the potential occurrence of such interaction effects. however, penicillin treated females, expected to only target cardinium, did not result in a significantly different offspring sex ratio compared to the control and tetracycline treatment. therefore no indications of the potential additional effect of cardinium on the sex ratio could be observed.

it is known that wolbachia can induce several reproductive alterations like parthenogenesis induction, male-killing and feminization  <cit> . parthenogenesis induction is highly unlikely to occur since no offspring were produced by unmated females . a female biased sex ratio can further be caused both by male killing and feminization. if male killing is present, the number of hatched offspring from infected females is typically half of that from uninfected females since male embryos are selectively killed. feminization, however, converts genetic males into phenotypic females which results in an equal number of hatching offspring.

based on our pedigree data, we found a significant positive correlation between clutch size and proportion of sons in each clutch, wherein smaller clutches were significantly more female biased. this points into the direction of killing of male embryos as the most likely manipulating mechanism. nevertheless, more exclusive evidence could have been obtained from the antibiotics treatment. although the higher hatching rate of tetracycline treated individuals approached twice the clutch size of control females, which is congruent with the expectations under male killing, this difference was not significant. the difficulty to clearly infer about the possible manipulating mechanism in our study species is most likely attributed to the large variance in clutch size . relationships between clutch size and sex ratio could therefore only be observed for the extensive pedigree data set.

recognizing the effect of microorganisms on the reproductive biology of spiders is of high importance to further understand the mechanisms that cause the pronounced diversity of reproductive phenotypes observed in this arthropod order. at least for our male dimorphic study species  <cit> , the sex ratio distorting effect of wolbachia could be involved in the stable coexistence of both distinct male phenotypes through its influence on sexual selection, as suggested by theoretical  <cit>  as well as empirical  <cit>  investigations. in addition, our findings of an important role of endosymbionts on sex ratio distortion might provide a useful framework to decipher the mechanisms that cause parthenogenesis in spiders  <cit>  and the facilitation of adaptive sex ratio adjustments that are commonly observed in social spiders to reduce male mate competition  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we adopted a threefold strategy to corroborate the role of endosymbiont bacteria in causing a female distorted sex ratio in the solitary dwarf spider oedothorax gibbosus.  pedigree analysis confirms that the sex ratio trait is primarily maternally inherited,  pcr-assays show that individuals are infected with up to three endosymbionts known to cause reproductive alterations in arthropods, i.e. wolbachia, rickettsia and cardinium and that females infected with wolbachia produce significantly more females than males compared to uninfected females.  antibiotic treatment of wolbachia infected females restores the production of an equal amount of males and females. this is the first direct evidence of endosymbiont interference in reproductive characteristics in the araneae order. these findings can have major implications on understanding the mechanism causing the variety of reproductive phenotypes present in spider species.

