BACKGROUND
campylobacter is a leading cause of human gastroenteritis and is annually responsible for estimated 400- <dig> million cases of human infection worldwide  <cit> . among campylobacter species, c. jejuni is the major human-pathogenic species, accounting for more than 90% of human campylobacteriosis  <cit> . human c. jejuni infections are primarily caused by the consumption of contaminated poultry, because the spillage of intestinal content containing a large number of c. jejuni during slaughter can contaminate cooling water, knives and poultry meat in the processing plant  <cit> . during transmission of c. jejuni from animals, primarily poultry, to humans, this important zoonotic foodborne pathogen encounters various stresses, such as non-growth temperatures, starvation, hypo- and hyper-osmotic stress, and desiccation  <cit> . despite the well-known fact that campylobacter is a fastidious bacterium, human campylobacteriosis cases have significantly increased presumably due to the ability of this pathogen to survive under harsh environmental conditions  <cit>  in addition to its low infectious dose   <cit> . for example, high genetic diversity of campylobacter spp. and the ability to transform into a viable-but-non-culturable state may enhance its adaptability to unfavorable growth conditions  <cit> . additionally, biofilm formation and stringent response also contribute to the survival of campylobacter under stress conditions  <cit> . however, the molecular mechanisms for stress resistance are still largely unknown in campylobacter.

in many bacterial species, alternative sigma factors play an important role in regulation of stress-defense genes under hostile environmental conditions  <cit> . because a sigma factor can coordinate gene transcription in response to environmental stimuli, many bacteria possess multiple alternative sigma factors, some of which are often dedicated to stress responses. for example, rpos is a sigma factor important for adaptive responses in many gram-negative pathogens, and rpos mutations in escherichia coli, salmonella, pseudomonas and vibrio significantly impair bacterial ability to resist various stresses, such as starvation, low ph, oxidative stress, hyperosmolarity, heat and cold  <cit> . in e. coli, rpos is involved in resistance to high osmolarity in stationary-phase cells and survival in cold-shock by regulating one set of rpos-dependent genes, including otsa and otsb, which are necessary for synthesis of internal trehalose as an osmoprotectant and important for survival at low temperature  <cit> . in addition, rpos controls the acid resistance in e. coli by modulating gadc, a gene involved in the glutamate-dependent low ph-resistance, hdeab, encoding ph-regulated periplasmic chaperons, and cfa, a gene for cycloporpane fatty acid synthesis  <cit> . as another stress-response sigma factor, rpoe regulates extracytoplasmic functions related to sensing and responding to bacterial periplasmic and extracellular environmental changes, which contributes to heat- and oxidative stress resistance in many gram-negative bacteria, including e. coli, pseudomonas and salmonella  <cit> . the rpoe mutation in salmonella reduces bacterial survival and growth in macrophages by the loss of rpoe-dependent gene expression such as htra, a gene required for oxidative stress resistance  <cit> . to defend from extracytoplasmic stress and generate unfolded envelope proteins caused by stress shock, additionally, rpoe regulates the expression of genes encoding periplasmic folding catalysts, proteases, biosynthesis enzymes for lipid a and components of the cell envelope  <cit> . the alternative transcription factor sigma b is known to play a central role in gene expression regulation in response to nutrient starvation and environmental stresses, including exposure to acid, ethanol, and heat in gram-positive bacteria, listeria and bacillus  <cit> . the sigma factor b regulon in gram-positive bacteria also include genes involved in the stress response, such as catalases, intracellular proteases and efflux pumps  <cit> .

although alterative sigma factors involved in stress defense are available in many bacteria, the c. jejuni genome sequence revealed that c. jejuni does not possess stress-related sigma factors and has only three sigma factors   <cit> . rpod and flia are known to be dedicated to the transcription of housekeeping and flagella biosynthesis genes, respectively. rpon is involved in the transcription of genes of flagella biosynthesis  <cit> ; thus, the rpon mutation affects the formation of flagellar secretory apparatus  <cit> , and the secretion of virulence proteins  via the flagella export apparatus  <cit> . in addition, rpon plays an important role in bacterial motility, colonization and invasion abilities directly or indirectly in c. jejuni  <cit> . since rpon is involved in the regulation of genes required for virulence, stress resistance and nitrogen fixation in many bacteria, we hypothesized that rpon may function as an alternative sigma factor associated with stress resistance in c. jejuni. in this work, we investigated the effect of rpon mutation on the resistance of c. jejuni under various environmental stresses.

RESULTS
survival defects of the rpon mutant
after construction of an rpon mutant and a complementation strain, bacterial motility was determined to verify the success of the rpon mutation, because an rpon mutation is known to make campylobacter aflagellate and non-motile  <cit> . consistently, the rpon mutant showed significant defects in motility with complete restoration by complementation . to examine if an rpon mutation affects the growth of c. jejuni, bacterial growth was measured at different temperatures with or without shaking. the growth of the rpon mutant was comparable to that of the wild type in broth cultures with shaking ; however, the rpon mutant showed significant growth defects, when it was cultured without shaking, and this growth defect in static cultures was completely restored in the complementation strain as determined by measuring the optical density . to verify if the difference of od value between the wild type and the rpon mutant can be related to bacterial viability, viable cells were also counted under the same condition. without shaking, the viable cell counts of the wild type and the complementation strain were slightly reduced until  <dig> hr, and then the wild type and the complementation strain started to grow. in contrast, the viable cell counts of the rpon mutant continued to reduce during the whole period of culture , suggesting that the rpon mutation resulted in survival defects. the survival defect of the rpon mutant in the static culture was observed at both 37°c and 42°c . these results show that rpon affects the survival of c. jejuni under aeration-limited static culture conditions.

susceptibility of the rpon mutant to osmotic stress
due to the hypersensitivity of campylobacter to various osmolytes  <cit> , nacl was used as an osmolyte to investigate the susceptibility of the rpon mutant to osmotic stress in this study. when grown on mueller-hinton  agar plates containing a high concentration  of nacl, the rpon mutant exhibited significant growth defects . the colony size of the rpon mutant on mh agar plates was extremely small even after incubation for two days compared to the wild type , suggesting the rpon mutant suffers more osmotic stress than the wild type under the same stress condition. we used transmission electron microscopy  to investigate bacterial morphology under the osmotic stress. interestingly,  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of rpon mutant cells were abnormally elongated after exposure to osmotic stress. the rpon mutant was approximately several times longer  than the wild type in the presence of  <dig> % nacl, and the morphological change in the rpon mutant was restored by complementation .

susceptibility of the rpon mutant to ph stress
while the optimal ph range for the growth of c. jejuni is  <dig> - <dig> , c. jejuni can still survive at ph  <dig>  -  <dig>   <cit> . resistance of the rpon mutant to acid stress was assessed by growing on mh agar plates at ph  <dig> . the acid stress tests showed that the viability of the rpon mutant was substantially reduced at ph  <dig>  compared to the wild type . in contrast, alkali stress  did not make any differences in viability between the wild type and the rpon mutant . these results suggest that rpon contributes to c. jejuni's resistance to acidic stress, but not to alkali stress.

resistance of the rpon mutant to oxidative stress
the oxidative stress resistance of the rpon mutant was examined by growing on mh agar plates containing  <dig> mm hydrogen peroxide. although the rpon mutant is more sensitive to osmotic and acid stresses than the wild type, the rpon mutant was more resistant to hydrogen peroxide than the wild type , and the susceptibility was restored to the wild-type level by complementation .

effects of an rpon mutation on resistance to heat, cold and antimicrobials
cold and heat stress was generated by exposure to -20°c and 55°c, respectively, and made little difference in viability between the rpon mutant and the wild type . in addition, an rpon mutation did not affect c. jejuni's resistance to antimicrobials, such as erythromycin, cefotaxime, gentamicin, polymyxin b, rifampicin and ampicillin .

discussion
many bacterial pathogens have multiple sigma factors to regulate gene expression efficiently in response to environmental changes  <cit> . in this work, the role of rpon was investigated under various stress conditions. notably, significant survival defects were observed when the rpon mutant was grown statically , whereas the growth of the rpon mutant was comparable to that of the wild type in shaking cultures. to assess if the survival defect of the rpon mutant in static cultures would be mediated by the motility defect by the rpon mutation, we compared the growth of a flaa mutant with the wild type under the same culture condition; however, the flaa mutant grew as comparably as the wild type . this suggests that the survival defect of the rpon mutant under the static culture condition was not caused by its loss of motility. instead, the survival defects of the rpon mutant may be related to the ability to respire under oxygen-limited conditions, because the levels of oxygen dissolved in broth media are lower in static culture than shaking culture. c. jejuni rarely encounters an active aeration system in its natural habitat , which may be more similar to static culture than shaking culture. the rpon mutation significantly impairs c. jejuni's ability to colonize the intestines of chicken because of poor attachment of the aflagellated rpon mutant to the epithelial cells in the intestines  <cit> . in addition to the loss of motility by the rpon mutation, the survival defects in the static culture condition may also be responsible for the colonization defect of the rpon mutant. molecular mechanisms of the survival defect in the rpon mutant are currently being investigated in our group.

because rpon is known to be important for osmotolerance in some bacteria, such as listeria monocytogenes  <cit> , resistance to osmotic stress was compared between the rpon mutant and the wild type. nacl is a common food additive used to inhibit microbial growth, and significantly impairs the culturability of campylobacter at concentrations greater than  <dig> %  <cit> . in this work, the growth of c. jejuni was substantially inhibited even by  <dig> % nacl . tem analysis showed that the wild-type c. jejuni was slightly elongated at high  nacl concentration, whereas the rpon mutant was significantly elongated compared to the wild type at the same nacl concentration . the morphological change was completely restored by complementation , suggesting the active involvement of rpon in this morphological change of c. jejuni under osmotic stress. morphological abnormalities of the rpon mutant indicate that the rpon mutant is more stressed than the wild type under the same osmotic stress condition . morphological changes by osmotic stress have also been reported in other bacteria. aeromonas hydrophila, a gram-negative rod-shaped bacterium, becomes elongated or turns to spherical forms by exposure to high nacl concentrations  <cit> . in lactobacillus casei, high nacl concentrations affect the size of bacterial cell and cell-wall modification, and the alteration of the cell wall increases antimicrobial susceptibility  <cit> . although the genetic response of c. jejuni to high and low osmotic conditions has not been well studied yet, it has been reported that the rod spiral c. jejuni turns to coccoid forms when grown in nutrient media with low osmolality  <cit> . the previous report plus our findings demonstrate that both hyper- and hypo-osmotic stress abnormally alters the morphology of c. jejuni. this may probably result from changes in intracellular ion concentrations by hydration under osmotic stress and may influence bacterial gene expression; however, understanding its molecular mechanisms still awaits further investigation.

the rpon mutant was highly susceptible to acidic stress  compared to wild type , whereas the growth of both the rpon mutant and the wild type was similarly reduced under alkaline conditions . recently, an extensive screening of a transposon mutant library revealed that the adaptation of c. jejuni to acidic ph requires a number of genes mediating various cellular processes, including those involved in motility, metabolism, stress response, dna repair and surface polysaccharide biosynthesis  <cit> . interestingly, mutations of motility-associated genes, such as flgr and flid, impaired the growth of c. jejuni at low ph  <cit> . based on this previous report, the increased susceptibility to acid stress in the rpon mutant may be associated with the motility defect of the rpon mutant.

reactive oxygen species are inevitably produced by aerobiosis and cause damages to biomolecules, such as proteins, dna and membranes  <cit> . as a microaerophile, c. jejuni requires oxygen for growth, though atmospheric level of oxygen is toxic to the cell. various factors are known to mediate oxidative stress resistance in c. jejuni, including sodb , kata , ahpc , dps , the multidrug efflux pump cmeg, and perr  <cit> . in this work, the rpon mutant was more resistant to h2o <dig> than the wild type, and complementation restored the h2o <dig> susceptibility to the wild-type level . this is similar to the case of perr; the perr mutation increased c. jejuni's resistance to h2o <dig> by derepressing kata  <cit> . it is unknown if rpon is functionally related to perr. however, the  <dig> rpon-regulated genes which were predicted by in silico analysis in c. jejuni do not contain the oxidative stress resistance genes and perr  <cit> ; thus, it appears that the change in h2o <dig> susceptibility by an rpon mutation can be indirect in c. jejuni. it has been reported that the rpon mutation makes the c. jejuni morphology less spiral  <cit> , suggesting rpon affects the formation of the typical rod-spiral morphology of c. jejuni. in our study, we also observed that the rpon mutant is slightly less-spiral compared to the wild type, and osmotic  stress resulted in obvious morphological changes in the rpon mutant . the morphological changes caused by the rpon mutation can be accompanied by the alteration of bacterial membrane and cell wall, and would possibly result in permeability changes. h2o <dig> is non-ionic and freely passes through membranes. thus, the rpon mutation may interfere with the permeability of h2o <dig> and confer resistance to h2o2; however, this possibility will be examined in future studies.

CONCLUSIONS
as a zoonotic foodborne pathogen, c. jejuni encounters various environmental stresses during transmission and infection, such as changes in osmolarity, temperature and the high acidic ph in the stomach; only the bacteria that survive in these deleterious stresses can reach human hosts. thus, the ability of c. jejuni in stress resistance can be considered an important factor associated with food safety. this work clearly demonstrated that rpon plays an important role in the resistance of c. jejuni to various stresses. compared to the wild type, the rpon mutant was more susceptible to osmotic stress  and acidic ph. interestingly, the rpon mutation rendered c. jejuni more resistant to h2o <dig> than the wild type. notably, the rpon mutant exhibited significant survival defects in the static culture conditions. although understanding of molecular mechanisms for stress tolerance may exceed the scope of our present work, in this study, we provided new insights into the role of rpon, one of the three sigma factors of c. jejuni, in the survivability of this bacterial pathogen under various stress conditions.

