BACKGROUND
influenza hemagglutinin  is responsible for the attachment and fusion of the virus to the target membrane. mature ha is composed of ha <dig>  and ha <dig>  subunits connected by a disulfide linkage. ha <dig> can be divided into the fusion peptide  domain, the heptad repeat  regions, transmembrane domain  and the cytoplasmic tail . the functional roles of fp and hr domains have been demonstrated rather clearly  <cit> : the hydrophobic fp domain is sequestered in the resting state but exposed and inserted into the target membrane on low ph activation; the hr domain undergoes extensive refolding to form the hairpin structure to bring the two membranes proximal and probably provides free energy to overcome the barrier of membrane merger. a previous study by lai et al.  <cit>  revealed that the functional fusion peptide of influenza virus had a kinked helix structure with a fixed angle in the micellar environment. however, the role played by tmd remains controversial except for the recognition that it anchors the fusion protein on the viral membrane and is involved in the late stages of the fusion process. as evidence for the latter proposition, cells expressing a glycosylphosphatidylinositol -anchored ectodomain of ha have been shown to support hemifusion to target membranes at low ph  <cit> , implying a tmd role in transiting membrane hemifusion to full fusion. the result was corroborated by a stringent tmd length requirement for supporting full membrane fusion  <cit> , strongly suggesting that it is necessary for tmd to span both inner and outer leaflets to fulfill its function of driving complete fusion via hemifusion. on the other hand, a mutational study of the hiv- <dig> tmd demonstrated that substitution of one specific residue in tmd did not alter the fusion protein function, whereas replacement of tmd with that of cd <dig>  <cit>  or of vesicular stomatitis virus g  <cit>  abolished the viral fusion activity without affecting transport and cleavage properties.

the structure, orientation and interaction of the tmd of ha <dig>  has been investigated by tatulian and tamm  <cit> . it was found that the highly helical tmd inserted into lipid bilayer nearly perpendicular to the membrane surface, probably forming oligomers of various sizes and water-accessible pores. they suggested that tmd had a role at the late stages of membrane fusion, including dehydration of water at the apposing membrane surfaces. melikyan et al.  <cit>  have shown that substitution of the tmd of ha  with tmd from other unrelated proteins does not affect membrane fusion. on the other hand, mutation of selected residues within tmd abolished fusion  <cit> .

taken together, these findings led to the hypothesis that there may be not an absolute sequence-specific requirement for tmd to interact with fp in the fusion reaction  <cit> .

as a widely held model on protein-induced fusion proposes that the ectodomain of fusion proteins consists of heptad repeat domains sandwiched between fp and tmd capable of forming a helix hairpin, it is of interest to explore whether there exists any interaction between fp and tmd and, if so, what is the nature of the interaction and its involvement in the fusion process. in addition, to clarify the architecture of tmd in the membrane in complex with fp, we conducted biophysical experiments on the peptides derived from ha <dig> tmd and fp in a model membrane. owing to the potentially weak interaction between tmd and fp in the membranous environment, fluorescence spectrophotometry was employed which is most suitable for long-range  interactions in lieu of the nuclear magnetic resonance  measurements that are sensitive to short-range association . we found that tmd self-associated more tightly than fp in the membrane. the two peptide molecules form a loose complex in an antiparallel manner, with tmd oligomers interspersed with fp molecules and modulation of lipid penetration of fp by interacting with tmd.

an operational model of the fusion mechanism based on the findings of the present work and previous study was constructed to shed light on the role of tmd and fp with an emphasis on the promotion of the transition from hemifusion to full fusion by the two regions in ha <dig> represented by tmd and fp.

elucidation of the function of tmd and fp and their interaction in the context of ha-induced membrane fusion may provide a missing piece in the mechanistic study of a host of cell-cell and cell-virus fusion events in which the helix-bundle was shown to be the core structure, for example, in fusion mediated by other proteins involved in the intracellular vesicle fusion  <cit> .

RESULTS
influenza tmd peptide associates with and inserts into the membrane
the membrane association can be determined by the intensity and blue shift of tryptophan residues in the tmd peptide in the hydrophobic milieu of membrane bilayer. in figure  <dig> we show trp fluorescence intensity changes upon mixing with dmpc:dmpg  vesicles  and the stern-volmer constant  obtained from quenching with acrylamide . a shift of emission maximum from  <dig> to  <dig> nm and the enhancement of emission as the peptide in aqueous buffer was added to the vesicular dispersion indicate the immersion of the tmd peptide in the lipid bilayer. insertion into the membrane is ascertained by a marked decrease in ksv, from  <dig>  to  <dig>  at ph  <dig>  and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  at ph  <dig> , for tmd in association with vesicles. the smaller ksv value,  <dig> , compared with  <dig>  at ph  <dig>  coupled with the difference in the ratio of ksv in the two ph tested suggests that the insertion of the peptide is deeper at acidic than neutral ph.

self-assembly of tmd in the membrane bilayer can be deduced from rhodamine self-quenching by variation of composition of the fluorescent-labeled peptide
we have probed the self-assembly of influenza ha <dig> fp in the membrane and found a loose association for the fp molecules  <cit> . in the present study, the dependence of rhodamine  self-quenching on the composition of the fluorescence label was used to probe the self-association of tmd  and tmd-fp association . in figure 2a, the following two observations are noteworthy for both acidic and neutral ph: first, the flatness of the normalized intensity in the x = 1– <dig>  range , compared with ha <dig> fp  <cit>  , suggests a very tight tmd association; second, in the low x  regime  a much smaller increase in the normalized intensity than the case of fp also corroborates the idea of tight self-binding for ha <dig> tmd molecules. this conclusion is further supported by the association between fp and tmd described in the next section. another line of evidence for tighter self-association of tmd is provided by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  measurements . the multiple oligomeric species of tmd at low ph is in marked contrast with the single monomer band for fp, demonstrating higher propensity of self-association for tmd. moreover, the pattern for the mixture of tmd and fp is the combination of the individual tmd and fp bands, indicating that the interaction between the two peptides cannot sustain the dispersing force exerted by the sds detergent and the underlying electric field. the data are in line with the idea of weak interaction between tmd and fp, as is further elaborated in the following sections. oligomerization of tmd has been documented by tatulian and tamm  <cit> .

the nature of binding between tmd and fp was revealed in figure 2b. for both ph levels tested, the normalized intensity of the rho dye labeled to tmd or fp of ha <dig> increases on mixing with their counterparts, while no change is observed when fp of human immunodeficiency virus is added to the tmd-containing solution. this result clearly indicates that the interaction between tmd and fp is not random. we also found that the intensity enhancement is less pronounced for the labeled tmd than the labeled fp when the tmd:fp complex is formed, indicating that self-packing of tmd is tighter and tmd likely forms the inner core in the complex. the difference is easily detected in top and middle panels of figure 2b for ph  <dig>  in which rho-tmd experiences less dequenching than rho-fp at the same x value; also, at smaller x, rho-fp shows a larger increase suggesting a dispersed fp subunit by complexing to tmd , supporting the concept of an inner tmd core for the tmd:fp complex which is more directly shown in the next section.

rhodamine self-quenching measurements reveal association of tmd with fp and tmd probably forms the inner core in the membrane
using the rhodamine group attached to ha <dig> fp and tmd peptides to compare the effect of complex formation on the self-quenching allows determination of the configuration of the fp:tmd complex in the membrane. in the experiments, the fluorescence intensity as a percentage of that in the presence of triton x- <dig>  is used as a gage for aggregation, with smaller values representing tighter association. as summarized in table  <dig>  a substantial increase in rho-labeled fp at low ph upon addition of tmd suggests association of these two peptides. this indicates that, at ph  <dig> , fp molecules self-assemble with considerable strength, but are broken up upon incubating with tmd in the bilayer.  it is likely that fp monomers are wrapped on the exterior of the tmd oligomer, as deduced from the markedly smaller intensity of rho labeled to tmd than that labeled to fp. alternatively, the loosely associated fp oligomers, as evidenced by much larger rho-fp dequenching than that of tmd displayed in table  <dig>  may distribute around the tight-packed tmd. either interpretation is in line with the previous conclusion of weak self-association of ha2-fp in the membrane  <cit> . a negative control is provided by the self-quenching data on mixing of ha <dig> tmd and gp <dig> fp of hiv- <dig> ; no detectable change in the extent of quenching is observed compared with gp <dig> fp alone .

it is noteworthy that a substantial rho-tmd dequenching upon addition of fp is observed in the composition variation study, particularly at low x values  while little dequenching is found for rho-tmd complexed to fp. conceivably, the long-range interaction between the fluorescent labels attached to tmd, which is monitored in the low x regime , is affected by fp addition; however, the short-range interaction probed by experiments leading to data in table  <dig> using fully labeled tmd exhibits little change with fp addition, indicating a very compact tmd oligomer  subunit un-dissociable by complexing to fp.

again the association for both fp and tmd in the complex is tighter at acidic ph than neutral ph .

fret measurements between nbd and rhodamine afford evidence for interaction between tmd and fp
the interaction between tmd and fp can be most directly investigated by fret experiments using nbd and rho labeled to the two peptides as the donor-acceptor pair. figure  <dig> displays fret efficiency measured at ph  <dig>  versus acceptor concentration. the higher efficiency obtained for experimental curves than that calculated with random distribution of the two peptides in the lipid clearly indicates an interaction between them.

fp molecules are arranged in antiparallel orientation in the tmd:fp complex
the association between fp and tmd prompted us to investigate the orientation of fp with respect to tmd in the complex. fret experiments were conducted because of its sensitivity to the distance between the donor and acceptor fluorophores. to differentiate between these two possible orientations, we labeled donors and acceptors at each of the two ends of the peptides and compared the differential fret efficiency. figure  <dig> shows the pyrene to nbd fluorescence energy transfer efficiency monitored at the pyrene emission peak . it is clear that fret is larger when the donor-acceptor pair is labeled at different ends than fret for the pair attached to the same end at either n- or c-terminus of the peptides. the pattern is the same at both ph  <dig>  and  <dig> , with larger fret efficiency at acidic ph suggesting a stronger fp:tmd complex at the fusogenic ph.

insertion depth of ha <dig> fp is altered by the interaction with tmd
it has been shown by tatulian and tamm  <cit>  that tmd inserted into the membrane nearly perpendicular to the membrane surface. on the other hand, ha <dig> fp has been found to insert obliquely into the membrane. hence, it is of interest to examine the effect of tmd:fp formation on the membrane insertion depth and angle of fp. as illustrated in figure  <dig>  ksv of cobalt quenching of nbd labeled at the n-terminus of fp decreases with the introduction of tmd. in stark contrast, ksv increases upon complexing to tmd for nbd labeled at the c-terminus of fp. the effect of adding tmd on ksv is the same for ph  <dig>  and  <dig> . the data strongly suggest that the n-terminal portion of fp penetrates deeper while the c-terminus shallower as the tmd:fp complex forms in the membrane. importantly, as discussed in the following, the alteration of the insertion depth of the n- and c-termini of fp upon complex formation leads to the idea that fp aligned more parallel to tmd with its n-terminus close to the c-terminus of tmd. the finding may have a bearing on the role of tmd in promoting membrane hemifusion to complete fusion transition, as is elaborated in the discussion. compatible with the previous results  <cit> , insertion of fp is deeper at acidic ph.

the tb3+/dpa measurements suggest that the ha <dig> tmd peptide does not exhibit membrane leakage activity as fp does
ha <dig> tmd inserts into membrane nearly perpendicularly and promotes dehydration but causes less membrane perturbation than fp as revealed by atr-ftir measurements
to examine the membrane interaction of tmd, and membrane perturbation of tmd alone and tmd:fp complex, infrared experiments were carried out. the secondary structure and orientation of tmd, fp and tmd:fp are summarized in table  <dig>  helix accounted for 64% of the secondary structure for tmd, in qualitative agreement with the values obtained by tatulian and tamm  <cit> . no significant change in helix content was observed for tmd:fp complex, whose helicity is approximately an average of that of tmd and fp. the insertion angle for tmd was found to be 34° with respect to the normal of the membrane, slightly larger than the value reported by tatulian and tamm  <cit> . similar to the helix content, the insertion angle of tmd:fp helix is an average of that of tmd and fp. we also note in figure  <dig> that the extent of dehydration is greater for fp than tmd. moreover, the membrane perturbation probed by the change in lipid acyl chain orientation caused by fp and by tmd  revealed that fp has a greater effect than tmd. the lesser membrane-perturbing effect of tmd than fp seen here is compatible with the results of leakage experiments . the smaller insertion angle for tmd than that for fp and less dehydration of tmd may be correlated with its smaller perturbation on the membrane acyl chain orientation. importantly, as shown in the inset of figure  <dig>  the dehydration caused by tmd:fp is more pronounced than fp and tmd individually, indicating a synergetic membrane-perturbing effect of the formation of tmd:fp complex suggesting a role of tmd and fp association in destabilizing the fusing membranes.

discussion
tmd of ha <dig> inserts into membrane bilayer with a ph-dependent depth
we have shown that ha <dig> fp penetrated more deeply into the membrane at low ph. the result in figure  <dig> on tmd membrane-insertion depth displays similar ph dependence. the deeper insertion at acidic ph for both tmd and fp, as discussed in the following, may have ramifications for the low-ph activation of ha2-mediated fusion process.

self-assembly of tmd is stronger than fp and is insignificantly affected by the incorporation of fp
a previous investigation revealed loose self-association of fp in the membrane  <cit> . here we show in table  <dig> that tmd molecules form tightly packed oligomeric subunits in the membrane which are tighter than fp as deduced from the greater rhodamine self-quenching for tmd. no discernible dequenching is observed for rhodamine-labeled tmd as fp is added, while rhodamine conjugated to fp has enhanced dequenching with tmd incorporation. this suggests that tight tmd packing is intact upon interacting with fp whereas inter-fp distance becomes longer for loosely aggregated fp monomers when attracted by tightly associated tmd oligomers nearby. another line of evidence for a more stable oligomer formed by tmd can be visualized in figure 2c, in which only the monomeric fp band is displayed. more indirect evidence for tighter association of tmd than fp and that tmd constitutes the inner core of the tmd:fp complex can be deduced from figure 2b. the association between the two kinds of molecules is further affirmed by the fret results shown in figure  <dig> indicating larger transfer efficiency than random distribution of the two peptides from nbd to rhodamine conjugated, respectively, to tmd and fp at the opposite ends. the orientation between tmd and fp can be resolved by fret experiments in which pyrene  and nbd  were labeled to tmd and fp at either n- or c-terminus . the result clearly showed an antiparallel tmd:fp association.

membrane interaction of tmd and fp
it is interesting that, unlike fp, tmd displays little membrane disrupting effect despite the closer tmd packing, as shown in the leakage experiments summarized in figures 6a and 6b. this is corroborated by the atr-ftir data on the dehydration  and lipid acyl chain orientation . this could be explained by the smaller membrane insertion angle  for tmd, causing less membrane perturbation. after all, tmd serves as an anchor for the viral fusion protein and therefore should not induce membrane permeation and death of the virus.

the membrane perturbing effect of tmd and fp has also been studied by atr-ir measurements as shown in figure  <dig>  the larger fraction of carbonyl vibrational peak for the tmd:fp complex than that for either tmd or fp reveals a synergistic membrane-perturbing effect of the tmd:fp complex. as membrane dehydration represents a major barrier to fusion, this result suggests that association of the two ha <dig> domains, primarily by perturbing the membrane bilayer at the fusing site, promotes membrane merger mediated by the influenza hemagglutinin.

in this work, fluorophotometry, such as fret and rhodamine self-quenching, was used to study the association between tmd and fp and membrane organization of tmd. it turns out that this is appropriate because the active distance for these fluorescence measurements is in the range of 10– <dig> Å, which covers the loose interaction between fp and tmd. the loose tmd:fp complex inferred from the present work is in line with the sodium dodecyl sulfate gel electrophoresis experiment in which the two coincubated peptides exhibited separate tmd and fp bands under the electric field and dispersing force of sds .

biological implication of fp:tmd interaction
as elaborated above, it is possible that the tmd oligomers are surrounded by fp on the external surface or loosely associated fp molecules disperse around tmd homo-oligomers. it has been shown that the polar segment immediately following fp of hiv- <dig> gp <dig> is conformationally plastic  <cit>  and that the tryptophan-rich pre-tm stretch possesses membrane activity  <cit> . given the involvement of tmd in the hemifusion-to-complete fusion transition and the stringent length requirement for this function  <cit>  we propose a working model for the late steps of ha-mediated fusion . at the pre-hairpin stage, fp inserts into the target membrane; trimerization is mainly mediated through self-association of the hr <dig> region while hr <dig> domain is somewhat unordered. perhaps owing to the flexibility and membrane activity of the fp-proximal region and the membrane-perturbing pre-tm region  <cit> , refolding of the pre-hairpin structure occurs when ha is exposed to acidic ph, pulling the two apposing membranes close. in the membrane interior, fp and tmd move towards each other in antiparallel orientation to form a loose complex, with self-assembled tmd surrounded by fp or interspersed with fp in a somewhat straggling manner, in view of the report that fusion activity is retained with the tmd segment replaced by tmd from other membrane proteins  <cit> . in addition to deepening the fp penetration into the lipid bilayer and further deforming the membrane at the fusing site, the loose interaction between tmd and fp may foster clustering of neighboring fp and the associated tmd molecules, a necessary step for the fusion pore formation and enlargement. we propose that the latter process constitutes a major step for fp and tmd to exert their function. concomitantly, hr <dig> and hr <dig> of the ectodomain form a helix hairpin bundle in the space between the apposing membranes. the free energy released from the rearrangement and conformational change enables the fusion protein and viral and target membranes to surmount the barrier of membrane dehydration and deformation  required for membrane coalescence  <cit> . in other words, the synergetic membrane-perturbing effect  and the deepening membrane penetration of fp resulting from complexing to tmd , in combination with tmd traversing both leaflets of bilayer, eventually cause the rupture of the inner leaflets of both attending membranes resulting in full fusion by the cooperative fp:tmd cluster recruited to the fusion site.

we have provided several lines of evidence for the loose association between tmd and fp in the model membrane, in contrast to highly specific recognition of the receptor by the surface subunit of the viral fusion protein. perhaps the role of tmd in the membrane fusion is twofold: first, mechanically it anchors the fusion protein onto the viral membrane and secures the oligomerization of the fusion protein through its tight self-association, and importantly, it does not destabilize the membrane in the absence of fp; second, it has a weak interaction with fp, thereby reinforcing the destabilizing effect of fp on the inner leaflet of the target membrane by deepening fp membrane insertion . this latter effect is manifested by the requirement of tmd length for different phenotypes of fusion, hemifusion and full-fusion activity  <cit> , because spanning both leaflets of the bilayer for tmd is conceivably a prerequisite for tmd to execute this function. the differential results on the effect of altering the basic residue in the middle of the hiv- <dig> tmd sequence  <cit>  may be related to the weak association between tmd and fp deduced herein . the concept that the role of tmd in the fusion process lies more in disrupting the inner leaflet of the fusing membranes than the specific interaction with fp is consistent with the inability of a gpi-anchored ha ectodomain to mediate full fusion  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the results presented in the work highlight the importance of the interaction of tmd with the membrane and tmd in complex with fp in the steps leading to pore initiation and dilation and shed some light on the fusion reaction mediated by other type i viral fusion proteins.

