BACKGROUND
vision is central to the survival of animals. visual cues are used for orientation, detecting prey, avoiding predators and communication. the visual process starts with visual pigments absorbing light and initiating a photochemical cascade that leads to neural signaling, perception and ultimately visually mediated behavior. a common method for studying vision is the measurement of spectral sensitivity. spectral sensitivity is the relative efficiency of detection of light as a function of wavelength. spectral sensitivity is used to describe the characteristics of visual pigments found in cone photoreceptors in the retina, and it is particularly useful in describing the mechanisms of color vision  <cit> .

comparative studies in vertebrates established the presence of four spectrally distinct classes of cone visual pigments produced by several different opsin genes: sws <dig> being the ultraviolet/violet-sensitive class , sws <dig> being the short wavelength-sensitive class , rh <dig> being the mid-wavelength-sensitive class  and lws being the long-wavelength-sensitive class   <cit> . these opsin genes have been identified in the earliest vertebrate lineage, the jawless fishes or agnathans   <cit> , and arose through duplications of a single ancestral opsin gene. mutations in duplicated genes can lead to the evolution of additional spectral classes of cone visual pigments within a class of opsin gene. in fact, in many teleost fishes, cone opsin genes have undergone gene duplication to produce a wide range of opsin genes  <cit> . the expression of different subsets of these genes can potentially generate large-scale variation in spectral sensitivity and the mechanisms of color vision in fish  <cit> .

the cichlid fishes of lake malawi are an excellent model system for examining large-scale variation in color vision. lake malawi has 700- <dig> species of cichlids  <cit>  that have evolved from a common ancestor in a brief period of evolutionary time   <cit> . malawi cichlids are notable for their diversity in male nuptial color patterns, sexual dimorphism in color patterns and visual communication processes governing mate choice  <cit> . cichlids have undergone multiple opsin gene duplication events, producing seven classes of cone opsin genes  <cit> . these seven opsin genes include an ultraviolet-sensitive , two short-wavelength-sensitive , three mid-wavelength-sensitive  and long-wavelength-sensitive  cone opsins. of particular interest is that malawi cichlids show differential expression of primarily three of the seven available cone opsin genes  <cit> , with some evidence of differential expression through ontogeny  <cit> . this raises an intriguing question of how seven opsin genes are maintained in malawi cichlids. our central research focus concerns the large-scale diversity in cichlid visual systems and differences in the number of cone classes that participate in color vision. here we examine variation in cone classes contributing to spectral sensitivity in cichlids between individuals, sexes and species and discuss the adaptive significance of this variation in color vision.

RESULTS
to quantify the number of physiologically functional cone classes, we recorded electroretinograms  from whole fish preparations of three malawi cichlids: metriaclima zebra, melanochromis auratus and protomelas taeniolatus. we measured the b-wave amplitude of ergs, representative of on  bipolar cell activity, to assess the integrative response of functional cones. we were primarily interested in evaluating the number of cone classes contributing to spectral sensitivity and their corresponding visual pigments, but we also used multiple-mechanism modeling to understand the opponent and nonopponent cone interactions at play that can shape the spectral tuning of cone mechanisms. our analysis was focused on describing variation in spectral sensitivity with respect to individual, sex and species differences.

individual differences in spectral sensitivity
over  <dig> spectral sensitivity curves were recorded from a total of  <dig> females and  <dig> males of the three species studied. the spectral sensitivity of each individual was evaluated under three different color background conditions, each aimed at isolating the sensitivity of specific cones . for each individual, we identified the number of sensitivity peaks and their spectral locations for the three background conditions. we then fitted cone pigment absorption templates  <cit>  to the sensitivity peaks using a least-squares method.

individuals of all three species of malawi cichlids examined in this study possessed  <dig> different cone subsets . a maximum of five different cone classes were present in 41% of fish, four different cone classes were present in 56% of fish, and three different cone classes were present in only 3% of the fish  . all cone subsets  consisted of at least two pigments corresponding to single cones and two pigments corresponding to double cones.

in total,  <dig> different subsets of cone pigments were identified across the species studied. the number of individuals that exhibited each pigment subset, the number of cone classes included in each subset and the frequency of each cone pigment subset per species are indicated. the λmax  values of cone pigments that comprised each subset are given .

aλmax  of visual pigment template that were fitted to the sensitivity curve . owing to cone interactions, the sensitivity peaks measured were typically narrower than the fitted pigment templates, resulting in relatively low r <dig> values.

bestimated a <dig> percent in the retina .

cthe visual pigment template that resulted in the highest r <dig> value when fitted to the long-wavelength limb of the spectral sensitivity curve .

dthe visual pigment template which resulted in the second highest r <dig> value when fitted to the long-wavelength limb of the spectral sensitivity curve .

ethe cone pigment subset to which each individual was assigned.

examining the individuals of each species separately revealed that all individuals in m. zebra possessed four cone pigments, while 55% of individuals in m. auratus and 67% of individuals in p. taeniolatus possessed five cone pigments .

the collection of all cone subsets exhibited by either m. auratus or p. taeniolatus included the complete opsin gene set . that is, each of these species utilizes the complete set of six cone pigments . however, the collection of all subsets exhibited by m. zebra encompassed only five cone pigments and excluded the lws pigment.

sex differences in spectral sensitivity
to evaluate how sex differences contribute to the variation in cone subsets, we calculated the frequency of cone subsets in each species and sex. in all species, the individual variation in pigment subsets used was high, and a strong trend for differences between females and males in the identity and frequency of the pigment subsets they utilized emerged . the degree to which pigment subsets were shared between sexes varied across species. half of m. zebra females shared subset  <dig> with all conspecific males, 28% of m. auratus males shared subset  <dig> with half the females and 60% of p. taeniolatus females shared subsets  <dig> and  <dig> with 71% of males.

frequency of cone pigment subsets in females and males of m. zebra, m. auratus and p. taeniolatus. frequency of cone pigment subsets was calculated for each sex and each species on the basis of spectral sensitivity data. the sample size for each of the examined groups is indicated in parentheses.

the frequency of each cone pigment present in females and males was calculated . sex differences in the frequency of cone pigments were evident in all species, with m. auratus and m. zebra showing the largest differences. the frequency of m. auratus females showing sws <dig> pigments was 75% larger than in males, while the frequency of males showing sws2a and lws pigments was 71% and 100% larger than in females, respectively. the frequency of m. zebra males showing sws2a cone pigment was 100% larger than in females, while sws2b cone pigment was found only in females. in contrast, the frequency of cone pigments in p. taeniolatus showed less variation across sexes, with pigment frequencies differing 12%-42% between sexes.

we also examined the effect of sex on the pattern of cone opsin gene expression. we focused our analysis on m. auratus and p. taeniolatus, the species that exhibited the lowest and highest degree of common cone pigment subsets between the sexes, respectively. variation in opsin gene expression between females and males in m. auratus was larger than in p. taeniolatus . specifically, in m. auratus, the expression of rh2b and rh2a opsin genes differed across sexes . in contrast, in p. taeniolatus, no significant differences in the relative opsin gene expression were detected between sexes . see additional file  <dig> for detailed t-test results and additional file  <dig> for primer specifications for cone opsin genes. the frequency of cone pigments and opsin gene expression are not quantitatively comparable. in the calculation of pigment frequency, each individual is scored as either  <dig>  or  <dig> , whereas gene expression can assume any value between  <dig> and  <dig>  moreover, the expression level of an opsin gene does not necessarily dictate its contribution to sensitivity, since patterns of convergence of cones onto retinal interneurons and the network processing of these neurons  <cit>  are critical to governing visual responsiveness. our results show that females and males differ in the cone opsin gene expression profiles. our results also suggest that females and males differ in cone pigment subsets and in the frequency of cone pigments. however, owing to sample size limitation imposed by the complexity of spectral sensitivity measurements, the statistical significance of the sex differences observed in cone pigment subsets and in the frequency of cone pigments cannot be evaluated at this time. it is important to note, however, that the variability of all three properties of the visual system of cichlids was consistently larger in m. auratus than in the other two species.

species differences in spectral sensitivity
in general, different cichlid species used different cone subsets . closer examination reveals that females of the three species did not use the same cone subsets, but 43% of male m. auratus shared three cone subsets with p. taeniolatus males.

the frequency of cone pigments varied across species . the frequency of rh2a  and rh2b  showed the smallest variation and did not differ significantly between species . in contrast, the frequency of lws  and sws <dig>  showed the largest variation and differed significantly between species . see figure  <dig> caption for detailed statistics. the frequency of sws <dig> was highest in m. zebra , lower in m. auratus  and lowest in p. taeniolatus . the frequency of lws in p. taeniolatus  and m. auratus  was higher than in m. zebra .

the frequency of the sws <dig> cone pigment across species qualitatively correlated with planktivory. m. zebra may be highly planktivorous, feeding on both phytoplankton  and zooplankton   <cit> . m. auratus is omnivorous, consuming algae and a wide range of nonalgal dietary items such as cyclopoid copepods  <cit> . p. taeniolatus is almost strictly herbivorous and feeds on the biocover detached from rocks, mainly comprising algae and diatoms  <cit> .

the frequency of the lws cone pigment across species was quantitatively correlated with the proportion of long-wavelength reflectance in the color pattern of conspecific males . as a first-order approximation, the quantum catch of an lws cone pigment was calculated for the spectral reflectance of the species used in this study. the normalized quantum catch was highest in p. taeniolatus , lower in m. auratus  and lowest in m. zebra .

color vision in lake malawi cichlids
spectral sensitivity curves determined using different color background conditions were used to evaluate mechanisms of color vision. color vision requires the possession of at least two differentially sensitive cones that interact through opponent and nonopponent processes to enable wavelength discrimination  <cit> . our results show that 97% of individuals possessed four or five cone classes. to study cone interactions, we used a multiple-cone mechanism  model, employing strict criteria , to reconstruct spectral sensitivity under different background conditions. to do this, we selected three individual fish that exhibited the most frequent cone subset for a given species. these were subsets  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  occurring in 73%, 36% and 42% of the m. zebra, m. auratus and p. taeniolatus individuals, respectively.

spectral sensitivity was successfully reconstructed using the mcm model  . cone interaction was expressed as an additive  or subtractive  contribution to the modeled spectral sensitivity, and we summarize these cone interactions in table  <dig> . typically, the cone class exhibiting the highest sensitivity for a spectral range contributed positively to the modeled spectral sensitivity, whereas other cone classes contributed either positively  or negatively  to the modeled spectral sensitivity. the successful reconstruction of spectral sensitivity curves further validated our analysis and the distribution of the cone pigment subsets. most importantly, we identified and characterized cone interactions representative of retinal neural network processing, essential to color vision.

ksws1-klws represent the weights of the relative contribution of each cone mechanism to spectral sensitivity used in the multiple-cone mechanism model. weights can be positive  or negative . the spectral ranges listed in this table represent discernible peaks  in the spectral sensitivity curves, and each peak was fitted by the multiple cone mechanism model.

discussion
pentachromatic color vision in lake malawi cichlids
ninety-seven percent of fish examined in this study employed cone subsets of four or five pigments, with most m. auratus and p. taeniolatus exhibiting five functional cone classes. the spectral sensitivity of all three species of cichlids was shaped by both opponent and nonopponent cone interactions, and thus our data provide the first comprehensive evidence for pentachromatic color vision in vertebrates. although the presence of five  cone classes was previously reported in microspectrophotometry studies  <cit> , this is the first demonstration that five cone mechanisms were used by a single individual. in this regard, designating the dimensionality of color vision requires the essential evidence that shows not only that the different cone mechanisms participate in spectral sensitivity but also that the different cone mechanisms show multiple neuronal interactions. p. taeniolatus and m. auratus showed five distinct cone classes spectrally compressed in a range of  <dig> nm  and  <dig> nm , respectively. the spectral compression of this sensitivity provides the basis for extraordinary spectral discrimination, which could be important in visual communication. to better understand how pentachromatic color vision would be beneficial to cichlids, we need to consider factors at play in the visual environment of cichlids where visual communication takes place:  the high species diversity of cichlids in lake malawi   <cit> ,  the large within-genera variation in the color pattern of fish and the small within-genera variation in their size and shape  <cit>  and  the prevalence of visual cues driving mate choice  <cit>  and intrasexual competition  <cit> . visual communication would depend on exquisite sensory performance in this visual environment, since cichlids are continually challenged to make fine-scale discriminations of complex color patterns. this visual system capability would be particularly important in guiding visual behavior related to mate choice, where the detection and recognition of conspecific optical signals is critical. these visual adaptations could be fundamental to mate choice fidelity and contribute to the maintenance of biodiversity in the cichlid communities of lake malawi.

it is important to point out that our findings differ from the notion that lake malawi cichlids primarily exhibit three cone pigments  <cit> . recent reports show a significant variation in the number of opsin genes expressed among malawi species  <cit> , with several species  expressing more than three cone opsin genes  <cit> . furthermore, microspectrophotometry studies have revealed classes of cones in low abundance in the retina of various species that are of unknown significance  <cit> . our study suggests that these rare cone classes contribute to the spectral sensitivity of lake malawi cichlids.

sex differences in the color vision of lake malawi cichlids
our study provides some evidence for sex differences in opsin gene expression, and possibly in spectral sensitivity, for cichlids. while the sample size in electrophysiology studies tends to be low, a possible pattern of differentiation between males and females emerged. the large diversity of cone pigment subsets found in each species was in part qualitatively related to sex differences. this, together with qualitative sex differences in pigment frequency and significant differences in cone opsin gene expression, suggests the possibility for sex differences in the visual system of some lake malawi cichlids. our results suggest that the most prominent sex differences occurred in m. auratus. we argue here that males and females may have quite different visual requirements in visual communication scenarios  <cit> . m. auratus differs from the two other species in two aspects.  m. zebra and p. taeniolatus males hold a permanent territory while females choose among potential mates  <cit> ; m. auratus males, on the other hand, assume a territory only temporarily around breeding events  <cit> .  m. zebra and p. taeniolatus males are conspicuous while the color pattern of females is dull, whereas both female and male m. auratus are conspicuous and exhibit colorful, but very different, body patterns  <cit> .

we propose a possible explanation for the observed distribution of sex differences across species. considering the significant role of visual cues in female mate choice  <cit>  and male-male competition for territory  <cit> , both females and territorial males of m. zebra and p. taeniolatus would likely benefit from possessing color vision attuned to provide the best recognition ability of conspecific males. in contrast, m. auratus males assume a territory only temporarily and thus are less dependent on recognition of conspecific males to increase their mating success. additionally, not holding a permanent territory potentially allows m. auratus males to choose between females. indeed, in the cichlid astatotilapia flaviijosephi, males defend territories only during the breeding season and actively choose between females  <cit> . furthermore, the investment of m. auratus females in their color pattern adds support to the hypothesis that m. auratus males choose between females. thus, the distribution of sex differences in the visual system across species might be associated with territorial behavior. however, the adaptive role of sexual dimorphism in color vision of lake malawi cichlids requires further examination.

adaptive significance of species differences in the color vision of lake malawi cichlids
the variation in cone pigment frequency across species reflects visual adaptations that both enhance the contrast of transparent prey and detect signals important for mate choice, suggesting that both natural selection and sexual selection played a role in shaping the spectral sensitivity of cichlids.

the frequency of the sws <dig> cone pigment across species qualitatively correlated with planktivory. uv photoreception mediated by the sws <dig> cone pigment enhances the contrast of transparent zooplankton against the water background and thus aids in their detection  <cit> . however, uv sensitivity does not confer any advantage over longer-wavelength sensitivity in the detection of opaque food items such as loose algae. thus, uv sensitivity is expected to be highly advantageous for the planktivorous m. zebra, less advantageous for the omnivorous m. auratus and least advantageous for the herbivorous p. taeniolatus, which is in agreement with our findings. thus, the presence of the sws <dig> pigment in the retina of cichlids has likely significant adaptive value. in this regard, the expression of the sws <dig> opsin gene was recently reported to be highest among species foraging on zooplankton, phytoplankton and algae and lowest among species foraging on fish or benthic invertebrates  <cit> ; however, the relationship between opsin gene expression and spectral sensitivity in cichlids is still largely unknown. uv photoreception is also tightly linked to polarization sensitivity, and this may provide yet greater contrast enhancement of transparent prey  <cit> . researchers in our lab are currently examining polarization sensitivity in cichlid fishes and its role in visual behavior.

the frequency of the lws cone pigment across species was quantitatively correlated with the proportion of long-wavelength reflectance in the color pattern of conspecific males. while the possession of the lws cone pigment by m. auratus and p. taeniolatus may facilitate the detection of long-wavelength signals of conspecifics, this would not be the case for m. zebra that do not have prominent long-wavelength signals, which is in agreement with our findings. therefore, the presence of the lws pigment in m. auratus and p. taeniolatus has a significant adaptive value. interestingly, the detection of uv reflections from the color pattern of these fish species may be mediated through the β-band of the lws cone pigment , thus potentially eliminating the need for the possession of the sws <dig> pigment to detect uv signals from conspecifics.

both natural and sexual selection work sequentially to contribute to the divergence of lake malawi rock-dwelling cichlids  <cit> . in the first episode of cladogenesis, competition for trophic resources resulted in the differentiation of trophic morphology and the diversification of the visual system to allow the utilization of different foraging styles. the correlation of the frequency of the sws <dig> cone pigment across species to planktivory , and the recent report that the expression of the sws <dig> opsin gene correlates with planktivory  <cit> , support the idea of diversification of the visual system based on competition for trophic resources. in the second episode of cladogenesis, sexual selection contributed to the differentiation of male nuptial coloration and the accompanying diversification of the visual system to allow high recognition ability of conspecifics. the correlation of the frequency of the lws cone pigment across species to the proportion of long-wavelength reflectance from male color patterns supports the idea of visual system diversification based on the diverse male nuptial coloration.

different cichlid species used different cone subsets, with the spectral sensitivity of females being more constrained than that of males. this is suggestive of specific tuning of color vision in females to allow for the best recognition ability of the distinctly colored conspecific males. previous studies have shown that different cichlid species express diverse opsin gene subsets  <cit> , supporting our results. however, a close examination of the different constraints imposed on the visual systems of females and males needs to be undertaken.

the retention of cone opsin genes in lake malawi cichlids
none of the individuals examined possessed all available six cone pigments . however, the large number of pigments utilized and the high diversity in pigment subsets within a species add support for the retention of the complete set of cone opsin genes in malawi cichlids.

several factors may contribute to the observed pigment diversity within a species. first, a significant genetic component of opsin expression was reported  <cit>  where individuals with different genetic histories may utilize different pigment subsets. second, thyroid hormones  are important in vertebrate development and can modulate the opsin gene expression and induce cone loss in fish  <cit> . the level of th in fish has been associated with environmental stress and subordinance via the effect of cortisol  <cit> . thus, individuals differing in their stress level or social status may utilize diverse pigment subsets through th level modulation. third, social visual cues in fish modulate the activity of gnrh neurons  <cit> . since gnrh has been shown to affect retinal neurons  <cit> , it is possible that it may be responsible for changes in opsin gene expression and spectral sensitivity in fish.

CONCLUSIONS
the cichlid model system illustrates that the visual systems of fish may differ across individuals, sexes and species. the large number of available cone opsin genes facilitates this variation in the spectral sensitivity of fish. we show that even rare cone populations and opsin gene expression at low levels contribute to the spectral sensitivity of fish. our results suggest that the diversification of color vision across species contributes to sensory adaptations that both enhance the contrast of transparent prey and the detection of optical signals of conspecifics. therefore, both natural and sexual selection may work in concert to shape spectral sensitivity in fish. taken together, our findings have important implications for understanding the variable nature of fish color vision and the selective forces shaping detection and recognition capabilities.

