BACKGROUND
the western ghats of india and highlands of sri lanka are a global biodiversity hotspot, i.e. they contain several endemic animal and plant species which are recognised as being distinct at a high taxonomic level  <cit> . endemism is particularly marked among amphibians, with over 75% of subcontinent species restricted to this region alone  <cit> . explaining biogeographic patterns has mainly focussed on the geological history of the subcontinent, which indicates prolonged periods of isolation from the late cretaceous to the early tertiary  <cit> . before joining the eurasian mainland, india was part of gondwana  and gradually became detached from other landmasses during its northward journey across the tethys sea  <cit> . although the actual isolation of india has been debated , molecular studies have demonstrated the presence of ancient lineages in india, and these are interpreted as evidence of this geological history  <cit> .

the subsequent accretion of the indian plate into eurasia during the early tertiary  <cit>  was a potential catalyst for biotic exchange between the subcontinent and the eurasian mainland. it has been shown that an out-of-india dispersal of gondwanan elements into eurasia resulted in the wider distribution of previously isolated groups  <cit> . however, less attention has been given to the opportunity of "into-india" movement of laurasian species after the establishment of this new geological connection. the exchange of species between the indian subcontinent and eurasia must have been affected by the geomorphological changes generated after their collision. the uplift of the himalayas and the tibetan plateau not only created physical barriers for dispersal, but also heavily influenced the prevalent climate  <cit> . the climatic regime in asia changed from a zonal-pattern to a monsoon-dominant system, a reorganization that had major consequences for asian and indian terrestrial ecosystems  <cit> .

true toads  are a family of anurans with a wide distribution, comprising over  <dig> species  <cit> . their present-day natural absence on several landmasses of gondwanan origin , their nested position within nobleobatrachia , and their recent origin  <cit> , imply that they reached the indian subcontinent only after the indo-asia collision. toads thus constitute an ideal group for studying tertiary into-india dispersal. despite numerous studies on phylogenetic relationships in bufonidae  <cit> , species from the indian subcontinent were always underrepresented and their phylogenetic relationships remain largely elusive. in addition to multiple species whose taxonomic affiliations are uncertain , toads on the indian subcontinent are classified in five genera: bufoides  and adenomus  are considered endemic to the subcontinent, duttaphrynus has a wide distribution, and torrentially adapted ansonia and arboreal pedostibes species show disjunct distributions in wet-zone areas of south-east asia and india  <cit> . current taxonomy therefore suggests multiple dispersal events between the indian subcontinent and adjacent regions.

here we analysed a combined set of mitochondrial and nuclear gene fragments to investigate phylogenetic relationships and biogeography of indian bufonidae. our sampling includes  <dig> toads from the subcontinent and a representative diversity of species of adjacent regions, with particular attention to shared genera ansonia, pedostibes and duttaphrynus. we performed dating estimates and biogeographic analyses to investigate biotic exchange between the indian subcontinent and adjacent regions, and evaluated how this affected endemism in the western ghats-sri lanka biodiversity hotspot.

RESULTS
phylogenetic relationships of bufonidae
our data matrix consists of  <dig> basepairs ,  <dig> bp of which could be unambiguously aligned. maximum parsimony  analyses of the total dataset produced  <dig> equally parsimonious trees of  <dig> steps. maximum likelihood  analyses of the total dataset produced a single ml tree , which is very similar to the bayesian consensus phylogram . our analyses confidently determine the phylogenetic position of ten known species currently treated as incertae sedis "bufo" in figure 1). in agreement with previous evidence  <cit> , we recover with high support the northern african "bufo" mauritanicus as sister species of a sub-saharan amietophrynus clade . based on this support, we suggest transferring the species "bufo" mauritanicus schlegel,  <dig> to the genus amietophrynus. the remaining "bufo" species in our study are nested in, or closely related to the genus duttaphrynus as originally defined . the bufo scaber group  <cit> , here represented by "bufo" scaber and "bufo" atukoralei, is nested in duttaphrynus. to restore monophyly of duttaphrynus and to place sampled "bufo" species in a taxonomic framework, we suggest expanding duttaphrynus to include the most recent common ancestor of bufo melanostictus  and bufo stomaticus lütken,  <dig>  and all of its descendants. eight known species, including those belonging to the bufo stomaticus group sensu  <cit>  , are thus transferred to this genus .

Δ ln l is the difference of likelihood between the ml tree and the best tree compatible with the constraint indicated under "phylogenetic hypothesis"

in contrast to previous studies, we recover with high support the old world toads as a clade nested among new world taxa , but the sequence of early diversification of its major lineages remains poorly resolved. furthermore, our analyses differ from previous hypotheses in a number of important aspects: first, the african species schismaderma carens, in contrast to other studies  <cit> , is recovered as sister species of a strongly supported churamiti-nectophrynoides clade. however, support for this african clade as a whole remains moderate. second, in agreement with a previous study  <cit> , our analyses do not support the monophyly of pseudepidalea but find an ambiguous phylogenetic position for pseudepidalea brongersmai . third, the genus pedostibes is not recovered as being monophyletic :p. hosii does not group with the type species p. tuberculosus, but comes out as the sister species of phrynoidis juxtaspera . fourth, species of the genus ansonia similarly do not form a clade . instead, south-east asian species group with pelophryne .

a previously unrecognized adaptive radiation of toads
our analyses reveal a previously unrecognized adaptive radiation of toads, containing torrential,  arboreal, and drought-adapted ecomorphs in adult and/or larval forms . the name adenominae cope  <dig> is available to denote this clade in a phylogenetic or linnaean system  <cit> . the malabar torrent toad "ansonia" ornata from the western ghats is the sister lineage of all other genera in this radiation . courtship, mating, egg-laying and tadpole development of this species all happens in and around torrential habitats. it also exhibits morphological characters that reflect its torrential ecology . furthermore tadpoles of this species possess a specialized suctorial disk, allowing them to cling on rocks in fast flowing water . although both larvae and adults of the disjunctly distributed south-east asian ansonia species look remarkably similar  <cit> , they form the sister clade of the asian genus pelophryne, species that show terrestrial adaptations . the creation of a new genus will be necessary to accommodate the indian species ansonia ornata günther,  <dig> .

another interesting member of this toad radiation is the malabar tree toad pedostibes tuberculosus, a western ghats endemic species that is largely arboreal  <cit> : during the night, males attract the females by calling from tree holes or an elevated position on leaves of vegetation. furthermore, the fingers and toes of this species are dilated in broad truncated disks, which is a clear adaptation to their arboreal lifestyle. our analyses indicate that pedostibes from the indian subcontinent and the malayan peninsula independently evolved toe pads and an arboreal ecology  <cit> . pedostibes tuberculosus also has a specialized development: it lays about  <dig> eggs in a clutch  at the edge of streams, in which the bottom-feeding tadpoles further develop .

various ecomorphs are also evident in the genus adenomus, which are slender toads endemic to the highlands of sri lanka   <cit> . the three members, one of which  is considered extinct, inhabit streams in tropical montane forests or are semi-arboreal  <cit> . the radiation also includes a western ghats endemic lineage containing "bufo" koynayensis, a species formerly placed in its own species group because its morphology did not correspond with any other recognized oriental group  <cit> . this species often inhabits rocky mountain streams and has a bright yellow coloration during the mating season. interestingly, it also lays its eggs in clutches . because of these reasons, we suggest transferring "bufo" koynayensis and its undescribed sister species to a new genus . finally, the radiation includes a clade of pond-breeding species with a warty skin and more "typical" toad morphology. this group contains toads that were formerly placed in the bufo melanostictus, bufo stomaticus, bufo scaber or bufo arabicus groups. together, they have a broad distribution, covering india, south-east asia, the arabian peninsula, and possibly northeast africa.

dating estimates
our dating estimates are listed in table  <dig> and  <dig>  analyses using ingroup + outgroup calibrations  and ingroup calibrations alone  resulted in highly similar node ages. additionally, removal of individual time constraints resulted in congruent dating estimates . all analyses place the crown origin of bufonidae around the paleocene-eocene border ; analysis b:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya, table 2). this divergence time estimate is consistent with previous amphibian studies that cover a variety of methods and taxon sampling  <cit> . our analyses further indicate that bufonids reached the old world around  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya . the origin of specialized endemic lineages  on the indian subcontinent is estimated between  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mya .

mean ± standard deviation  and 95% credibility intervals  are shown for two sets of calibration points used in this study 

ancestral areas were reconstructed by both diva and mp analyses. dating estimates of two sets of calibration points are shown . abbreviations are: s, south-east asia; w, western ghats and sri lankan highlands; i, remaining indian subcontinent; a, arabian peninsula. nodes are cross-referenced in figure 2

our time estimates for the origin of bufonids differ substantially from a recent study where this event was placed in the late cretaceous   <cit> . this older dating estimate can be attributed to the use of the oldest "leptodactylid" fossil baurubatrachus pricei†  to calibrate the crown node of nobleobatrachia. this is possibly an overestimation: the identification of baurubatrachus as a leptodactylid is questionable given the lack of synapomorphies defining this family  <cit>  and its polyphyly according to molecular studies . for example, calyptocephalella gayi was originally assigned to leptodactylidae, but recent molecular studies have shown a close relationship to australian myobatrachidae. therefore, calibrating the most recent common ancestor of all "leptodactylidae", including calyptocephalella gayi and nobleobatrachia, at  <dig> myr would have been a more conservative approach and would likely have given results similar to our dating estimates.

biogeography
our trees show a deeply nested clade of old world bufonids, indicating a single dispersal event . this result is in contrast with a previous hypothesis suggesting that one toad lineage returned to the new world  <cit> . bayesian dating estimates suggest that bufonids reached the old world around the late oligocene, a period that has been associated with global climate warming  <cit> . we hypothesize that this allowed toads to access northern latitudes and subsequently reach eurasia. although trans-oceanic dispersal cannot be excluded, colonization is more likely to have occurred over the trans-beringian land bridge, which connected eurasia and north america intermittently from the mid-cretaceous until the late pliocene  <cit> . after arrival in eurasia, they rapidly spread southwards, reaching africa, south-east asia and the indian subcontinent around the oligocene-miocene transition.

the early diversification of toads on the indian subcontinent led to the origin of specialized endemic lineages  in the early miocene . dispersal-vicariance  analyses  indicate that this radiation occurred on the southern parts of the subcontinent, as the oldest lineages are currently restricted to the western ghats and sri lankan highlands. the timing of this radiation corresponds with a period that is marked by global climatic- and environmental changes  <cit> . these were probably caused by the combined effect of tibetan uplift and retreat of the paratethys epicontinental sea, both of which were initiated by the indo-asia collision  <cit> . on the indian subcontinent, the transition from a zonal to a monsoon-dominated climate pattern may have led to the aridification of the remaining peninsula, and a significant shift from closed forested tropical ecosystems towards more open savannah-like ecosystems  <cit> . if correct, specialized frogs distributed in the western ghats-sri lanka biodiversity hotspot would have become isolated from similar mountainous rainforest habitats. this would also explain why other rainforest clades radiated and largely remained in the highlands of sri lanka, even when sea-level variations frequently permitted dispersal to the mainland  <cit> .

our ancestral area reconstruction and dating estimates  indicate that around the middle miocene, toads successfully dispersed out of the western ghats-sri lanka hotspot and colonized other parts of the subcontinent, south-east asia, and the arabian peninsula. it is possible that dispersal of these toads was more frequent, but more extensive taxon sampling is required to address this question.

CONCLUSIONS
our results show that the late oligocene-middle miocene interval was an important period for the diversification of specialized endemic lineages on the indian subcontinent. it is likely that this period was not only essential for bufonid diversification, but also led to isolation of newly arrived lineages in other taxa of laurasian origin. if confirmed, the indian subcontinent's higher taxonomic endemism not only originated from cretaceous isolation, but also from into india dispersal and subsequent radiation of new elements after accretion to the eurasian mainland.

