BACKGROUND
rna-seq is revolutionizing the study of gene expression. rna-seq has been shown to be quantitatively accurate over a larger range of expression levels than previous methods, such as microarrays, while also being more effective at identifying genes that show low expression levels  <cit> . rna-seq is also leading to major breakthroughs in the study of functional rnas and gene regulation  <cit> . studies of large scale patterns of expression of micrornas have shown the fundamental roles these molecules play in regulating transcripts, while studies of long non-coding rnas have revealed an unforeseen depth of functional roles for these genes in gene regulation and epigenetics  <cit> .

while the technical and experimental logistics of how best to use rna-seq are being addressed in a variety of contexts  <cit> , one question that has received relatively little attention is the extent to which structure specific extractions are necessary for an accurate determination of gene expression. we use the terms “structure” and “organ” interchangeably, as we are referring to biological structures with distinct functions within a larger whole. in insects, for example, structures  such as the fat body and segmental ganglia are contained within the abdominal body segment. we refer to large structures, such as the abdomen, with many internal structures as “composite structures”. essentially, although efforts are under way to develop procedures for effective isolation of structures for rna extraction   <cit> , there is little experimental support for composite structure extractions actually being difficult to interpret or prone to error. this has led to widespread use of composite structures in rna-seq studies of small organisms such as insects  <cit> .

although many studies are using composite extractions, there are potential problems with this approach. first, if genes are expressed in many different structures within the composite structure, then signals of gene expression from the different organs may interfere with one another. for example, if the structure of interest is small relative to the size of the rest of the structure , then a strong difference in gene expression within the gland may be washed out by different patterns of expression elsewhere. second, incomplete homogenization of the composite structure during extraction may lead to little tissue from particular structures actually being extracted. hence, there are straightforward reasons to suspect that rna-seq from composite-structures such as body segments may cause false negatives and difficult to interpret patterns of differential expression.

here we explore the necessity of using structure  specific extractions for rna-seq using three honey bee structures. we focus on two structures, the sting gland and the digestive tract, that occur within one body segment, the whole abdomen. the sting gland is a relatively small structure within the larger composite structure that can be predicted to expresses a large number of specialized genes. these include the many venom proteins that make up honey bee venom, along with the enzymatic machinery used to produce and modify these proteins  <cit> . exploring patterns of differential gene expression in sting gland specific extractions and comparing them to patterns of expression in the whole abdomen extractions can address the question of how much error can be expected when a composite extraction is conducted but the focal tissue is a small specialized structure within it. the digestive tract is a large structure not thought to be highly specialized . by comparing patterns of gene expression in digestive tract specific extractions to patterns in the whole abdomen we can explore how much error is to be expected when the focal structure is a sizeable portion of the composite structure. both comparisons will shed light on whether contrasting patterns of gene expression in different structures and false negatives in general are a problem for rna-seq using composite structures.

RESULTS
transcriptome characterizations based on structure-specific or composite extractions
the simplest potential problem with composite extractions is that genes that are expressed in small structures within the composite structure may be falsely determined to be not expressed in the composite structure. this may be a particularly pressing problem for genes with important functions that show low expression levels in small structures. we began our exploration of this issue by first determining the total number of genes expressed in each structure . the sting gland showed the largest transcriptome size, while the abdomen and digestive tract showed lower levels of expression. these numbers are for the same number of reads from each strucuture , so they presumably represent differences in how comprehensively the transcriptome was canvassed at this sequencing depth in conjunction with the complexity of the transcriptome. hence, with respect to the sting gland versus the digestive tract, it is possible that the sting gland contains a higher number of expressed genes, or it is possible that the coverage level is sufficient to completely document expression in the sting gland, while it is insufficient to document all the genes expressed in the digestive tract. while this question is not resolvable with the current data set, the comparison of the sting gland transcriptome size to that of the whole abdomen transcriptome size is more straightforward. here, since the sting gland is contained within the abdomen, the abdomen must have a larger transcriptome size. hence, the fact that the sting gland was determined to have a larger transcriptome than the whole abdomen means that the whole abdomen has not been sequenced at sufficient depth to identify all the genes present within it. hence, unless an rna-seq study sequences at sufficient depth to perform an analysis proving that the number of genes found to be expressed is the total level , there will always be concern that genes with low expression levels in particular tissues within the composite structure are missing from the data set.

figures  <dig> and  <dig> follow up on the results of figure  <dig> by attempting to discover which of the genes present in the structure specific extractions are missing in the composite extractions and why. figure  <dig> shows genes that are present in the sting gland transcriptome, but not present in the whole abdomen transcriptome and vice versa . analyses are for the nurse bee transcriptomes. forager transcriptome comparisons showed the same patterns and are therefore omitted. for genes that were present in the sting gland, but not in the whole abdomen, most of them show low expression levels suggesting they were missing from the whole abdomen data set due to insufficient coverage. however, a small, but significant, number of genes showed relatively high expression in the sting gland  and were nonetheless missing from the whole abdomen data set . for these genes, insufficient coverage as the cause for their being missing from the abdominal transcriptome is less parsimonious than the alternative possibility, which is that random error in the sampling from the whole abdomen caused some genes with high local expression to be missing from the composite structure transcriptome. this problem exists because the optimal amount of starting material for rna extraction is much smaller than the size of many structures, such as the abdomen, yet the researcher wants a sample that is representative of the whole composite tissue. we used the common method for solving this problem, which is grinding in liquid nitrogen before taking a sample for rna extraction  <cit> . although grinding in liquid n <dig> generates a fine powder of tissue that is easily mixed, the sample may still be insufficiently homogenized to eliminate strong stochasticity in the amount of each sub structure that makes it into the extraction. this is because the size of the powdered grains of tissue can still be significant relative to the size of small glands. our data suggests that grinding tissue to a powder in liquid n <dig> may be insufficient to ensure complete homogenization and random sampling from a large structure. a simple solution may be to extract rna from a much larger amount of ground sample  and then sample a subset of the pooled rna for downstream analyses.

for genes that were present in the whole abdomen, but not present in the sting gland, the pattern was different than that for genes present in the sting gland but not the abdomen . here the mode class of genes had high expression in the abdomen . the genes present in the abdomen, but missing from the sting gland transcriptome, are therefore presumably highly expressed specialized genes not expressed in the sting gland. the sting gland itself, for example, has many venom proteins with high expression levels that presumably would not be expressed in other structures in the abdomen. genes with equally specialized functions are likely found in other structures as well.

figure  <dig> shows the results for the same type of analysis for the digestive tract and the whole abdomen . the pattern here is quite different from that with respect to the sting gland versus the whole abdomen, presumably due to the sting gland being a tiny structure within the whole abdomen, and the digestive tract being quite a large structure. in this case, genes that were present in the digestive tract, but missing from the whole abdomen, are all genes with low expression levels . hence, the issue of missing key genes may not be a problem for large focal structures within composite structures, as the composite extraction contained all the genes except those with very low expression in the focal tissue. this is true for transcriptome characterization, but as we will see in the next section does not hold for rna-seq. the opposite comparison, genes that were found in the whole abdomen but missing from the digestive tract showed a pattern more like that found for the sting gland versus the abdomen comparison. in short, many genes with high expression levels in the abdomen were not found in the digestive tract presumably because they exhibit specialized functions elsewhere in the abdomen.

errors in diagnosing differentially expressed genes due to composite structure extraction
the major hypothesized problem associated with composite structure extraction and rna-seq is contrasting gene expression patterns for the same genes in different structures interfering with a determination of differential expression. for example, when a researcher conducts an rna-seq study on a whole body segment and finds that a gene is not differentially expressed, does it mean that it is not differentially expressed anywhere in the body segment or does it mean that there is no overall difference in expression level when summing the inputs from all the internal organs? essentially, it is easy to imagine that a gene that is strongly differentially expressed in one organ may be determined to be non-differentially expressed in a much larger composite structure due to expression of the gene elsewhere washing out the signal from the small structure. hence, there could be a strong false negative problem with composite extractions. likewise, it is easy to imagine that a gene with contrasting differential expression patterns in different structures may give a strong signal of being differentially expressed in one direction that is representative of a strong signal from one structure washing out several opposite signals from other structures. hence, although a determination of differential expression in a composite extraction is not a false positive, it can be difficult to interpret.

figure  <dig> explores these potential problems for identifying differentially expressed genes in the sting gland and digestive tract. we conducted three rna-seq analyses: nurse bee sting glands versus forager sting glands, nurse bee digestive tracts versus forager digestive tracts, and nurse bee abdomens versus forager abdomens. we used three rna-seq software packages  with two biological replicates for each sample and a total of  <dig> million quality controlled reads for each sample. in total, we found  differentially expressed genes in the sting gland between nurses and foragers,  in the digestive tract, and  in the whole abdomen. from here on we present the noiseq results in the main text and the results for the other two packages in the supplemental information , as all analyses led to the same basic conclusions. for each gene differentially expressed in the sting gland or the digestive tract, we determined whether that gene was significantly differentially expressed in the whole abdomen, and if so, in what direction . in other words, if the gene was found to be expressed at higher levels in nurses relative to foragers in the sting gland, was it also found to be expressed at higher rates in nurses in the whole abdomen? for the sting gland,  <dig> out of  <dig> differentially expressed genes in the sting gland were found to be not differentially expressed in the whole abdomen . for the digestive tract,  <dig> out of  <dig> genes differentially expressed in the digestive tract comparison were not differentially expressed in the whole abdomen comparison . gene names, expression values, and p values from each analysis are in supplemental additional file 4: table s <dig>  nearly identical patterns were found for the other software packages , so the effects are not caused by the statistical algorithm used to identify differentially expressed genes.

we next shed light on the patterns found in figure  <dig> by plotting the ratio of expression levels for genes in both focal tissues relative to that in the composite tissue . a gene with a ratio of  <dig>  for example, would be expressed at the same level in both the focal and composite tissue, implying that it is not specialized . in other words, we are comparing the rpkm value for each gene in the sting gland or digestive tract with that for the same gene in the abdomen. we focus on the nurse libraries. the forager libraries showed the same pattern and are therefore omitted. figure  <dig> shows that the sting gland has many more genes with higher levels of expression relative to that in the abdomen  compared to the digestive tract , digestive tract  <dig> out of  <dig> ; fisher’s exact test: p <  <dig> ). hence, more genes show a dilution of expression level in the whole abdomen relative to the sting gland, than for the abdomen relative to the digestive tract. this could explain why a higher percentage of genes that were significantly differentially expressed in the sting gland were not significant in the whole abdomen, relative to the same comparison between the digestive tract and the abdomen , digestive tract:  <dig> out of  <dig> ; fisher’s exact test: p <  <dig> ). overall, our data supports the notion that false negatives are a serious problem in rna-seq with composite structures, such as body segments, and may be particularly pressing for genes with specialized functions in small structures, such as glands.

with respect to genes potentially showing the opposite pattern of differential expression in a composite structure relative to a smaller structure within it,  <dig> such genes were identified in the sting gland, and  <dig> in the digestive tract . these contrasting signals of differential expression between tissue specific and composite tissue analyses suggests there may be a rich pattern of variation of function across tissues for such genes. this would make interpreting expression patterns for those genes quite difficult in composite extractions. this result suggests again that composite tissue extractions can be difficult to interpret and might best be avoided whenever possible.

finally, transcription factors are a class of genes that are well known to be used repeatedly in different structures in contrasting manners. they are therefore a class of gene for which composite extractions could be an acute problem. figure  <dig> repeats the analysis conducted in figure  <dig> for just the differentially expressed transcription factors . in total, there were  <dig> differentially expressed transcription factors in the sting gland nurse bee to forager comparison,  <dig> in the nurse bee to forager digestive tract comparison, and  <dig> in the nurse to forager abdomen comparison . most differentially expressed transcription factors in the sting gland were not differentially expressed in the abdomen , meaning that the problem of false negatives is also true for transcription factors. one transcription factor  showed the opposite pattern of expression in the whole abdomen relative to the sting gland. the numbers for the digestive tract  mean the sample size is too small for any comparisons between structures, but descriptively, most transcription factors differentially expressed in the digestive tract were also differentially expressed in the abdomen  and none were in the opposite direction. in summary, only  <dig> transcription factor was found to show the opposite pattern of expression in the composite structure relative to the organ specific analysis, but false negatives were common. given the role that transcription factors play in controlling the expression of many other genes, such errors may be more significant than for other classes of genes.

CONCLUSIONS
making sequencing libraries from composite structures, such as body segments, and even whole insects is commonplace in rna-seq studies  <cit> . our results suggest that this practice can lead to false negatives for genes that show even strong patterns of differential expression in particular structures . for genes that show complex patterns of variable expression in different structures across the organism, it is further likely that composite extractions are of little utility other than for identifying genes as candidates of interest. this is because it is difficult to infer the direction of differential expression in composite structures when more than one pattern may be present. finally, our study focused on the abdomen, which is a relatively simple composite structure in comparison to a whole larval insect. it is likely that the types of errors documented here associated with identifying differentially expressed genes will be magnified in studies using whole organisms. hence, given that structure specific extractions are usually possible for even very small structures  <cit> , they should be conducted whenever possible.

