BACKGROUND
today, experimental research has uncovered a great amount of regulatory interactions between different transcription factors . these interactions can be summarized in gene regulatory networks  that control the differentiation, specification and function of cells at the genomic level. the levels of interactions within large grns are of enormous depth and complexity. details about many grns are emerging, but in most cases it is unknown to what extent they properly describe a given process, i.e. the grade of completeness is uncertain. this uncertainty stems from limited experimental data, which is the main bottleneck for creating detailed dynamical models of cellular processes. parameter estimation for each node is often infeasible for very large grns. these grns are static representations of the interactions and can provide scaffolds for fine grained low-level models  <cit> . a mathematical low-level model allows for a detailed quantitative analysis of the system and has predictive power. construction of detailed quantitative models of large grns is often infeasible because the underlying data is too sparse to parameterize the model. analysis of model properties on static network graphs, on the other hand, provides only limited insights.

to circumvent these shortcomings, we propose to construct a scaffold model of ordinary differential equations . analysis of some key properties of this model is feasible without knowledge of the kinetic parameters. the detected properties are compared to experimental data for validation. parameterization of this model can be achieved by iteratively improving parts of the model once sufficient data become available.

as an example application for our approach, we construct a provisional scaffold model for gene regulation in the early sea urchin embryo based on the endomesoderm grn, one of the best studied large developmental grns. the endomesoderm gene regulatory network provides the genetic hardwiring of the control and regulation of gene expression during development of the endoderm, mesoderm and primary mesenchyme cells   <cit> . these territories mainly arise from the macromeres  and micromeres . for further details on the embryogenesis of the sea urchin, please refer to  <cit> . the endomesoderm grn  describes the regulation of the expression of  <dig> genes  as well as intercellular signaling  and protein interactions . the network is constantly updated, thus the actual number of genes and topology described at  <cit>  now differs from that used here.

the structure of the network is constructed from a multitude of perturbation experiments, including injection of morpholino-substituted antisense oligonucleotides that effectively knock down mrna translation  of a specific gene  <cit> , injection of engrailed repressor domain fusions to turn activators into repressors, or mrna over expression . the network as described in  <cit>  is an interpretation of a vast amount of experimental data. as pointed out by smith  <cit> , perturbation experiments may lead to ambiguous results, which need to be clarified in subsequent experiments. although the experimental results currently available are solid and only error prone due to incompleteness, we believe that a computational analysis of the endomesoderm network could greatly substantiate its interpretations. additionally, the analysis of a mathematical model allows for the detection of possible errors and identification of ambiguities in a more comprehensive way.

since the underlying data are mainly the results of perturbation experiments and time course data for mrna abundances are available for only a small subset of genes , this model cannot be fully parameterized from experimental data. parameter estimation is also impractical due to the size of the model. the experimental data lack sufficient detail to unambiguously assign realistic kinetics for transcriptional activation and repression to each gene in the network. we therefore chose a generalized approach for the construction of transcription kinetics. in order to analyze our ode model with regard to the perturbation data, we developed a monte carlo method to assess the qualitative effects of perturbations  of an ode model in spite of sparse data. a schematic description of this method is given in figure  <dig>  the method uses randomly sampled sets of parameters to detect parameter-invariant, qualitative perturbation effects. for each set of parameters, we simulate the model under different experimental conditions. comparison of these different simulations reveals downstream effects of applied perturbations, which persist over a large range of parameter sets. these effects are compared to experimental data, indicating to what extent the model topology qualitatively reproduces the experimental data. although developmental systems have been shown to exhibit a high degree of robustness to genetic variation  <cit> , one cannot assume that all interactions within a developmental grn are invariant to parameter changes. the activity of negative and positive feedback loops, for example, depends on quantitative information. this holds true for the endomesoderm network, so we do not expect our model to reproduce the experimental data perfectly, even if the underlying topology is completely accurate. to rank the agreement between simulation and experimental results, we repeat the analysis with randomized network topologies.

the detailed results of our analysis show which parts of the model reproduce the experimental data exceptionally well or exceptionally poor. additionally, our analysis shows a large number of effects not yet tested experimentally. these predictions can be used for experimental validation.

our work provides a scaffold for quantitative kinetic modeling of the endomesoderm network, publicly available in sbml format in the biomodels database  <cit> . refinement of this scaffold model is straightforward: well studied parts of the model  can be refined in isolation and then reintegrated upon the scaffold. such a stepwise improvement of the model is, in our opinion, less error prone than setting up a comprehensive detailed model from scratch. the iterative nature of the approach also provides a simple way to organize concerted efforts and directly shows which parts of the endomesoderm grn require most attention in future experimental research.

RESULTS
heuristic inference of topological perturbation effects of ode models
in the following, we describe the method we use to detect topological perturbation effects from ode models of grns and give a sample application that indicates the reliability of this method. the heuristic we propose here allows for an assessment of the correctness of a grn topology given the underlying data without the need to estimate parameter values. it is thus applicable to very large grns. a diagram of the method is given in figure  <dig> 

if realistic kinetic parameters for a given grn model are known, the quantitative effect of the knockdown  or mrna overexpression  of one or more of its components can be simulated. the qualitative effect of kd or moe conditions that are invariant to the choice of parameters can be computed for large networks using our method. since these effects are inherent in the topology of the grn, we call them topological perturbation effects .

extraction of tpes from small grns can be straightforward and obvious, but for large grns, manual detection of all topological features becomes infeasible and error-prone. to detect tpes of a given network topology, logical models can be applied  <cit> . the advantage of our continuous approach is that the model can be improved stepwise by restricting the distribution from which the parameters are drawn or fixing certain known parameters, eventually yielding a comprehensible quantitative model.

given the topology of a grn that has been constructed in some way from experimental data , we construct a corresponding ode model m <dig> . for each experimental perturbation perti, a model variant mi is created and all model variants are simulated using different randomly sampled parameter sets p <dig> .k, yielding simulation results  . differences in simulation results for a pair  that are consistent under most parameter sets are detected as tpes . the effects detected with this monte carlo approach are then compared to experimental data to compute the agreement between experimental data and constructed model .

tpes can be detected for a wide range of perturbations to the model. in contrast to experimental cis-regulatory analysis, this computational approach can identify the effects of all possible perturbations on all genes in a proposed grn simultaneously. this predictive power of the analysis can be used to test the proposed grn by targeted experimental research.

inference of the reliability of the proposed heuristic
the agreement between tpes and in-vivo data depends on the reliability of our heuristic. assume that our heuristic is expected to return an agreement of 80% if a given topology inferred from experimental data is correct. if we then test another topology obtained from a different set of data and get an agreement of 75%, the network is close to completeness because 75% of the optimal 80% are 94%. to obtain a correct topology and underlying data to determine the reliability of our heuristic, we used in-silico data simulated from a given topology. this approach is sketched in figure  <dig>  we chose a subnetwork of the endomesoderm network  <cit>  for this test.

the chosen subnetwork consists of interactions between blimp <dig>  bra, brn, eve, foxa, gatae, hox, otx, pmar <dig> and wnt <dig>  parameters have been estimated for this model  <cit> . we denote the in-silico perturbation data  and the computed tpes .

comparison of the in-silico data kmest, which contains tpes and parameter-specific effects, and tpes kmmcshow the following results:  <dig> % of the perturbation effects were equally detected in both settings. false negatives  constitute  <dig> %, false positives constitute  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the effects are detected with opposite signs in the two settings. this indicates that our heuristic approach to identify tpes yields satisfying qualitative results at least for small networks. if the wiring of the model is equal to the real topology, about 74% of tpes detected with our monte carlo approach should match experimental perturbation data.

assumptions underlying the ode model of the endomesoderm grn
the method explained above is most useful when dealing with large models associated with sparse experimental data. parameter estimation is infeasible here, but our method allows a preliminary assessment of the main features and comparison to experimental data. the endomesoderm network is a large network with sparse associated data. in order to set up the actual ode model, we make the following assumptions concerning the relevant biological mechanisms during development and their mathematical representation. the model is concerned with the endoderm, mesoderm and pmc territories of the early sea urchin embryo. for detailed information on sea urchin development, please refer to  <cit>  and references therein.

although each embryonic territory differs concerning the expression of genes, abundance of transcription factors  and signaling molecules, we assume that each cell contains the same genetic information, i.e. that no histone modification occurs in the early stages of development. we assume that each territory consists of a homogeneous number of cells, i.e. that cells in the same territory contain the same combination of tfs and express the same genes. if gene expression is regulated in part by extracellular gradients, these regulating gradients can be assumed to differ throughout individual territories and thus the regulated genes are also likely to be expressed differently in different parts of the same territory. but unless we simulate a whole population of cells , an ode model is only capable of assessing averages of this population.

in our model, we will not try to reproduce expression time courses or spatial expression patterns. the objective is to detect the topological features arising from the endomesoderm grn and to compare them with experimental perturbation data. the assumptions stated above enable a straightforward modeling of the three territories referenced in the endomesoderm network: each territory  is modeled as one cell, each containing the same regulatory interactions.

important signaling events in development are controlled by intercellular signaling, either direct or by extracellular gradients. the effects of intercellular signaling are necessary to produce differential expression, one of the key aspects of development. for simplicity, we reduce the dynamic interaction between the different cells of the embryo to a static input depending on assigned cell type and simulation time. making this simplification, we lose possible topological effects that manifest only in the interaction between cells. on the other hand, we avoid possible errors as well as excessive computation. realistic modeling of extracellular gradients would require spatial modeling of a growing embryo. this would require simulation of a growing population of cells each containing an ode model. the population of cells would need to contain territories not included in the endomesoderm network. it would further require realistic numbers of cells in each territory and subpopulation of a territory producing a specific extracellular signal and additional assumptions concerning diffusion rates.

an ode model constructed according to the assumptions made above can produce differential expression in different territories depending on the static inputs. it can simulate the effect of perturbations within a territory. it cannot simulate the effects of perturbations that propagate through intercellular signaling unless the static inputs are modified to dynamic interactions between the different territories.

construction of the ode model of the endomesoderm network
the assumptions made above are used to construct an ode model from the topology of the endomesoderm network . since the detailed cis-regulatory interactions, and thus transcription kinetics, are not available for all genes in the network, we chose to construct a provisional scaffold model including all genes, but using simplified transcription kinetics. from this provisional model, we hope to eventually set up a realistic model, refining individual transcription kinetics by hand. for most genes in the network, the regulatory inputs and their nature are known. but the detailed cis-regulatory wiring, which would be necessary to set up realistic transcription kinetics, is only known for a very limited number of genes, for example endo <dig>  <cit> . therefore, we chose the following simplified approach.

to construct an ode model, the endomesoderm network  is first transformed into a boolean model. we used the data included in the biotapestry  <cit>  view of the network  to determine the kind of regulatory interaction between a tf and the expression of a gene as well as the boolean operator used to combine different inputs to one gene. in general, two activating inputs were connected using the or operator, inhibiting inputs were appended using the and operator. the boolean model has  <dig> gene regulatory interactions, of which  <dig> are activating and  <dig> are inhibiting. in total, the model contains  <dig> and and  <dig> or operators. the boolean formulas for gene regulation are transformed into rate laws for the ode model . the ode model also contains translation, mrna as well as protein degradation and protein interactions, all following mass action kinetics.

the model contains three different embryonic territories, endoderm, mesoderm and primary mesenchyme. the three different territories are identical copies of the transformed boolean model. external inputs to the different territories are modeled as hill-functions modulated by events that are territory-specific. initial conditions were set according to the biotapestry view of the endomesoderm network and are also tissue specific. the model contains  <dig> genes and  <dig> variable species,  <dig> reactions and  <dig> parameters for each cell type .

we evaluate the model with respect to qualitative experimental data on perturbation effects, not with respect to quantitative time courses of mrna abundance. nevertheless, the constructed model must be capable of producing differential expression in the different territories to qualify as a model of development. figure  <dig> shows simulated time courses for different genes and territories using an average of simulation results from different parameter sets. these time courses do not reproduce experimental time courses, but they demonstrate that our provisional model is capable of producing differential expression. the time course for alx1-mrna abundance clearly shows that it is only expressed under pmc conditions, which agrees with experimental data. otx is expressed in all three territories but to different extents in each territory. the strength of expression in each territory differs due to upstream inputs.

monte carlo simulation of knockdown and overexpression experiments using randomly sampled parameter sets
in order to compare the effects of knockdown  or mrna overexpression  perturbations on our model with experimental results, we simulated the unperturbed system and different perturbation experiments . to create models of knockdown and overexpression experiments efficiently, we changed the original rate laws for transcription in the following way:

   

   

   

we chose a multiplicative decrease for knockdown experiments because in the analogous experiments, the transcribed mrna is blocked from translation similarly in case of high and low expression rates.

overexpression in experiments was brought about by injection of synthetic mrna, so the resulting increase in expression is independent of the endogenous expression. for this reason we chose an additive increase for overexpression.

we simulated all perturbation experiments affecting single genes mentioned in the endomesoderm qpcr tables  <cit>  as of december,  <dig>  except for fusion of genes with the engrailed repressor domain. simulation of these fusion experiments would have required careful adjustments of all affected rate laws and would have required additional assumptions on the mechanisms of the fused tfs in combination with other tfs. the set m <dig> .n  of perturbed models contains alx <dig> kd, alx <dig> moe, pmar <dig> kd, pmar <dig> moe, soxb <dig> kd, soxb <dig> moe, dri kd, ets <dig> kd, hnf <dig> kd, tbr kd, snail kd, foxb kd, brn kd, eve kd, blimp <dig> kd, gatae kd, hox kd, gcm kd, foxa kd, bra kd, otx kd, gatac kd. we simulated both the original and the perturbed models using  <dig> parameter sets. as an example, we present the effects of pmar <dig> perturbations on several genes, alx <dig>  ets <dig>  tbr and hesc, in detail. the means of the mrna abundance over all parameter sets for different perturbation conditions are plotted as time course in figure  <dig>  pmar <dig> directly inhibits expression of hesc , hence hesc expression is increased under pmar <dig> kd and decreased under pmar <dig> moe conditions. although not directly regulated by pmar <dig>  the expression of tbr, alx <dig> and ets <dig> are positively correlated with perturbations in pmar <dig> because they are all inhibited by hesc.

the same correlation is illustrated in figure  <dig>  where the abundance under unperturbed and perturbed conditions for one mrna species at a certain time point is plotted for all parameter sets. the negative correlation between pmar <dig> and hesc expression are shown on the left side, the positive correlation between pmar <dig> and alx <dig> expression are shown on the right side. the positive influence of pmar <dig> expression on the expression of tbr, alx <dig> and ets <dig> is mediated by the double negative regulation via hesc, as described in  <cit> .

visualizations of all simulated perturbation experiments are given in additional file  <dig>  the results can either be sorted by perturbation, indicating targets of the perturbed gene, or by affected genes, indicating the regulators of a gene. sorting by perturbation clearly identifies groups of co-regulated genes that are indeed associated with different embryonic territories. the knockdowns of alx <dig>  dri, ets <dig>  hnf <dig> and pmar <dig> for example have detectable effects under pmc conditions only . genes with coinciding patterns of regulatory effects indicate groups of genes associated with similar territories/regulators. the genes in the downstream differentiation gene batteries  can be grouped according to their reaction to different perturbations, as indicated in figure  <dig> 

gatae and hox generally have opposite effects, as depicted in figure  <dig>  this can be explained by the inhibitory role hox has on gatae expression. comparing the vast effects of hox-kd with its relatively limited role in the network topology, it is obvious that a large number of the detected effects are due to the inhibition of gatae expression. such effects are examples for the difficulties that arise in the analysis of large grns  <cit> . in the case of similar ambiguities in experimental data, simulation of additional perturbations can be used to screen for experiments that, according to the current network topology, are most efficient in resolving these.

comparison of experimental and simulated perturbation effects
the qualitative comparison of perturbations either detected experimentally or in simulation using different sampled parameter sets  show that the model does not reproduce all experimentally detected effects. the quantitative experimental data were converted to qualitative results using sensible thresholds in order to compare them to the qualitative simulation results .

the effects of kd  in the simulation results are recorded for each of the three territories . as the experimental data only show effects on the whole embryo and not only on a specific territory, we consider as a match the accordance between experimental data and simulated effects in at least one of the territories. this seems reasonable because we omitted the dynamics of intercellular signaling, which might lead to propagation of a perturbation from one territory to another and several genes are only expressed in one territory, both in model and experimental data. using this scheme to compare simulation and experimental data, we find that 48% of the kd experimental data  are qualitatively reproduced in our model. we note that the few moe experiments available compare significantly inferior  to kd experiments , reflecting the unphysiological conditions that are created by injection of mrna in the embryos, where often amounts are injected that can be several to hundreds of orders of magnitudes higher than the endogenous amounts produced.

a summary of the comparison results is given in table  <dig>  a visualization is given in figure  <dig> and a detailed qualitative overview in additional file  <dig>  the effects of some perturbations are reproduced very well , while the effects of other perturbations are reproduced only poorly, worst were the effects of ets1-kd and soxb1-moe. these two genes are mainly regulated by unknown genes . the regulatory inputs to these genes are not well characterized experimentally and thus demand refinement.

agreement between experimental data and topological perturbation effects. column a lists matches and total experimental data points, column b indicates the percentage of matches. the last three lines indicate results for all perturbations, for all knockdown perturbations and for all moe perturbations.

the comparison also indicates genes that frequently react to simulated perturbations as described in experimental data  and genes for which simulation and experimental data rarely match . this behavior might be caused by the large number of upstream interactions varying in strength with the different parameter sets. other genes, which are important regulatory genes, like foxb, foxa and eve also frequently fail to reproduce the experimental data. these genes have important regulatory roles. therefore a major conclusion of this analysis is that the wiring of these genes deserves refinement or that the correct regulation here crucially depends on the chosen kinetic parameters.

a comparison of the agreement of simulation results with experimental data for each of the different territories with experimental data reveals that the pmc territory has the highest accordance to experimental data . this high accordance is most likely due to the extent to which the regulatory interactions in each territory have been investigated. indeed, the pmc grn is the best studied part of the network and a recent publication by oliveri et al. describes a complete pmc grn  <cit> , which we are currently evaluating on its own.

we need to note that the method presented here is a heuristic approach. although our results indicate that the endomesoderm network topology is not sufficient to reproduce all experimental data, we cannot exclude the possibility that there might exist a choice of kinetic formulas and corresponding parameter values that enables the given topology to perfectly reproduce the experimental data.

in summary, these results indicate the need for a detailed analysis of the regulatory interactions involving ets <dig> and soxb <dig>  while the regulation of other genes should be investigated in more detail as well . overall, the model reproduces 48% of the experimental data .

refinement of model and topology heavily relies on more experimental data. we have simulated the effects of  <dig> perturbation experiments on the expression of  <dig> genes. effects were recorded for  <dig> time points, yielding  <dig> possible perturbation effects from simulation. of these  <dig> possible effects, we could only associate  <dig> with experimental data. especially for ets <dig>  foxa and eve, perturbation experiments can be designed for which our model predicts significant effects, listed in table  <dig>  some of these effects are listed on  <cit>  under "genes not affected or shown to be affected only indirectly". our analysis is not limited to direct effects, so that a comprehensive analysis of the network topology needs to include this data. such experiments should yield results useful for the improvement of the ode model and the endomesoderm network as well. besides new experimental data, a careful analysis of the current, detailed experimental data for each interaction in the network and its incorporation into the network is necessary to produce a realistic and quantitative model.

selected detected topological perturbation effects that could not be associated with experimental data. these tpes can be used as predictions for validation of model and topology with new experimental data.

comparison with updated network topology
as the endomesoderm grn is work in progress, new data and interpretation thereof is constantly added. an updated version of the endomesoderm grn can be accessed at  <cit> . the topology underlying our investigation has been published on the web in december  <dig>  we compared the wiring of the genes that we described as deserving refinement  with their wiring in the actual topology at  <cit> .

we could not find changes in the wiring of ets <dig>  soxb <dig> and foxb. the wiring of the downstream genes noted above as reproducing experimental data poorly  were not changed as well. we did, however find changes in the wiring of foxa  and eve . these and other changes in the topology will affect tpes and their consistence with experimental data. but not all of our concerns have been addressed, like ets <dig> and soxb <dig>  for example.

certainly, the updated wiring needs to be addressed in future models that build on the scaffold proposed here. it is, however, out of the scope of this analysis to keep the model up to date with the newest topology at  <cit> . our aim is to propose a provisional model that can serve as a scaffold for refining and updating the network and provide a benchmark for judging the topology.

comparison with topologically randomized networks
in order to evaluate and rank the agreement between simulation and experimental data, we constructed randomized networks from the endomesoderm topology and computed their accordance with experimental data. the agreement between the randomized networks tested here and the experimental data is no higher than  <dig> %, roughly half as good as between the correct ode model and experimental data . two random networks with comparable features were constructed by randomly swapping edges in the original ode model as described in section methods and  <cit>  . the randomized networks were subjected to the same method as the original network: conversion to ode model, simulation with random parameter sets, detection of tpes, comparison with experimental data. for the original model, using only as little as  <dig> parameter sets for simulation resulted in a similar agreement with experimental data as when using  <dig> parameter sets . hence,  <dig> parameter sets were used for the randomized models to decrease computation time. the randomized models also contained three identical submodels, which only differ in their temporal inputs. the number of edges switched in the randomization was set to  <dig> times the number of genes in the network, resulting in about  <dig>   <dig> exchanges of edges. the randomized models analyzed here were able to reproduce only  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the experimental data. we also investigated an additional randomized model in which we switched  <dig>   <dig> instead of  <dig>   <dig> edges and found similar results .

although this agreement with experimental data is in the range of the endoderm part of the original model, no randomized model exceeded this accordance significantly, as does the pmc part of the complete model . also, a combination of any three of the randomized networks did not yield an overall accordance with experimental data greater than 25%. we therefore assume that the computed agreement with experimental data of the randomized networks is dependent only on the general topological features of the model , the experimental data and the temporal inputs. this indicates that the agreement with experimental data between a model of comparable general features as the one described here with the specified temporal inputs and the experimental data used here can be expected to be less than 25% by chance alone. the accordance with experimental data expected by chance is thus about half the accordance observed using the original topology, indicating significantly improved validity of the endomesoderm network compared to random networks.

applicability of the method
the method applied here is generally applicable to any grn. it is applicable without any prior knowledge of parameters, although a reasonable sampling distribution should be specified.

using only very limited information, our method is able to extract topological features of a grn, which can be compared to experimental data. predictions made by the model can be checked experimentally to refine both ode model and grn topology.

in contrast to other, i.e. discrete modeling frameworks, the resulting model can be used for detailed revision and refinement. the refined model can be subjected to the same method for evaluation again, providing a measurement for the resulting increase or decrease in accordance with experimental data. furthermore, once a satisfying accordance is reached, the constructed network can be used to iteratively estimate parameters of subnetworks. the goal of this improvement must be a fully parameterized ode model that can be subjected to extended analysis methods. although the method would require extensive computation when a large number of parameter sets is considered, our analysis shows that only a small fraction of the parameter space needs to be sampled to produce reliable results. we therefore propose to iteratively compute simulation runs and evaluate these until the results converge.

the method is applicable to rather large models for which parameter estimation is not feasible or to models in which different scenarios in the form of different topologies are to be evaluated.

in the case that no comparable models are available, the randomization of the model provides reasonable means of comparison. the computation of robustness to random parameter variations for all genes in the network is a by-product of the computational processes applied here . given a considerable network size and a reasonable limit on parameter values, this robustness might help to identify further features of the network architecture, as described in  <cit> .

outlook
as mentioned earlier, the constructed model is by no means sufficient to quantitatively assess the temporal dynamics of the developing sea urchin embryo. in order to improve the model, intercellular effects need to be incorporated in a dynamical way, kinetics for transcriptional activation for each gene must be accurate and parameters for these kinetics need to be determined. we argue that due to the size of the network, improvements should be added in an iterative way, improving the reliability of subnetworks that can be plugged back onto the scaffold.

this can be done by choosing a subnetwork for which extensive experimental data are available  and parameter estimation is feasible. the subnetwork can be examined in isolation and an improved version can be integrated into the scaffold model. instead of randomly sampling all parameters, the estimated parameters values can be used and the number of sampled parameters is decreased, increasing the reliability of the analysis. generally, transcription kinetics can be modified to express the detailed cis-regulatory logic including tf cooperativity or competitive binding. the probability distributions from which parameter values are sampled can be modified to restrict the values of certain parameters to smaller ranges if experimental data suggests this. using these three approaches, the model can be refined and each iteration of the refinement can be evaluated by comparison with a previous version of the model.

various approaches for modeling transcriptional activation  exist. most of these general approaches lack details concerning possible cooperativity of tfs, for example by changing the availability of binding sites  <cit> . we therefore doubt that exclusive use of generalized transcription kinetics as described here and in  <cit> ) are sufficient for a realistic, quantitative model of the endomesoderm network.

once intracellular processes can be modeled satisfactory, the model has to be extended to ensembles of cellular models interacting via extracellular signaling factors. examples for modeling ensembles of ode models are given in  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
if we do understand a biological system, we can create a mathematical model that can reproduce experimental data. if the mathematical model fails to reproduce experimental data, we obviously do not understand all essential parts of the system. we have created a provisional mathematical model of the entire endomesoderm grn, the first to our knowledge, and used our heuristic to test our understanding of this system. this test results in 48% agreement between simulation results and experimental data. for a correct model, we expect  <dig> % agreement with our heurisitc ; randomized versions of the model reproduce only  <dig> % of the experimental data. we thus conclude that the presented model is only partially correct and that some crucial interactions are not included.

to improve the model, we need to use more realistic transcription kinetics than the stereotypic ones used here. however, the underlying data is not sufficient to unambiguously assign realistic kinetics to all genes in the network. we hope that our provisional model can be used to assign improved kinetics stepwise, starting with genes for which the sufficient data is available . in addition, it is clear that the regulatory interactions in the endomesoderm network are not complete. this is obvious for the genes that still contain inputs termed 'ubiquitous' , even in the updated endomesoderm grn. consequently, new experimental data is necessary to improve our understanding of gene regulation in the sea urchin embryo. for well established parts of the network , detailed data is required. for important regulatory genes like soxb <dig> and ets <dig>  the missing regulators need to be determined. model and heuristic proposed here can significantly improve the integration of new data by testing the resulting change in tpes.

the method we described enables a heuristic assessment of the quality of a network topology generated from perturbation experiments. it allows screening of different topologies due to its low demand in experimental data, before further steps  are undertaken. besides highlighting which parts of the topology agree well with existing experimental data, the model also provides predictions that can aid in the design of new experiments.

finally, we propose that our method can be used to assess the completeness grade of any network. this could be especially useful for grns involved in human diseases, where the amount of connectivity is only unknown and/or many genes/interactions are missing.

