BACKGROUND
apoptosis, a form of programmed cell death, is a process needed for normal development and maintenance of tissue homeostasis in multicellular organisms  <cit> . cells undergoing apoptosis show characteristic changes, such as chromatin and cytoplasm condensation, chromosomal dna fragmentation, breaking up of nuclei and then of cells into fragments called apoptotic bodies  <cit> . individual cells apoptose, while the neighboring cells remain undamaged  <cit> . apoptosis is a complex process whereby a proteolytic cascade of caspases is activated in cells  <cit> .

the occurrence of apoptosis is a feature of female germline development common to vertebrate and invertebrate species  <cit> . in the drosophila melanogaster ovaries, there are two checkpoints where programmed cell death occurs. one is in the germarium , where apoptosis probably regulates the proper ratio of germline cells to follicle cells  <cit> . the other checkpoint is located in the vitellarium   <cit> . the number of egg chambers undergoing apoptosis increased in d. melanogaster fed a diet lacking protein  <cit> , under the effect of 900-mhz and 1800-mhz radiation  <cit> , and after exposure to chemical agents  <cit> . the normal development of mature egg is consistently associated with apoptosis of  <dig> nurse cells in the egg chamber  <cit> . it is noteworthy that apoptosis and autophagy coexist at all the above mentioned stages of oogenesis in d. melanogaster  <cit> .

it has been also hypothesized that the apoptotic process had a symbiotic origin  <cit> . in terms of the endosymbiotic theory, mitochondria, which play a major role at the early stages of apoptosis, evolved from the free-living prokaryotes  <cit> . one of the symbionts may be involved in the regulation of apoptosis in partner cells. to illustrate, extracellular parasites, particularly such worms as filarial nematodes, schistosomes and the cestode taenia crassiceps, are able to induce apoptosis in host immune cells  <cit> . bacterial pathogens  can either block or induce apoptosis in host cells, depending on the stage of infection  <cit> . at the early stage of infection, bacteria replicate in the host cell, using different mechanisms to prevent apoptosis. at the late stages of infection, the bacteria induce apoptosis in the host cell, thereby facilitating egress and ensuring infection of neighboring cells.

wolbachia associated with various hosts in which it manipulates viability and reproduction causing parthenogenesis, feminization, male killing and cytoplasmic incompatibility, provides a unique model for studying mechanisms of symbiont interactions  <cit> . the wolbachia strain wmel is widely spread in natural populations of d. melanogaster  <cit> ; in contrast, wmelpop has been detected in a laboratory stock of d. melanogaster  <cit> . it is possibly not encountered in nature. in d. melanogaster, the wmelpop strain reduces lifespan, proliferating widely in the brain, muscle and retina cells  <cit> . in certain insect species, the presence of wolbachia is required for oogenesis  <cit> . removal of the wolbachia strain watab <dig> from parasitic wasps asobara tabida resulted in copious apoptosis of the egg chambers in the ovarioles and led to sterility  <cit> . the mechanisms whereby the endosymbiont wolbachia impacts apoptosis in host cells have been poorly studied. preferential infection and high accumulation of wolbachia in region 2a of the germarium  <cit>  where the checkpoint is located in drosophila was thought-provoking. we raised the question: can bacteria wolbachia in region 2a of the germarium affect the frequency of apoptosis there? using fluorescence and transmission electron microscopy we compared germaria from ovaries of two d. melanogaster stocks infected with either the wmel or wmelpop strains with germaria from two uninfected counterparts. it was established that the presence of wmel did not alter apoptosis frequency in germaria from d. melanogaster canton s. in contrast, the number of germaria containing apoptotic cells in the checkpoint was considerably increased in the wmelpop-infected flies as compared with their uninfected counterparts. thus, evidence was obtained indicating that the virulent wolbachia strain wmelpop has an effect on the fate of germline cells during d. melanogaster oogenesis.

RESULTS
frequency of apoptosis in germaria from ovaries of the uninfected and wolbachia-infected d. melanogaster
two parts are distinguished in the drosophila ovariole: the germarium made up of four regions  and the vitellarium   <cit> . the region 2a/2b, where apoptosis can occur, contains 16-cell cysts, somatic stem cells , which contact with the somatic stem cell niche  and follicle cells . cell death in this region of the germarium was detected by two methods, acridine orange -staining and tunel assay. fluorescence microscopy of ao-stained ovarioles demonstrated that apoptotic cells were located as large yellow or orange spots in region 2a/2b of the germarium from d. melanogaster . germaria containing no apoptotic cells fluoresced homogeneous green . it should be noted that wmel- and wmelpop-infected flies, besides bright spots in region 2a/2b , showed weak punctuate fluorescence both in regions 2a/2b and  <dig> of the germarium . such fluorescent puncta were not observed following tunel, thereby indicated that they were not caused by apoptosis.

the percentage of germaria containing apoptotic cells was  <dig> ± <dig> % in the uninfected d. melanogasterw1118t maintained on standard food, whereas it increased to  <dig> ± <dig> % in the wmelpop-infected flies . analysis performed with the wmel-infected d. melanogaster canton s revealed no significant differences from their uninfected counterparts .the next step was to exclude the possible effect of insufficient nutrition on the current results. to do so, we conducted experiments in which flies were raised on rich food source taking into account that it decreases the number of germaria containing apoptotic cells  <cit> . we found that rich food causes a decrease in the relative proportion of apoptotic germaria in both w1118t and w <dig> flies; however, the difference between these two groups was significant . the percentage of germaria containing apoptotic cells did not change under the effect of rearing d. melanogaster canton s on different food. based on analysis of apoptotic cell death by tunel, three groups of germaria were distinguished: tunel-negative, tunel-positive with 1- <dig> distinct puncta in region 2a/2b and tunel-positive with a cluster of bright spots . there was no evidence for variation in the frequency of apoptosis between wmel-infected  and uninfected  flies ; however, there was evidence for a difference in the frequency of apoptosis between the w1118t and w <dig> flies . the total percentage of germaria containing apoptotic cells in d. melanogaster agreed well with the one obtained with ao-staining. thus, tunel confirmed the results of ao-staining.

data of ao-staining of germaria from  <dig> fly stocks maintained at different food.

ultrastructure of germaria from ovaries of the uninfected and the wolbachia-infected d. melanogaster
for an ultrastructural analysis of germarium cells, we first chose under the light microscope those longitudinal sections that enabled us to define region 2a/2b of the germarium . cyst cells in region 2a/2b were interconnected by ring canals and consisted of nuclei that exhibited numerous invaginations, protrusions, and cytoplasm rich in organelles . our ultrastructural data for germarium cells of the uninfected and the wolbachia-infected flies allowed us to identify cysts in region 2a/2b showing characteristic features of apoptotic death . the cytoplasm was more electron-dense in such cystocytes, some mitochondria became markedly swollen . the matrix of mitochondria was light and just a few small cristae were discerned at the periphery . we observed also cells with electron-dense cytoplasm, which had lost contact with their neighboring cells . in such cells, chromatin appeared condensed in apoptotic nuclei and the lumen of the nuclear envelope was dilated . at the last stage of apoptosis, cells disaggregated into large and small fragments, or apoptotic bodies, with characteristic electron-dense cytoplasm containing ribosomes, endoplasmic reticulum membranes, and frequently intact mitochondria .

analysis of germarium cystocytes of wmel- and wmelpop-infected flies showed that individual bacteria were distributed throughout all the cytoplasm, occasionally occurring as small groups . large accumulations of adjacent bacteria were observed in apoptotic cyst cells . in these masses, the bacteria varied in morphological appearance . some endosymbionts showed normal ultrastructural features: a three-layered envelope, a matrix with many ribosomes and dispersed chromatin. in contrast, most bacteria were surrounded by a three-layered envelope, the matrix was of low electron density with a few ribosomes. disrupting bacteria were also encountered. these were not enclosed by an envelope, their matrix was loose, light, devoid of ribosomes. the follicle cells surrounding the cysts in region 2b of the germarium showed a normal morphology and low levels of wolbachia with normal structure .

at the periphery of the germarium, fragments of degrading cells were frequently seen in region  <dig>  precisely where ao-staining of the germaria from the wolbachia-infected flies was punctate . these fragments were filled with multilayered membranes, nuclear remnants, mitochondria, and bacteria with normal and abnormal morphology . the cell organelles and bacteria were often engulfed by autophagosomes. besides bacteria with light matrix, like those in apoptotic cysts , the autophagosomes occasionally enclosed electron-dense bacteria-like structures  <dig> - <dig>  μm in diameter  or similar smaller ones . at the periphery of the germaria, autophagosomes containing individual bacteria with normal morphology were observed .

discussion
this is, to our knowledge, the first study that demonstrated by using ao- and tunel staining an increase in the frequency of apoptosis in the germarium checkpoint in wmelpop-infected d. melanogasterw <dig>  this increase is possibly caused by the specific effect of the wolbachia strain wmelpop, since it was not observed in wmel-infected d. melanogaster canton s. our current electron microscopic observations allowed us to identify changes in wolbachia morphology in apoptotic germline cells.

morphological evidence of apoptosis in germarium cells
the ultrastructural features of apoptosis in the cyst cells of higher eukaryotes have gained wide recognition. they include cytoplasmic and nuclear condensation ; nuclear fragmentation ; normal morphological appearance of cytoplasmic organelles; an intact plasma membrane  <cit> . the ultrastructural changes we identified here in d. melanogaster cyst cells are consistent with the above hallmarks. furthermore, we revealed mitochondria of two types: intact morphology in one type and markedly swollen with a few cristae in the other. a similar heterogeneity of mitochondrial ultrastructure has been observed during apoptosis in granulose cells of japanese quail   <cit> , lymphocytes from leukemia patients  <cit> , and megakaryocytes from patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura  <cit> . it has been suggested that the swollen mitochondria release cytochrome c, which activates a cascade of proteolytic reactions, while the normal ones retain their capacity for atp synthesis, a process apoptosis requires  <cit> . according to our qualitative analysis using em, morphological evidence of apoptosis was revealed in germline cells from uninfected flies and those infected with wmel and wmelpop. thus, there are reasons for inferring that the endosymbiont wolbachia in d. melanogaster cystocytes has no effect on sequential passage of intracellular organelles through apoptosis. to reveal the possible differences between the effect of the wmel and wmelpop strains on apoptosis in the germaria, additional morphometric analysis of the number of apoptotic structures and of wolbachia density in the cystocytes is required.

structural features of wolbachia in apoptotic cysts
wolbachia with matrix of moderate and low electron density in apoptotic cells in region 2a/2b of the germarium have been previously encountered in other types of d. melanogaster ovaries  <cit>  and they presumably reflect different functional states of bacteria. wolbachia with disrupted envelopes and light matrix are possibly dying bacteria in apoptotic cells. such appearance has not been observed in wolbachia injured or killed by heat stress  <cit>  and tetracycline  <cit> . the electron-dense bacteria-like structures at the periphery of region  <dig> of the germarium may be evidence of changes in dying wolbachia. large masses of structures of this kind resembling the bacteria endospores have been found in the brain cells of the wmelpop-infected d. melanogasterw <dig> <cit> . in our view, the electron-dense structures, which we revealed at the periphery of region  <dig> of the germarium, are presumably autophagosome encapsulated dying wolbachia. a supporting line of evidence came from wright and barr  <cit> , who on the basis of their observations on degenerating germaria cysts from mosquitoes aedes scutellaris suggested that these structures represented degenerating wolbachia.

cell fragments containing dying bacteria and autophagosomes and appearing as numerous smaller puncta in regions 2a/2b and  <dig> of the germarium may represent autophagy, not apoptosis. this appears plausible when recalling that ao stains not only apoptotic cells, also lysosomes  <cit> . tunel did not reveal such puncta in these regions.

the possible role of the wolbachia strain wmelpop in programmed cell death in region 2a/2b of the germarium
our current estimates of apoptosis in region 2a/2b of the germarium from the ovaries of the uninfected d. melanogasterw1118t raised on standard food are consistent with those reported elsewhere  <cit> . it is of interest that apoptosis level in the germaria decreased in d. melanogasterw1118t, but not in d. melanogaster canton st after transfer to rich food. this may be indicative of differences in sensitivity to changes in food composition between different fly stocks. ao- and tunel staining demonstrated that the virulent wolbachia strain wmelpop increased the percentage of germaria containing apoptotic cells in d. melanogasterw <dig> ovaries, while wmel strain was without such an effect. the effect of wmelpop on cystocytes in ovaries was observed in flies maintained on standard and rich food. evidence was provided that the effect of wolbachia on d. melanogaster is not general, being rather specific to the pathogenic strain wmelpop.

what pathways may be envisaged for the wolbachia strain wmelpop caused increase in the number of germaria whose cysts undergo apoptosis? on the one hand, bacteria may have a direct effect on germline cells . in fact, one of  <dig> cyst cells becomes the oocyte, the other  <dig> differentiate into nurse cells in region 2a of the germarium. this is associated with transport of  <dig> centrioles into the pre-oocyte, where the microtubule-organizing center forms  <cit> . wolbachia distribution is dependent upon microtubules during oogenesis and bacteria show mislocalization in the egg chambers treated with colchicine which causes depolymerization of microtubules  <cit> . evidence has been obtained indicating that wolbachia are evenly distributed throughout the oocyte and nurse cells during stages 1- <dig> of oogenesis, becoming concentrated at the oocyte anterior during stages 3- <dig>  <cit> . with this in mind, the high levels of wolbachia in cystocytes during differentiation into oocyte and nurse cells in region 2a of the germarium may possibly lead to impairment at the structural and/or molecular level, the cyst may undergo apoptosis as a consequence .

on the other hand, the increase in the number of germaria containing apoptotic cysts may result from the action of the bacteria on the sscs, which gives rise to follicle cells in region 2b of the germarium . drummond-barbosa and spradling  <cit>  have suggested that apoptosis in region 2a/2b of the germarium serves to maintain the proper ratio of germline cells to somatic follicle cells. in poorly fed flies, follicle cells slow down their proliferation, the germline cells to somatic follicle cell ratio becomes skewed, resulting in cyst apoptosis in region 2a/2b which corrects this ratio  <cit> . it has been established that stem cells are maintained in specialized microenvironment called the niche  <cit> . the abundance of wolbachia in the sscn  <cit>  is of interest in this context. thus reasoning, it may be assumed that the presence of wolbachia in the sscn decreases the ssc proliferation rate, the ratio of germline cells to follicle cells becomes imbalanced and, as a consequence, cysts undergo apoptotic death. judging from our current data, the ultrastructural appearance of follicle cells in region 2b of the germarium from ovaries of wmelpop-infected d. melanogasterw <dig> was normal, thereby indicating that wolbachia presumably did not negatively affect follicle cells. it should be noted that the fecundity of the wmelpop infected d. melanogaster w <dig> was not decreased as compared with their uninfected counterparts  <cit> . this was evidence of insect plasticity, rendering them capable to adapt to diverse factors.

taken together, our findings clearly demonstrated that the wolbachia strain wmelpop has an effect on the egg chamber formation in the d. melanogaster germarium. however, the underlying mechanism is still unclear. we intend to perform a comparative morphometric analysis of apoptotic structures and bacteria in cystocytes of wmel- and wmelpop-infected flies. the results would be helpful in deciding whether the increase in apoptosis frequency is due to high bacterial density or to particular pathogenic effect of the wolbachia strain wmelpop on female germline cells.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study showed that the presence of the wolbachia strain wmelpop in d. melanogaster ovaries led to an increase in the frequency of apoptosis in the germarium checkpoint. two possible pathways along which wolbachia affect egg chamber formation in region 2a/2b of the germarium have been suggested. future research should be conducted to clarify the mechanism underlying this phenomenon.

