BACKGROUND
chickens were domesticated from the red junglefowl  about  <dig> years ago  <cit> , and the changes in morphology, physiology and behaviour as a response to this have been immense. for example, most domesticated chickens grow to at least twice the size of rjf, become sexually mature at a lower age, lay manifold more and larger eggs, show a wide variation in plumage colour and structure, and have a different behaviour in a number of contexts, such as reduced fearfulness  <cit> . in general, domestic animals are assumed to have adapted to a life among humans by evolving higher flexibility in diet, better ability to breed in captivity, less stress susceptibility, and a more socially tolerant disposition  <cit> . it has been suggested that epigenetic mechanisms might be involved in cases like this  <cit>  where wide-encompassing phenotypic changes occur in a short evolutionary time.

however, there is limited knowledge of the extent to which expression and epigenetic profiles are inherited in animals. reliable inheritance is necessary in order for epigenetic variation to be a major component of any evolutionary process. we have earlier shown that stress-induced modifications in both behaviour and brain gene expression profiles in domestic chickens are to some extent transferred to the offspring  <cit> , and other studies have shown similar transgenerational transmission in other species, including humans  <cit> . this indicates that some epigenetic variation may indeed be inherited, but the details and significance of this, as well as its putative evolutionary significance, remain to be elucidated.

one of the possible epigenetic mechanisms, which could be related to variation in gene expression, is methylation of cytosine, preferentially in so called cpg-islands of promoter regions  <cit> . therefore, we targeted methylation and gene expression simultaneously to investigate whether any of those, or both, would differ between two populations of chickens, recently separated by domestication. we hypothesised that both methylation and gene expression would differ between the populations and show transgenerational stability, opening the possibility for both to be involved in domestication-related phenotypic changes.

by using expression and methylation arrays on hypothalamus samples, we show that profiles of gene expression as well as promoter methylation differ between domesticated white leghorn layer chickens and their ancestors, the red junglefowl. there were also similar differences, although less pronounced, between phenotypically different families within breeds. the differences were largely maintained in the offspring, demonstrating a reliable inheritance of epigenetic states, and for some of the genes the differential methylation was maintained after eight generations of intercross. our results therefore suggest that selection of favourable epigenetic variants may have been an important aspect of chicken domestication.

RESULTS
brain gene expression differences within and between populations
in this experiment, we studied variations in gene expression and methylation in brains of rjf and domesticated white leghorns , and their offspring. we focussed on thalamus and hypothalamus, brain regions involved in fear and stress responses, both of which have changed significantly during domestication  <cit> . within each population, we selected parental animals with divergent phenotypes in order to maximise the within population genetic variation. specifically, we used two pairs of each population, with pairs within population differing in their behaviour in a series of previously validated tests of stress reactions in chickens  <cit> . from these, totally  <dig> offspring were hatched and reared until three weeks of age, when they were tested in a fear test, similar to that used in the parents.

in both breeds, body weights differed between families in both generations, and behavioural scores, as measured in the fear tests, differed between families in both generations of wl, but not rjf . hence, morphological, and to some extent behavioural, phenotypes showed a significant and transgenerationally stable variation in the animals used for the present study. it should be noted that phenotyping was done at different ages in the two generations, which may have been the reason for the lack of transgenerational correlation in fear behaviour in rjf. all eight parents were sacrificed at an age of  <dig> days, and  <dig> offspring  at  <dig> days, and from each brain, the thalamus-hypothalamus region was removed for extraction of both dna and mrna. for the offspring, eight pools of both were prepared, each consisting of six same-sex samples within families. hence, there were in total eight parental single-animal samples, and eight pools of offspring samples. the mrna was hybridized to a 38k affymetrix chicken gene expression microarray, and the dna was used for subsequent tiling array analysis of methylation. between populations, there were in total  <dig> significantly  differentially expressed  genes in the parents, and  <dig> in the offspring. the lower number of de genes in the parents could possibly be an effect of the lower power of detection given the smaller biological sample size in this generation. between families within populations, only a few genes were significantly de, and also dm was less frequent between families . this indicates that expression and methylation profiles are relatively stable within breeds, but both may have changed considerably during domestication.

transgenerational stability of gene expression profiles
out of the significantly de genes in the parents , 86% percent  were also significantly de in the offspring , and there was a distinct similarity in the expression differences in both generations . the overall pattern of fold-change levels between populations  was strongly correlated over generations , further showing a transgenerational stability in gene expression profiles. also within populations, the overall pattern of fold-change levels between families was highly correlated across generations .

we further used signalling intensities of individual probesets on each microarray to correlate global expression levels between parents and their own offspring, compared to offspring of other birds, and found a significantly higher correlation within families than between , t =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). this was true both for rjf and wl, and further supports that specific brain gene expression profiles are indeed inherited.

gene methylation: inheritance and differences between populations
for analysis of differential methylation , we selected  <dig> genes from the list of genes which had the highest fold changes in de in both generations, both in the between- and within-population comparison. note that only  <dig> of these were significant in parents and  <dig> in offspring. for each of these genes, 50- <dig> bp-probes representing a region spanning from - <dig>  kb upstream to + <dig>  kb downstream of the transcription start point  were placed on a custom made tiling array. methylated dna immune precipitation  was used to enrich methylated dna fragments, and after labelling and hybridisation, the relative levels of methylated to un-methylated dna was assessed for each probe.

out of the  <dig> selected genes,  <dig> were significantly dm  when comparing rjf and wl parents, and  <dig> were dm in the corresponding comparison in the offspring. a smaller number were classified as dm when comparing between families within population . a heat map of the genes classified as dm in both generations showed a highly consistent pattern across generations . furthermore, dm levels were significantly correlated between generations when comparing rjf with wl , and also to a lesser degree when comparing wl, but not rjf families .

of the  <dig> genes which were significantly dm in both generations , 79% were hypermethylated in wl . this is a highly significant bias , indicating that this breed has acquired novel methylation patterns during its selection history.

we further analysed the relationship between dm and de on the  <dig> selected genes. there was no overall correlation between the level of dm of a gene  and the degree of de of the same gene . furthermore, there was no overrepresentation of de genes among the top  <dig> dm promoters when compared to a random sample of  <dig> dm genes . this is contrary to the common notion that methylation causes down-regulation of gene expression, but similar findings have recently been reported from other species, for example humans  <cit> . the finding is quite surprising, and indicates that the specific sites of methylation may be of major importance for gene regulation. for example, there may be a substantial difference between methylation of transcription factors compared to insulator sequences. since we only analysed a  <dig> kb region around the transcription start site of each gene, we can not exclude that dm in other, more distant regulatory regions may be more closely connected to the expression level.

to illustrate examples of the transgenerationally stable methylation patterns observed, we show methylation graphs for four genes  in figure  <dig>  in all four, the methylation pattern was reliably inherited, shown by the fact that the dm pattern was highly similar in parents and offspring. abhd <dig> showed extensive dm ranging several kb downstream of the transcription start site. in none of the four genes, the significantly dm loci were in cpg-islands, so methylation must have targeted cytosines in other genomic contexts. extensive methylation of non-cpg regions have recently also been reported for the human methylome  <cit> , and it remains unknown which functions these epigenetic variants may serve.

verification of differential methylation with independent animals, tissues and method
to verify the results of the array-based methylation analysis, we arbitrarily selected four genes, which were dm on the tiling arrays in either parents or offspring, fuca <dig>  pcdhac <dig>  txndc <dig>  and rufy <dig>  and replicated the findings for those, using a different technique and a different animal material. hypothalamus/thalamus regions from eight five-weeks old rjf and eight wl  were dissected and treated as described above. the dna was bisulfite-treated, and the degree of methylation was determined in the regions that were significantly dm on the tiling array using methylation sensitive high resolution melting  analysis.

all four genes were significantly dm in the same direction as found on the tiling array  . this suggests that the tiling array produced reliable results and that the observed methylation differences are representative for the population differences at large.

in order to check for tissue-specificity of the dm, we also performed hrm on the same four genes, using dna-pools prepared from cerebellum and blood from the offspring samples included in the tiling arrays. all four genes were significantly dm in cerebellum. in blood, fuca <dig> and pcdhac <dig> were significant, while rufy <dig> showed a tendency for dm  . the fact that txndc <dig> was not dm in blood indicates that this gene shows tissue-specific, heritable methylation.

genetic stability of methylation differences
there is a risk that the methylation differences detected by the medip technique could be affected by sequence differences in the promoter regions used for the arrays. to exclude this possibility, we used the recently published resequencing data of red junglefowl and domestic chickens  <cit>  to check the  <dig> significantly dm probes in both parents and offspring for possible deletions, insertions and snp density. apart from occasional snps , no major sequence differences were detected.

the methylation differences observed may be a result of either inheritance of the epigenetic changes independently of genetic changes, or result from sequence differences which secondarily affect methylation at close or remote loci. this is more difficult to differentiate, since it would require extensive resequencing data of the individuals actually used in the study, combined with, for example, methylation qtl-studies.

to suggestively analyse whether differential methylation of specific loci are caused by sequence differences we decided to study its genetic stability and segregation over several generations. for this purpose, we used a total of  <dig> birds from the eighth generation of an intercross between rjf and wl. in this population, genetic recombinations in each generation have broken up the linkage between adjacent loci, and we could therefore check for both stability of the methylation sites, and for possible cis- or trans-regulation of these.

from this group of advanced intercross birds, we selected individuals, which were homozygous for either the wl or rjf-allele, or heterozygotes, of an snp located within 176- <dig> kb of the locus showing dm. using hrm analysis on dna from blood, extracted from these different genotypes, we again analysed the methylation on fuca <dig>  pcdhac <dig> and rufy <dig> in these individuals . for fuca <dig>  we found two different non-significant, but distinct, methylation levels, where the birds homozygous for the wl-marker were hypermethylated, and heterozygotes were similar to the ones homozygous for the rjf-marker . with respect to pcdhac <dig>  the three genotypes were significantly different , with heterozygotes having a methylation level falling between the hypermethylated wl homozygotes, and the rjf genotypes. rufy <dig> showed a high level of methylation, which was not significantly different between the three genotypes. hence, two of the three dm loci were stable over the eight generations of intercrossing, and tended to segregate according to genotype at the locus. this is consistent with a cis-regulating mechanism, showing a dominant inheritance of hypomethylation in genotypes with rjf alleles for fuca <dig>  and an intermediate, codominant inheritance in pcdhac <dig>  rufy <dig> may possibly be under control of trans-acting loci, which have segregated during the intercrossing.

although these results are not conclusive, they suggest that sequence differences may determine the dm for at least two of the three loci, possibly for all of them. this further suggests that selection during domestication may have targeted genotypes which modify the epigenomes, perhaps affecting phenotypes indirectly.

genetic pathways
to examine which genetic pathways and functions that may have been affected by de and dm, we performed a gene ontology  analysis. we analysed the dm and the de genes in each generation separately, and then selected those go-terms and kegg pathways , which were significantly enriched in both generations .

a majority of the enriched go terms are related to phosphorylation and kinase activity, important aspects of intercellular signalling. looking specifically at the kegg pathways enriched among dm and de genes in offspring only , the analysis shows that mapk signalling pathway , long-term potentiation , neurotrophin signalling pathway  and gnrh signalling pathways  are enriched. all these are potentially interesting from a domestication perspective, in that they may be related to well documented differences between rjf and wl in stress tolerance, behaviour and reproduction.

over-representation of epigenetically affected genes in selective sweep regions
we considered that the epigenetic differences between the layer breed and their ancestor could reflect general effects of selection during domestication, as suggested above, perhaps being related to differences in the domestication induced phenotypes, such as growth, feeding behaviour and social tolerance. if so, we would expect the epigenetic differences to be accumulated in genomic regions which have been under selection during domestication. therefore, we compared our data to one of our earlier, and recently published, datasets on chickens  <cit> . this dataset consists of an extensive list of selective sweeps related to chicken domestication, based on resequencing of populations of rjf and a number of domesticated breeds. in total,  <dig> selective sweeps present in all domestic chickens, and  <dig> present in egg laying breeds only, were used. a sweep was defined as a  <dig> kb region where the heterozygosity z-score was below - <dig> 

there were  <dig> de genes  with annotated loci within the  <dig> mb of the genome covered by the sweep analysis. five of them were situated within  <dig> kb of selective sweeps present in all domestic chickens , and nine in the laying breed sweeps .

we performed the same analysis on  <dig> dm loci, and found that four were within  <dig> kb of sweeps in all domestic chickens , and six in laying breed sweeps . the significant overlapping genes in laying breed sweeps are shown in additional file  <dig> 

it is interesting to note that abhd <dig>  which was the strongest dm and one of the strongest de genes in our experiment, is positioned in a laying breed sweep. this gene is named ephx <dig> in humans, and is related to detoxification of exogenous chemicals  <cit> . based on its position in a selective sweep, and its differential methylation and expression, it would appear that the epigenetic variant of the gene  may have been selected during domestication. ksr <dig>  an important gene in mapk/ras dependent signalling  <cit> , as well as adra2c, an alpha adrenoreceptor that may be related to egg laying  <cit>  and regulation of the sympathetic stress reaction  <cit> , are also situated in laying breed sweeps.

although our data do not allow us to conclude on which genes and which sweeps that are associated with specific phenotypes, they suggest that selection of epigenetic variation may have been an important part of chicken domestication.

general discussion
our findings show that differential methylation and gene expression in hypothalamus/thalamus are abundant in a comparison between domesticated white leghorn layers and their wild ancestors, the red junglefowl. many of these epigenetic differences are inherited, demonstrating transgenerational stability. it is possible that these differences are a result of selection during domestication, targeting either sequence differences which affect epigenetic states of specific loci, or epigenetic states which are not related to sequence differences.

the causal relationship between methylation and gene regulation is not clear, since differential methylation was associated with both up- and down-regulation of the gene expression, or did not affect it at all. since similar dissociation between methylation and gene expression has recently been found in the human genome as well  <cit> , this indicates that epigenetic regulation is more complex than previously assumed. whereas it is often believed that methylation of promoter regions is associated with down-regulation of gene expression, our results indicate that gene regulation is more complex than so. for example, chromatin structure may be more important than commonly assumed. furthermore, we found that cpg-islands are not always methylated, so there may also be evolutionary contraints on methylation sites, hence affecting the rate with which epigenetic adaptations may occur in different parts of the genome. although speculative, these issues should be considered in future research.

some of the methylation differences observed appear to be tissue-specific, whereas others affect a wider range of cells. the mechanism whereby differential methylation at a particular locus only in, for example, the brain can be transferred from parents to offspring remains elusive. in drosophila, similar observations have been made with respect to gene expression, where induced differences specifically in the brain can be transmitted via sperm and cause tissue specific effects in the next generation  <cit> . possibly, microrna regulation may be involved  <cit> , and both sperm and eggs may also transfer specific histone variants  <cit> . there is also a close link between genetics and epigenetics, in that the epigenetic state of a particular locus is determined by both genetic and epigenetic variations at other loci  <cit> .

stable inheritance of epigenetic variants has been demonstrated in plants  <cit> . also in mammals , there is increasing evidence that this occurs widely  <cit> . our results are the first to demonstrate the same in birds, and furthermore show a long-term stability over several generations of specific methylation states.

although we have only studied one population each of red junglefowl and domesticated chickens, the observations in this experiment could indicate that selection of favourable epigenomes, or genotypes favourably affecting the epigenome, may have been an important aspect of chicken domestication. however, further studies are needed, where methylation of specific genes are analysed in a wide range of domesticated populations, analogous to the recent study of sequence variation in the domesticated chicken genome  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
both gene expression and promoter methylation profiles in hypothalamus differed between white leghorn chickens and their wild ancestors, the red junglefowl. family differences within breed as well as breed differences were maintained in the offspring, showing a reliable inheritance of epigenetic states, which may have been an important mechanism involved in the rapid evolutionary changes of chickens during domestication.

