BACKGROUND
bovine viral diarrhea virus  infections are seen in all ages and breeds of cattle worldwide and have significant economic impact due to productive and reproductive losses  <cit> . bvdv is a single-stranded, positive-sense rna virus, belonging to the flaviviridae family, genus pestivirus  <cit> . bvdv genotypes are classified according to their effects in cell cultures into two different biotypes: non-cytopathic  and cytopathic . different isolates of both forms commonly exhibit antigenic differences  <cit> . the pathogenesis of the disease caused by bvdv is complex and involves persistent infection  and immune suppression with the ncp biotype during early gestation, followed by an acute infection by a cp biotype  <cit> . pi animals shed virus and initiate further virus replication and genetic variation  <cit> . the fatal form of bvdv mucosal disease only occurs in animals carrying the ncp biotype and become exposed to the cp biotype  <cit> . even though bvdv is one of the most studied infective agents in cattle it is probably one of the least understood. this is mainly because bvdv are a group of multiple viruses affecting virtually all organs and system in the body, including innate and adaptive immune system  <cit> . identifying the molecular mechanisms and developing strategies for controlling the spread of the virus are the challenges faced by bvdv researchers.

taking into consideration that pi animals are the major disseminators of bvdv in the cattle population, we hypothesized that low doses of bvdv infection can provide some answers in the bvdv pathogenesis. in our earlier work we assessed selective and non-selective antigen uptake mechanisms in bvdv-infected monocytes and outlined some similarities and differences between the two bvdv biotypes  <cit> . following the differences in the antigen uptake function of monocytes and using the same infection protocols we determined the tlr, cytokine and costimulatory molecules gene expression in the infected cells  <cit> . francini et al. using high doses of bvdv in vitro did not detect significant differences in the tlr expression levels in bovine macrophages  <cit> . using a proteomic approach, we demonstrated that cp bvdv biotype affected the expression of proteins related to professional antigen presentation. in particular, proteins related to immune responses, such as cell adhesion, apoptosis, antigen uptake, processing and presentation, acute phase response proteins, mhc class i- and class ii-related proteins and other molecules involved in immune function of professional antigen presentation have been significantly altered after bvdv infection  <cit> . finally, we demonstrated the differential effects of cp and ncp bvdv biotypes on the expression levels of the protein kinases and related proteins affecting the development of infection and antiviral mechanisms in bovine monocytes  <cit> .

to better understand the complexity of the mechanisms by which the cp and ncp bvdv cause disease, and to identify biotype-related differences in significant biological functions and pathways here we further analyzed the expression of immunologically important proteins by combined use of go and systems biology network modelling.

RESULTS
our overall approach to determine the differential effects of cp and ncp bvdv infection on the monocyte-dependent innate and adaptive immune responses involved identification of differentially expressed proteins in each type of infection followed by functional modelling using both go and ingenuity pathway analysis  pathway and network analysis . the results of each of these steps are presented in more detail in the following sections.

 <dig>  protein identification and differentially expressed proteins in ncp and cp bvdv-infected monocytes
we initially identified a total of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> bovine proteins from uninfected, ncp and cp bvdv-infected bovine monocytes, respectively. by comparing ncp bvdv-infected host proteins to their uninfected counterparts we were able to determine up- and down- regulated host proteins occurring in either cp or ncp bvdv infection . this gave us a total of  <dig>  altered proteins unique to ncp bvdv-infected monocytes and  <dig>  altered proteins unique to cp bvdv-infected cells.

compared to uninfected monocytes, ncp bvdv altered the expression of  <dig> host proteins with  <dig>  being down-regulated and  <dig>  being up-regulated . in comparison, cp bvdv altered the expression of  <dig> host proteins of which  <dig>  were down-regulated and  <dig>  were up-regulated, compared to uninfected monocytes . of these differentially expressed proteins,  <dig> host proteins were common to ncp and cp bvdv infections. the expression trends for these shared proteins were similar for all except for integrin alpha 2b  and integrin beta  <dig> , that were down- regulated by ncp bvdv and up- regulated by cp bvdv infection.

comparison of proteins unique to ncp bvdv-infected monocytes  with proteins unique to cp bvdv-infected cells  showed that  <dig>  common host response proteins,  <dig>  and  <dig>  proteins unique to ncp and cp bdvd-infected monocytes, respectively .

 <dig>  go functional analysis of bvdv-infected monocytes
go annotations were publicly available for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the bovine proteins in our ncp and cp bvdv datasets, respectively. we further assigned go annotations to an additional  <dig> % and  <dig> % of bovine proteins, respectively; bringing the total number of proteins with go annotation available for functional analysis to  <dig> % and  <dig>  % of our ncp and cp bvdv datasets, respectively . this enabled us to perform a comprehensive go functional modelling. our go annotations have been submitted to agbase, where they will be quality checked and made publicly available. we summarized the go annotations for bovine proteins differentially expressed in cp and ncp bvdv infections to identify biological functions in the host response that correspond to infections with these two biotypes. antioxidant activity, ligand binding, response to stimulus, and extracellular space were over-represented in the ncp bvdv-infected monocytes compared to their cp bvdv-infected counterparts . transport, enzyme activity, metabolism, and intracellular matters are more highly represented during cp bvdv infection .

 <dig>  proteins with significantly altered expression in cp and ncp bvdv-infected monocytes: network and pathway analysis
at ipa threshold of significance,  <dig> and  <dig> networks and  <dig> and  <dig> functions/diseases were significantly represented in the proteomes of ncp and cp bvdv-infected monocytes, respectively. the top ten functions/diseases , and the associated signalling pathways are shown in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  analysis of the top ten pathways revealed that pathways representing macropinocytosis signalling, virus entry via endocytic pathway, integrin signalling and primary immunodeficiency signalling were identified only in ncp bvdv-infected monocytes. in contrast, pathways like actin cytoskeleton signalling, rhoa signalling, clathrin-mediated endocytosis signalling and interferon signalling were identified only in cp bvdv-infected cells. of the six common pathways involved in cp and ncp bvdv infection, acute phase response signalling was the most significant for both bvdv biotypes . in each of those six pathways, cp bvdv altered the expression of  <dig> host proteins compared to the  <dig> altered proteins due to ncp bvdv infection.

tf: transferrin; sod2: superoxide dismutase  <dig>  mitochondrial; a2m: alpha-2-macroglobulin; itgb6: integrin, beta 6; itgb3: integrin, beta  <dig> ; spn: sialophorin; ptprc: protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type, c; csf1r: colony stimulating factor  <dig> receptor; fgr: fibrinogen gamma chain numbers between brackets indicates the number of altered proteins involved in the functions/diseases or pathway

f2: coagulation factor ii ; fgr: fibrinogen gamma chain; lyn: v-yes- <dig> yamaguchi sarcoma viral related oncogene homolog; tapbp: tap binding protein ; spn: sialophorin; itgb3: integrin, beta  <dig>  numbers between brackets indicates the number of altered proteins involved in the functions/diseases or pathway

analysis of the ten most significant ipa functions/diseases for the cp and ncp biotypes revealed that five were shared, although different proteins were involved in these pathways. the cp bvdv-altered proteins were involved in five cellular-related functions . when compared, host proteins differentially expressed in cp and ncp bvdv-infected monocytes included acute phase response signalling, fcγ receptor-mediated phagocytosisin macrophages and monocytes, actin cytoskeleton signalling, antigen presentation pathway, b cell development, rhoa signalling, caveolae-mediated endocytosis signalling, clathrin-mediated endocytosis signalling, il- <dig> signalling and interferon signalling .

discussion
the complex and unique nature of bvdv continues to challenge infectious disease researchers, veterinarians, and the cattle industry. in addition to evading the adaptive immune system, bvdv evade key mechanisms of innate immunity  <cit> . although a good understanding of the roles of the two biotypes in the production of persistent infections and the precipitation of mucosal disease has been obtained, there are still unanswered questions regarding the origin of cytopathic viruses and the mechanism by which they cause pathological changes in cells.

in our previous studies we used proteomics to identify host proteins involved in professional antigen presentation altered by cp  <cit>  and protein kinases altered by cp and ncp  <cit>  bvdv. we have now extended this work by identifications of altered host proteins by ncp and cp bvdv infection based on rigorous statistical methods for peptide identification and control of false positive identifications. likewise, the workflow for differential protein expression includes multiple testing corrections  <cit> . comparing host proteins in cp and ncp bvdv-infected monocytes to uninfected controls for differential protein expression showed a higher number of affected proteins by cp biotype. in general, cp bvdv showed more profound effect on the protein expression levels in bovine monocytes with significantly increased number of down-regulated proteins and decreased number of up-regulated proteins compared to the ncp bvdv biotype. this observation is in accord with our previous reports that cp bvdv in general, had more profound effects on antigen uptake mechanisms, tlr, cytokine and co-stimulatory molecule gene and protein kinase protein expression levels in bovine monocytes  <cit> . the observed significant biotype-related differences might explain the mechanisms by which cp bvdv, in contrast to ncp biotypes that do not induce cell death, cause pathological changes in infected cells, in particular antigen presenting cells.

in contrast to our previous report on the multiple similarities and some significant biotype-related differences in the monocyte protein expression patterns  <cit> , this new complex modelling approach revealed mostly profound biotype-related differences in all functional groups. this observation strongly supports our hypothesis that low doses of bvdv infection can be crucial to understand the complex pathogenesis of bvdv  <cit> .

pathway and network analysis of bovine proteins differentially altered by bvdv also identified significant biotype-related differences. it is known that ncp bvd viruses can establish pi as a result of infection of the embryo early in its development by interfering with a key mechanism of the innate immune system through the interferon  type i production  <cit> . since inf is also important in the activation of the adaptive immune response, suppression of this signal may be essential for the establishment of pi  <cit> . we previously reported that both proteins, cd <dig> and mx are increased in bvdv-infected monocytes. however, in this study that uses stringent protein identification parameters compared to our earlier proteomics methods, expression of mx significantly increased with cp bvdv infection only. mx protein is believed to be induced exclusively via signalling through the type i inf receptor  <cit> .

the early stages of the host response to infectious agents include a number of physiological changes, collectively known as the acute phase response. our previous report identified multiple acute phase response proteins altered by cp bvdv  <cit> . in this study, acute phase pathway was demonstrated to be the first significant pathway in both ncp and cp bvdv infection. although, ncp and cp viruses altered different numbers of host proteins in general, they had the same effects on the monocyte protein expression levels. the acute phase response is comprised of reactions localized at the site of infection, as well as the initiation of systemic responses, which include a rapid increase in the serum concentration of some proteins, known as acute phase proteins   <cit> . recently, it is becoming clear that viruses interact with iron metabolism. iron is needed for virus replication, and therefore, by ensuring the infected cell is iron replete, a virus favours its own growth. moreover, increased concentrations of iron in the body can cause tissue damage and inflammation and affect organ function  <cit> . for hepatitis c viral infection, the detrimental effects of excess iron are well documented, and elevated iron status is also associated with increased mortality in hiv- <dig> infection  <cit> . here we show that both cp and ncp bvdv up-regulate transferrin , a negative acute phase protein and a major iron transporter, causing iron overload and exacerbates disease . alternatively, both ncp and cp bvdv down-regulated haptoglobin , a positive acute phase protein capable of binding haemoglobin and removing it from the circulation to prevent iron loss, renal damage and inhibit microbe iron uptake, thus reducing its function as an antioxidant. although, high hp levels have been reported in the blood of cattle with infections/diseases like mastitis, metritis, traumatic reticulitis, bacterial nephritis and bovine respiratory syncytial virus  <cit>  and many others, there is no literature indicating its involvement in bvdv infection. therefore, our finding seems to be unexpected, and to investigate the meaning of these two observations, further studies are needed.

interestingly, among  <dig> proteins that have been altered by both biotypes only two proteins, integrin alpha 2b  and integrin beta  <dig> , were differentially altered by cp and ncp bvdv biotypes. integrins are the main cell surface receptors for proteins within the extracellular matrix ; they enable cells to migrate, form strong adhesive junctions, and respond to ecm contact by differentiating and/or proliferating  <cit> . our results indicate that 24h ncp bvdv infection decreased the levels of itga2b and itgb <dig>  whereas cp bvdv biotype significantly increased their expression levels. both integrins are involved in integrin signalling pathway, one of the top ten pathways affected by ncp bvdv-infection. protein alpha  <dig>  that was also down-regulated by ncp bvdv, is known to be a member of the integrin family involved in integrin signalling pathway, and was recently shown to be involved in cell differentiation  <cit> . this finding indicates that ncp bvdv unlike the cp counterpart, inhibited the level of communication of the ecm and cell differentiation. finally, all the integrins affected by bvdv are also involved in caveolae-mediated endocytosis signalling pathway which was one of the top ten pathways affected by both ncp and cp bvdv biotypes.

in general, the observed effects of cp bvdv in this study are in agreement with our previous reports suggesting that cp bvdv, while promoting the expression of proteins involved in monocyte activation and differentiation, is inhibiting their antigen presentation to immunocompetent t cells, thus resulting in the uncontrolled inflammation, enhanced viral spread, and impaired anti-viral defense mechanisms in the host. unlike the cp bvdv biotype, ncp bvdv increased the expression of proteins involved in compensatory survival and inhibition of cell activation mechanisms, promoting virus persistence  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we identified bovine proteins whose expression altered significantly during bvdv infection compared to the uninfected monocytes. those monocyte protein profiles distinguished between the two biotypes showed that cp bvdv had more profound effect on the protein expression levels with significantly increased number of down-regulated proteins and decreased number of up-regulated proteins compared to the ncp bvdv biotype. the use of go showed profound biotype-related differences in all go functional groups, indicating that low doses of bvdv infection can be crucial to understand the complex pathogenesis of bvdv infection. also, systems biology network modelling identified multiple biotype-related differences in significant biological pathways that could explain the observed biological differences. in particular, our data indicated that only cp bvdv significantly increased the protein expression levels of mx protein that is believed to be induced exclusively via signalling through the type i inf receptor. inf receptor signalling activates the adaptive immune responses, and suppression of this signal may be essential for the establishment of persistent infection that could explain the observed biological differences.

in this study, acute phase pathway was demonstrated to be the first significant pathway in both ncp and cp bvdv infection. although, ncp and cp viruses altered different numbers of proteins in general, they had the same effects on the monocyte protein expression levels. our finding indicates that ncp bvdv unlike the cp counterpart, inhibited the level of communication of the ecm and cell differentiation thus promoting the establishment of persistent infection. the differences in the expression of the integrins can also mean that cp bvdv infection induces monocytes to differentiate into macrophages, or, alternatively, that monocytes that have already embarked on the differentiation into macrophages, are more susceptible to cp bvdv infection.

taken together, the combined use of go information and systems biology network modelling extended our knowledge of the roles of ncp and cp bvdv biotypes in the production of persistent infection and cytopathic effects respectively.

