BACKGROUND
precision medicine requires of better ways of defining diseases by introducing state-of-the-art genomic technologies into the diagnostic procedures. a more precise diagnostic of diseases, based on the description of their molecular mechanisms, is critical for creating innovative diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic strategies properly tailored to each patient’s necessities  <cit> . consequently, a deeper understanding of the consequences that the combined effect of gene activities has over the functionality of the cell has become a major concern in the analysis of genomic data. moreover, this knowledge is essential to understand how gene activity perturbations account for disease. the analysis of genome-wide expression profiles has produced an unprecedented amount of data on gene activity under a plethora of experimental conditions. nowadays more than one million of microarray experiments are available, stored in public databases. however, the conversion of such data into a better understanding of the underlying biological processes that explain molecular mechanisms of diseases still remains an open issue. early attempts to deal with the problem of understanding the collective contribution of gene activities to the definition of phenotypes  produced a family of algorithms commonly known as single enrichment methods   <cit> . such methods study over-representations of functional annotations in groups of differentially expressed genes  <cit> . typical functional annotations used for this purpose are gene ontology   <cit> , kegg pathways  <cit> , etc. later, the gene set enrichment analysis  method  <cit>  pioneered another family of more sensitive algorithms based on testing the distribution of functional annotations along a list of genes ranked by differential expression  <cit> . both approaches consider functional modules as discrete, unstructured entities composed of elements  of identical importance with respect to the trait analyzed. this is a quite unrealistic assumption that drastically reduces the statistical power in any testing framework  <cit> .

nevertheless, functional modules with detailed information on their internal structures are available in several repositories such as kegg  <cit> , reactome  <cit> , etc. in fact, there is a recent interest in exploiting the information contained in different biological pathways to understand cellular function and disease mechanisms  <cit> . recently, a few pathway topology pt-based algorithms have been published  <cit>  that use the internal structure of the pathway to elucidate global activation status for the pathway from gene expression data. some pt-based algorithms use the pathway structure to compute measurements of coordinated activity  among pairs of genes  <cit> . other, as the signaling pathway impact analysis   <cit>  or the netgsa  <cit> , infer scores that account for the global activation status of pathways taking into account the relationships among their constituent gene products. conceptually similar methods, implementing more sophisticated ways of scoring pathway global activity based in the relationships among the corresponding gene products, have also been proposed  <cit> .

in most of the methods described above individual values accounting for gene expression are combined, as defined by the internal structure of the pathway, into a global score for the entire pathway. that is, pathways are used as whole functional units in the interpretation of gene expression experiments. however, the biological consequence of the activity of a pathway is not a trivial concept. stating that a pathway is activated  is not very informative by itself. in fact, partial activation  within the same pathway can have very different  biological implications. for example, the apoptosis signaling pathway can lead to two opposite cell behaviors: apoptosis and degradation  or antiapoptosis  depending on the final protein that receives the signal . therefore, depending on their relative location within the pathway, changes in the activation state of one or several proteins can change  the cell behavior. some of the pt-based methods use values of differential gene expression within the context of the pathways to calculate scores for pathway sub-structures  <cit> . however, such scores have a difficult interpretation for both significant and non-significant parts of the pathway because the differential expression of a gene does not necessarily imply a transition from an active to an inactive state . however, the most serious problem occurs when one or several inhibitors within a pathway present a non-significant differential expression. in this case, its activation state is unknown and, consequently, its effect  on the sub-pathway.

from a completely different angle, other approaches have attempted to model protein signaling networks in detail  <cit> . such approaches offer a detailed description of the network modeled and have been used to check for inconsistences in the network or for finding new interdependences between their constituent elements. these models were used to study properties of the pathways analyzed  <cit> , to optimize network models using experimental data   <cit> , or to study pathway responses  <cit> , but none of these approaches consider the use of gene expression measurements derived from transcriptomic experiments .

the approach proposed here offers a conceptually new way of understanding the functional consequences of changes in gene activity associated to any comparison of conditions by taking into account the internal structure of the pathways. this structure is used to split up the pathway into stimulus-response sub-pathways, or circuits, which trigger particular cell functionalities. in other words, the method enables the estimation of the probabilities of activation of these cell functionalities. this approach allows overtaking the simplistic view of a pathway as an entity that is either active or inactive as a whole. here we show how the analysis of these signaling circuits results in a more detailed and realistic description of the functional consequences of gene up-and down-regulations within the context of each pathway. in many cases, the resulting activation/deactivation of individual functionalities within the pathway helps to suggest a causal explanation for disease mechanisms. we illustrate the application of the methodology with gene expression data obtained from various microarray experiments with different conditions and diseases.

RESULTS
performance of the methodology
as previously commented pathways are multifunctional entities that can trigger a range of different cell functions and it is often meaningless to talk about the activation of a pathway as a whole or relating its global activity to a disease. opposite to this view, we propose a different method which accounts for the change in the probabilities of signal transmission along the different signaling circuits defined within pathways. briefly, we first use the values of gene expression to infer probabilities of gene product presence/absence . then, we use such probabilities to calculate the probability of signal transmission along the circuit, from the receptor protein  to the effector protein . we take into account that interactions between proteins can be either activations or inhibitions . if the probability of having the circuit activated for signal transmission is significantly higher in one of the conditions of the comparison then a change in a specific pathway activity is reported as a result. since some circuits of the modeled pathways might be declared significant simply as a consequence of type i errors , we carried out a simulation and we also studied a real case in which no differences were expected.

we first simulate probe datasets with identical probability of being activated, to which normally distributed noise is added . all the samples would represent pathways whose genes will have a similar activity state and, consequently, should have their signaling circuits in the same activity state. for this reason, no differences should be observed in any comparison. we produced  <dig> datasets, of n =  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> samples with probabilities  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  of being activated. figure 1a shows the results of the simulation. at the conventional p-value of  <dig>  chosen for the test the ratios of false positives are negligible .figure  <dig> 
analysis of the false discovery rate of the signaling circuit test proposed. a) results of the simulation experiment. a total of  <dig> datasets, of n =  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> samples were simulated. all the probes for all the genes in all the nodes of the pathways had the same probability of being activated . normal distributed . at the conventional p-value of  <dig>  chosen for the test, the ratios of false positives are negligible. b) results with a real dataset of pediatric acute myeloid leukemia  which contains gene expression microarray data of  <dig> samples, which  should display a similar gene expression profile. we produced  <dig> datasets, of n =  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> samples, by randomly subsampling the  <dig> samples dataset. any of the datasets was divided into two equal parts and compared to each other with the test. again, the number of false positives is negligible.



we have also used a large dataset of pediatric acute myeloid leukemia  which contains gene expression microarray data of  <dig> children  <cit> . in principle all samples should have a similar profile of gene expression, and consequently similar activation states in the signaling circuit. we produce  <dig> datasets, of n =  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> samples, by randomly subsampling the  <dig> samples. any of the datasets was divided into two equal parts and compared to each other with the proposed methodology. figure 1b shows that for any data size  the number of false positives is almost inexistent. in fact, some real biological variation that could result in slight circuit activity differences cannot be ruled out. consequently, some of these very few false positives might, in reality, be true positives as well.

additionally, two microarray datasets containing cases and controls in a study of breast cancer   <cit>  and another study of genes with increased expression in aml   <cit>  were used to check the predictive performance of features consisting of circuit activation values estimated using the proposed method. this predictive performance can be considered representative of a low number of failures in detecting real activations   <cit>  and allows us to check for the extent of type ii error. we used support vector machine   <cit>  for the classification of the samples. the accuracy of the classification obtained was evaluated by ten-fold cross validation  <cit> , using the following parameters: proportion of correct classification  and the area under the curve . the results obtained were in: for the breast cancer dataset, pcc was  <dig>  and the auc  <dig> , while in the aml dataset  <cit>  pcc was  <dig>  and the auc  <dig> . these results allow discarding a significant amount of type ii error in the method.

dissecting pathway functionalities
signaling-dependent mechanisms of colorectal cancer progression
we have used an example of colorectal cancer  to illustrate this concept. a recent microarray  study has been used to systematically search for genes differentially expressed in early onset crc  <cit> . the study involves the comparison between  <dig> crc cases and  <dig> healthy controls . several pathways are known to be affected in crc. for example, the proposed test detects a significant increase of signaling activity in circuits leading to growth proliferation, cell cycle and anti-apoptosis in the jak-stat pathway . this result is coherent with previous results, which describe how the inhibition of this pathway induces apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, and reduces tumor cell invasion in colorectal cancer cells  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
model of the
jak-stat
pathway in crc with the corresponding significant changes in the signaling circuit activities. red nodes indicate activated circuits in the crc patients with respect to the healthy controls and blue nodes indicate circuit deactivations. solid lines indicate activations and dashed lines indicate inhibitions.



another pathway whose activity is significantly altered is the wnt signaling pathway. this pathway has a canonical wnt/β-catenin cascade and two non-canonical pathways named wnt/planar cell polarity  pathway and wnt/ca2+ pathway, forming part of the complete wnt signaling pathway. the results of the test reveal a significantly increased activity for two out of the three circuits . genes belonging to the wnt/pct pathway, such as rhoa or rac and jnk are known to be up-regulated in cancer  <cit> . this would explain the activation of the circuit leading to jnk, which is one of the possible responses triggered by this pathway. other pt-based analyses also point to this pathway as a key player in crc  <cit> .

a remarkable example of precise detection of a signaling circuit activity occurs in the vegf pathway, whose induction is known to be involved in malignant transformation  <cit> . human colorectal tumors produce vascular endothelial growth factor  whose expression is up-regulated in tumor cells by cyclooxygenase- <dig> , represented in the kegg pathway in additional file 2: figure s <dig> by node ptgs <dig> , and directly correlated to neoangiogenesis and clinical outcome  <cit> . cox <dig> catalyzes the production of pgi <dig>  and high levels of pge <dig> have been reported in colorectal adenocarcinomas in comparison with adjacent normal tissue  <cit> . we observed that only the circuit leading to pgi <dig> production, via ptgs <dig> , was significantly activated  in this pathway.

as a general rule, it is worth noticing that the patterns of circuit activities, which account for cell functionalities, cannot be easily derived from the changes in gene expression. additional file 2: figure s2b illustrates how different gene  up- and down-regulations suppress and compensate to each other to finally  result in no change for the rest of circuits . thus, genes activated or deactivated, with no effect in this pathway, are free to play a different role in another pathway. this demonstrates the usefulness of the proposed approach that provides direct information on the specific pathway activities that result in pathologic conditions, instead of just reporting gene activities out of context.

study of genetic and diet-induced murine models of obesity
in our previous study  <cit> , we characterized the adipose tissue macrophages  from wild type  and ob/ob mice at  <dig> and 16 weeks of age. we showed that at 16 weeks wt atm had a predominantly m <dig> antinflammatory phenotype. the m <dig> phenotype was also observed in 5 weeks old ob/ob atms. conversely, 16 week old ob/ob atms had switched to a predominantly m <dig> proinflammatory phenotype, which was associated with severe insulin resistance, diabetes and an enrichment of proinflammatory macrophages in adipose tissue. the analysis of the activity of signaling circuits revealed specific signaling ways used to achieve the different physiological conditions. after 16 weeks, wild type animals remain able to control their carbohydrate metabolism and they are progressively expanding their adipose tissue. this process requires remodeling of adipose tissue and may be facilitated by m <dig> antinflammatory atms. compatible with this expansion, figure 3a documents a significant activation of circuits triggering cell cycle, in particular the wnt/β-catenin, whose role in tissue remodeling by weight gain has already been identified  <cit> . vegf pathway is also activated in 16w wt atms . the activity of this pathway is increased when there is increased demand in adipose tissue expansion and also when there is hypoxia as part of an adaptation to increase vascularization in the tissue. in some way, increased demands for growth results in hypoxia which is compensated by increased vascularization. this result is compatible with macrophages producing vegf and contributing to remodeling of adipose tissue when it is expanding as part of the age related growth  <cit> . on the other hand, figure 3b documents the generalized activation of different circuits of the apoptosis pathway in ob/ob 16 week mice when compared to the 16 week wt mice. degradation and cleavage of caspase substrate is activated. however the relationship between survival and apoptosis changes with respect to the 16 week wt mice. survival is activated and the circuits triggering apoptosis are different. these anomalous activities in apoptosis pathways in atm macrophages from ob/ob 16 weeks are in agreement with the characteristic huge amount of fat deposition, inflammatory responses and adipocyte crowns of apoptotic adipocytes.figure  <dig> 
signaling changes in mouse models of obesity. a) activation within the wnt pathway of circuits triggering cell cycle, in particular the wnt/β-catenin, when wildtype mice 16 weeks old is compared to wildtype 5 weeks old, and b) activation of different circuits of the apoptosis pathway in ob/ob 16 week mice when compared to the 16 week wildtype mice. red nodes label activated circuits with respect to initial state of each comparison and blue nodes label deactivations. solid lines indicate activations and dashed lines indicate inhibitions.



signaling changes in human bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells
in the human hematopoietic system, aging is concomitant with decreased bone marrow cellularity and decreased adaptive immune system function. on the other hand it is also associated to increased incidence of anemia and other hematological disorders and malignancies. it has been suggest that changes within the hematopoietic stem cell  population during aging contribute significantly to the manifestation of these age-associated hematopoietic pathologies in mice  <cit> .

a recent gene expression profiling study revealed that aged human hsc transcriptionally up-regulate genes related to cell cycle, myeloid lineage specification, and myeloid malignancies  <cit> . the study highlighted a few genes that have been implicated in hematopoietic malignances and are differentially expressed between elderly and young human hsc, being age-up-regulated: aurka, fos, hoxa <dig>  myc, trim <dig>  while maff and fplt <dig> resulted to be age-down-regulated  <cit> . our analysis of signaling circuit activity detected activation in the circuit ending in the fos gene in the t-cell receptor signaling pathway. this circuit triggers proliferation, differentiation and immune response . actually, gene set analysis carried out in the original study suggests that slight but coordinate deregulations in genes associated to cell cycle, hematological system development and function, cellular growth and proliferation and humoral inmune response occurred in elderly hsc when compared to young cells  <cit> . in other words, the original study discovered only the gene expression signatures of the processes whose activation mechanisms is reported in detail by the signaling circuit activation method proposed here.figure  <dig> 
signaling changes in the
t-cell receptor signaling
pathway of human bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells. red nodes label activated circuits with respect to initial state of each comparison and blue nodes label deactivations. solid lines indicate activations and dashed lines indicate inhibitions.



cross-talk between pathways: a case study of deregulation of programmed cell death in fanconi anemia
signaling pathways are connected among them and such connections can also be detected using the method proposed here. furthermore, the results can potentially reveal the precise mechanism by which a pathway specifically triggers a particular biological response in a second pathway. since pathways work cooperatively, the incorrect activation of a specific circuit can activate a wrong circuit in another pathway creating a perturbed signaling cascade that could eventually result in a disease condition. the observation of the combined behavior of all the signaling pathways in a diseased cell can eventually reveal interesting details of the overall mechanism of the disease and help in the inference of ways of intervention. we illustrate this concept with the detection of cross-talk between pathways in an example of fanconi anemia , a disease in which signaling is known to play a relevant role. fa is a rare chromosome instability syndrome characterized by aplastic anemia as well as cancer and leukemia susceptibility  <cit> . it has been proposed that disruption of the apoptotic control, a hallmark of fa, explains the phenotype of the disease to some extent  <cit> . a recent study used gene expression microarrays to identify differences at the transcription level in bone marrow cells between normal volunteers and fa patients  <cit> . eleven normal volunteers and  <dig> patients were studied. gene expression datasets for fa were obtained from the geo database .

it has been proposed that one of the genes related to the disease, fancc, is involved in jak/stat signaling and apoptotic signaling  <cit> . the model of both pathways using the data of this experiment enables the precise identification of the mechanisms by which jak/stat pathway specifically triggers one of the survival circuits of the apoptosis pathway that eventually results in the disease. figure  <dig> shows the changes in signal transmission activities across all the signaling circuits when fa patients are compared to the controls. while the activity of the signaling circuit ending in cihs, leading to cell proliferation, is inhibited the activity of the circuit ending in akt <dig> is significantly activated in fa . this signaling circuit, according to kegg functional annotation, specifically triggers the antiapoptotic activity in the apoptosis pathway. figure 5b shows a detailed description of the process of antiapoptotic activity activation. three signaling circuits are significantly inactive in fa  and other three circuits are significantly active . the consequences of the observed changes in the activation status of the circuits affected can easily be understood at the light of the functions they trigger . firstly, one of the circuits triggering apoptotic response  is inactivated in fa. additionally, another two circuits triggering degradation  and cleavage of caspase substrate , respectively, are also deactivated. on the other hand, circuits ending in bcl2l <dig>  birc <dig> and bcl <dig>  that trigger survival, are activated. thus, the final consequence is that the antiapoptotic pathway activity in fa increases with respect to a normal cell. this does not mean that apoptosis cannot occur in fa. actually it does  <cit> , most probably through the circuits ending in bax and/or tp <dig> , whose activity is not different from the activity in normal cells. this observation suggest that known features of fa, such as hypersensitivity to dna cross-linking agents  <cit>  or chromosomal instability  <cit>  could be a consequence of the abnormal survival of cells with damaged dna. actually, the authors of the original study describe that some functional categories, including “negative regulation of programmed cell death” are over-represented in the fa samples. actually, recent reports have confirmed that fa proteins participate directly in canonical signaling pathways that influence survival and self-replication of hematopoietic cells  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
models of the a) jak-stat and b) apoptosis pathways in fa along with the corresponding significant changes in the signaling circuit activities. red nodes label activated circuits in the fa patients with respect to the healthy controls and blue nodes label deactivations. nodes that simultaneously participate in activated and deactivated pathways are labeled in yellow.



conventional -based methods of functional enrichment, even if they take into account the relationships between the components, fail in revealing details on the molecular mechanisms that mediate the pathologic behaviors of the apoptosis in fa. and, obviously, cannot account for the cross-talk between pathways.

comparison with other approaches
it is difficult to provide a reasonable comparison of the procedure proposed with other procedures because they test different aspects of the functionality of the pathway. a recent revision on pathway-based methods describe the evolution of the different algorithms proposed from those that only consider membership relationships between the genes of a pathway  to those, more sophisticated, that use the topology of the pathway   <cit> . however, the ultimate property to be tested here is the behavior of the whole pathway, while our approach checks for significant differences in the probability of activation of the individual stimulus-response signaling circuits. only very recently, a few methods that consider sub-pathways have been proposed  <cit> . the clipper approach  <cit>  applies first a gaussian graphical model that deconstructs the whole graph that defines the pathway into smaller sub-graphs , that are further individually tested. the cliques are genes connected through the pathway structure but not necessarily related with the actual stimulus-response biologically relevant circuits used here. for example, a clique within a stimulus-response sub-pathway can have their genes significantly up-regulated but the signal might not be transmitted if the sub-pathway is interrupted upstream or downstream. another approach, the degraph  <cit> , uses multivariate analysis to identify differential expression patterns that are coherent with a given sub-graph structure. again, this method uses the same approach of searching for any sub-graph within the pathway, irrespective of its biological meaning. moreover, both approaches splits nodes composed of several proteins into multiple nodes regardless of the nature of these multi-protein nodes. the dissociation of a node which is a protein complex, where all the proteins must be present to produce an active complex, into individual nodes leads to erroneous results. we used the crc dataset  <cit>  to compare the signaling circuit activity method proposed here to the clipper method  <cit> , as recently implemented in the graphite web application  <cit> , and the degraph  <cit>  method. additional file 4: table s <dig> shows the  <dig> significant pathways found. a large number of pathways, such as cocaine addiction, african trypanosomiasis, long-term depression, salivary secretion, and many others completely unrelated to cancer are obvious false positives. focusing only on cancer related pathways we consider vegf, jak-stat, erbb and wnt. in vegf, clipper only detect a portion of the sub-pathway leading to the production of cox <dig> via ptgs <dig> , which is detected by our approach and is known to be activated in crc  <cit> . clipper and degraph declare so many pathways as significantly activated because they detect sub-graphs, which are portions of signaling circuits of dubious biological meaning. as previously commented for some up-and down-regulations of individual genes, some sub-graphs have not impact on biological functions triggered by signaling pathways as well. and again, in many cases the use of differential expression instead of individual gene activation or deactivations might introduce errors in the role of inhibitors in the pathways.

additionally, two almost identical approaches that define sub-pathways in a similar manner to our signaling circuits but score them in a similar manner to spia  <cit>  have recently been published  <cit> . however, the use of differential expression values in the nodes instead of actual presence/absence estimations lead to incorrect assumptions on the activities of sub-pathways, as mentioned above. moreover, they do not provide any software for carrying out the test, which critically compromises the potential usefulness of both approaches.

in an apparent conceptual downgrade, the way in which new sub-pathway based methods check its validity implies checking whether the pathways in which they found significant sup-pathways are also significant in conventional fsc or pt-based methods or not. although probably of limited value, we produced a similar comparison. we have used the crc example  <cit>  for the comparison. we have analyzed the pathways to detect significant changes in signal transmission activities in the signaling circuits between the two conditions compared. table  <dig> represents the number of circuits significantly activated and deactivated in cases with respect to the controls. we compare this approach to: a) a conventional ora test  <cit> , which require a pre-selection of genes based on individual tests for each gene  <cit> ; b) to a fsc test  which do not require of the previously mentioned step of pre-selection of genes; c) to a pt-based approach, the spia  <cit> , which takes into account the internal structure of the pathway for the calculation of a global activity index for the whole pathway.table  <dig> 
analysis of the activity of the pathways by means of different approaches in the case-control comparison of early onset colorectal cancer


circuits
sea

pathway
total
case
control
up vs down
up vs all
down vs all
gsea
spia
down*
inh*
up*
down*
up*
up*
up*
down*
down*
down*
up
 <dig> – this pathway is not implemented in spia.

the first column contains the name of the pathway. the next three columns, collectively labeled as circuits, list the number of sub-pathways in the pathways  and the number of them significantly activated in cases with respect to controls  or vice versa  in the comparison, respectively. the three next columns, collectively labeled as sea, list the results of a conventional functional enrichment test  <cit>  in three situations: up vs down) when the significantly upregulated genes are compared to the significantly downregulated genes, up vs all) when significantly upregulated genes are compared to rest of genes, and down vs all) when significantly downregulated genes are compared to the rest of genes. up, down and all means where the major part of the pathway lies in the comparison. significantly up- and downregulated genes are obtained by a conventional t-test with multiple test adjustment as implemented in the babelomics program  <cit> . although the trends of the results are coincident with the other analyses, none of them resulted significant. the column labeled gsea contains a version of gsea test  <cit>  implemented in the babelomics program. the * and the boldface indicate the trend is significant according to the test. the last column, labeled as spia, contains the result of the application of the pathway impact analysis  <cit> .



no main discrepancies were observed among the significant values reported by the spia method and the proposed method. in some cases, the behavior of spia is closer to the gsea, probably because both methods return a global pathway score  however, our method is testing a different aspect of the activity of a pathway than spia and gsea do. for example, a pathway known to be active in cancer is the vegf signaling pathway, whose inhibition has been suggested as an anticancer therapy  <cit> . several circuits in this pathway were detected as activated by the proposed approach but not by the other approaches . likewise, the relationship of jak-stat signaling pathway to colorectal cancer is known, given that its disruption reduces tumor cell invasion in this cancer  <cit> . again, circuits within the jak-stat pathway were found activated by the approach proposed here and by gsea but not by spia. the apparent superior sensitivity of gsea methodologies in this case is probably due to its lower specificity  <cit> . the general conclusion derived from the comparison is that the method proposed here finds circuits activated in pathways which are detected as significant by whole-pathway fsc or pt-based methods. as expected, our more sensitive method also detects activations of specific signaling circuits in pathways which were non-significant in fsc tests.

CONCLUSIONS
because of the complexity of the cell, functional traits cannot be understood as the result of the action of only one or a few genes  <cit> . the multigenic  nature of many common phenotypes  is one of the causes of the low statistical power rendered by conventional marker- or gene-based testing strategies when applied to genomic data   <cit> . specific strategies for pathway analysis , despite more sensitive than gene-based approaches, still provide a very poor detail on the actual functionalities affected in the cell.

therefore, in a realistic scenario, the conventional paradigm that link disease to the failure of a particular gene needs to be changed for a systems-biology-oriented view  <cit> , in which the causative factor of the disease is not the gene itself but perturbations of the combined activity of several genes, functionally related through pathways . thus, the anomalous activity of one or several circuits, responsible for specific cell functionalities, could be the ultimate cause of the disease. probabilistic models have been used some time ago in theoretical approaches to understand regulatory networks  <cit>  and, more recently, for different types of studies that involved the characterization of regulatory or signaling circuits  <cit> . increasing the knowledge on the way in which signaling circuits operate is crucial: changes in the activity of the biological functions triggered by signaling pathways  are behind the mechanisms of several diseases. here, we extend the idea of probabilistic model to the study of the functional consequences of gene expression in the context of signaling pathways. simple but efficient probabilistic models of pathway activity have been developed here for a collection of signaling pathways from kegg  <cit> .

unlike other conventional approaches, where either the activity of individual genes or the activity of the complete pathway was tested, this approach dissects the structure of the pathway and tests the activity of the stimulus-response signaling circuits. actually, the notion of pathway is somehow an arbitrary concept based, in some cases, on historical or theoretical concepts that may include many different actual functional roles. the aim of the method proposed here is focusing on the actual elementary functionalities triggered by these circuits within the context of the pathway, whose failure  can be associated to the disease. there are only a few recently published methods that consider sub-pathways, however they present some problems that seriously limit its applicability and compromises the accuracy of the results provided  <cit> . firstly, some of them do not consider biologically meaningful sub-pathways, such as the signaling circuits considered here, but rather any sequence of connected proteins , no mater of their relevance in the signaling transmission process  <cit> . this produces false positives because pathways are declared as significantly activated when some of such topologically-defined sub-graphs are active, regardless of their contribution to effective signal transmission. even if the circuits are reasonably well defined  <cit> , many nodes, often composed by several proteins, are not well resolved, which results in erroneous estimations of the states of the circuits. moreover, all these methods use differential expression values in the nodes instead of actual probabilities of node activity, which lead to incorrect assumptions on the activities of sub-pathways in general and signaling circuits in particular. in addition some of the methods do not provide any software, which critically compromises their potential use  <cit> .

the analysis of type i and type ii errors demonstrated the accuracy of the methodology proposed. the examples presented in this paper illustrate the use of the concept of the probability of stimulus-response circuit integrity for signal transmission in different scenarios including cross-talk between pathways.

we have focused on gene expression data obtained from microarrays purely by practical reasons of availability: it is the most abundant genomic data publicly available. obviously, gene expression values can be obtained by other methodologies, providing the data compared are in the same scale . in particular, it is likely that in a near future most of the gene expression measurements will be obtained from rna-seq experiments  <cit> . different measurements for differential gene expression have been proposed, that can accurately account for the estimation of the differential gene expression  <cit>  that could be easily adapted to measure the differential activation of a signaling circuit.

detailed pathway models helps to understand the disease mechanism  <cit>  as well as throw light on possible mechanisms of drug action  <cit> . such models facilitate the advent of a real systems medicine where interventions over particular molecules can be understood within a systems context  <cit> . actually, the method proposed fosters the conceptual transition from gene-based biomarkers to mechanism-based biomarkers . these can be derived from the gene expression values combined in a way that have a biological meaning and potentially account for the disease mechanism. moreover, pathway models will likely play an important role in the interpretation of different types of genomic data apart from gene expression. thus, models of pathways can also be used to study the possible impact of mutations found in exome or whole genome resequencing experiments in the context of pathway functionality. the study of the combined effect of these mutations on the different signaling circuits and consequently the resulting cellular functionality damaged will help to understand the mechanism of the disease and to propose ways of intervention. similarly, it will also be possible to understand the functional implications at pathway level of genome-wide regulatory constraints found in methyl-seq  <cit>  experiments and its corresponding impact in diseases. steps toward model the functionality of the cell will render more detailed insights into the knowledge of the living systems and will provide more powerful statistical tools to study the behavior of the cell in a diseased condition. models developed here for the relatively simple scenario of signaling pathways really capture the network of relationships among proteins that account for particular aspects of the functionality of the cell.

