BACKGROUND
the recent development of next-generation sequencers has allowed us to sequence the complete genome of various species easily and rapidly  <cit> . even though deep sequencing is the fastest and cheapest method to date, the species examined by deep sequencing are still limited to model organisms and species that are medically or commercially important. for example,  <dig> complete genomes are available among mammals, which occupy only  <dig> % of species on the earth, whereas only  <dig> genomes including  <dig> fruit-fly genomes are available for insect genome, which comprise more than 50% of all species  <cit> . from the viewpoint of biodiversity, we need to know the genomes of as wide a range of species as possible to allow for environmental protection, to provide material for diversified genetic resources and to promote the basic sciences such as ecology, genetics and evolution  <cit> . for species not currently included in genome projects, it is still possible to determine genes and their sequences by constructing cdna libraries and cloning with race methods. large-scale genomic studies to better understand biological diversity, and evolutionary systems and mechanisms, however, are not possible via these strategies because they are limited to the use of only a few samples. on the other hand, with the spread of next-generation sequencers across the globe, there has been a rapid increase in the accumulation of dna sequence data  <cit> , which makes it difficult to undertake traditional bioinformatic analyses such as homology searches. thus, there is a need to develop new methods for large-scale genomic studies of non-sequenced species. our aim is not to find all homologous genes between sequences, which is not possible in case where rna is absent or weak. indeed, detection of all homologous genes is not possible using microarray methods as such experimental methods tend to result in false positive and true negative estimations. there have been several attempts to examine gene expression profiles using microarray  <cit> , but the challenge to search homologs themselves by microarray is unique and novel.

toward this end, we have developed a novel strategy to pursue large-scale genomic studies using a microarray. as a first step, we tried to identify homologous sequences between species diverged hundreds of millions of years ago. in this study, we selected humans and squids, for a comparison of mammals and cephalopods. we choose these species because though they diverged in the pre-cambrian period and evolved independently, both acquired elaborate eyes and brains that are remarkable among the two major classes of bilateral animals; i.e., deuterostomes and protostomes  <cit> . accordingly, a comparison of genes and gene sets between these species is of particular interest for the understanding of animal evolution. there is no need to conduct in vitro homology searches if both genomes are sequenced, so we have chosen squid as a non-sequenced species. there are, of course, many candidates for such a study; for example, humans vs mice or flies vs mosquitoes, but we sought to test our study in non-sequenced species from scratch, and assess the sensitivity for homology detection between relatively distant species. we will continue work on other pairs once we have obtained reliable results for humans and squids.

RESULTS
can an in vitro homology search array detect homologs in remotely related species?
to search for homologies between human and pygmy squid genes, we developed a novel in vitro homology search array consisting of probes for human and squid genes. the total number of probes on the array was  <dig>  including  <dig>  probes designed from human genes and  <dig>  probes designed from pygmy squid genes . to avoid cross hybridization against very similar probes on the same array, we have selected appropriate region in the coding genes in both species .

next, we performed microarray experiments using pygmy squid mrna. the mrnas were obtained from the whole embryonic head , including the brain and eye, and the remaining portion of the embryo  for two purposes; to conduct two independent microarray experiments to test for reliability and to observe the changes in gene expression between different tissues. we found the significant expression of  <dig>  and  <dig>  probes out of  <dig>  human probes in the head and the body of pygmy squids, respectively, using agilent microarray scanner protocols . this indicates that about  <dig> % of the human probes tested were homologous genes .

are these genes really homologs in pygmy squids?
it is possible that the number of expressed genes is over-estimated due to hybridization to non-target genes on the microarray even though we used standard scanner protocols and our probes were carefully designed to avoid hybridization to non-target genes. note that such cross-hybridizations will dramatically reduce expression intensities. we first checked the number of probes for which the intensities were high among human probes and found that the expression levels  of most of these genes were less than  <dig>   expression intensities on a 20bit dynamic range as measured by an agilent microarray scanner. this result implies that most probes detected non-target genes.

to dismiss this possibility, we carefully checked probes with high intensities. we set the threshold as  <dig>  expression intensities and extracted the highly expressed genes having intensities meeting this criterion as potential homologous genes. we then determined  <dig> and  <dig> homologs in samples of head and body respectively. out of the  <dig> and  <dig> genes,  <dig> and  <dig> genes are already known in the public databases; thus, we can conclude that highly expressed genes in our array are homologous genes. furthermore,  <dig> and  <dig> genes are newly identified homologs .

we then validated whether or not our in vitro homology search array can identify genes already known to be highly conserved between humans and squids. we have checked the expressed genes in squid samples using  <dig>  squid probes on the array, and found  <dig>  and  <dig>  out of  <dig>  genes are expressed at intensities higher than the threshold, in head and body respectively. a comparison of squid ests from the genbank against human genes designed on our array showed that  <dig> genes have a less than 1e- <dig> e-value in blastn search against human genes, and these were then used for the validation of homologies . out of  <dig> homologous genes,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were detected on our array in head and body, which is equivalent to the average detection coverage of all probes and indicates that our strategy is a useful method for the detection of homologous genes in a query sample  and could successfully detect homologous genes on our array.

what kinds of genes have been identified in this in vitro homology search?
not only does our array estimate homologous, but we can also detect expression discrepancies between two different samples; i.e., the squid head and body. it is possible that sequence identity of squid genes against human probes might affect signal intensity in the microarray. however, the same probe with a different signal intensity provides reliable information on changes in gene expression. we identified  <dig> genes in which expression varied significantly between samples for the squid head and body . all  <dig> genes were newly identified by our method.

statistically significant differential expressions were extracted, and more than  <dig> fold change were listed. sequences of probename can be obtained from additional file  <dig>  containing probe information.

the list of homologous genes indicates that 84% of the genes are function-known in human genome annotation, and go classification analysis  <cit>  suggests that the majorities of the genes are dna-binding proteins  or are involved in cellular process and regulation  . this seems to be a reasonable result because, even more than  <dig> million years after the divergence between humans and squids, dna binding proteins are usually included among highly conserved genes due to selection pressure  <cit> . go functional composition between head and body was not so different, mainly because these genes are highly conserved between distant species and showed essential gene set conserved at nucleotide level.

discussion
novel approaches to the estimation of homologous genes in non-sequenced species
our in vitro homology search array was able to estimate more than five thousand homologous genes in squid and human, which represents 68% of the human genes tested in this study. this indicates that a large-scale genomic comparative homology search is suitable for non-sequenced species. we were able to obtain this result from a single experiment, and by doing further experiments, we expect the number homologous genes identified to increase. as only  <dig> nucleotides and  <dig>  ests for pygmy squid have been submitted to genbank as of may  <dig>  our approach is a very efficient technique by which to identify homologous genes. our method will be useful particularly for sibling genome-sequenced species.

several cross-species microarrays have been designed for various purposes, and a number of papers have provided thoughtful insights into the design and analysis of microarray experiments  <cit> . other approaches have focused on the genomic and transcriptomic diversity within mammals or primates  <cit> . specific targets, such as nitrogen availability and toxicogenomics, could be pursued through the use of cross-species arrays  <cit> . heterologous or duplicated regions are hard target to detect with microarrays because of cross hybridization; however, careful assessment and analysis of those data have been reported recently  <cit> . unlike these previous studies, our approach has a specialized target, the identification of homologous genes between distant species.

there is a vogue strategy for the large-scale genomics based on next-generation sequencers <cit> , but the advantage of our method lies in the low experimental costs. microarray-based experiments are  <dig> to  <dig> times cheaper than current next-generation sequencing methods, and this reason alone is sufficient to encourage the application of this method to millions of species to promote the the study of biodiversity. in silico homology search methods, including normal homology searches such as blast, are, on the contrary, powerful tools with which to detect both close and distant homologies, but they require query sequences that are usually only partially available in non-sequenced species.

limitations and solutions
there are some difficulties in detecting homologous sequences by experimental methods. first, in comparing amino acid sequences, dna sequences are easily mutated over long periods. we often use homology searches  for closely related species, and translated searches of amino acid databases for distantly related species. as it is not possible to perform translated searches in experiments, we can only detect homologous regions if their sequences are well conserved and protected from mutations by slow molecular clocks. we are now assessing the efficiency of hybridization by conducting artificial cross-hybridization microarray experiments .

second, we need to focus on gene coding regions for homology detection because it is likely that intergenic regions are too highly mutated for experimental detection. we, therefore, used mrnas to search for homologous genes between two different species. in the case of mrnas, problems still arise in the distribution of gene expression intensities.

third, probe design in the microarray is also problematic. if probes with similar sequences are used in the same microarray, it is possible to detect expressed genes with two different probes as cross hybridization. to avoid this problem, we have calculated probe sequences in which edit distances are at least 70% different from the most similar probes. we are currently investigating the effect of cross hybridization by designing two different microarrays with a few artificial mutation sites . the potential for cross hybridization should be considered carefully when designing microarrays.

fourth, there is a problem with duplicated genes and gene families. these genes have hundreds of homologous siblings that prevent experimental homology searches due to cross hybridization. to prevent estimating false positive homologs, we have removed duplicated genes from the array. our method was aimed at detecting homologous genes. the search for homology between species proceeds more efficiently if we focus on single copy genes. detection of homologs of multi-copy genes would require a different probe design strategy.

possible applications to other species such as more closely related species
we have tested this methods on humans and squid, which are distant from each other in terms of nucleotide sequence conservations. we could still identified  <dig> homologous genes, and estimated more than  <dig>  candidate genes in squid that could have homologs in humans. this indicates that if we apply this method with more probes from humans, we may identify an increased number of homologous genes in squid. this method may also be applied to other species groups such primates, rodents, or diptera , thus allowing larger scale and cheaper genomic comparisons.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed an in vitro homology search array for the estimation of distantly related homologs. it allows the estimation of homologous genes between humans and squids, which diverged more than  <dig> million years ago. some genes are, of course, false positive estimations, but the highly expressed genes are thought to be homologous genes. this experimental strategy will be particularly valuable when the explosion of dna sequences data expected to be produced by next-generation sequencers leads to computational limits on the performance of homology searches.

