BACKGROUND
the evolution of host ranges in parasitic life forms deserves special attention, not only because it allows the investigation of numerous questions central to evolutionary biology, but also because of the tremendous ecological and economic importance of ecosystem functions delivered by these species. the time-scales over which processes like host-switching and co-speciation take place are of immediate interest as they not only help us understand current host ranges, but also predict future developments and adaptability of parasitic species. insect parasitoids represent a special case of parasitic organisms because they ultimately kill their hosts during development. they are often classified ecologically into idiobionts and koinobionts. idiobionts prevent further development of the host after initially immobilizing it, while koinobionts allow the host to continue its development after parasitization, often over several host life stages  <cit> . while many koinobionts show high degrees of specialization and host fidelity, idiobionts are usually generalists and can even vary in their host ranges even at the population level. in such generalists, individuals often show a high level of behavioural and developmental plasticity as a response to an inconstant environment, and this plasticity can be crucial for their persistence  <cit> . on a macro-evolutionary level, such plasticity can result in a high rate of host switching. if host switches are common in the evolutionary history of a group, then the phylogenies of hosts and parasitoids show low concordance  <cit> . the opposite pattern, i.e., high concordance between host and parasitoid phylogenies, can result from very tight associations and a correspondingly low frequency of host switches, and in the extreme even co-speciation between host and parasites or parasitoids  <cit> . an intermediate level of phylogenetic concordance can be expected if host ranges evolve according to the “host-ecology hypothesis”  <cit> . this hypothesis assumes that parasitoid species are able to broaden their host ranges by recruiting new hosts that exist within the parasitoids searching niche, and that this process can eventually lead to the appearance of a new, specialist species. specialization thus takes place on the level of the host’s niche instead of its taxonomic or phylogenetic identity.

in parasitoid wasps, our knowledge of host range evolution is very limited due to a lack both of reliable host records in many groups and of sound species-level phylogenies  <cit> . very few studies have examined the evolution of host ranges and thus the prevalence of different macro-evolutionary processes from a phylogenetic perspective  <cit> . the specious parasitic wasp genus ichneumon linnaeus,  <dig>  consists mainly of endoparasitoids that attack the pupal stage of their macro-lepidopteran hosts  <cit> . after parasitization, the hosts do not continue to grow and the parasitoid larvae thus have to develop on the host resources present at the time of oviposition; most ichneumon species thus follow the idiobiont strategy of development  <cit> . several exceptions however exist in the genus, e.g., ichneumon eumerus wesmael,  <dig> and ichneumon caloscelis wesmael,  <dig> that attack the larva of their hosts, while emerging from the pupa  <cit> . these species clearly are koinobionts and might show a closer association with their hosts. within ichneumon, some species are highly polyphagous as is typical for idiobionts, while other species are known only from a single host species  <cit> ; this genus therefore offers an interesting system to study the evolution of host association patterns and host specificity.

based on morphological investigations and laboratory host choice experiments, hinz and horstmann  <cit>  differentiated between two groups of species within the genus ichneumon. the first group consists of polyphagous parasitoids that generally attack species of noctuidae moths that pupate in cavities below ground. hosts of the second group pupate above ground or in the vegetation; their parasitoids are more often oligophagous or even monophagous, and include many species that attack butterflies . hilpert’s  <cit> ad hoc hypothesis of the phylogeny of the genus ichneumon was based on the assumption that these two parasitoid groups represent natural entities. as possible synapomorphies for the two groups, he cited the overall body shape and especially the form of the antenna in the females, which are short and stout with a blunt tip in the first and elongated and pointed in the second group . the shortening of the antennae, which represent an overall more compact body shape, is discussed as an adaptation to searching for hosts that pupate below ground, where long antennae would be obstructive and prone to injuries  <cit> . body and antennal shape might thus be misleading as phylogenetic characters in ichneumon, as they might have appeared several times through convergent evolution by adaptation to host pupation sites  <cit> . understanding the evolution of host relationships in a group can thus also be crucial for a proper interpretation of morphological characters in a phylogenetic context, as has been shown for parasitic wasps already several times in the past  <cit> .

here, we build the first molecular phylogeny of the genus ichneumon including  <dig> species using two mitochondrial markers, cytochrome oxydase  <dig>  and nadh dehydrogenase  <dig> , and the nuclear 28s rrna . the molecular phylogeny was reconstructed using maximum likelihood  and bayesian approaches. to investigate whether parasitoids that attack host species of the same family cluster together, we plotted host family associations onto the parasitoids phylogeny. additionally, we tested for monophyly of the butterfly parasitoids under a likelihood-based and a bayesian approach. to test the host-ecology hypothesis for ichneumon, the evolution of the parasitoids’ searching niche was reconstructed. finally, we tested for correlated evolution between antennal shape and the host pupation site.

RESULTS
phylogenetic reconstruction
the bayesian consensus tree recovered for the  <dig> ichneumon and five outgroup taxa  is shown in figure  <dig>  the topologies obtained from the maximum-likelihood and bayesian analyses were highly congruent and conflicting nodes between the consensus trees only reached low support. most of the relationships are resolved with high confidence, and species that were represented by more than one specimen were recovered as monophyletic. some of the more recent nodes are however associated with very short branches and low support values. our dataset did not provide any resolution for several more closely related species pairs, with identical co <dig> barcodes encountered for ichneumon delator and i. oblongus and for i. gracilentus and i. caloscelis, respectively. pairwise uncorrected p-distances below 1% in co <dig> were found for  <dig> additional pairs of species.

maximum likelihood and bayesian analyses all only support the monophyly of the genus ichneumon when it is expanded to include chasmias lugens and coelichneumon deliratorius. the support for the monophyly of such an ichneumon s. l. was high in both analyses  , while monophyly of the genus excluding c. lugens and c. deliratorius proved to be very unlikely .

evolution of host ranges
parasitoid species that attack hosts that belong to a single lepidopteran family do not cluster together, as shown in figure  <dig>  but instead appear in distant parts of the tree. sister species often attack hosts from different families, and parasitoids of none of the host families were recovered as monophyletic. also the parasitoids of butterfly hosts were recovered as paraphyletic in all our analyses, and the hypothesis of monophyly of these species was highly rejected both by a bayesian approach  and by the shimodaira-hasegawa test  <cit>  .

species that attack their hosts above or below ground, respectively, do not form monophyletic clades either . parsimony and maximum likelihood ancestral state reconstructions revealed that this behavioural trait changed at least five times during the evolution of the genus ichneumon. this is the case when all the nodes that received low support are resolved in order to minimize the number of switches; in the consensus topology, this character showed at least seven state changes. reconstructing the character states at the deeper nodes of the phylogeny proved virtually impossible for such a fast-evolving character, and although attacking hosts that pupate above ground was favored as the ancestral state for the genus, this result was not obtained under ml, and might be highly dependent on the taxon sampling.

morphological adaptations to host pupation site
to test for correlated evolution between parasitoid body shape  and attacking hosts with specific pupation sites , we compared the likelihoods of a model assuming independent evolution to a model assuming that the two traits coevolved  <cit> . the likelihood ratio test significantly supports the dependent model . this result was confirmed by the bayesian approach which converged on the dependent model with  <dig> % posterior probability . although the correlation was generally supported, there are several exceptions to this rule . except for i. fulvicornis which has an elongated antennae but attacks hosts pupating below ground, these species have a more compact body shape, but attack hosts above ground.

*species marked with an asterisk are known only from a single host species, and are thus potentially monophagous.

#ichneumon caloscelis and ichneumon fulvicornis attack the larvae of their hosts, and the habitat of the last instar larvae are here given instead of the pupation site.

discussion
phylogeny of ichneumon and implications for taxonomy
we here present the first molecular phylogeny of the genus ichneumon. it will serve as a robust starting point for future investigations of this specious genus, both in terms of phylogenetic and evolutionary research. our molecular dataset provided good resolution of most of the nodes in the tree, but proved not to be variable enough to resolve some of the more recent relationship. even the mitochondrial locus used for dna barcoding  <cit> , cytochrome oxidase  <dig>  did not allow distinguishing among all the included ichneumon species, with identical barcodes observed at least in two species pairs, and pairwise distances below 1% in many more. a similar observation has been made in the ichneumonid subfamily diplazontinae  <cit> , but co <dig> has proven very useful in other groups of parasitic wasps  <cit> . the failure of dna barcoding in ichneumon might be due to imperfect taxonomy, insufficient variability of the markers to detect relatively recent speciation events, or in some of the cases due to incomplete lineage sorting or introgression  <cit> . more data, including several fast-evolving nuclear markers like introns will probably be necessary, as non-monophyly of biological species in mitochondrial dna has been convincingly demonstrated already in several cases, and might concern up to a third of all species in nature  <cit> .

the genus ichneumon as it is currently defined was not retrieved as monophyletic , unless chasmias lugens and coelichneumon deliratorius were included. the relations of these species to ichneumon have been discussed controversially in the past, and the morphological definition of the genus is based mainly on characters that might well be plesiomorphic  <cit> . chasmias lugens does not fit well into the genus chasmias morphologically, and based on our result should definitely be treated as part of the genus ichneumon, where we transfer it hereby . coelichneumon deliratorius, based on morphology and on the results of the current study, has recently been re-included in the genus ichneumon <cit> .

the molecular phylogeny recovered here clearly refutes the ad hoc hypothesis of the evolution of this genus as it was put forward by hilpert  <cit> . the synapomorphies that hilpert suggested to support his cladogram are mostly mere trends  <cit>  and included several character states that are putative adaptations to parasitizing particular hosts. as one example, hilpert used a stout versus elongated shape of the female body and antennae to support an early split within ichneumon. we could demonstrate here that a stout body shape is probably an adaptation to searching for hosts below ground. character states associated with host relations can be misleading for classification and phylogenetic reconstruction, as has been shown for various groups of parasitoid wasps  <cit> . in brief, such characters are only reliable if the switch to a particular host group happened only once during the evolutionary history of a group of parasitoids, but are prone to be homoplasious if it has been colonized several times in parallel.

numerous switches between host families and between host searching niches
host ranges in ichneumon have undergone numerous switches during the evolution of this genus, and there was no sign of a conservative evolution of host associations among the species examined here . on the other hand, the ichneumon species known to be polyphagous are usually restricted to hosts from a single family, demonstrating specialization at a low taxonomic level. our taxon sampling was too sparse to predict how often host families are retained across speciation events, even though some of the included species might be closely related. reliable host records are only available for a small fraction of the known ichneumon species, and well-identified material suited for dna extraction is difficult to get. the  <dig> species sampled here only represent a small fraction of the total species diversity of the genus, and if minor radiations have taken place within a host group, they might have been overlooked with our limited taxon sampling. in any case, our study provides a conservative estimate of the minimum number of host switches that took place during the evolution of this genus.

although similar studies are scarce, a prominent role for host switching in shaping the host ranges of parasitoid wasps has been demonstrated in several cases. sime & wahl , based on a morphological phylogeny, observed separate origins of butterfly parasitism in the callajoppa genus group , and stated that host ranges in these parasitoids were dominated by comparatively recent host switches. a similar scenario was put forward by shaw  <cit> , again based on a morphological phylogeny. zaldivar-riveron et al.  <cit>  used molecular markers in combination with a calibrated relaxed clock analysis to show that host associations changed quickly during the evolution of rogadinae braconids, and that the radiation of the wasps took place dozens of millions of years after the radiation of their hosts.

in terms of the niche where ichneumon females search for their hosts, we observe a similar pattern. polyphagous species only attack hosts that can be found either above or below ground, but no conservatism was apparent on a higher phylogenetic level , as it would be predicted under the host-ecology hypothesis  <cit> . again, our taxon sampling does not exclude the possibility of smaller radiations within one searching niche, as it has been demonstrated for the braconid wasp genus aleiodes <cit> . in this genus, closely related species tend to parasitize hosts with similar physical and ecological properties but which do not need to be closely related.

a high level of behavioural plasticity in host searching and host selection could be an explanatory factor for the macro-evolutionary patterns that we observed here, especially as behavioural traits have been shown to be less stable than physiological or morphological traits on evolutionary time-scales  <cit> . shaw  <cit>  suggested that a new host association resulting from behavioural plasticity of a female parasitoid wasp might even be passed on to its progeny through post-eclosion or pre-adult experience  <cit> . these mechanisms could enable the parasitoids to respond quickly to changes in host availability. they might be especially important in idiobiont parasitoids that only spend a short period of time in close association with the living host and thus do not need to adapt as much to the host’s physiological environment as koinobionts. anecdotal evidence for the importance of host searching behaviour in comparison to host physiology stems from a laboratory experiment with ichneumon hinzi, a supposedly monophagous parasitoid of xestia speciosa . in the laboratory, the parasitoid females also accepted the pupae of other, not closely related noctuids, and their progeny could successfully complete development in these non-host species  <cit> . these hosts are probably excluded from the natural host range of i. hinzi through a narrow search strategy of the female that is focussed on its primary host.

CONCLUSIONS
we here present evidence that the evolution of host ranges in the parasitoid wasp genus ichneumon included multiple transitions between host families and between microhabitats where the hosts can be found. similar studies are scarce due to a lack of well-supported phylogenies for most groups and, more importantly, a lack of reliable host records for most parasitoid species. new molecular techniques, e.g., the dna barcoding of host and parasitoid remains, or even of the gut contents of adult parasitoid wasps  <cit> , might in the future complement time-intensive field observations and rearing as a means to document host-parasitoid associations and will thus allow for a more detailed picture of the evolution of host ranges in ichneumon as well as in other parasitoid wasps. a better understanding of the dynamics and speed of the evolution of host associations will be crucial in order to predict adaptability of parasitoids to changes in the environment. furthermore, it has important implications for risk assessments in bio-control, and for the comprehension of the tremendous diversity of parasitoid wasps.

