BACKGROUND
molecular surveys of protistan diversity research, traditionally based on amplification of small subunit  rrna  gene fragments from environmental samples, clone library construction and sanger sequencing have discovered protistan novelty at all levels of taxonomic hierarchy  <cit> . at the same time, such surveys indicated that we have described only a very small fraction of the species richness of protistan communities  <cit> . there are few ssu rrna gene surveys of any community that are reasonably complete  <cit> ; the majority appear to be no more than small samples from apparently endless lists of species present at any locale studied. . this is not only detrimental to the exploration of the true richness and complexity of protistan communities, but also hampers comparative analyses of protistan communities in an ecological and biogeographical context  <cit> . massively parallel tag sequencing  is a promising remedy and offers a means to more extensively sample molecular diversity in microbial communities  <cit> . for example sogin et al.  <cit>  analyzed up to  <dig>  tags per sample of the v <dig> hypervariable region of the bacterial ssu rrna genes from deepwater masses of the north atlantic and hydrothermal vents in the ne pacific. the study revealed that bacterial communities are one to two orders of magnitude more complex than previously reported, with thousands of low abundant populations accounting for most of the phylogenetic diversity detected in this study . this was confirmed by huber et al.  <cit>  who analyzed nearly  <dig>  bacterial and ca.  <dig>  archaeal v <dig> tag sequences obtained from two biogeochemically distinct hydrothermal vents. these data sets demonstrated that these distinct population structures reflect the different local biogeochemical regimes, corroborating previous indications that environmental factors and geographic separation lead to non-random distributions of microbes . pyrosequencing has subsequently unveiled the richness and complexity of soil bacterial communities  <cit> , human  <cit>  and macaque  <cit>  gut microbiota. in the project described in this paper we applied the  <dig> sequencing technique to eukaryotes to analyze the complexity of microbial eukaryotic communities in two environmentally contrasting anoxic basins .

the cariaco basin is the world's largest truly marine anoxic body of water located on the northern continental shelf of venezuela  <cit> . primary production in cariaco, microbial biomass, and midwater dark co <dig> fixation vary strongly with factors such as seasonal riverine inputs, seasonal upwelling intensity, lateral intrusions of water from the caribbean sea, and trade-wind intensity  <cit> . the basin exhibits pronounced vertical chemical gradients controlled by physical transport of oxygen downwards and reduced compounds upwards countered by biological demands. typically, oxygen concentrations decrease from saturation at the surface to  <dig> μm between  <dig> and  <dig> m. deeper waters have remained anoxic and sulfidic down to the basin's bottom at ca.  <dig>  m over timescales of centuries to millennia  <cit> . significant enrichments in abundance of bacteria, bacterial activity and protists are routinely observed in the redoxcline and in the sulfidic waters underlying the redoxcline  <cit> . the framvaren fjord located in southwest norway shares the feature of a defined oxic/anoxic interface with the cariaco basin. yet, this fjord varies in many physico-chemical parameters  from the latter. for example, while the cariaco basin is truly marine with a redoxcline below the photic zone and relatively low sulfide concentrations below the redoxcline, the oxic-anoxic boundary layer of the fjord is located at shallow depth  with high sulfide concentrations below the redoxcline and steep biogeochemical gradients down to the bottom waters . sulfide levels in bottom waters are  <dig> times greater than those in the black sea  <cit> . initial studies of these two sites  based on clone-library construction and traditional sanger sequencing indicate evidence for adaptation of protistan communities to differing environmental conditions along o2/h2s gradients. in spite of tremendous efforts in these previous studies, the sequencing depth was still significantly less than predicted total diversity and one might argue that additional sequencing would reveal homogeneous communities along these gradients. massively parallel tag sequencing  offers the opportunity to evaluate if the structuring of microbial communities observed in these two contrasting basins still holds true at significantly increased sequencing efforts, whether richness predictions based on clone library analyses are supported and how well severely undersampled clone libraries reflect the "true" protistan diversity at a specific locale.

nd = not detectable.

--- = not available

RESULTS
the number of high-quality eukaryotic reads we obtained from each sample ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . after dereplication , the numbers of unique eukaryotic tags ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . after exclusion of metazoan tags, we were left with numbers of unique tags ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>  , most of which could be assigned to protists and fungi  for further analyses. the number of tags from non-eukaryotic domains was only marginal  indicating the high domain-specificity of the primers used.

sampling saturation
despite substantial sequencing effort, the communities under study did not show saturation  in unique otu richness. when clustering otus at one nucleotide difference, the number of otus detected decreased sharply, but still did not saturate. only when clustering the tags at two, three, five and ten nucleotides difference  differences), did the sampling saturation profiles show a tendency of leveling off. the collapse of detected otus when comparing unique tags with otus based on two nucleotide differences , is remarkable: in the same sample  up to  <dig>  times more unique otus were detected compared to otus <dig> nt. in contrast, the number of detected otus varied noticeably less when comparing otus over a clustering range of three to ten nucleotides, indicating that most of the tag variation was within two nucleotide differences between tags. interestingly, regardless of the initial number of unique tags that varied greatly among the eight samples, all samples showed similar numbers of otus when tags were clustered at two, three, five and ten nucleotide difference.

rank abundance
in all eight samples, the frequency distribution of protistan tags within unique protistan otus was very uneven : only few populations were dominating the individual data sets, while the majority of otus contained less than ten sequences. the combined frequencies of these low-abundance unique phylotypes in the individual amplicon libraries accounted for  <dig> %- <dig> % of total protistan tags analyzed in each sample and thus, were considered as rare. regardless of the sampling effort, this proportion of rare taxa remained similar for all samples .

community comparisons
an upgma linkage distance analysis of unique otus based on jincidence  identified two distinct clusters one of which consisted of all fv samples, another of samples car <dig>  car <dig> and car <dig>  all from below the interface. the deep-sea sample from the cariaco interface  was the most distinct of all car samples regarding protistan community membership with higher affinity to the other car samples rather than to the fv samples. in the framvaren fjord, the two samples that were taken at different seasons from below the interface of the central basin were most similar to each other , while the below-interface sample from the upper basin  -  <dig> km apart from the central basin station - was less similar to both fv <dig> and fv <dig>  neither samples car <dig> and car <dig>  which were sampled from below the interface in the same season but at different locations, nor samples car <dig> and car <dig>  which were sampled from below the interface at the same site but in different seasons clustered together. instead, samples car <dig> and car <dig>  were most similar in terms of community membership. these two samples were collected at two different seasons from below the interface at two different locations .

protistan community structures
the vast majority of all unique tags could be confidently assigned to a defined taxonomic rank, at least at class-level . between  <dig> %  and 21%  of unique tags could not be reliably assigned a taxonomic rank because sequence similarity to their best blast match was too low . we attribute this to mainly two reasons. first, numerous sequences of described species that are deposited in genbank lack the nucleotide positions that correspond to the v <dig> region of the ssu rrna gene  in part or completely; second these unassignable tags correspond to as yet unsequenced taxonomic groups. unfortunately it is currently not possible to discriminate between these two categories, rendering any interpretation of the proportion of unassignable tags speculative. we do not consider chimeras as a major contributor to unassignable tags because, as our protocol amplifies short dna sequences with a negligible likelihood of chimera formation  <cit> . the proportion of unique tags that had only environmental sequences as the nearest match, without a sequence of a named species falling into the minimum 80% sequence-similarity boundary was large , reflecting the paucity of cultured representatives and the taxonomic annotation of environmental sequence data in public databases. in future studies, the implementation of specifically curated and annotated databases like keydnatools  will be beneficial for the taxonomic assignment of tags that have a good blastn match to environmental sequences but lack a species-match within a defined sequence similarity threshold. a tremendous number of higher taxonomic groups represented by tags that accounted for at least 1% of the overall number of protistan tags were discovered in each sample. for example, in sample fv <dig> we detected  <dig> such groups. when tag sequences that account for <1% of all protistan tags were taken into account , this number was even larger. such groups included: euglenozoa, rhodophyta, jakobida, ichthyosporea, telonema, cryothecomonas and apusozoa. in sum, all major eukaryotic lineages have been detected in each individual sample. however, the proportion of the different taxonomic groups in the individual samples varied considerably. generally, all samples were dominated by alveolate otus, accounting for up to 64% of all unique protistan tags in an individual sample . in all car samples, dinozoa contributed to the largest proportion of alveolate otus, followed by ciliophora. the latter were noticeably less abundant in the car <dig> and car <dig> samples. in the framvaren samples, ciliophora comprised a decidedly larger proportion of the alveolata, in fv <dig> and fv <dig> reaching or even exceeding the percentage of dinozoa, respectively .

interestingly, in nearly all dominant phyla occurring at both locales, the taxon composition in the non-sulfidic anoxic water depth was distinctly different from the sulfidic waters below the redoxcline . for example, in the cariaco basin, unique tags assigned to polycystinea accounted for 31% of all protistan tags in the interface , while below the interface this number ranged between 3%  and 7% . however, generally, the genotype diversity in the sulfidic waters was decisively higher in a variety of taxon groups compared to the anoxic, non-sulfidic waters. ciliophora tag proportion varied more than five-fold between car <dig> and car <dig>  cercozoa 18-fold between car <dig> and car <dig>  bacillariophyta seven-fold, ascomycota nearly 10-fold, heterokontophyta and chlorophyta ca. seven-fold between these samples . this, even though to a lesser extent, was also true for the framvaren fjord. just to mention a few examples, the proportion of dinozoa-assigned tags decreased from 42% in the interface  to 14% below the interface , ascomycota increased nearly three-fold, cercozoa increased ca. four-fold and haptophyta, chlorophyta and heterokontophyta nearly five-fold . figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> show the lower-rank taxonomic groups of dominant phyla displayed in figure  <dig> that predominantly account for the differences in genotype richness between the non-sulfidic and the sulfidic water samples. while for example coscinodiscophycidae bacillariophyta were missing from the non-sulfidic waters at both locales, they accounted for up to ca. 4% of all bacillariophyta in the sulfidic waters . this was also true for other taxonomic groups like xanthophyceae and phaeophyceae , chlorodendrales ; oligohymenophorean ciliates increased noticeably in the sulfidic waters at both locales , just to mention a few examples.

when comparing higher-taxonomic groups  found in framvaren vs. cariaco we noted that radioloaria , which are typically pelagic marine protists primarily found in the open ocean and very scarce or absent altogether in coastal waters  <cit> , were the only higher taxon group that was detected in all cariaco samples but in none of the framvaren samples. conversely, the proportion of cercozoa in framvaren samples was noticeably higher than in cariaco. differences between framvaren samples and cariaco samples become more pronounced when looking at lower taxon levels . for examples blastodiniales and noctilucales  were exclusively found in all cariaco samples. rhizosoleniophycid bacillariophyta  and pseudoscourfieldiales  were noticeably higher in all cariaco samples and choricystis  genotypes were much more diverse in framvaren.

discussion
the application of the  <dig> sequencing technique to the investigation of protistan communities in two anoxic marine basins revealed three significant findings. first, even a sampling effort that was one to two orders of magnitude larger than that achieved by environmental clone library construction and sanger sequencing, was not successful in retrieving all unique ssu rrna gene sequences present in a single sample . up to  <dig>  unique tags could be identified in a 7-l water sample from the cariaco basin without reaching saturation . however, this is unlikely to reflect the true species richness, because  not all ssu rrna gene copies within a species are necessarily identical  <cit> ,  some of the observed tag variability may be due to extreme variability of the v <dig> region in specific taxonomic groups, and  <cit>  even when minimizing the effect of sequencing and pcr errors using a systematic trimming procedure  the accuracy of the  <dig> pyrosequencing strategy  is  <dig> % -  <dig> % for small subunit rrna genes  <cit> . indeed, in sample car <dig> the number of otus drops from  <dig>  to ca.  <dig>  when phylotypes are clustered based on one nucleotide difference . thus, about half of the unique protistan tags retrieved from this sample are potentially afflicted with an error and/or represent the same taxon. the detected number of unique tags would likely represent an overestimation of taxon richness. on the other hand, clustering otus at ten nucleotide differences  resulted most likely in an underestimation because different taxa may be lumped together into the same otu. consequently, it is reasonable to assume that the true taxon richness is reflected in the range between otus <dig> nt  and otus <dig> nt .

interestingly, even the number of detected otus <dig> nt exceeded previous parametric and non-parametric richness estimates from the same sites, based on clone-library derived otus called at 99% or 98% sequence similarity, respectively  <cit> . explanations for this may be several fold:  even though the sample sizes obtained from previous cariaco and framvaren clone libraries were relatively large, the sample size may still have been too small to obtain adequate resolution of the complex communities. if so, this makes previous clone library-based richness estimates severe underestimations;  the statistical error of previous richness estimates may be too large, which cannot be assessed due to a lack of good confidence intervals;  <cit>  abundance-based richness estimates may not reflect the true community richness or relative species abundance in a sample but rather the pcr-amplicon richness. the reasoning for the latter is that in contrast to bacteria, the copy number of ssu rrna genes varies widely among protists  <cit> . thus, the relative amplicon copy number after pcr does not necessarily reflect the relative abundance of a specific taxon in a sample, rendering abundance-based species richness estimates highly erroneous. it is likely that these factors and probably other factors that we cannot account for at present resulted in severe richness underestimations. we hypothesize that the protistan richness in marine anoxic waters by far exceeds previous estimates, and that anaerobic protistan communities are substantially more complex than previously reported. it will be interesting to further investigate how sequence divergence of a hypervariable ssu rrna gene region translates into taxonomic entities. this will help interpreting the vast diversity of tags generated by massively parallel tag sequencing.

most of the observed complexity was found in the low-abundance populations. even when calling otus at five nucleotide differences, the proportion of rare otus  ranges between 71% and 81% in fv samples and between 78% and 83% in car samples , indicating that the high number of rare taxa is not an artifact based on high intra-species heterogeneity in the v <dig> region. this corroborates, to a somewhat lesser extent, the previous findings in the bacterial world  <cit> . the origin and meaning of this complexity is still unclear  <cit> . actually, to date there is no evidence that this high frequency of low-abundant genotypes describes a true diversity. it could result from the amplification of detrital or extracellular dna. on the other hand, it is reasonable to assume that a liter of water is only inhabited by a few individuals of a protist species that never meet in this volume and are therefore subjected to allopatric speciation. the result would be tremendous microheterogeneity that is reflected in these rare genotypes. one hypothesis suggests that these rare genotypes  may represent a large genomic pool, which helps the protistan community to react to any biotic or abiotic changes  <cit> . in this seed-bank scenario, the species that are best adapted to prevailing environmental conditions would always be abundant in a community.

the second significant finding is the phylum-richness of protistan communities that is missed by the clone library/sanger sequencing approach. previous environmental protistan diversity surveys in the same sites of the framvaren fjord  did not retrieve any sequences assigned to apusozoa, chrysomerophytes, centroheliozoa, eustigmatophytes, hyphochytriomycetes, ichthyosporea, oikomonads, phaeothamniophytes, and rhodophytes, all of which have been recovered with the massively parallel tag sequencing approach. similarly, a vast array of higher taxon ranks detected in this tag-sequencing project could not be detected with an extensive clone library sampling in cariaco . interestingly, the tags that could be assigned to taxonomic groups not detected via clone libraries all account for <1% of the unique protistan tags, explaining why they have been missed with the clone library approach  <cit> . regarding taxonomic groups that were represented by large relative abundances of tags , the  <dig> data sets corroborate well with clone library-obtained data. evidence of and tentative explanations for the dominance of these taxonomic groups in anoxic marine systems have already been intensively discussed elsewhere .

the broad taxonomic representation of  <dig> tags nicely demonstrates the efficiency of the primers used to target the hypervariable v <dig> region of eukaryote ssu rrna genes. however, up to 50% of unique  <dig> tag sequences in our data sets were metazoa. this is a general problem also observed in ssu clone libraries  and not specific to  <dig> technology  <cit> . the consequence is that this large proportion of potential non-target tags has to be taken into account when designing protistan diversity studies using  <dig> technology. either sequencing effort needs to be increased  <dig> -fold to get the desired number of protistan tags, or group-specific  <dig> primers need to be applied subsequently to focus on selected protistan groups.

our findings also reveal that higher sampling efforts can be obtained in a cost- and time-efficient way by the application of pyrosequencing, which therefore paints a substantially more comprehensive picture of protistan communities. the degree of undersampling inherent in most published clone library-based studies may be so high that it is possible that they cannot be compared in a meaningful manner to other equivalent surveys of diversity. getting a comprehensive picture of a microbial community is critical to addressing fundamental questions in protistan ecology on the basis of molecular diversity surveys. such questions include for example, determining the true richness and evenness of microbial communities, which is important in defining microbial ecosystem dynamics  <cit> , and determining the biogeographic distribution of specific taxonomic groups, the stability of protistan communities over time, as well as local patchiness of protists. all of these community attributes are cornerstones for understanding microbial diversity, ecology, and evolution  <cit> .

some of these subjects frame the third important finding of this study. the eight sites sampled differed markedly in community composition. based on community membership, it appears that protistan communities from the supersulfidic framvaren fjord with an interface located in the photic zone are distinct from the ones of a less sulfidic anoxic deep-sea site. similarly, anaerobic protistan communities exposed to hydrogen sulfide are distinct from those that thrive in sulfide-free oxygen-depleted habitats. even though we cannot unequivocally identify h2s as the single most important driving force shaping these protistan communities using this dataset, this observation is not unexpected: h2s-detoxification requires specific adaptation that is not necessarily present in all facultative or strictly anaerobic protists  <cit> . for example, atkins et al.  <cit>  found a significant difference in the hydrogen sulfide tolerance of different hydrothermal vent species they isolated, including the closely related sister taxa cafeteria and caecitellus. cafeteria strains isolated by these authors could tolerate up to  <dig> mm sulfide under anoxic conditions over the  <dig> hr course of their experiment, rhynchomonas nasuta could tolerate up to  <dig> mm sulfide, and caecitellus could only tolerate up to  <dig> mm sulfide. symbioses between protists and sulfide-oxidizing bacteria are another adaptive strategy observed in micro-oxic environments with high hydrogen sulfide concentrations. for example, the peritrich ciliate zoothamnium niveum found in mangrove channels of the caribbean sea depends on its sulfur oxidizing ectobionts for detoxification of its immediate environment  <cit> . scanning electron microscopy has revealed a visible diversity of ectobiotic prokaryotic associations with ciliates in the anoxic water column of cariaco, and these associations are likely to be dependent on the distinct chemical nature of the basin's water column . the environmental selection pressure that acts on the phylogenetic composition of protistan communities can be of interest for the design of environment-specific phylo-chips , compared to the shallow framvaren fjord  are obvious: surface waters of the cariaco basin are subject to strong seasonal upwelling, driving as much as 13-fold excursions in net primary production  between upwelling and non-upwelling seasons  <cit> . this causes significant seasonal variations in vertical carbon fluxes, which seems to be not only very important for the dynamics of viral  <cit>  and bacterial communities  <cit>  in such systems, but also for protistan communities, even though the exact mechanisms for how vertical carbon flux variations may act on protistan communities are largely unknown. one possibility could be that due to selective interactions of protist with specific bacteria  <cit> , changes in vertical carbon flux that have a direct influence on bacteria can act indirectly on protistan communities.

at first glance it seems disturbing that metazoa accounted for up to ca. 50% of all eukaryote tags . because most metazoans are very sensitive to anoxia and hydrogen sulfide, this raises the question about the nature of these tags, whether they represent organisms that could plausibly live in the geochemical environments under study or rather represent contamination. such high proportions of unique metazoan tags are indeed not unexpected after careful consideration: body parts, eggs or planktonic larvae of an individual taxon that may have been present in  <dig> to  <dig> liter water samples used for dna extraction would contribute tremendous amounts of genomic dna compared to the few individuals of a protistan taxon. therefore, the ssu rrna gene copies of this individual metazoan taxon would outnumber any protistan ssu rrna gene copy numbers by far, resulting in high proportions of metazoan tags. for example, one individual copepod contributes almost  <dig>  nearly identical amplicons to the fv <dig> amplicon library . in order to account for intrinsic error rates of the pyrosequencing technique  and for intraspecies ssu rdna polymorphisms as described above for protistan data, we also clustered all metazoan tags at one to five nucleotides differences in a separate analysis. indeed, it turned out that the proportion of unique metazoan tags decreased decisively , accounting for only  <dig> % to  <dig> %  of total eukaryote tags when clustered at five nt differences . data serving as the basis for the relative distribution of taxonomic groups presented in figures 4- <dig> can be found in additional file  <dig> 

only a few taxa accounted for most of these metazoan tags, which belonged predominantly to copepods, cnidaria, ctenophores, molluscs and polychaetes . copepods can survive anoxia and high hydrogen sulfide concentrations for long periods of time  <cit> . also several molluscs  <cit> , cnidarians, ctenophores  <cit>  and polychaetes are tolerant of anoxia  <cit> . even bryozoa that were detected in three of the samples  are capable of thriving under anoxic conditions  <cit> . thus, the detection of metazoan sequences in anoxic environments retrieved by domain -specific pcr primers is not surprising. yet, with the exception of copepods, which we can observe frequently at least in the oxic-anoxic interfaces of our sampling sites we did not confirm the presence of these metazoan taxa in the water samples under study by visual inspection. this is mainly due to the fact that we only screened 20-μl aliquots microscopically . because of this, small forms  of larger metazoans or small metazoans like bryozoa represented in our amplicon libraries may have been easily overlooked. it is reasonable to assume that the metazoan amplicons may represent a mixture of allochtonous material  and autochtonous organisms. however, taking into account the low proportion of unique metazoan taxa when clustered at  <dig> nt differences and the high likelihood of the indigenous nature of most of the metazoans represented by the non-protistan tags it is reasonable to consider contamination in general as an insignificant issue.

this study shows that when  <dig> pyrosequencing of the v <dig> region is paired with rigorous downstream data processing, this method is more time- and cost-efficient, and produces a much more comprehensive picture of the protist community than sanger sequencing of clone libraries, allowing for better estimates of community complexity. while direct comparison of the framvaren and cariaco communities is complicated by multiple physico-chemical differences between these two sampling locations, it is possible to distinguish protistan communities on the basis of community composition in the supersulfidic framvaren fjord with an interface located in the photic zone from those in the deep-sea anoxic and less sulfidic environment. furthermore, protistan populations in the sulfide-free oxic/anoxic interface in both framvaren and cariaco are distinct from those that are exposed to hydrogen sulfide. however, the specific environmental factors structuring protistan communities remain unknown.

CONCLUSIONS
this study combined high-throughput parallel tag sequencing with a highly conservative bioinformatic analysis pipeline to investigate protist community complexity in two contrasting anoxic marine ecosystems . our data suggest that both ecosystems under study are highly variable regarding the dynamics of protistan communities on a spatial and temporal scale. however, high-resolution sampling will be necessary to reliably assess the true extent of this variability. furthermore, this study illustrates that our current understanding of the ecological complexity of protist communities, and of the global species richness and genome diversity of protists, is severely limited. a deep sequencing of ca.  <dig>  v <dig> ssu rrna gene tags in total allowed us to recover eukaryotic taxonomic groups that were not detected by previous clone library-based diversity surveys of both sampling sites. furthermore, the number of detected otus far exceeded previous richness estimates from the same sites based on clone libraries and sanger sequencing, even when tag sequences were clustered at up to ten nucleotide differences . our data highlight the magnitude of the under-sampled protistan gap in the eukaryotic tree of life, and support the notion that not only in bacteria but also in protists over 90% of the observed diversity was represented by rare otus that had less than  <dig> sequence tags assigned to them. even though  <dig> pyrosequencing is not a panacea, it allows for more comprehensive insights into the diversity of protistan communities, and combined with appropriate statistical tools, enables improved ecological interpretations of the data and projections of global diversity.

