BACKGROUND
laterality, previously considered to be exclusively a human characteristic, has been show in many vertebrates as well as invertebrate species . thus, the asymmetry of cerebral functions seems to be the rule rather than the exception in the animal kingdom  <cit> . analyses of lateralized motor, perceptual or behavioral responses broaden our understanding of cerebral organization and of treatment of information by each cerebral hemisphere.

characteristics of perceived stimuli can be linked to the treatment of the information received by one of the cerebral hemispheres and to the implication of a given hemisphere. this link is modulated by subjects' internal state such as levels of hunger, vigilance or stress  <cit> , as well as their age  <cit>  or social environment  <cit> . moreover, stimulus characteristics like emotional value  <cit>  and novelty  <cit>  are known to influence perceptual laterality.

the anatomical characteristics of the visual nervous system make visual laterality a good candidate to study perceptual laterality, and most particularly in dolphins. it is well known that the two cerebral hemispheres do not receive sensory information from a single stimulus in the same proportions. for instance in many mammals, the contralateral hemisphere receives monocular visual information faster  than that received by the ipsilateral hemisphere   <cit> . so the involvement of each cerebral hemisphere depends on the organization, the quantity and the transmission speed of nervous impulses  <cit> . dolphins are particularly interesting model for hemispheric laterality investigations for at least four reasons. first, their eyes are situated laterally and all their optic fibers cross  <cit>  allowing a reliable interpretation of the underlying cerebral asymmetry. the left hemisphere receives visual information exclusively from the right eye, and the right hemisphere from the left eye. moreover, stronger isolation of brain hemispheres is due to relatively less developed corpus callosum  <cit> . preferential use of a given eye  at the group level indicates the treatment of visual information by the contralateral hemisphere  <cit> . second, several reports evidence the existence of lateralized behavior in marine mammals . for example, the general tendency of dolphins to swim counter-clockwise  <cit>  might indicate the presence of laterality in this species. third, previous reports indicated that dolphins generally use monocular vision , and that they visually solve visio-spatial tasks better using their right eye and therefore their left brain hemisphere  <cit> . however, a recent study has shown that even if dolphins were clearly able to visually discriminate between familiar and unfamiliar human beings, they preferentially used their left eye to look at those two categories of people  <cit> . forth, dolphins possess a high brain/body ratio  <cit> , and several of the brain's morphological traits differ from those of terrestrial mammals  <cit> : their brains present anatomical structures similar to those of highly evolved brains, but at the same time, the organization of their rudimentary neocortex recalls more that of the hypothetical ancestor of mammals  <cit> . analysis of their perceptual laterality should help understand the implication of each hemisphere in the treatment of various types of information, compared to other species.

one of the most frequently studied characteristics of stimuli influencing perceptual laterality is novelty). a certain consensus appears concerning the processing of the novelty of a stimulus . generally, the left eye is privileged to look at novel stimuli  and/or to be better at processing or storing visual information which allows recognition of individual conspecific  <cit> . but exceptions can be found. de boyer des roches et al  <cit>  have shown that mares used preferentially their right eye to explore novel objects. according to navon  <cit> , characteristics of objects can be visually analyzed either globally or in detail . local characteristics are mainly analyzed by the posterior superior temporal-parietal regions of the left hemisphere while global characteristics are analyzed by the posterior superior temporal-parietal regions of the right hemisphere   <cit> . thus, a link between the type of information treatment and the stimulus characteristics can be surmised: global analysis should be favored when observing a familiar object, whereas local analysis should occur in presence of a novel object to gather detailed information.

our aim was to understand how these marine mammals perceive, analyze and treat visual stimuli with different levels of familiarity . in this study the following questions were investigated experimentally:  is there a behavioral laterality in dolphins, as it was found in others marine animals?  how does stimulus novelty affect the visual preference in dolphins? three contradictory predictions can be done. first, based on the 'novelty hypotheses', dolphins should preferentially use their left eye to look at novel objects  and should not display any preference for non-novel objects . second, according to the 'information treatment modality hypothesis'  <cit> , dolphins should use their left eye to look at very familiar objects, because a global visual inspection is sufficient to recognize and categorize the stimulus, but use their right eye to look at unfamiliar objects for which a more detailed visual inspection is required. the third prediction was based on thieltges et al  <cit>  results. these authors have demonstrated that dolphins used their left eye to look at human whatever their degree of novelty. so we wondered whether dolphins would generalize this left eye preference to look at all kinds of objects, regardless of their degree of novelty. 3) is there a link between visual and swimming laterality? as swimming laterality seems strong in captive dolphins, we also analyzed the swimming preferences of our animals in order to control that the visual laterality observed was not a direct consequence of swimming preferences.

RESULTS
reactivity
stimulus category neither influenced the number of trials when dolphins approached and observed the set-up spontaneously , nor the total number of gazes at objects of each category significantly . dolphins preferred monocular to binocular vision to look at object of all categories .

laterality
first reaction 
three dolphins  used their left eye to observe very familiar previously manipulated objects, whereas two dolphins  used their left eye to observe familiar never-manipulated objects. none of the dolphins was lateralized when viewing unfamiliar objects .

at the group level, a significant left bias was evident when watching at very familiar previously manipulated objects  . conversely, a significant right bias was evidenced for watching at unfamiliar objects . when watching at familiar never manipulated, objects the dolphins did not use one eye preferably  .

strength of laterality did not vary significantly with experimental situation , χ2=  <dig> , df =  <dig>  p =  <dig> ).

reactions following the first reaction
peos, mininos and thea used more their left eye to look at very familiar, previously manipulated, objects. two dolphins  used their left eye significantly more frequently to look at familiar never manipulated objects. conversely, amtan used more her right eye to observe unfamiliar objects .

at the group level, as for the first reaction, a significant left bias was evidenced for watching at very familiar previously manipulated objects , but no significant bias was found for watching at familiar never manipulated objects . the following reactions to unfamiliar objects differed significantly from the first reaction to these objects as no bias towards the usage of the left or right eye was found  .

strength of laterality did not vary significantly between the three experimental situations .

comparisons of bias and strength of laterality between the first and the following reactions
laterality indices and strength of laterality did not differ significantly between the first and the following reactions irrespective of the experimental situation  z =  <dig>  p =  <dig> ; fnm situations: vli z =  <dig>  p =  <dig> , abs  z =  <dig>  p =  <dig> ; nf condition: vli z =  <dig>  p =  <dig> , abs  z =  <dig>  p =  <dig> ).

rotational bias
all our dolphins were strongly lateralized, they swam significantly more frequently in one direction than without direction . four of the five dolphins preferred to swim counter-clockwise . at the group level our dolphins also showed a preference to swim counter-clockwise .

 <dig>  discussion
our data showing that all our dolphins used monocular vision spontaneously more frequently than binocular vision confirmed previous reports  <cit> . this is certainly due to the lateral eye position determining a small binocular visual field in this species. a bias to use their left eye  to look at very familiar previously manipulated objects emerged clearly at the group level for both the first gaze and the following reactions. the first gaze reaction to unfamiliar objects revealed a preference to use the right eye . however, this bias disappeared during the subsequent reactions. no eye preference was found for familiar never manipulated objects. our dolphins also showed a counter-clockwise bias when swimming.

we can first confirm that our dolphins were strongly lateralized when swimming and when looking at objects. the fact that very familiar objects were visually inspected with the left eye while unfamiliar objects were visually inspected with the right eye, support the first of our three predictions based on the information treatment modality highlighted by navon  <cit> .

this difference of laterality at the group level between previously manipulated stimuli  and unfamiliar stimuli  might thus be explained by the way information leading to identification of objects is treated. during the first inspection of unfamiliar stimuli, dolphins might analyze details of the objects notably to build a spatial mental representation in three dimensions of the different parts of the object. this type of analysis is characteristic of information treatment by the left hemisphere  <cit> . conversely, visual analysis of very familiar objects remains global and is characteristic of information treatment by the right hemisphere. our results confirm the difference between treatments: dolphins used their left eye  to look at very familiar objects  and their right eye  to look at unfamiliar objects . no eye preference was found for the inspection of objects presenting an intermediate familiarity value . however, as soon as a previously unfamiliar object has been seen once, this object becomes familiar, but still not manipulated, so no more eye preference is found in the subsequent visual inspections. this change from using the left hemisphere when treating visual information of an unknown shape to using the right hemisphere when that shape has become familiar has been reported previously  <cit> . the preference to use the right eye to explore details of objects confirm previous reports on the visual discrimination capacities of dolphins  <cit> . dolphins discriminated visually better and solved visio-spatial tasks better using their right eye.

this rapid switch of classes from unfamiliar to familiar support studies that concluded in favor of a rapid visual memorization in dolphins  <cit> . the difference of treatment between very familiar and familiar objects also highlights the importance of the manipulation in dolphins. we can suppose that dolphins may possibly have difficulties in constructing a spatial mental representation of familiar never manipulated objects and of unfamiliar objects that have become familiar solely through visual modalities. if this is the case, manipulation of objects by dolphins could facilitate their construction of a global representation of an object enabling dolphins subsequently to categorize it directly, as echolocation and vision are generally linked  <cit> .

in a previous study with the same dolphins we found a left-eye preference to look at familiar and unfamiliar human beings  <cit> . this shows that any human being is treated visually as are very familiar objects, a global inspection being sufficient to have a mental representation of this kind of stimulus. we must acknowledge that a human observer was present in this study near the exposed object and that this could have influence the visual response of our dolphins. however, the observer was the same person for all object presentations and always stood at the same place. the fact that the eye used changes with the object category let us think that the presence of the observer had no impact on our data.

in addition to perceptual laterality, we also analyzed swimming laterality and could thus control that the visual laterality observed here was not a direct consequence of swimming preferences. our dolphins were lateralized at the motor level. our group revealed a preferred rotation direction , thus supporting most previous reports on this theme  <cit> . this verified our third hypothesis. this rotational bias alone cannot explain the predominance of the use of one eye since the direction of their visual laterality is influenced by stimulus category.

as dolphins are migrant species they are confronted to a changing environment. being able to categorize new versus familiar objects allows dolphins a best and a rapid adaptation to novel environment. since we have demonstrated that dolphins used more their left eye to inspect well-known objects  as well as humans  <cit> , future investigations should explore about the visual preference of dolphins when looking at conspecifics. as dolphins are social species and as other cetacean species, like beluga whale   <cit> , expressed social laterality, it will be legitimate to wonder whether dolphins will also use their left eye to look at all kinds of congeners or if the familiarity with the conspecifc has some importance. this social laterality at population level could play an important role in the daily life of species like bottlenose dolphins presenting a fission-fusion social system, i.e. with opportunities to meet conspecifics of different degrees of familiarity.

CONCLUSIONS
we clearly show the influence of a familiarity gradient on dolphins' visual laterality. a bias to use their left eye  to look at familiar previously manipulated objects emerged clearly at the group level, whereas we found a bias to use the right eye  to look at unfamiliar objects. a global vs detailed visual treatment can explain the observed laterality.

swimming laterality was strong but no link was found between visual and swimming laterality. so our experimental results pointed out some cognitive capacities of dolphins that are indispensible for their wildlife  <cit> . to complete our studies, an analysis of social laterality will be pertinent. on which side a dolphin approach another congener and can the familiarity with the congener modulate this laterality?

