BACKGROUND
anxiety and depression are among the most frequently-observed psychiatric effects associated with nicotine  in tobacco smoking  <cit> , similar to cases using well-known addictive psychostimulants such as cocaine  <cit> . these nc-related symptoms have been reported as direct effects of nc, which disappear following smoking cessation  <cit>  or as withdrawal symptoms  <cit> . in experimental models, similar to the anxiety- and depression-related behavioral symptoms from other causes, brain gabaergic and serotonin  neurons contribute to the anxiogenic effects of nc  <cit> , whereas brain monoamine neurons contribute to its depressive effects  <cit> . however, since the distribution of brain nicotinic acetylcholine receptors , the primary targets of nc, is widespread and functional interactions between the above indicated anxiety- and depression-related neurons and nachrs have been demonstrated  <cit> , different mechanisms mediating anxiety- and depression-related behaviors as compared to behaviors caused by the other addictive drugs can be predicted. for example, nc also causes anxiolytic and antidepressant effects in both humans and animals, depending on dose, time after use, and previous exposure to nc  <cit> , and these effects seem to reinforce the habitual use of nc. furthermore, because of the overlapped distributions of nachrs and the targets of other abused drugs such as da neurons, the targets of addictive psychostimulants, and the similarity of the effects of nc to those of other addictive drugs  <cit> , nc is thought to play a role as a trigger for other abused drugs  <cit> .

the anxiogenic effects of nc are, like the anxiety-related behavioral symptoms from other causes, attenuated by benzodiazepine - and 5-ht-related anxiolytics in several animal models  <cit> . however, based on the above-explained characteristic pharmacological effects of nc  and the widespread distributions of nachrs, it is possible that the role of these bz- and 5-ht-related drugs as anxiolytics may be modified in nc treatment groups. furthermore, although some contributions of gabaergic and 5-ht neurons, the targets of bz- and 5-ht-related anxiolytics, to depression-related behavioral symptoms have also been suggested  <cit> , the effects of these drugs against the nc-induced depression-related behavioral symptoms have not been studied. recently, functional interactions between brain cannabinoid  receptors and nachrs have been demonstrated, and modifications of the behavioral effects of nc by cb receptor ligands , e.g. attenuation of nc-induced anxiety-related behavioral symptoms by a cb agonist, have been elucidated  <cit> . functional interactions between brain cb receptors and receptors related to anxiety and/or depression  have also been demonstrated  <cit> . furthermore, several endogenous cbs were discovered, and their potential therapeutic uses, including anxiolytic and antidepressant effects reported for endogenous agonists such as anandamide, have been suggested  <cit> .

in the present study, based on the predicted peculiarity of the behavioral effects of nc, the time course of anxiety-related  and depression-related  behavioral alterations were examined in both single and repeated treatment groups of mice, and the characteristics of the appearance of these behavioral symptoms, which may be correlated with the habitual use of nc, were investigated. furthermore, one of the objectives of the present study was to examine the effects of both conventional bz- and 5-ht-related anxiolytics and cbs, some of which can function as both anxiolytics and antidepressants, against the nc-induced anxiety- and depression-related behavioral symptoms, and to investigate the possible use of these drugs as both anxiolytics and antidepressants.

RESULTS
time course of nc-induced anxiety-related behavioral alterations
for the single nc  treatment group , at  <dig> min time point, behavioral alterations derived from an anxiety-related attenuated preference for open arms  were observed for each parameter value in the elevated plus-maze test. on the other hand, at  <dig> min time point, there was a significantly increased amount of time spent in open arms and an attenuated latency to first open arm entry, suggesting attenuations in anxiety-related behavioral alterations and anxiolytic effects of nc. with respect to the total number of entries into arms, there was no significant difference as compared to the control group at  <dig> min time point. however, at  <dig> min time point, a significant attenuation in the total number of entries into arms, indicating an increased ratio of the number of entries into open arms and suggesting anxiolytic effects of nc, was observed. all of the altered parameter values returned to the control levels at  <dig> time point.

for the repeated nc  treatment group , at  <dig> min time point, a tendency towards an increased amount of time spent in open arms and a significantly attenuated latency to first open arm entry, suggesting anxiolytic effects of nc, was observed. on the other hand, at  <dig> min time point, behavioral alterations derived from an anxiety-related preference for closed arms were observed for each parameter value. for the total number of entries into arms, a significant attenuation, suggesting anxiolytic effects of nc, was observed at  <dig> min time point. however, at  <dig> min time point, there was no significant difference as compared to the control group. at  <dig> min time point, the anxiety-related attenuated preference for open arms persisted.

in both single and repeated treatment groups, the anova analyses revealed significant main effects of nc treatment for each parameter value . furthermore, significant main effects of test time and interactions between nc treatment and test time were also observed for some parameter values, which indicated some time-dependent changes.

time course of nc-induced depression-related behavioral alterations
for the single nc treatment group , at  <dig> min time point, depression-related alterations in swimming behaviors  were observed for each parameter value in the forced swimming test. however, all of the altered parameter values returned to the control levels at  <dig> min time point.

for the repeated nc treatment group , depression-related alterations in the swimming behaviors were observed at  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> min time points.

in both single and repeated treatment groups, the anova analyses revealed significant main effects of nc treatment for each parameter value . furthermore, significant main effects of test time and interactions between nc treatment and test time were also observed in the single treatment group, which indicated some time-dependent changes.

effects of anxiolytics or cbs on nc-induced anxiety-related behavioral alterations
for the single nc treatment group , effects of anxiolytics or cbs were examined against nc-induced anxiety-related behavioral alterations observed at  <dig> min time point in the elevated plus-maze test. for pairwise comparisons, in the groups co-treated with the anxiolytics diazepam , way <dig> dihydrochloride , and ondansetron hydrochloride , and the cbs anandamide , 2-arachidonylglycerol , virodhamine , and cp <dig> -cis-3- -trans-4- cyclohexanol) , some suppressions of the anxiety-related behavioral alterations  as compared to the nc-only group were observed. in particular, in the nc-way and nc-vd groups, all of the parameter values returned to the control levels. on the other hand, no significant alterations were observed, either with or without the co-treatment with anxiolytics or cbs, in the total number of entries into arms.

for the repeated nc treatment group , effects of anxiolytics or cbs were examined against nc-induced anxiety-related behavioral alterations observed at  <dig> min time point. for pairwise comparisons, in the groups co-treated with dz, way, on, aea, and vd, some suppressions of the anxiety-related behavioral alterations as compared to the nc-only group were observed. in particular, in the nc-way and nc-vd groups, all of the parameter values returned to the control levels. on the other hand, no significant alterations were observed, either with or without the co-treatment with anxiolytics or cbs, for the total number of entries into arms.

in both single and repeated treatment groups, the anova analyses revealed significant main effects of nc treatment for each parameter value except for the total number of entries into arms . furthermore, significant main effects of anxiolytics or cbs treatment and interactions between nc and anxiolytics or cbs treatment were also observed for the time spent in open arms and the latency to first open arm entry in the single treatment group, and for each parameter value except for the total number of entries into arms in the repeated treatment group, which indicated some influences of the anxiolytics and/or cbs on the nc-induced anxiety-related behavioral alterations. however, in each anxiolytic- or cb-only group, no significant alterations in each parameter value were observed .

effects of anxiolytics or cbs on nc-induced depression-related behavioral alterations
for the single nc treatment group , effects of anxiolytics or cbs were examined against nc-induced depression-related behavioral alterations observed at  <dig> min time point in the forced swimming test. for pairwise comparisons, in the groups co-treated with aea and vd, some suppressions of the depression-related behavioral alterations  as compared to the nc-only group were observed. in particular, in the nc-vd group, all of the parameter values returned to the control levels.

for the repeated nc treatment group , effects of anxiolytics or cbs were examined against nc-induced depression-related behavioral alterations observed at  <dig> min time point. for pairwise comparisons, only in the group co-treated with vd, significant recoveries in the depression-related behavioral alterations to the control levels were observed for each parameter value.

in both single and repeated treatment groups, the anova analyses revealed significant main effects of nc and anxiolytics or cbs treatment for each parameter value . furthermore, significant interactions between nc and anxiolytics or cbs treatment were also observed for the activity counts, which indicated some influences of the anxiolytics and/or cbs on the nc-induced depression-related behavioral alterations. however, in each anxiolytic- or cb-only group, no significant alterations in each parameter value were observed .

discussion
the present experiments demonstrated chronologically overlapped occurrences of nc-induced anxiety- and depression-related behavioral alterations in both single and repeated treatment groups of mice. on the other hand, although some correlations in the underlying mechanisms could be predicted as described above, there were also some differences in the time courses between the two kinds of behavioral alterations . furthermore, an absence of antidepressant effects of many anxiolytics against the nc-induced depressed swimming behaviors was revealed . with respect to the involved sites of the primary target nachrs, the contribution of both alpha <dig> and alpha4beta <dig> subunits was suggested for the anxiogenic effects of nc  <cit> , whereas the absence of any contribution of alpha <dig> subunit was demonstrated for the depressive effects of nc  <cit> . however, it has been reported that both anxiety- and depression-related behavioral alterations are accompanied by the increased secretion of stress hormones such as corticosteroids through the activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal  axis  <cit> . the transient but simultaneous occurrences of anxiety- and depression-related behavioral alterations observed in the present results may be correlated with the predominant influence of the stress-related endocrine system.

as explained above, the anxiogenic effects are evaluated by an attenuated preference for open arms in the elevated plus-maze test, whereas depressive effects are evaluated by suppressed swimming behaviors  in the forced swimming test. in previous studies, the opposite behavioral effects, i.e. anxiolytic and antidepressant effects, were demonstrated for nc  <cit> . under the present conditions, only depression-related suppressed swimming behaviors were observed , whereas anxiolytic effects were observed in both single and repeated treatment groups at different time points. although the underlying mechanisms have not been elucidated sufficiently, some contributions of temporary modifications of the endogenous 5-ht and cb system have been suggested for the occurrence of anxiolytic effects  <cit> . time-dependent modifications in the stress-related endocrine system  <cit>  also seem to correlate with the temporary occurrence of nc-induced anxiolytic effects. nevertheless, based on animal models of nc treatment in which anxiolytic and antidepressant effects were predominantly observed  <cit> , the appearance of contrary behavioral symptoms, for example anxiogenic vs. anxiolytic symptoms, seemed to be controlled closely by the treatment conditions . for example, the antidepressant effects of nc have been reported to be affected by dose-dependent alterations in 5-ht turnover  <cit> .

between the single and repeated treatment groups, there were obvious differences in the time course of nc-induced anxiety- and depression-related behavioral symptoms. in the repeated treatment group, both nc-induced anxiogenic and depressive effects were prolonged as compared to the single treatment group . the time of the nc-induced anxiolytic effects was also different between the single and repeated treatment groups. in addition to the modified and time-dependent activation of the hpa axis  <cit> , repeated nc-induced prolonged stimulation of the sympathoadrenal system  <cit>  may contribute to the long-lasting behavioral alterations. furthermore, in the repeated treatment group, the antagonistic effects of some cbs observed in the single treatment group were not seen . although single nc-induced anxiety-related behavioral symptoms were partially antagonized by selective cb agonists such as ara and cp  <cit> , repeated nc, like chronic stress  <cit> , seemed to cause an enhanced stress-related response which was not antagonized by those cb agonists. although the induction of anxiogenic effects has been reported for cp  <cit> , neither ara nor cp provided any anxiogenic or anxiolytic effects in the ara- or cp-only group, with the present doses at the selected time points . however, anxiolytic effects were observed only in the single nc treatment group, unlike the psychostimulant treatment groups in which both ara and cp provided anxiolytic effects in the repeated treatment groups  <cit> . repeated nc treatments may specifically activate other "anxiety-related" brain receptors, in addition to enhancing stress-related responses.

with respect to the effects of anxiolytics or cbs, the absence of both antidepressant and depression-enhancing effects for the bz- and 5-ht-related anxiolytics was demonstrated in the present study, in spite of the suggested contribution of gabaergic and 5-ht neurons to the depressive effects of nc  <cit> . only vd, a mixed agonistic/antagonistic endocannabinoid  <cit> , provided significant antidepressant effects in both single and repeated treatment groups. against the anxiogenic effects of nc, vd provided significant antagonistic effects: the anxiolytic effects were as strong as way, an antagonist of 5-ht1a receptors for which a direct contribution to the anxiogenic effects of nc has been suggested  <cit> . therefore, the mixed cb agonist/antagonist vd  <cit>  was favorable for blocking the present nc-induced behavioral effects, compared with the other cbs, which functioned mainly as brain cb receptor agonists  <cit> . in the single treatment group, however, partial antagonistic effects of aea restricted to the activity count parameter were provided against the depressed swimming behaviors. aea and the strong selective cb agonists ara and cp partially attenuated the single nc-induced anxiety-related behavioral alterations in the elevated plus-maze test. although the detailed characteristics of each cb  have not been elucidated, the partial antagonistic effects of aea against the depressed swimming behaviors may be correlated with the presence of specific effects and/or targets of aea as previously suggested  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present study demonstrated a chronological overlap for the anxiogenic and depressive effects of nc. a prolongation of these behavioral effects caused by repeated administrations and early transient anxiolytic effects seemed to lead to the reinforcement of habitual use of nc, similar to other addictive drugs such as harmful psychostimulants.

among anxiolytics and cbs, the endogenous cb vd, which is known to act as a mixed agonist/antagonist on brain cb receptors, attenuated both anxiogenic and depressive effects of nc. this supports the contribution of brain cb receptors to nc-induced anxiety- and depression-related behavioral symptoms. furthermore, one can predict that the role of vd as a mixed agonist/antagonist on brain cb receptors contributed to its double validity as both an anxiolytic and an antidepressant.

