BACKGROUND
the adaptation of polymerase chain reaction  methodology to the investigation of rna provides the researcher a method featuring speed, efficiency, specificity and sensitivity. since rna cannot serve as a template for dna polymerase, a reverse transcription step was combined with pcr to transform rna into a suitable complementary dna , a technique that is referred to as rt-pcr   <cit> . rt-pcr has enabled important experiments dealing with gene expression and its regulation. more sensitive and less laborious than northern blotting hybridization and rnase protection assays, it has rapidly become a common procedure  <cit> .

however, a frequent cause of concern among investigators performing quantitative rt-pcr is inaccurate data acquisition due to dna contamination in rna preparations, because pcr cannot discriminate between cdna targets synthesized by reverse transcription and genomic dna contamination. dna contamination in rna preparations is easily detected by performing a non-reverse transcriptase control. furthermore, pcr primers can be designed for controlling the genomic dna contamination. primers that span intron-exon boundaries amplify a product from contaminating dna that includes the intron, making it larger than the expected cdna product. alternatively, primers can be designed to anneal at a splice junction avoiding any signal based on dna contamination  <cit> . unfortunately, the genome of low eukaryotic or prokaryotic cells has few intron containing genes, which makes the above strategies useless. we have been faced with the problem of dna contamination in our samples of rna after initial attempts to study mrna level in sacchromyces cerevisiae by rt-pcr. common methods used to remove dna from rna samples include poly  mrna purification by oligo  chromatography  <cit> , selective rna precipitation with lithium chloride  <cit>  and selective dna extraction with acid phenol: chloroform  <cit> . oligo  chromatography is expensive and requires extensive manipulation whereas licl precipitation and acid phenol: chloroform extraction could not be effective, mainly in the amplification of rare transcripts when an increasing number of cycles or amount of template rna has to be used. an alternative method employs treatment of rna samples with dnase i followed by heat inactivation of the enzyme  <cit> . optionally, heat denatured dnase is extracted and rna precipitated in order to avoid the presence of some compounds that could interfere with rt-pcr assay. the present study describes the comparison of two protocols for preparing yeast rna free from dna suitable for rt-pcr analysis based on dnase i removal of genomic dna.

here, we analyze the use in rt-pcr assay of yeast rna samples isolated from routine techniques and treated by dnase i, in order to remove the dna contamination. an additional step of rna extraction followed by precipitation with ethanol must be included in order to guarantee that the unfractionated rna samples are suitable for the analysis of expression of any saccharomyces cerevisiae gene.

we hope that the re-evaluation of the methods for preparation of samples for rt-pcr showed here will encourage the use of this up to now under appreciated methodology for analyzing the mrna levels in saccharomyces cerevisiae.

RESULTS
to emphasize the fact that a simple dnase i treatment on crude rna preparation is sufficient to perform accurate estimative of mrna level by rt-pcr, we carried out the study of the expression of act <dig> mrna along of the growth of an yeast strain in ypad medium, using untreated and treated rna samples obtained from cells harvested at different growth stages . the amplification by rt-pcr using act <dig> primers and dnase i treated samples produced less intense bands  at all growth phases when compared to those where untreated rna was used . at stationary phase, using total rna devoid of dna contamination  no expression of act <dig> genes was observed, a result consistent with those obtained using northern-blotting analysis  <cit> , that showed a 100-fold decrease in act <dig> mrna level at stationary phase.

in conclusion, total yeast rna preparations can be made suitable for rt-pcr analysis of gene expression if they are free of contaminant dna. dnase i treatment was effective in reducing to an undetectable level the dna originally present in rna samples. different dnase brands can be used for this purpose. here, dnase i preparations supplied form different manufacturers were used and both were very efficient in eliminating contaminant dna. an additional step of extraction of reminiscent rna with phenol: chloroform: isoamyl alcohol and precipitation with ethanol, as described in protocol i, although more laborious, can be applied to amplify any saccharomyces cerevisiae rna using rt-pcr methodology. the main problem with this procedure is the need of starting with a higher amount of rna to minimize loss of the sample during the precipitation step. protocol ii, on the other hand, is simple, practical and rapid because it avoids the extraction/precipitation steps and allows the direct use of treated rna samples for rt-pcr assays. however, as magnesium concentration is a critical parameter in both rt and pcr reactions, the amount of edta used for inhibiting dnase i activity must be carefully titrated.

CONCLUSIONS
rt-pcr can be a method for determining transcript level in total unfractionated yeast rna, since the rna samples are free from contaminant dna.

dna contamination from rna samples can be efficiently eliminated by treatment with commercial dnase i preparations.

however, although simple and efficient, that treatment introduces chelant cation in rna samples which makes it, in some cases, not suitable to be utilized in a subsequent enzymatic analysis like rt-pcr, because the enzymes used in that methodology, reverse transcriptase and dna polimerase are mg2+-dependent.

to ensure that no false positive result, or on the contrary, failure on mrna amplification occur, we established a general procedure for any s. cerevisiae mrna amplification, where an additional step of rna extraction followed by precipitation with ethanol was included.

the re-evaluation of these methods described here will permit, a large scale or repetitive gene expression evaluation as those commonly performed during yeast utilization in industry, can be performed by rt-pcr, without additional cost, since even unfractionated rna can be suitable for this methodology.

