BACKGROUND
mycosphaerella is a large genus of plant pathogenic fungi, composed of more than  <dig>  species  <cit> . one of the most important species is mycosphaerella fijiensis morelet  <cit>  anamorphic paracercospora fijiensis), a heterothallic ascomycete that causes black sigatoka in bananas. this disease was first reported in fiji, an archipelago located in the southeast pacific ocean. in latin america, this disease was first reported in  <dig>  <cit> . black sigatoka results in severe economic losses due to its high capacity for destruction, representing a major social and economic problem, especially in underdeveloped countries where bananas are cultivated and used as a major food source  <cit> .

black sigatoka can lead to production losses of 35-100%  <cit>  and must be strictly controlled using costly fungicides  <cit> . the frequent and heavy use of fungicides can lead to the emergence of organisms that are resistant to the active compounds, as observed in central america in the case of strobilurin fungicides  <cit> . research projects using experimental hybrids are being performed in attempts to generate plants that are genetically resistant to m. fijiensis <cit> . however, the high genetic diversity found in m. fijiensis <cit>  may represent an obstacle to the development of resistant plants because resistance may be quickly superseded.

recently, the m. fijiensis genome was sequenced and became available on the joint genome institute website . the genome is approximately  <dig>  mb long, and half is estimated to be formed by repetitive element sequences  <cit> . repetitive sequences are ubiquitous components of fungal genomes. in most genomic analyses, repetitive sequences are associated with transposable elements   <cit> .

transposable elements can be hierarchically classified by class, subclass, order, superfamily, family and subfamily. there are two classes of tes that differ in the presence or absence of an intermediate rna. in class i tes, the dna is synthesized from a single rna transposon copy via reverse transcriptase and is then able to insert itself elsewhere in the genome. in class ii tes, direct excision occurs, followed by integration into the genome  <cit> .

all class i tes transpose via an intermediate rna that is transcribed from a single copy of the genome and produces a cdna via reverse transcription, which is encoded by the element itself. each complete transposition cycle produces a new copy. consequently, retrotransposons are often the major contributors to the repetitive fraction in the genome. retrotransposons have two major subclasses, the ltr  retrotransposons and the non-ltr retrotransposons , which are distinguished mainly by the respective presence or absence of ltrs at their ends. furthermore, groups of non-autonomous tes lack one or more of the genes essential for transposition, including mites  for class ii, sines for non-ltr retrotransposons, and trim retrotransposons  and lards  for ltr retrotransposons  <cit> . the ltr retrotransposons are prevalent in eukaryotes and contain direct-repeat sequences flanking a coding region. these retrotransposons vary in size, reaching up to  <dig> kb. they typically contain so-called gag and pol orfs. the gag region encodes structural proteins that form a virus-like particle . occasionally, the retrotransposons can also contain orfs of unknown function. the pol region encodes a protease, a reverse transcriptase, an rnase and an integrase  <cit> . the two main superfamilies of ltr retrotransposons are gypsy and copia, which differ in the order of the regions that encode the reverse transcriptase and the integrase within the pol region  <cit> .

class ii tes can be divided into two subclasses. subclass  <dig> comprises the tes that are transposed by integration and excision mechanisms, in which both strands of dna are cleaved during excision, whereas subclass  <dig> consists of tes that duplicate before insertion. subclass  <dig> contains two orders; the most well known is the tir  order. this order contains nine superfamilies: tc1-mariner, mutator, hat, merlin, transib, p, pif/harbinger, cacta and crypton. subclass  <dig> has two orders: helitron and maverick <cit> .

the effect of te insertion depends on the location where it occurs in the genome . however, few alterations are caused by a transposition event because deleterious mutations are preferentially eliminated. thus, some of the deleterious effects of tes may be due to ectopic recombination among tes of the same family. to prevent possible damage caused by the presence of tes in the genome, some fungi possess te-silencing mechanisms, such as rip . rip is a gene silencing mechanism that leads to the mutation of repeated dna sequences during the neurospora crassa sexual cycle . in general, rip induces g:c-to-a:t mutations in duplicated dna sequences that are longer than  <dig> bp and share more than 80% identity  <cit> . recently, rip has been described in a wide range of fungi belonging to different classes  <cit> . in specific cases, such as in pucciniomycotina, the process and target site of hypermutation are conserved  <cit> .

excluding deleterious insertions, the mutational activity of tes may promote genetic diversity and speed up the adaptation process. in addition, some transposons are physically linked to genes and can control their expression  <cit> . recently, li et al.  <cit>  showed that many mirnas are derived from tes and that the incorporation of these cognate tes into the conserved domains of genes that encode proteins may lead to their integration into regulatory networks via mirna.

thus, given the potential importance of transposons in the evolution of m. fijiensis, the present study describes an analysis of tes to characterize the main class i and class ii elements present in the genome of m. fijiensis and the possible impacts of their presence in the genome of the fungus that causes black sigatoka.

RESULTS
analysis of transposable elements in the genome of m. fijiensis
using a combination of bioinformatics analyses and manual inspections, we have identified  <dig> % of the sequenced genome of m. fijiensis as corresponding to tes, of which 61% are related to complete copies of tes and the other remaining 39% are degenerate copies . approximately 86% of the sequences identified have identity with ltr-gypsy elements. due to the number of accumulated mutations, very degenerate sequences may have no role in the regulation of genes and, because of decreased homology between the sequences, may not represent targets for ectopic recombination. these considerations drove us to search for complete transposable elements because such elements contain copies less affected by mutations and they can have a real impact on the evolution of this pathogen. a total of  <dig> ltr-gypsy and  <dig> ltr-copia elements belonging to class i were identified. twenty-eight mariner, five mutator and one harbinger class ii elements were also identified. together, these tes represent approximately  <dig>  mb of the genome, corresponding to  <dig> % of the sequenced genome. the structures of the main tes identified are presented in figure  <dig>  upon analysis of the genes encoding proteins related to transposition, only three ltr-copia elements were identified as being potentially active in the genome. the other tes contained multiple stop codons within the sequences encoding the proteins responsible for transposition.

the ltr-gypsy elements, the main representatives in the genome of m. fijiensis, vary in size and are on average  <dig>  to  <dig>  bp. these elements contain direct ltrs containing from a few hundred bp to over  <dig> kb. the 5' and 3' ltr in each element typically end in inverted repeats with the consensus 5'-tg … ca- <dig>  as found in many retrotransposons such as gypsy/ty <dig>  <cit> . a total of  <dig> insertion sites or tsrs  were identified, with a wide variation in the tsrs of the ltr elements . a total of  <dig> ltr elements were analyzed; the remaining  <dig> ltr elements manifested differences in the 5’ and 3’ insertion sequences and were not analyzed because they showed evidence of ectopic recombination in the genome. the insertion sites varied in size from four to six bp. a total of  <dig> insertion sites of five bp,  <dig> sites of four bp and three sites of six bp were found. the majority of the four-bp insertion sites were primarily related to elements of approximately  <dig>  bp. the most frequently found insertion sites were: ctata , tatag  and atata . among all of the insertion sites identified,  <dig> sites exhibited low frequency and were observed no more than twice. regarding the class ii transposons, the insertion sites were: ta , gcagcaacc, gactctggt, tcgtctc, tcatgccc  and ctc .

transposable elements physically linked to coding regions or protein domains
the analysis of the regions approximately  <dig>  bp upstream and downstream of each te allowed the identification of  <dig> genes encoding proteins or protein domains . several genes were identified that encoded proteins related to important metabolic pathways, such as malate synthase, malate dehydrogenase, fructose- <dig> -bisphosphatase, acetyl-coa c-acyltransferase, ribose-5-phosphate isomerase a, sucrose-6-phosphate hydrolase, phosphoglycerate mutase, atp synthase, glutaminases and glutamate cysteine ligase .

d: downstream.

u: upstream.

additional identified genes encoded proteins that potentially exhibit strong correlations with pathogenic systems, such as abc  and mfs  transporters and regulatory proteins similar to laea and serine/threonine kinases. the analysis also identified genes that encode proteins related to detoxification , and multiple protein domains involved in signal transduction, including pre-mrnas , oxidoreductases , ubiquitilation , membrane proteins , exocytosis  and proteins with functions related to apoptosis and dna repair processes . no complete copy of a te has been found in a silenced gene or in an intronic region.

evidence of rip in the genome of m. fijiensis
most of the identified tes contained stop codons in the sequences encoding the proteins related to transposition. only three ltr-copia elements exhibited “in silico” evidence of activity, because they have high identity among the ltrs, with orfs consistent with complete mrna transcription. the tpa/apt and / ratios were used to investigate rip-like events in the genome of m. fijiensis among the tes with more than 80% identity. altogether, eight te groups were identified that shared more than 80% identity among the tes within the same group. the groups and the respective numbers of aligned sequences were mutator , mariner <dig> , mariner <dig> , ltr-copia , ltr-gypsy <dig> , ltr-gypsy <dig> , ltr-gypsy <dig>  and ltr-gypsy <dig> . rip-like mutations were identified when the index values generated for each element group were compared with the standards for both indices used . 

*standard reference values of the rip indices are: tpa/apt >  <dig>  and / <  <dig>   <cit> .

hybridization profiles related to transposons of class i and ii
two hybridizations with examples of class i and ii tes were performed in an attempt to detect possible traces of activity of these tes in m. fijiensis populations. in the first hybridization, the probe used was the reverse transcriptase of the one sagui ltr-copia, which exhibited evidence of recent activity by bioinformatic analysis. this element is  <dig>  bp in size, with 100% identical ltrs. the orf encodes the conserved domains of the key proteins related to transposition, with the exception of aspartic protease, whose conserved domains are difficult to identify . we have identified "in silico" four copies of this element in the genome of m. fijiensis. the hybridization profile of the sagui element revealed copy variations among the different m. fijiensis isolates. among the nine isolates analyzed, eight different hybridization profiles could be observed .

in the second hybridization, the probe was constructed from the conserved regions of four mariner transposons with no “in silico” evidence of activity in the sequenced genome . the hybridization profile also demonstrated copy variations among the different isolates. five different hybridization patterns could be observed among the nine isolates analyzed .

discussion
fungi are versatile eukaryotes that occupy different ecological niches and are responsible for several important processes, such as organic matter decomposition, symbiotic association and pathogenicity in animals and plants. this group of microorganisms is considered a model for the study of the biology and genetics of eukaryotes. accordingly, fungi are among those groups of organisms with the largest number of genomes already sequenced or in the process of being sequenced and annotated  <cit> .

the genomes of fungi contain varying numbers and sizes of repeated sequences, usually representing 3% to 10% of the sequenced genome. however, some genomes diverge from this range, such as the genome of ashbya gossypii, which, surprisingly, contains no detected tes  <cit> , and the genome of tuber melanosporum, which consists of 58% tes  <cit> . in laccaria bicolor, more than  <dig> genus-specific tes and a large number of remaining degenerate copies were found  <cit> . the genome of mycosphaerella graminicola contains  <dig> % of repetitive sequences, and a large percentage of these sequences are in dispensable chromosomes  <cit> . in the present analysis, the repeatmasker software, one of the most readily available and widely used bioinformatics tools for the detection, characterization and analysis of repetitive element sequences in the genomes of eukaryotes  <cit> , along with the ltr-finder and the repeat finder programs, determined that approximately 7% of the m. fijiensis genome consists of complete tes. using differences in the dinucleotide profile, clutterbuck  <cit>  estimated that approximately 50% of the genome of m. fijiensis is composed of repetitive elements. compared with analysis based on anomalies in the dfd , which have little specificity, analysis using repeatmasker is much more specific because it uses a database  of consensus sequences from the principal characterized transposable elements. the anomalies in the dfd may overestimate the number of transposable elements in the genome because they detect any changes in the gc content, including telomeric and centromeric sequences, material from horizontal transfer, satellite regions, supernumerary chromosomes and riped sequences, among others. moreover, rip appears to be intense in m. fijiensis. rip is a mechanism that acts on not only transposable elements but also on other duplicated sequences. thus, clutterbuck  <cit>  inferred a large number of repetitive sequences without specifying what percentage of these sequences are actually transposable elements. moreover, repeatmasker can fail to detect very degenerate copies of elements and also can miss tes that are not represented in the database . as the evidence suggests that the rip process operates heavily on the genome of m. fijiensis, it is expected that very degenerate copies are partially identified by the program. however, due to the number of accumulated mutations, very degenerate sequences may have no role in the regulation of genes and, because of decreased homology between the sequences, may not represent targets for ectopic recombination. these considerations drove us to search for intact transposable elements because such elements contain copies less affected by mutations and they can have a real impact on the evolution of this pathogen.

in terms of the types of tes identified, retrotransposons appear to be largely responsible for the repetitive fraction of the m. fijiensis genome. these elements were found in hundreds of copies and exhibit great family diversity. gypsy/ty <dig> has been the main te group identified in phytopathogenic fungi  <cit>  and has also been widely identified in the genome of m. fijiensis. the class ii tes are typically ancient elements found in almost all eukaryotes; however, they are usually found in a small number of copies  <cit> . the best represented class ii elements were those belonging to the tc1-mariner superfamily, one of the most diverse and widely distributed in nature. another superfamily identified that occurs in various species of eukaryotes was the mutator superfamily. both superfamilies encode a transposase and are flanked by tirs; however, they differ in relation to the insertion site. elements of the tc1-mariner superfamily usually insert into ta sequences, while tes of the mutator superfamily have insertion sites that vary from  <dig> to  <dig> bp  <cit> . finally, an element belonging to the harbinger superfamily exhibited a high accumulation of mutations and did not allow for the detection of conserved domains. elements belonging to this superfamily generally have two orfs, one encoding a dna binding protein and the other encoding a transposase  <cit> .

there is strong evidence that ectopic recombination events are now or have been very intense in the genome of m. fijiensis. this is because, in addition to finding a large number of degenerate sequences and solo ltrs,  <dig> identified retrotransposons had different insertion sites flanking the 5’ and 3’ end of the same element. the presence of different insertion sites at the ends of the same te and the presence of numerous degenerate sequences are indicative of ectopic recombination among retrotransposons. recombination events can influence the adaptation of this species by promoting rearrangements  and chromosome breakage  <cit> . in magnaporthe grisea, the analysis of the distribution of transposable elements in the genome has highlighted the fact that in the past there was an extensive ectopic recombination. as this organism relies on asexual propagation, recombination events can help improve the adaptation of these microorganisms because many genes that contribute to host specificity are present in regions rich in transposable elements. thus, recombination events can lead to deletions or alterations in the structure of these genes and therefore altered expression  <cit> . the involvement of tes in ectopic recombination has also been inferred in coprinus cinereus <cit>  and verticillium dahliae <cit> .

possible te activity has been identified in many sequenced fungal genomes. in l. bicolor,  <dig> different te families were observed, but the accumulation of mutations in the nucleotides was less than 5%, indicating that the tes were recently active. therefore, the potential activity of these elements could be inferred  <cit> . in the genome of fusarium oxysporum, the potential activity of these elements has been identified in several families  <cit> . the analysis of coding proteins from tes showed that only three ltr-copia elements contained uninterrupted orfs and were potentially active. the high number of stop codons identified in the tes could be explained by the presence of efficient transposon silencing mechanisms. in fact, our results indicated rip-like events with preferred mutations in cpg dinucleotides in both class i and ii tes. the rip index values were highly significant when compared with the set default values and standards set in other tes analyzed in different fungi , such as pettra in penicillium chrysogenum <cit>  and ophio3- <dig> in ophiostoma ulmi <cit> , demonstrating that this process must have been or is intense in m. fijiensis. furthermore, compared to the punt element of neurospora crassa <cit> , where rip is considered a severe event, all of the tes analyzed in m. fijiensis exhibited higher values. rip-like events in m. fijiensis have also been identified by clutterbuck  <cit> . however, only one transposon with three representatives was analyzed. the present study analyzed a total of  <dig> transposons. the existence of rip in certain genomes can carry a high evolutionary cost, as observed in n. crassa, where rip could be correlated with the absence or paucity of duplicated genes in the genome. because gene duplication is important for the evolution of any species, the existence of rip may have a significant impact on the genomes of several fungi  <cit> . however, there is also the possibility that rip can be mild, leaving one or more copies of a gene functional, and giving rise to novel alleles  <cit> .

the hybridization profile found for the sagui element evidence the recent activity of tes, given that a large proportion of the hybridization profiles found in different isolates were polymorphic, which can be correlated with the recent activity of the element in m. fijiensis populations. sagui has been identified and characterized as being potentially active because it possesses complete ltrs and orfs containing the domains of the key proteins involved in transposition. only the aspartic proteinase domain was not detected. however, this is an expected result, given that this protein is thought to be difficult to analyze because of its low similarity and different evolution rates  <cit> . regarding the mariner element, although no traces of activity were observed in the analyzed copies, the hybridization profiles of the different isolates showed polymorphisms, consistent with active tes in the m. fijiensis populations. another explanation for the few active tes in the analyzed genome may be the fact that in most sequenced fungi species, the genome is highly stable because it has been maintained under laboratory conditions for long periods of time. however, we must emphasize that defective or non-autonomous elements can be mobilized in trans by related active elements containing proteins with motif sequences recognized by enzymes that are essential to transposition  <cit> . moreover, degenerate sequences can still have the ability to modify gene expression of the neighboring genes. another important aspect is that the hybridization profile detected emphasizes the possibility of the use of such elements as molecular markers to trace the population structure of m. fijiensis in places where this disease has been described.

genes encoding proteins that may be related to pathogenic mechanisms have been identified around complete tes. many genes for abc and mfs transporters have been identified near tes-rich regions. some of these transporters have an important role as drug carriers and, therefore, provide protection to the organism against toxic products and fungicides. in plant pathogens, these transporters may be associated with multidrug resistance, virulence and altered sensitivity to fungicides  <cit> . another gene identified near a te encodes a protein similar to laea, a regulator of virulence genes and, possibly, the first antimicrobial target specific for filamentous fungal pathogens of plants and animals  <cit> . similarly, tes have been found near important genes related to the pathogenicity system in two important plant pathogens, m. grisea and f. oxysporum. at first, khang  <cit>  studied the gene avr-pita in the pertaining to avirulence gene family. these authors discovered that members of this family are associated with different types of transposable elements. the activity of these elements, as well as rearrangements caused by ectopic recombination, can potentially modify the structure or expression of avr genes, and thus new races of the pathogen may emerge. in f. oxysporum, certain regions of the genome related to pathogenicity have 74% of transposable elements identified in the genome, including 95% of all dna transposons that may be involved in gene duplication events  <cit> .

several genes encoding proteins involved in vital processes were found near te-related sequences. genes encoding proteins such as chitin synthase, involved in cell wall biogenesis, were found in regions with a high density of transposon-related sequences. several sequences encoding serine/threonine kinase proteins have been identified. these protein domains are related to different regulatory pathways in cellular processes, such as growth, sexual/asexual development  <cit>  and pathogenicity  <cit> . our results also identified several genes near tes encoding proteins with important roles in transcription, translation, replication, cellular respiration, nutrient and ion transport, dna repair, ubiquitination, apoptosis and cell wall formation and stabilization as well as those involved in important metabolic pathways, such as fatty acid metabolism, pyruvate metabolism and amino acid and vitamin biosynthesis and degradation. our results show that the insertions of transposable elements in the genome of m. fijiensis are probably harmless. however, the activity of the elements near important genes can potentially modify gene expression, as well as the rearrangements caused by ectopic recombination can modify gene structure.

a final relevant fact regarding the presence and maintenance of transposable elements in the genome of several species is the possible role of tes in gene regulation. excluding deleterious insertions, tes may be linked to the regulation of gene expression. this is a process known as domestication and represents an example of the exaptation of tes at the molecular level, which would explain their maintenance in the genome of several species  <cit> . recently, humans mirnas derived from tes have been implicated in the regulation of important pathways, such as cell proliferation, chromosome segregation, mitosis and apoptosis  <cit> . in addition, mirnas based on tes may represent essential components in the maintenance of genomic stability, serving as a safeguard for genome integrity and potentially functioning as an anti-cancer defense mechanism  <cit> . in fungi, little is known about mirna regulators. transposable element domestication through mirna-based regulation systems may be another important contribution of tes in fungi. therefore, further investigations into te dynamics and their role in regulatory networks via mrna should be performed in m. fijiensis, especially in light of the strong evidence reported in the present study about the organization and possible impacts of the presence of transposons in the genome of this fungus.

CONCLUSIONS
the analysis of tes in m. fijiensis suggests that tes play an important role in the evolution of this organism because the activity of these elements, as well as the rearrangements caused by ectopic recombination, can result in deletion, duplication, inversion and translocation. some of these changes can potentially modify gene structure or expression and, thus, facilitate the emergence of new strains of this pathogen.

the existence of rip may have a significant impact on the genomes of m. fijiensis because the occurrence of rip prevents the accumulation of transposable elements in fungi and this mechanism may also be related to the gradual divergence of duplicated genes, a process regarded as essential for the emergence of genes with new functions.

a thorough study and understanding of the role of tes in m. fijiensis would allow for more comprehensive understanding of the genome organization. in addition, these tes have low target site specificity, so it can be used for mutagenis or as molecular markers to study population and genetic diversity.

