BACKGROUND
peptidases  are proteolytic enzymes essential for the life of all organisms. the relevance of peptidases is proved by the fact that 2–5% of all genes encode for peptidases and/or their homologs irrespectively of the organism source  <cit> . in the swissprot database  <cit>  about 18% of sequences are annotated as "undergoing proteolytic processing", and there are over  <dig> known and putative peptidases in the human genome. it is also worth noticing that more than 10% of the human peptidases are under investigation as drug targets  <cit> . proteases are responsible for a number of fundamental cellular activities, such as protein turnover and defense against pathogenic organisms. since the basic protease function is "protein digestion", these proteins would be potentially dangerous in living organisms, if not fully controlled. this is one of the major reasons for the presence of their natural inhibitors inside the cell. all peptidases catalyze the same reaction, namely the hydrolysis of a peptide bond, but they are selective for the position of the substrate and also for the amino acid residues close to the bond that undergoes hydrolysis  <cit> . there are different classes of peptidases identified by the catalytic group involved in the hydrolysis of the peptide bond. however the majority of the peptidases can be assigned to one of the following four functional classes:

• serine peptidase

• aspartic peptidase

• cysteine peptidase

• metallopeptidase

in the serine and cysteine types the catalytic nucleophile can be the reactive group of the amino acid side chain, a hydroxyl group  or a sulfhydryl group . in aspartic and metallopeptidases the nucleophile is commonly "an activated water molecule". in aspartic peptidases the side chains of aspartic residues directly bind the water molecule. in metallopeptidases one or two metal ions hold the water molecule in place and charged amino acid side chains are ligands for the metal ions. the metal may be zinc, cobalt or manganese, and a single metal ion is usually bound by three amino acid ligands  <cit> . among the different ways to control their activity, the most important is through the interactions of the protein with other proteins, namely naturally occurring peptidase inhibitors. peptidase inhibitors can or cannot be specific for a certain group of catalytic reactions. in general there are two kinds of interactions between peptidases and their inhibitors: the first one is an irreversible process of "trapping", leading to a stable peptidase-inhibitor complex; the second one is a reversible process in which there is a tight binding reaction without any chemical bond formation  <cit> . a shift of interest towards the mode of interaction of protein inhibitors with their targets is due to the possibility of designing new synthetic inhibitors. the research is driven by the many potential applications in medicine, agriculture and biotechnology.

in the last years, an invaluable source of information about proteases and their inhibitors has been made available through the merops database  <cit> , so that it is possible to search for known peptidase sequences  or peptidase-inhibitor sequences . exploiting this source, in this paper we address the problem of relating a peptidase sequence  with sequences that can putatively but reliably inhibit it . to this aim we implemented a method that first and reliably discriminates whether a given sequence is a peptidase or a peptidase-inhibitor, and afterwards gives a list of its putative interacting ligands . our method provides answers to the following questions:

1) given a pair of sequences, are they a pair of protease and inhibitor that can interact?

2) given a protease , can we predict the list of the proteins in a defined database that can inhibit  the query protein?

3) given a proteome, can we compute the list of peptidases and their relative inhibitors for each protease class?

RESULTS
testing prosite and hmmer-pfam capability of detecting merops peptidases and inhibitors
the first step of our analysis is to evaluate the performance of prosite  <cit>  on data sets of proteases and inhibitors, as derived from merops  <cit> . our method focuses on the four major classes of peptidases and their inhibitors as identified by the catalytic group involved in the hydrolysis of the peptide bond: serine, aspartic, cysteine and metallo- peptidases. in merops there are annotations for  <dig> peptidase patterns and  <dig> inhibitor patterns. we adopted peptidases and inhibitors as annotated in merops as the positive class . the negative counterpart was taken from papia  <cit> , and comprises non-inhibitor and non-peptidase non homologue sequences  . we start by running prosite on the papia+merops data sets. prosite can or cannot find a correct match. if a known inhibitor  sequence is matched by a prosite inhibitor  pattern we count it as a true positive , otherwise it is labeled as a false negative . conversely, papia sequences having a match with a prosite inhibitor  pattern are false positives ; otherwise they are true negatives .

in table  <dig> the results obtained by filtering the prosite and the papia+merops data sets are listed. it is worth noticing that the prosite pattern search produces almost zero false positives on the merops+papia data set, although with a significant number of false negatives. this indicates that the method has a quite high specificity, but low coverage. in other words, a match has a high likelihood to be a true positive ; however due to the low coverage , still a non-match label may indicate a false negative .

in table  <dig> we report the same type of analysis using hmmer-pfam  <cit> . from the results it is evident that on average this method outperforms prosite. our finding is in agreement with early observations indicating that pfam is a better detection method than prosite  <cit> . we find that pfam is more balanced than prosite, although with a slightly lower specificity .

the decision-tree method
the high level of prosite specificity prompted us to combine this pattern matching procedure with hmmer-pfam by adopting a decision-tree method in order to take advantage of the features of both approaches . the results of the combined approach  are then listed in table  <dig>  it appears that the overall performance is slightly improved over hmmer-pfam alone. this is so particularly when the coverage of the positive class  is considered.

detection of possible protease-inhibitor interacting pairs
the most relevant issue addressed by this paper is the measure of the detection accuracy of possible peptidase-inhibitor interacting pairs. the idea is to address questions related to the putative peptidase/inhibitor interaction . in order to test the combined accuracy of our decision-tree with respect to the prosite and hmmer-pfam methods, we have taken all the possible sequence combinations of our selected data set, namely peptidase/inhibitor, peptidase/papia, inhibitor/papia, peptidase/peptidase, inhibitor/inhibitor, papia/papia, excluding the self-combinations . by adopting this procedure we ended up with  <dig> , <dig> pairs that were scored as described below.

we divided merops peptidase sequences in four classes according to their biological activity: aspartic , cysteine , metallo  and serine  peptidases. we labeled the inhibitors in the same way, with the exception that one more class is present for them, labeled as u; this set clusters all the inhibitors that are able to inhibit to some extent all types of peptidases .

among the  <dig> , <dig> possible pairs only those pairs pertaining to proteases and inhibitors of the same class are counted as members of the positive class . all the remaining pairs are labeled as negative examples. on this data set we tested prosite, hmmer-pfam and the combined decision-tree . we also tested the reverse decision-tree in which hmmer and prosite are swapped . in table  <dig> it is shown that despite of the fact that the overall accuracy  is very high for all methods, the decision-tree outperforms all the others as the increased values of all scoring indexes indicate. actually, the decision-tree approach shows the highest coverage and accuracy for both the peptidase-inhibitor interacting class and the negative set. it is also worth noticing that the correlation coefficient , that indicates the displacement from the random prediction, is very high for the decision-tree and it outperforms the second best method  of  <dig> percentage points, with a false positive rate close to  <dig> . this finding indicates that the decision-tree method can successfully be adopted to predict pairs of interacting peptidase/inhibitor, in order to sort out the subsets of possible interacting pairs of interest.

annotating peptidases and their inhibitors in human and mouse genomes
we applied the decision-tree method scored above to perform a large-scale genome annotation of peptidases and corresponding inhibitors of the human and mouse proteomes. we retrieved all known coding sequences and novel peptides from ensembl <dig>   <cit> . the human proteome consists of  <dig>  sequences; the mouse proteome contains  <dig>  sequences. the decision- tree method is compared with prosite and hmmer-pfam in singling out peptidases and inhibitors . the predictive performance of the decision-tree method in predicting putative pairs of peptidase/inhibitor for each major class of both proteomes is reported in table  <dig>  our results corroborate the view that among peptidases, the aspartic class is less populated than the other three and this is so in both proteomes. for inhibitors, the less populated classes are aspartic, cysteine and universal.

web server
in order to facilitate the user's search for protease/inhibitor interactions, we implemented a very simple web interface that exploits our developed decision-tree system. in practice it is possible to paste a sequence and the system checks whether that sequence is a protease or an inhibitor candidate. if the decision-tree returns a positive answer the server will provide the putative class among the four and the list of all possible known inhibitors . furthermore, the web server furnishes also the corresponding lists of possible ensembl protease-codes  of the human and mouse proteomes that belong to the predicted class of proteins and that can interact with the query sequence.

the server is available at  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we developed a decision-tree based method that exploits the features of prosite and hmmer-pfam in annotating peptidases and inhibitors and that is capable of correctly and reliably predict whether a given peptidase can or cannot interact with an inhibitor. the decision-tree discriminates peptidases or inhibitors with a score as high as 96%  of correct predictions, improving both the coverage and the specificity of the positive class  over prosite and hmmer-pfam. furthermore the decision-tree method is capable of predicting if a given protein pair is a pair of protease and inhibitor that can interact. this task can help in sorting out and speeding up the selection of possible interacting partners. given a protease or an inhibitor the decision-tree method computes the list of the proteins in a defined database that can inhibit or that can be inhibited by the query protein. finally, given a proteome the system provides the lists of peptidases and their relative inhibitors for each discriminated class.

