BACKGROUND
acrodonta is a group of squamate lizards that have the characteristic acrodont dentition. acrodonta consists of two families, agamidae and chamaeleonidae, while pleurodonta having the pleurodont dentition includes iguanidae sensu lato  <cit> . these three families are extant related members of the infraorder iguania  <cit> , containing approximately  <dig>  species in the world  <cit> . they are mainly dendrophilous or ground living, and herbivorous or insectivorous animals. agamids show a certain level of morphological convergence with iguanids whereas chamaeleonids are morphologically quite unique in various organs, such as eye, tongue, tail, and toe  <cit> . in contrast to the mainly new world distribution of iguanidae, extant acrodont families are distributed primarily in tropical or subtropical regions of the old world  <cit> . agamids are widely distributed in asia , australasia and africa. chamaeleonids can be seen in africa , madagascar, middle east, spain, and south asia.

phylogenetic relationships between iguanian lizards have been studied both morphologically  <cit>  and molecularly  <cit> . these studies are in agreement with one another with respect to the monophylies of acrodonta  and chamaeleonidae. however, the monophyletic status of both iguanidae and agamidae is still under debate and these families have often been treated as metataxa . within the families agamidae and chamaeleonidae, morphological studies identified several groups that nearly correspond to agamid subfamilies  <cit>  and chamaeleonid genera  <cit> . however, the interrelationships of these relatively deep-branch clades have not been settled yet even by the molecular studies that combined a few genes from mitochondrial and/or nuclear genomes. collection of more nucleotide sites may help to increase resolution in phylogenetic analyses.

complete mitochondrial genomes may be a target for this purpose because they provide ample nucleotide sites with straightforward sequencing and analytical procedures  and because they are relatively free from dna recombinations and gene duplications/deletions  <cit> , albeit with some criticisms on the close genetic linkages of mitochondrial genes, potential saturation of rapidly evolving sites, and occasional strong positive selections  <cit> . vertebrate mitochondrial dnas  are  <dig> -  <dig> kbp double-stranded circular dnas, which encode  <dig> genes for  <dig> trnas,  <dig> rrnas, and  <dig> proteins together with a major noncoding region or control region  that is believed to regulate replication and transcription of the mtdna  <cit> . the gene organization of these encoded genes and the cr is usually very conservative but, in some groups such as agamidae, gene rearrangements have been reported  <cit> . why the evolution of mitochondrial genomes is less conservative in some lineages with respect to rates of changes in the sequence and the gene arrangement is still an open question.

when we started this study, complete or nearly complete mtdna sequences were known from four agamids  <cit>  and one chamaeleonid  <cit> . macey et al.  <cit>  later added more than a dozen of chamaeleonid taxa mostly from genus chamaeleo. in this study, we collected additional mitogenomic sequences from taxa that represent major groups of agamidae and chamaeleonidae. using these molecular data, we addressed to clarify 1) frequency and timing of the gene rearrangements, 2) phylogenetic relationships among major acrodont groups, and 3) historical biogeography of acrodont lizards in their higher taxonomic level.

RESULTS
mitogenomic features of acrodonta
complete or nearly complete mtdna sequences of  <dig> agamid and  <dig> chamaeleonid species were determined for this study . these sequences, together with previously reported mitogenomic sequences for  <dig> agamids  <cit>  and  <dig> chamaeleonids  <cit> , were used to characterize features of acrodontan mitogenomes. the acrodontan mitogenomes contained  <dig> genes that show clear sequence similarity to corresponding mitochondrial genes from other vertebrates. anticodon sequences of trna genes were identical to those of other vertebrates with an exception.

asterisks for the mtdna length represent values for nearly complete mitogenomes with imcomplete cr sequences. the length of cr does not include that of trnapro gene for chameleons.

1mitochondrial genome sequences for these taxa were originally determined by dr. sayed a. m. amer and provided for this study through his courtesy.

abbreviations for museums are: nsmt, national science museum, tokyo; num, nagoya university museum; sdncu, specimen depository of the graduate school of natural sciences, nagoya city university; cas, california academy of science; and mvz, museum of vertebrate zoology, university of california at berkeley.

the anticodon triplet sequence of mitochondrial trnapro genes is usually 5'-tgg-3'  <cit> . thus, an unmodified uridine is likely to be present at the first anticodon base of mature trnapros that are responsible for decoding all four ccn codons  <cit> . so far, only unmodified uridine in this position is considered to be capable of pairing with all four bases at the third codon positions, while modification of the uridine leads to decoding only partial codon members of the 4-codon boxes  <cit> . calotes versicolor, a member of draconinae, had the 5'-tgg-3' anticodon in the trnapro gene. however, acanthosaura armata, another representative of draconinae, was found to have a 5'-cgg-3' anticodon. this is not a sequencing error, for the same 5'-cgg-3' sequence was found in the second individual of a. armata and an individual of acanthosaura lepidogaster . at present, we do not know how the ccn codons, all of which appear frequently in protein-coding genes of a. armata mtdna, are decoded by products of this aberrant trnapro gene and/or possibly imported proline trnas from cytosol. unknown modification or editing starting from cytidine at the first anticodon position may be responsible for this.

acrodontan mitogenomes show extensive variations in the location and orientation of the trnapro gene, which is typically encoded by the light strand and located between the trnathr gene and the cr in most other vertebrates . all the chamaeleonids examined possess the trnapro gene at the 3' side of the cr, 200- <dig> bp 5' to the trnaphe gene . the translocated trnapro gene accompanies two different types of at-rich regions around it . among agamids, the trnapro gene was found in the typical location and orientation for representatives from uromastycinae, leiolepidinae, amphibolurinae and hydrosaurinae. two representatives from draconinae  had an inverted trnapro gene , which was originally found by amer and kumazawa  <cit> . finally, the trnapro gene was translocated immediately 5' to the trnaphe gene in two representatives from agaminae  <cit> . thus, these anomalies in the position and orientation of trnapro gene were found in a lineage specific manner. another example of specific changes in the gene arrangement or features was seen in two representatives from australasian agamid subfamily amphibolurinae , in which duplicate cr sequences are inserted between nd <dig> and nd <dig> genes  <cit> . on the other hand, the characteristic stem-and-loop structure for the putative light-strand replication origin is known to have disappeared from the wancy trna gene cluster in multiple agamid lineages  <cit> . among the  <dig> iguanian taxa examined, all iguanid and chamaeleonid taxa retained this structure, whereas uromastyx benti, hydrosaurus amboinensis and two amphibolurine agamids did not have it.

control regions of chamaeleonid mitogenomes were considerably longer than agamid and iguanid counterparts. the average length of the cr was  <dig> bp among  <dig> chameleons, while that was  <dig> and  <dig> bp, respectively, among  <dig> agamids and  <dig> iguanids . figure  <dig> shows the schematic diagram of the chamaeleonid crs. as seen for mammals , domain  <dig> contains etas  elements and tandemly repeated sequences. domain  <dig> contains the central conserved region in which conserved boxes c, d and f  <cit>  are identified . domain  <dig> contains conserved sequence blocks  i and iii  <cit>  and two types of at-rich sequences. the first type, that occurs 5' to the trnapro gene, is characterized by repetition of a stretch of a followed by a stretch of t, n, and the second type found mostly 3' to the trnapro gene  is a repetition of an at sequence, n. although these two types can also be seen in non-chamaeleonid crs , they occur in chamaeleonids in much larger scales. moreover, chameleon crs, except for t. melleri, were found to have a long array of tandemly repeated sequences 5' to the etas regions in domain  <dig> . taken together, the expanded size of chamaeleonid crs is primarily due to tandem repetitions in domain  <dig> but this is also due to the extensive arrays of the two types of at-rich sequences in domain  <dig> 

phylogenetic analyses
iguanidae forms a sister group of acrodonta in which agamidae and chamaeleonidae are both monophyletic and sister to each other . these results were supported with  <dig>  bayesian posterior probability  and 100% maximum likelihood  bootstrap values. macey et al.  <cit>  recognized  <dig> major clades in agamidae and considered them agamid subfamilies, from which the present study includes 1- <dig> representative species. within agamidae, uromastyx benti  diverged first and leiolepis guttata  diverged next . uromastycinae and leiolepidinae have often been considered to be sister to each other, making a basal clade in agamidae  <cit> . among the other four agamid subfamilies, two representatives from amphibolurinae diverged first, followed by hydrosaurus amboinensis  and finally by two representatives from each of agaminae and draconinae .

twelve representative species that cover all  <dig> traditional genera of chamaeleonidae were sampled in this study: brookesia, rhampholeon , calumma, furcifer, bradypodion  and chamaeleo . our tree  shows that brookesia decaryi and rieppeleon kerstenii represent basal chamaeleonid lineages but that they are not sister to each other. our tree also shows non-monophyly of the traditional genus chamaeleo. six hornless species in the traditional subgenus chamaeleo  appeared in an entirely different position from horned trioceros melleri. t. melleri forms a sister group of calumma parsonii and furcifer oustalleti and all these three taxa cluster with kinyongia fischeri with the exclusion of the  <dig> hornless chamaeleo species.

previous studies  <cit>  suggested highly accelerated molecular evolutionary rates of acrodontan mitochondrial genes. this tendency was conspicuous for almost all lineages of acrodonts and reflected by considerably longer branches for acrodonts as compared to those for iguanids .

divergence times
the results suggest triassic-jurassic  divergence of acrodonta from iguanidae but much younger mid-cretaceous  divergence into agamidae and chamaleonidae . agamid subfamilies may have separated during late cretaceous times while chamaeleonid radiations into extant genera were estimated to have occurred in the cenozoic after the k/t boundary. among the time constraints used in the divergence time estimation, only the 5<t< <dig> mya divergence between african and arabian chamaeleo species was based on a biogeographic assumption. in order to evaluate effects of this ingroup calibration on divergence time estimation, we also conducted the multidistribute analysis without this constraint. the resultant divergence times at various iguanian nodes  were very similar to those obtained including this biogeographic constraint , supporting its congruence with other older time constraints based on fossil evidence.

recent molecular dating with multiple nuclear genes , though based on different dating methods and time constraints, suggested somewhat younger dates for the divergence of acrodonta from pleurodonta  and the separation into agamidae and chamaeleonidae . however, there is some topological difference between the studies  and several different analyses could provide at most  <dig> million years of confidence interval in each side of the best time estimate  <cit> . thus, the nuclear time estimates for the agamidae-chamaeleonidae split may partly overlap our mitochondrial estimate .

discussion
structural evolution of acrodontan mitogenomes
in the present study, mitogenomic sequences were collected from major representative lineages of acrodonta to provide an opportunity to compare mitogenomic structures among three iguanian families. iguanid mitogenomes were very conservative with no gene rearrangements. they also appear to have evolved much more slowly than agamid and chamaeleonid counterparts as judged from relatively short branch lengths within iguanidae . on the other hand, acrodontan  mitogenomes have an entirely different tendency with occasional gene rearrangements and increased molecular evolutionary rates.

in fig.  <dig>  possible lineages for the mitogenomic reorganizations described here are mapped along the phylogeny based on the parsimony criterion. although agamid mitogenomes have several examples of gene rearrangements, most of them can be assigned to specific lineages without multiple parallel changes, supporting the rarity and less homoplasious nature of mitochondrial gene rearrangements  <cit> . the only possible homoplasious change is the translocation of the trnapro gene from the 5' to 3' side of the cr in both agaminae and chamaeleonidae. however, the trnapro genes in these taxa are placed in a somewhat different genomic context; i.e., neighboring sequences composed of two types of at-rich sequences are always present in the chamaeleonids . this supports that translocations of the trnapro gene in agamines and chamaeleonids resulted from independent events. moreover, if this translocation had occurred once in a common ancestral lineage of agaminae and chamaeleonidae, multiple reversals to the original location of the trnapro gene must be assumed in several agamid lineages, which seems unlikely . gene rearrangements around the cr have been shown to occur independently in multiple lineages by the canonical duplication-and-deletion mechanism  <cit> .

to the best of our knowledge, very few studies  <cit>  have characterized structural organization and evolution of crs in lizard mitogenomes. the present study shows that a region encompassing boxes c, d and f retains a notable similarity among acrodonts and even among diverse groups of vertebrates . on the other hand, acrodontan crs do not seem to conserve csb ii in domain  <dig> and agamids do not even retain csb iii . this is in sharp contrast with crs of several iguanids, gekkonids and lacertids which conserve all three members of csbs , presenting another evidence for more conservative nature of iguanid mitogenomes than acrodontan counterparts.

phylogenetic relationships
as outlined earlier, acrodontan phylogeny was originally reconstructed with morphological data, which has been evaluated with molecular data using some mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences. the present study addressed this issue using the hitherto longest molecular dataset . as a trade-off of gaining the large number of sites, we had to somewhat sacrifice the depth of taxon sampling. it is thus important to assess monophylies of individual groups in order to interpret our results with respect to subfamilial or generic interrelationships.

fortunately, previous molecular studies using a number of taxa but less sites provided strong evidence for a number of clades in agamidae and chamaeleonidae. for example, honda et al.  <cit> , macey et al.  <cit>  and amer and kumazawa  <cit>  strongly, in terms of high bootstrap or other tree-support values, suggested monophylies of uromastycinae, amphibolurinae, draconinae and agaminae within agamidae. the remaining subfamilies leiolepidinae and hydrosaurinae contain limited numbers of extant species and the monophyly of some leiolepidine species was also strongly supported  <cit> . in addition, the occurrence of subfamily-specific gene rearrangements  is consistent with the monophylies of the corresponding groups. within chamaeleonidae, recent molecular studies using multiple gene sequences  <cit>  supported the monophylies of two of the traditional six genera . remaining traditional genera chamaeleo, calumma, bradypodion and rhampholeon may each be an assemblage of a few monophyletic groups  <cit>  but no definitive conclusion has been obtained on their phylogenetic relationships.

our mitogenomic tree  strongly supports the monophyly of agamidae relative to chamaeleonidae . this is not an artifact due to, e.g., the long branch attraction because all acrodontan lineages appear to possess accelerated molecular evolutionary rates relative to iguanids . morphological analyses  and some molecular ones  did not support the agamid monophyly while other molecular studies  did. although agamidae has been regarded as a metataxon under the tentative assumption of its monophyly  <cit> , this no longer seems necessary in light of our strong molecular evidence on the agamid monophyly.

mitogenomic data provided agamid subfamilial interrelationships with strong tree-support values in general . these relationships are consistent with the most parsimonious tree obtained by macey et al.  <cit>  using ~ <dig>  bp mitochondrial gene sequences. however, the traditional morphological view tended to unite uromastyx and leiolepis into a basal clade . the kishino-hasegawa test  suggested that this sister relationship of uromastyx and leiolepis is unlikely, though not rejectable . the sister group relationship of agaminae and draconinae is common between morphological  <cit>  and molecular  results.

our mitogenomic tree  was consistent with other molecular studies  <cit>  with respect to the most basal divergence of genus brookesia and the subsequent divergence of the rhampholeon + rieppeleon group. however, this phylogenetic relationship was not clear in townsend and larson  <cit>  who used ~ <dig>  bp mitochondrial gene sequences for phylogenetic inference. we conducted bayesian analyses using combined mitochondrial gene sequences that were used by raxworthy et al.  <cit>  and townsend and larson  <cit>  and the results  also supported the most basal divergence of brookesia as shown in townsend et al.  <cit> . although brookesia  and rhampholeon  were once grouped into a common subfamily brookesiinae  <cit> , another morphological study based on osteological characters  <cit>  suggested the basal divergence of brookesia alone. taken together, but primarily based on our mitogenomic phylogeny , we conclude that the madagascan brookesia represents the earliest shoot-off of extant chameleons.

the monophyly of traditional genus chamaeleo was strongly suggested by morphological analyses based on distinct synapomorphies  and it was subsequently supported by a molecular study  <cit> . however, another molecular study  <cit>  found separate occurrence of its two subgenera  in the chamaeleonid phylogeny, albeit with little statistical evaluation for their non-monophyly. the most recent molecular study  <cit>  showed stronger evidence for the separation of chamaeleo and trioceros, proposing their elevation to distinct genera. our mitogenomic analyses  showed that trioceros melleri is placed distinctly from  <dig> representatives from chamaeleo. the kishino-hasegawa test rejected  the best tree obtained by constraining the chamaeleo + trioceros monophyly . the more conservative shimodaira-hasegawa test  did not reject this tree but its probability was very low , supporting the formal elevation of chamaeleo and trioceros to distinct genera  <cit> .

1probabilities by the kishino-hasegawa test

2probabilities by the shimodaira-hasegawa test 

values with a minus mean 'rejective' in the 5% level

tree <dig> : bayesian tree from this study 

tree <dig> : topology consistent with klaver and böhme  <cit> 

tree <dig> : topology consistent with raxworthy et al.  <cit> 

tree <dig> : topology consistent with townsend and larson  <cit> 

tree <dig> : bayesian tree reconstructed using a combined data set from raxworthy et al.  <cit>  and townsend and larson  <cit> 

tree <dig> : bayesian tree reconscructed with the mitogenomic data set by constraining the monophyly of chamaeleo + trioceros

see additional file  <dig> for newick representations for each tree.

together with results on testing some specific hypotheses derived from previous morphological and molecular analyses , mitogenomic data seem to provide a certain level of resolution on the chamaeleonid phylogeny. to the best of our knowledge, clustering of furcifer with a group of calumma containing c. parsonii  was not suggested by previous studies. nor was clustering of these two taxa with trioceros . evaluation of these new relationships, which did not receive strong bootstrap supports , awaits further taxon sampling of mitogenomic and/or nuclear gene data.

historical biogeography
previous studies on the historical biogeography of acrodonta did not necessarily postulate the monophylies of agamidae and iguanidae. thus, terms such as the origins of iguania, acrodonta and agamidae have been confusingly used. this study provided strong evidence for the monophylies of agamidae and iguanidae, with which previous biogeographic hypotheses can be reevaluated. here, we discuss the acrodontan biogeography based on molecular, paleontological and geological evidence without a priori assumption of vicariance or dispersal .

there have been two major hypotheses on the origin of acrodonta, i.e., where the most recent common ancestor of agamidae and chamaeleonidae was, either laurasian or gondwanan. occurrence of acrodontan priscagamid  fossils from mid-late cretaceous of asia  led some researchers to hypothesize laurasian  origin of iguania and acrodonta . a recent report of a gliding acrodont lizard  from early cretaceous of china  <cit>  may also support this idea. extant agamid lizards are distributed primarily in eurasia but some occur in australasia and africa. recent molecular phylogeny  is consistent with a view that extant agamidae originated from asia and that some descendant lineages  dispersed to australasia and africa during cenozoic times when they were geographically connected to or in close proximity to eurasia. on the other hand, there is good agreement in gondwanan  origin of extant chamaeleonids  <cit> . taken together, the laurasian origin of acrodonta requires the long-distance transmarine dispersal of chamaeleonid ancestors from eurasia to madagascar/africa.

gondwanan origin of iguania was proposed by estes  <cit>  based on some fossil evidence and the basal divergence of iguania from scleroglossa, which is not tenable by recent molecular phylogeny. macey et al.  <cit>  used molecular phylogeny to advocate the gondwanan origin of acrodonta and proposed that major acrodontan lineages diverged vicariantly and/or migrated to the northern hemisphere by plate tectonics . although a recent molecular study  <cit>  further supported the out-of-india radiation of a subfamily agaminae, other molecular studies  <cit>  questioned the gondwanan vicariance or multiple northward migrations for at least some lineages .

more recently, some fossil evidence shed a light on this issue. bharatagama from early-middle jurassic kota formation of india  represents the oldest record of early acrodont iguanians  <cit> . this fossil record may support the gondwanan origin of acrodonts  <cit> . if acrodonts did originate from gondwanaland, it is consistent with the likely gondwanan origin of iguanidae sensu lato  but ancestors of extant agamids, which were postulated to be in asia , may need to have migrated from the southern to northern hemisphere by transmarine dispersal.

the present study  suggested that agamidae and chamaeleonidae are each monophyletic and that they diverged from each other in the mid-cretaceous  although independent molecular dating using nuclear genes suggested somewhat younger dates around  <dig> mya  <cit> . okajima and kumazawa  <cit>  previously showed that the appreciable gap in the estimated divergence time of oplurine iguanids between mitochondrial  <cit>  and nuclear  <cit>  gene sequences could be due to multiple factors, such as differences in the tree topology and time constraints assumed for each study, the intrinsic data property of mitochondrial and nuclear sequences, and relatively poor squamate fossil records  <cit>  that can be used to constrain ingroup squamate divergences precisely.

in spite of this somewhat low precision of time estimation, the molecular dating results  consistently suggest that agamidae and chamaeleonidae were separated after the middle-late jurassic break-up of pangea into laurasia and gondwanaland  and when the latter two supercontinents were further fragmented by plate tectonics  <cit> . geological data suggest that india and madagascar were drifted from gondwanaland in the early cretaceous  and separated from each other in the late cretaceous  <cit> . then, india moved northward and accreted to eurasia from the latest cretaceous to eocene  <cit> .

assuming gondwanan origin of acrodonta, the molecular dating results  are consistent with a view that agamidae vicariantly diverged from chamaeleonidae on the india/madagascar landmass. it may be further hypothesized that agamidae migrated to eurasia on the drifting indian subcontinent  while chamaeleonidae was left within madagascar and its descendants migrated to africa over mozambique channel and later to eurasia . molecular dating  suggested that extant chamaeleonid genera diverged during cenozoic times. some of them are distributed exclusively in madagascar  while the others are distributed in africa  or in africa + eurasia . because africa and madagascar had been clearly separated in the cenozoic  <cit> , generic radiations of chamaeleonids cannot be associated with gondwanan vicariance. as previous authors postulated  <cit> , chamaeleonids are likely to have experienced transmarine dispersal over mozambique channel multiple times. to the best of our knowledge, the oldest certain fossil record of chamaeleonidae is chamaeleo caroliquarti from western bohemia  <cit> . africa had long been isolated from other continents but connected to eurasia in the miocene  <cit> . thus, occurrence of this fossil in the miocene of europe is consistent with the above-mentioned biogeographic explanation.

molecular dating  also suggested that extant agamid subfamilies diverged from each other in the late cretaceous. if agamidae did migrate to eurasia on india as hypothesized above, the dating result suggests that subfamilial radiations of agamids occurred on the drifting indian subcontinent. this may sound somewhat unlikely but this is not impossible under the assumption that a number of ancient agamid lineages radiated, dispersed locally in asia, and became extinct. vastanagama susani and tinosaurus indicus from the early eocene of india are known as the earliest certain agamid fossils in south asia  <cit> .

then, how can this hypothesis based on gondwanan origin of extant acrodont groups reconcile with the early cretaceous xianglong and mid-late cretaceous priscagamid acrodonts from laurasian sites ? xianglong and priscagamids are stem acrodont lizards which are unlikely to be nested within extant agamids but their exact phylogenetic positions are not yet known  <cit> . therefore, they probably diverged from a long branch of stem acrodonts 110- <dig> mya . these extinct groups may be laurasian relics of acrodont lizards which had diverged from gondwanan acrodonts  before pangean break-up into laurasia and gondwanaland. alternatively, they may simply have derived from the gondwanan ancestors by transmarine dispersal.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, mitogenomic sequences collected from major acrodontan lineages were analyzed in comparison with iguanid counterparts. we detected distinct modes of mitogenomic evolution among iguanian families. agamidae was highlighted in including a number of lineage-specific mitochondrial gene rearrangements and chamaeleonidae was found to have a much longer cr sequences. although mitogenomes of these two families appear to evolve at accelerated rates, they still retain certain conserved features in cr sequences.

our mitogenomic data provided a certain level of resolution in reconstructing acrodontan phylogeny, although there still remain ambiguous relationships. the strong support for the agamid monophyly should influence taxonomic treatment of the metataxon agamidae and the suggested separation of trioceros from chamaeleo would support elevation of these taxa to distinct genera  <cit> . more resolution in unsettled acrodontan phylogenies should be sought by sequencing and comparing considerably longer regions of nuclear genomes than ever.

in this study acrodontan biogeography was reevaluated mostly in favor of gondwanan origin of acrodonta, which was originally proposed by estes  <cit>  and macey et al.  <cit> . we suggest that the whole extant agamidae may have migrated to eurasia with india. however, we do not agree to the possibility that all or most of agamid subfamilies were introduced to eurasia, australasia or africa by the accretion of gondwanan plates at different times  <cit> .

finally, we should carefully state that molecular data and our arguments presented herein do not strictly rule out the laurasian origin of acrodonta  <cit>  under the assumption that the long-distance transmarine dispersal of chamaeleonid ancestor from laurasian sites to madagascar/africa was possible by unknown geological settings. further efforts in testing these hypotheses, including ours, by diverse approaches should be encouraged in future.

