BACKGROUND
bees  provide a rich system for exploring the evolutionary consequences of a wide variety of life history characteristics. bees provision larvae with pollen and nectar, a trait that evolved in the early- to mid-cretaceous from carnivorous, wasp ancestors  <cit> . it has been suggested that this transition from carnivory to pollenivory led to rapid diversification and expansion of bee lineages as a result of the exploitation of pollen as a novel resource . within bees, a number of life history traits have evolved multiple times both within and among bee families, including diet specialization, eusociality, and social parasitism . a robust phylogeny is fundamental to determine how changes in these life history traits have affected behavior, geographic range, phenology, susceptibility to habitat loss or pathogens, and gene or genome evolution.

over  <dig> molecular phylogenies of bees have been published to date, and yet phylogenetic relationships among the seven families of bees remain highly controversial, with conflicting results obtained among and even within studies . morphological analyses have placed the plasterer or cellophane bees, family colletidae , as sister to the remainder of the bee families , or basal together with stenotritidae , a small family with limited australian distribution . this result is largely driven by a single morphological characteristic shared by apoid wasps and colletid bees: a bilobed  tongue or glossa  <cit> . subsequent molecular and morphological analyses have not supported a colletidae-basal hypothesis, and the bilobed glossa may be an independently-derived character associated with the application of the cellophane-like lining to cell and burrow walls  <cit> .

the families megachilidae  and the family apidae  clearly form a monophyletic group , supported by the shared possession of highly modified first and second labial palpal segments  <cit> . the remaining bee families  form the loosely-defined “short-tongued” bees. relationships among short-tongued bees are unclear. monophyly of short-tongued bees has not been supported by most previous morphological or molecular studies, although one analysis of three nuclear genes supported a tree in which short-tongued and long-tongued bees are reciprocally monophyletic . the family andrenidae has been suggested to be sister to a clade containing colletidae, stenotritidae, and halictidae , sister to melittidae , or sister to all bees except melittidae .

molecular studies have proposed melittidae as monophyletic and sister to the remainder of the bees  or sister to the long-tongued bees . both morphological and molecular  <cit>  studies have supported a tree in which melittidae is a paraphyletic group at the base of bee phylogeny . such a topology would lend support to elevating the three melittid subfamilies  to families .

an obvious strategy to improve our ability to distinguish among alternative hypotheses is to increase both taxonomic sampling and the number of genes sampled for phylogenetic analysis . increased taxon sampling can improve statistical support for accurate phylogenetic estimates even when the taxa added have incomplete information  <cit> . we estimate phylogenetic relationships among an unprecedented number of apoid taxa by combining publically-available data from multiple, independent sources. we confined our analyses to dna sequences of nuclear protein-coding genes, which have more power than mitochondrial genes in recovering older relationships  <cit>  and are considerably more straight-forward to align compared to ribosomal genes. we tested alternative phylogenetic relationships from the literature for statistical significance. finally, we provide the first global biogeographic analysis to explore bee historical biogeography at the level of family and subfamily.

RESULTS
the bee tree of life
we have assembled the largest molecular data set for analyzing higher-level  relationships among bees to date. our data set includes  <dig> of the approximately  <dig> currently recognized bee genera  <cit> , including over  <dig>  sites concatenated from dna sequences of twenty nuclear protein-coding genes . although the alignment contains a substantial amount of missing data , we returned a phylogeny with high bootstrap proportions for the monophyly of each bee family . we obtained strong bootstrap support for several additional clades: the long-tongued bees , colletidae + stenotritidae, and a clade containing halictidae + colletidae + stenotritidae. melittidae is weakly supported as sister to all other bees, consistent with the hypothesis that the root of bee phylogeny falls near melittidae rather than colletidae . andrenidae is sister to colletidae + stenotritidae + halictidae , but with a bootstrap proportion of only  <dig>  .

at the subfamily and tribal levels, our phylogeny is broadly congruent with molecular phylogenies published for particular families, and where it is not, bootstrap support values fall below  <dig> . within apidae, discrepancies between this study and that of cardinal et al.  <cit>  include the placement of anthophorini, caenoprosopidini, ammobatoidini, manuelini, and apini/euglossini. our phylogeny is consistent with their finding that apinae is not monophyletic: we recovered a large clade composed of the majority of cleptoparasitic species of apinae and nomadinae. our inferred relationships among megachilid tribes differs from litman et al.  <cit>  only in the placement of lithurgini as basal to, rather than sister to, pararhophitini. our phylogeny lacks resolution within colletidae, but all well-supported nodes are also found in the estimate of almeida et al.  <cit> . within halictidae, thrincostomini is sister to halictini, in contrast to danforth et al.  <cit> , but our phylogeny is otherwise congruent with theirs. finally, the only discrepancy between relationships recovered within melittidae in this study and that of michez et al.  <cit>  is that we do not recover dasypodaini as monophyletic.

hypothesis testing
many of the family-level relationships in our tree are reasonably well-supported based on bootstrap proportions. despite this, we could not reject five of our plausible alternatives to rooting the bee tree with high statistical support . the placement of colletidae as basal to the remainder of the bees and the monophyly of long-tongued bees + melittidae can confidently be rejected as failing to fit our data, even after bonferroni correction for multiple testing . the remaining possible topologies all fall within the confidence set of both the approximately unbiased and weighted shimodaira-hasegawa tests. the bic places only one hypothesis within this 95%, in agreement with the maximum-likelihood estimate .

probabilities that a given topology falls within the 95% confidence set  under the weighted shimodaira-hasegawa test , approximately unbiased test , and bayesian information criterion . letters refer to the topologies in figure  <dig>  for each hypothesis, values that indicate the topology falls within the 95% confidence set are in bold. * = maximum-likelihood estimate.

phylogenetic inference based on dna sequence data can be affected by saturation—when phylogenetic signal among sequences is stochastically lost over time. saturation occurs more rapidly in fast-evolving sites, such as the third codon position, and removal of these sites may increase phylogenetic accuracy  <cit> . we estimated phylogenetic relationships after excluding the third codon position from our dna sequence alignment. the resulting maximum-likelihood estimate was unresolved, suggesting that third codon positions do contain phylogenetic signal .

several genes are relatively sparsely sampled across bee families , and phylogenetic analyses of individual genes returned poorly-supported topologies . while even incomplete data are often informative in concatenated analyses  <cit> , particularly when parameterizing the model of sequence evolution  <cit> , missing sequences could instead decrease statistical support for particular nodes, or cause an increase in bootstrap support due to systematic error. our data set was not phylogenetically decisive  <cit> : some taxonomic triplets in our concatenated data set were not sequenced for the same gene. partial tree decisiveness based on  <dig>  simulated, equiprobable trees  <cit>  was relatively high . we examined the subtrees generated by pruning taxa from the maximum-likelihood estimate to match taxon sampling for each data partition. the number of trees that could be built from these observed subtrees, or the terrace size  <cit> , is huge . when terrace size is high and phylogenetic decisiveness is inadequate, the pattern of taxonomic overlap among partitions may affect phylogenetic accuracy. however, the build tree, which is an adams consensus of trees in the terrace  <cit> , did return the same family-level relationships as the maximum-likelihood estimate . this suggests that incomplete taxonomic overlap across data partitions may be more problematic when examining species relationships within families.

we assessed the effects of reducing the proportion of missing data on our analysis by excluding poorly-sampled genes. when we concatenated only those genes sampled for at least two bee families  or at least four families , the resulting maximum-likelihood estimates supported the same family-level relationships as for the complete data set . we also reduced the empty cells in our matrix by combining data within genera, such that each genus was represented by one randomly-selected species per gene . these maximum-likelihood estimates all returned either the same topology as the species-level tree, or a topology in which andrenidae is sister to all bees except melittidae . when combining sequences at the genus-level, terrace size improved dramatically: only one tree could be returned from the taxon triplets observed across gene subtrees. we used one randomly-selected genus-level estimate  when examining historical biogeography of bees. the effects of these treatments do not change the overall conclusions: bee families are monophyletic, but uncertainty remains in the placement of andrenidae relative to other bee families .

missing data also come in the form of missing taxa, and certain groups are less well-sampled than others. andrenidae has a lower proportion of genera sampled relative to other bee families, and its phylogenetic placement is uncertain. only about 47% of andrenid genera have more than one gene sequenced , compared to the average within families  of 65% and the average across all bees of 79%. increasing taxon sampling across partitions for this group may be necessary to resolve its relationship to other bees, as this additional sequence data would contain information about internal nodes.

missing data, in terms of taxon and gene sampling, may not be the only source of weak statistical power when distinguishing among alternative hypotheses for relationships among bees. branch lengths along the backbone of the tree are noticeably shorter than average. the branch leading to the melittid bees, the branch between melittidae and the remainder of the bees, and the branch that determines the placement of andrenidae are all within the lower one third of the branch length distribution. thus, the uncertainty of early bee history appears to be due, in part, to short branches among families. this suggests that major lineage differentiation occurred within a relatively short amount of time early in bee history. incomplete lineage sorting or hybridization between lineages early in bee history could also obscure bifurcations. this problem is not unique to bees: similar difficulties in resolving early branching patterns based on molecular sequence data have also plagued researchers working on butterflies  <cit> , ants  <cit> , and birds  <cit> .

comments on the bioinformatics approach
database mining is not without problems. first, our ability to objectively curate data is limited. the inclusion of ceratina japonica within a clade of apis spp. rather than with other ceratina spp., or of the type species of anthophorini, anthophora plumipes, within the eucerine bees , is suggestive of either incorrect species identification, dna contamination, or error in uploading sequence to the genbank database. our skepticism that the placement of these species reflects evolutionary history is warranted. ceratina are morphologically very distinct from apis, even to a non-expert in field conditions, and error in species identification is highly unlikely. the longest ef1af <dig> sequence for ceratina japonica , and thus the one selected by our bioinformatic pipeline, is identical to the dna sequence in the apis mellifera genome , while a shorter sequence  is more similar to other ceratina . a similar problem occurs for anthophora plumipes, whose sequence for rna polii  is identical to that of eucera frater , although these species are otherwise genetically, morphologically, and geographically disparate. we did not prune these erroneously-identified sequences from our dataset prior to analysis, but when dna sequences from one species are concatenated with those of another, this will introduce inaccuracy into phylogenetic reconstruction. other unidentified taxonomic errors may be present within our dataset. one potential solution would be to ensure that a given sequence has as its best blast hit a member of the same species or genus prior to alignment, assuming that named genera represent monophyletic groups and that such data are available.

while not a source of phylogenetic error, several records refer to taxa that have subsequently been synonymized. for example, within apidae, inquilina is no longer recognized as valid, and has been synonymized with exoneura; within megachilidae fideliopsis is now a subgenus of fidelia. since the ncbi taxonomic databases are not always up-to-date with the latest classifications, our bioinformatic pipeline treats these genera as separate entities. the solution would be to manually curate sequence records to reflect the current state of taxonomy .

historical biogeography
in our biogeographic analyses , the ancestral distributions of many groups of bees remain uncertain, especially at the family level and for groups with widespread distributions . we could not clearly identify a sample bias in our data set that would drive this uncertainty. for example, we have identified the family andrenidae as more poorly sampled than other groups in our phylogeny. however, we are primarily missing south american taxa in the andrenid tribes calliopsini and protandrenini, and the addition of these would not be likely to alter biogeographic reconstruction.

ancestral distributions within the family melittidae are reconstructed with reasonable confidence. melittidae has its greatest genetic, tribal, and subfamily diversity in africa, and is reconstructed unambiguously as african in origin, as are its subfamilies, melittinae and dasypodainae .

andrenidae is reconstructed with weak support as primitively new world, consistent with the observation that basal genera of andreninae, all oxaeinae, and many panurginae are restricted to the americas  <cit> . for halictidae, our results also weakly support a new world origin. within halictidae, lineages with a mix of both new and old world taxa  are reconstructed in our analysis to be new world in origin, and the monophyletic groups halictinae + nomioidinae + nomiinae and halictinae + nomioidinae are weakly supported as ancestrally new world. this is in contrast to a previous analysis that hypothesized these lineages had origins in africa, based on a flawed assumption that nomiinae was likely of african origin  <cit> .

the common ancestor of stenotritidae and colletidae is weakly supported as south american, with the split between ancestrally south american colletidae and australian stenotritidae suggesting an ancient vicariance between south america and australia  <cit> . consistent with almeida et al.  <cit> , we find evidence of multiple interchanges between south america and australia, presumably via antarctica, over the course of colletid evolution. the colletid subfamilies euryglossinae  and hylaeinae are reconstructed as unambiguously indoaustralian  and the subfamily xeromelissinae is reconstructed as unambiguously south american. scrapterinae, the sole endemic african subfamily, appears to have arisen  from the indoaustralian euryglossinae .

the ancestral state for apidae as a whole is not clearly resolved. however, certain groups show clear connections with the new world. the “cleptoparasitic clade” of apidae  <cit>  is unambiguously reconstructed as south american. the corbiculate clade, as well as the monophyletic group including corbiculates and centridini, are reconstructed as ancestrally new world. xylocopinae, a widespread group, is entirely ambiguous. this could be due to the fact that three of the four xylocopine subfamilies  are stem- or wood-nesters and dispersal over water appears to be fairly common in such bees  <cit> . large bees, such as xylocopini, may also be capable of long-distance dispersal via flight. our results for anthophorini are unclear because of limited taxon sampling and because this group is geographically widespread. for a more detailed treatment of anthophorine historical biogeography, see dubitzky  <cit> .

for megachilidae, our results largely support the hypotheses proposed by litman et al.  <cit> . fideliinae, a paraphyletic group at the base of megachilidae, has one lineage in south america  and one in africa , consistent with an ancient vicariance event between south america and africa. the uncertainty in the ancestral reconstruction of lithurginae is not unexpected, as bees in this group are widely-distributed and wood-nesting. bees that nest in wood or preexisting cavities have a disproportionally high probability of long distance, human-mediated dispersal, and they may also be capable of dispersing over water via rafting  <cit> . wood- and cavity-nesting bees are among the most common introduced bee species in north america. of the  <dig> species of bees accidentally or intentionally introduced into north america,  <dig> are in the family megachilidae  <cit> . of the  <dig> exotic bee species reported in canada, ten are in the family megachilidae  <cit> .

our results would generally support a southern hemisphere origin for bees, because at the highest levels ancestral state reconstructions indicate strong connections among south america, australasia , and africa. the split between melittidae  and the remaining bee groups, many of which have inferred origins in the new world , is consistent with the hypothesis that gondwanan fragmentation impacted early bee evolution, as has also been suggested for megachilidae  <cit> . our results are consistent with a hypothesis, proposed by michener  <cit> , that bees arose in the xeric interior of gondwana, particularly west gondwana .

future directions
diversification among bee species has implications for processes driving early angiosperm diversification , but branching patterns early in bee history still remain unresolved. statistical support for diversification patterns could be improved by increasing the number of genes sampled, and thus the number of characters that may be informative about that diversification. sampling could be appropriately increased either by sequencing additional species for some of the more poorly-sampled genes , by using general arthropod primers to increase the number of genes sampled  <cit> , or by utilizing large-scale sequencing strategies such as transcriptomics  or targeted enrichment .

given the comparatively poor sampling of the bees’ closest evolutionary relatives, the root of the bee tree and thus early diversification patterns of bees, may be resolved by increasing the taxonomic and gene sampling of apoid wasps. to improve reconstruction of the early geography of bee diversification, further data would also need to be collected on biogeographical ranges of these wasp taxa.

CONCLUSIONS
our study includes the largest number of bee genera for any study to date. we have reconstructed all families as monophyletic and can reject several proposed hypotheses for relationships among families. our ability to reconstruct biogeographic patterns in bees at the highest levels indicates the utility of the supermatrix approach for historical biogeographic analysis. by including a much broader taxonomic and geographic sample of bees than has been included in previous studies of family-level relationships , we can more accurately reconstruct ancestral states using model-based methods. supermatrix methods, and the insights derived from analysis of the massive amount of sequence data currently publically available, are therefore a powerful approach for inferring patterns on a broad evolutionary scale.

