BACKGROUND
since the mid-1970s, large-scale episodic events such as harmful algal blooms and other microbial outbreaks, disease epidemics and mass mortalities have occurred in marine environments at a historically unprecedented rate, and may reflect environmental changes and an unfavorable energetic balance in animals  <cit> . anthropogenic global changes  have been implicated as contributors to disease outbreaks in marine ecosystems worldwide. one aspect of these changes is shifts in natural systems, altering inter-organism dynamics including many host-pathogen interactions and leading to the establishment of new diseases or increased pathogenicity and virulence of established diseases  <cit> . these emerging infectious diseases have been recently recognized as a threat, not only to humans, but also to global biodiversity  <cit> .

it is widely established that the susceptibility of organisms to infection is determined by a complex balance of environmental and host factors. disturbances of this equilibrium may result in multifactorial diseases as currently shown in marine invertebrates  <cit> . pacific oysters crassostrea gigas have repeatedly suffered abnormal mortalities during the summer months around the world. collectively, these mortality events are called summer mortality syndrome, a phenomenon that has been suggested to have a multifactorial etiology, resulting from the combination of multiple biotic and abiotic factors. those factors include the environment , aquaculture practices, oyster genetics and physiology, reproductive effort followed by spawning and the presence of opportunistic microorganisms  <cit> . since  <dig>  an herpesvirus, oshv- <dig>   <cit> , and various vibrio species  <cit>  have been systematically associated with these abnormal mortalities.

understanding the role of genetic basis in oyster resistance or susceptibility to infection should deeply contribute to identify the causes of mortalities and the traits that characterize enhanced survival capacities in oyster populations. in recent years, high-throughput genomic approaches have greatly improved knowledge on the genetic basis governing the mechanisms of resistance to infectious diseases, a major challenge for the modern human and veterinary medicine. several studies have supported a significant role for host genetics in differential susceptibility to many human infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, leprosy, hepatitis, malaria and also aids  <cit> . genome-wide studies have evidenced genomic polymorphic regions  correlated to changes in the susceptibility to some infectious agents  <cit> . in the recent years, genomic features such as gene copy number variations  and transcriptional signatures  <cit>  have been extensively investigated as contributing to disease susceptibility or resistance phenotypes. transcriptional  signatures comprise a combination of genes whose expression patterns are markers of a physiological status  <cit> . in human medicine, gene expression signatures have substantially aided in the diagnosis of cancer and the risk of developing active tuberculosis  <cit> .

here, we have investigated potential genetic basis for c. gigas resistance to vibrio infections by high-throughput transcriptomic and genomic approaches. for this non model species, the whole genome sequence is still not published  <cit>  but  <dig>  unique est sequences are publicly available   <cit> . thus, we applied the dge  deep-sequencing technology. similar to the massively parallel signature sequencing  approach  <cit> , the dge tag-based approach provides large-scale data sets to establish a complete quantitative and qualitative analysis of cell transcriptome without prior knowledge of genome annotation  <cit> . in a previous study, the dge technology was successfully applied for the characterization of defense mechanisms related to the oyster successful response and survival to virulent vibrio infections  <cit> . here, the aim was to identify a combination of genes whose inherent basal expression can predict the oyster capacity to survive infections. for that, the hemocytes  have been collected from oysters before an infection by virulent vibrio strains isolated during summer mortality episodes  <cit> . further monitoring of mortalities allowed classifying samples with contrasted phenotypes of survival or non survival capacity that have been used for the construction of dge libraries devoted to a predictive character of oysters to circumvent vibrio infection. through the exploration of dge data and individual gene expression study by microfluidic qpcr devices  <cit> , we have evidenced a 14-gene survival signature. besides, we show here for the first time an extraordinary individual polymorphism of hemocyte basal gene expression in oysters.

RESULTS
hemocyte transcriptome of oysters with an inherent capacity to survive vibrio infections
a nonlethal sampling method for hemolymph collection  <cit>  was applied to obtain the hemocyte basal gene expression profile before a challenge by pathogenic bacteria. hemocyte samples were collected from  <dig> tagged oysters that were further experimentally infected after an 8-day recovery. vibrio strains, v. splendidus lgp <dig>  or v. aestuarianus lpi 02/ <dig> , which were isolated during  <dig> summer mortality episodes in france, were used for experimental infections. survival rates were 59 % and 33 %  for animals infected by v. splendidus lgp <dig> and v. aestuarianus lpi 02/ <dig>  respectively. hemocyte mrna samples collected prior to vibrio infection were then categorized according to oyster survival. thus, two dge libraries were constructed from hemocytes of oysters able or not able to survive vibrio infections. they were named svir-8d  and nsvir-8d , respectively.

a total of  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> tag sequences  were obtained from the whole sequencing of svir-8d and nsvir-8d libraries, respectively, corresponding to  <dig>  unique tags. a comparison of tag occurrences  revealed that  <dig>  unique tags were differentially represented between libraries  . tag-mapping was performed against the c. gigas est database  containing  <dig>  ests from hemocytes  <cit> . from the  <dig>  est-matched sequences, only  <dig> sequences showed homologies to known proteins. thus, no striking relationship between biological functions and oyster capacity to survive infections was clearly evidenced. however, the svir-8d library appears to be more enriched in genes related to genetic information processing and immune response compared to nsvir-8d, which was enriched in metabolism and cytoskeleton reorganization .

oyster hemocyte transcriptome-wide analysis reveals a high polymorphism in basal gene expression at individual level
to assess whether gene expression profiles were related to survival capacity phenotypes, we have explored the dge data on individual oysters by high-throughput microfluidic qpcr approach  <cit> . three new independent experimental infections were conducted to obtain individual hemocyte samples from oysters able  and not able  to survive infection, as previously done for dge library construction. we focused on v. splendidus which has been shown dominant in field mortalities, since  <dig>  comparatively to v. aestuarianus. final survival rates of 50 % were obtained and, among the  <dig> hemolymph samples issued from the three independent infections,  <dig> samples, corresponding to  <dig> oysters for each phenotype, yielded high quality rna suitable for further analyses.

a total of  <dig> hemocyte-expressed genes were chosen from the  <dig>  sequences differentially expressed  between svir-8d and nsvir-8d dge libraries. both genbank annotated  and non-annotated  sequences were considered. the technical efficiency of three independent  <dig>  dynamic arrays was assessed by measuring the expression of the three reference genes in each qpcr chip . then, the expression profile of the selected genes was assessed to compare their mrna abundance according to the oyster survival phenotypes  at the individual level. surprisingly, the analysis of the large qpcr data set revealed an extraordinary interindividual variability in gene expressions for most of the transcripts measured. as illustrated in figure 2a, striking inter-individual differences in basal gene expression were seen for some genes with up to 20-fold change, for example, for the follistatin. to our knowledge, such a high inter individual variability in basal gene expression has never been previously reported in oysters.

additionally, the high-throughput qpcr analyses revealed numerous genes whose basal levels of expression could not be detected in some individuals . interestingly, those genbank annotated sequences appeared to correspond to genes involved in immune responses, including an interferon-induced protein 44-like, a tumor necrosis factor ligand superfamily member  <dig> , a member of oyster lysozymes , a baculoviral inhibitor of apoptosis repeat-containing protein  <dig> homologue  and members of the big defensin antimicrobial peptide family   <cit> . however, no significant relationships could be found between the expression detection of these genes and the s or ns phenotypes .

a hemocyte 14-gene expression signature as a predictor of oyster survival capacity
we have investigated the correlation between the profiles of hemocyte basal gene expression and the oyster survival capacity by the analysis of the mrna abundance of genes presenting exploitable quantitative values . due to well known oyster dna sequence polymorphism, rigorous melting curve analysis was required to ensure qpcr specificity and avoid misinterpretations of gene expression data  <cit> . thus, we only considered the qpcr data of  <dig> genes, from the  <dig> initial ones, expressed in the 45 s and  <dig> ns individual oysters. in spite of the high gene expression polymorphism, statistical partial least-squares  regression  <cit>  analysis revealed that the basal expression levels of a core set of genes were associated to s or ns phenotypes . to refine our analysis, we further considered only those genes that did not display high individual variability of basal expression among the oysters from a same phenotype. thus, the combination of the mrna abundance of  <dig> genes was identified that comprises a set of  <dig> genes highly transcribed in the s phenotype and a set of  <dig> genes highly transcribed in the ns phenotype .

the expression profile of these  <dig> hemocyte-expressed genes  was further used to foresee oyster survival using the expression data from oysters from both survival phenotypes. the x-loadings  corresponding to the data generated by qpcr and the y-loadings  corresponding to the oyster s and ns phenotypes are presented in figure 3b. the applied pls model segregated most of the  <dig> individuals according to their survival capacity  . to identify the hemocyte transcripts statistically related to each phenotype, we additionally applied appropriated fold change cut-offs . mann–whitney test  was performed individually on the  <dig> genes associated to the survival phenotypes. thus, Δcq which are the most reproducible values were processed to assess a significant difference between s and ns survival phenotypes. among the selected candidates, the expression profiles of  <dig> genes appeared to be significantly associated to an inherent capacity to survive infections . thus, we can presume that one individual with high probabilities to survive vibrio infections transcribes at high levels the seven genes associated to the s phenotype, and concurrently at low levels the seven genes associated to the ns phenotype. oysters from the ns phenotype  displayed an inverse pattern in gene expression profile for the survival signature. in the view of our findings, this 14-gene survival signature is able to predict the oyster survival capacity to infections by the pathogenic v. splendidus lgp <dig> 

mrna abundance of the 14-gene markers is revealing an inherent genetic trait rather than a particular physiological status
we confirmed that the survival signature revealed an inherent genetic trait in oysters rather than a pre-stimulation or a physiological response. indeed, high mrna abundance of the genes of the signature could have resulted from an increase in gene transcription for some individuals before the experiment. for that, oysters  were injected with a sublethal dose of v. splendidus lgp <dig>  or sterile sea water . non injected oysters were used as a control. as previously reported, a great variability in transcript rates was observed for both unchallenged and immune challenged  oysters. two main types of expression profiles were obtained among the signature genes . nine genes displayed no changes in transcript abundance at 24 h following either bacterial or ssw injection, compared to unchallenged animals as illustrated for multiple egf-like domains  <dig> and cytochrome c . besides, five genes, including the unknown bq <dig> .a.cg <dig> and zinc finger hit domain-containing protein  <dig> shown in figure  <dig> as examples, displayed a decrease of transcript abundance in circulating hemocytes following both the bacterial and ssw injection, thus independently of an acute response to the vibrio. no up-regulation was seen for any of the  <dig> hemocyte-expressed genes following the bacterial challenge or ssw injection. thus, mrna abundance of the  <dig> genes of the survival signature reveals, in oysters, basal gene expression independent from their physiological response.

polymorphism in hemocyte basal gene expression can be associated to variations in gene copy numbers in oyster genome
in an attempt to understand the genetic basis involved in the transcriptional regulation of the genes associated to oyster survival, we investigated whether variability in gene expression would reflect gene copy number variations  in oyster genome. a relative quantification approach was developed to verify a potential correlation between gene copy abundance and mrna expression of the oyster survival signature. for that, both genomic dna and total rna were extracted from ten oysters showing striking differences in gene expression of seven genes from the 14-gene survival signature for which pairs of primers present same efficiency and specificity on gdna and cdna. variations in gene copy number were shown for all analyzed genes. higher variations in gene copies  than in expression levels  were seen for four genes . conversely, for the other three genes, the variations in expression were higher  than in gene copy number  . finally, among those seven genes, only two presented positive correlation  between the relative abundance of gene copy and relative gene expression .

discussion
herein, we successfully identified a 14-gene survival signature, a cluster of hemocyte-expressed genes whose basal expression profile was predictive of the oyster capacity to survive vibrio infections. this study provides the first evidence that oyster survival to infectious diseases can be driven by genetic determinants. we revealed an extraordinary interindividual polymorphism in basal gene expression that is associated to an inherent capacity of some oysters to survive vibrio infections.

in previous work, we applied dge to highlight immune functions involved in the successful response of c. gigas to circumvent virulent vibrio strain infections compared to a non virulent one  <cit> . here, the aim was to evidence gene markers of an inherent survival capacity rather than to characterize biological functions or molecular mechanisms implicated in that capacity. we just observed an enrichment of genes related to immune response and genetic information processing in the svir-8d dge library. the comparative analysis of the hemocyte transcriptomes of oysters able  or not able  to survive did not highlight striking functional categories as potentially involved in oyster health promotion and conferring advantageous capacity to survive infections. this is not surprising considering the low number of sequences found with predicted functions . with further progress in the genetic resources in c. gigas, one can return to exploit the dge data and expect to characterize unambiguously biological functions associated with oyster fitness and optimal survival capacity.

the comprehensive and detailed quantitative analysis of the dge data at the individual level has shown here for the first time in oysters the remarkable interindividual polymorphism in hemocyte gene expression. it is illustrated by great variations in basal mrna levels up to 20-fold change between individuals. in human, variations in the basal mrna abundance of some key genes represent an important genetic basis underlying several physiological traits that includes resistance  to many known infectious diseases  <cit> . moreover, in many oysters from both survival phenotypes, basal mrna levels of some immune-related genes were not detected. it cannot be ruled out that due to a high level of dna polymorphism, only transcripts encoded by particular alleles could have been amplified  <cit> . indeed, it is widely recognized that oysters are one of the highest polymorphic species in the animal kingdom   <cit> . moreover, most of transcripts whose expression was shown to be absent among individuals corresponded to immune-related proteins, which have been shown in c. gigas to display a high level of sequence diversity  <cit> . another hypothesis is that some of these genes are not expressed in some individuals because of the absence of gene in the oyster genome. this has been shown for the human neutrophil antimicrobial peptide- <dig>   <cit> . since hnp- <dig> was proved to play an important role in infectious and inflammatory diseases  <cit> , it has been suggested that the absence of defa <dig> gene can result in changes in the human susceptibility to pathogenic microorganisms  <cit> . here, probably due to limited sampling number, we did not evidence a statistical correlation between the lack of hemocyte gene expression and the oyster capacity to survive infections, but this result prompted us to further analyze this phenomenon of absence of immune-related transcripts in oyster populations.

the existence of a genetic predisposition of oyster to survive vibrio infections was revealed by dge and high-throughput qpcr analyses. performed on independent sets of  <dig> oysters, from different geographical origin and history, these different transcriptomic analyses concurred in the statistical identification of a gene survival signature. indeed, in spite of the high polymorphism of gene expression, the combination of the basal expression levels of  <dig> hemocyte-expressed genes was shown to be correlated to oyster capacity to survive infections by the pathogenic v. splendidus lgp <dig>  this 14-gene survival signature includes  <dig> unknown genes and the potential role of the other annotated genes in the oyster health status and survival cannot be interpreted. however, interestingly, one member of the survival signature, a putative cystatin a, has already been identified as related to the ability of oyster to circumvent virulent vibrio infection in previous genomic study  <cit> . since v. splendidus lgp <dig> and v. aestuarianus are known to secrete extracellular proteases, we can assume that, highly expressed at basal level, cystatin, as protease inhibitor, may interact with the vibrio toxins contributing to oyster survival  <cit> . it is noteworthy that cystatins are a superfamily of multifunctional proteins  <cit>  that requires extensive characterization in oyster before speculating any function or role in survival. recently, a mortality gene expression signature was identified in c. gigas hemocytes of oysters that died in the field during summer mortality events in usa  <cit> . this so-called “mortality signature” comprised a core set of genes involved in cell death, protein synthesis and cellular assembly and organization. their expression increased in individuals previously to the occurrence of massive mortalities in the field  <cit> . besides, fleury et al.  <cit>  also showed in oyster tissues, such as gonads, gills and muscle, transcripts of immune-related genes differentially expressed between two oyster lines selected for their resistance and susceptibility to the  <dig> summer mortality events in france. however, these genes were identified according to an increase of their transcript abundance during various periods preceding a mortality event, revealing a physiological response of the oysters to field conditions. instead, our study has focused on the identification of genes whose basal expression in oyster may reflect an intrinsic character of survival capacity, i.e. a genetically-based trait underlying natural variation in gene expression.

in this attempt, it was important to verify that, in our experiments, the high mrna levels of the 14-genes identified as related to survival capacity were not due to a particular physiological status or a priming of the oysters prior to the hemolymph sampling. indeed, priming could confer protection against v. splendidus lgp <dig> infection, as described in various invertebrate species, where pre-stimulated animals were protected against a second and lethal challenge, and in a specific manner  <cit> . here, following microbial challenge or injury , no increase in transcript abundance was observed from the genes of the survival signature. instead, a decrease of transcripts was observed for five of them. such a decrease is either related to a migration of the hemocyte subpopulation expressing those genes towards the site of injection  <cit> , or to a down-regulation of expression following wound injection. besides, nine genes were evidenced as constitutively expressed in circulating hemocytes and not regulated by a microbial challenge. ruling out a priming possibility or an effect of physiological status, these results are in favor of genetic bases driving hemocyte high basal gene expression in some oysters.

in our study, copy number variations  in the  <dig> marker genes were evidenced among the individuals tested, as previously reported by schmitt et al.  <cit>  for genes encoding actin and two antimicrobial peptides . it is now established that cnv contributes to differences in gene expression and can be associated to variable phenotypes, including susceptibility to complex genetic disorders and infectious diseases  <cit> . for instance, in human, whereas an elevated number of copies of the β-defensin gene defb <dig> in the east asia population is associated to increased resistance to influenza  <cit> , high α-defensin  gene copies were shown to be significantly correlated with susceptibility to severe sepsis  <cit> . here, we have not found a correlation between cnv and gene expression profile for all of the genes of the survival signature. as elegantly shown by mileyko et al.  <cit> , the basal expression of some genes is not necessarily proportional to the gene copy number in the genome due to transcriptional feedbacks in complex regulatory networks. because oysters are highly polymorphic  <cit> , changes in gene expression can also be associated to a high degree of dna polymorphism in the gene promoter sequence  <cit> . our results indicated that the mrna levels of the different genes from the 14-gene survival signature are likely driven by distinct transcriptional processes.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our findings evidenced that oysters possess a complex genomic organization that is highly polymorphic, not only in terms of dna sequence  <cit> , but also in terms of number of gene copies and transcriptional regulation of genes. a deep analysis of the whole hemocyte transcriptome of oysters showing differences in the resistance to vibrio infection led to the discovery of a 14-gene predictive survival signature. currently, in human medicine, such gene expression signatures have considerably improved the diagnosis and understanding of complex genetic disorders and infectious diseases  <cit> . in the context of c. gigas aquaculture, the mass mortality syndrome represents a serious constraint to oyster production world-wide. thus, understanding the genetic basis involved in oyster survival constitutes an important piece in the oyster-pathogen-environment interaction puzzle. although oyster immunogenetics is still an emerging domain that requires great improvement in genomic resources, we showed that gene predictive-survival signature could provide a useful tool for preventing mortality events and for assessing genetic traits of interest for disease resistance selection programs.

