BACKGROUND
the formation of the vertebrate limb skeleton has become a paradigm of developmental biology due to its suitability for the study of processes such as tissue induction, cell differentiation, and spatial patterning of differentiated cell types  <cit> . a key cellular event in the early developing limb is the formation of condensations - high-density spot- or rod-shaped aggregates of precartilage mesenchymal cells  <cit> . these aggregates arise from and, once formed, are surrounded by, uncondensed mesenchymal cells embedded in a loose extracellular matrix . only the condensed cells differentiate into chondrocytes. thus condensations prefigure the limb cartilage primordia, which directly form the skeletal elements, or more usually are replaced by bone.

although molecular and cellular changes accompanying the formation of limb precartilage condensations have been studied extensively , and computational models simulating their generation in vitro and in vivo have been put forward , the detailed mechanisms by which condensations are initiated and become arranged in spatial patterns, particularly in vivo, are still not fully understood. while it is well accepted that mesenchymal condensation involves local changes in cell-ecm and cell-cell adhesive interactions, some of the proposed mediators of this process, such as tenascin, ncam and n-cadherin, have been shown not to be essential for normal limb development in mice  <cit> . fibronectin remains a viable candidate for an indispensible ecm determinant of condensations  <cit> . but cell clusters that anticipate fully formed condensations  are seen in vitro as early as  <dig> h  <cit> , at least  <dig> h before fibronectin is detectable.

the proximate ecm, matricellular, and cell adhesive mediators of limb precartilage condensation must therefore be induced by molecules or cell activities that act earlier in development. while condensations are sometimes treated as downstream manifestations of a program initiated by the limb bud's signaling centers like the apical ectodermal ridge  and the zone of polarizing activity  , there is little evidence relating cellular states induced by such centers to production of the molecules that mediate cell aggregation. moreover, formation of limb-like arrays of skeletal elements can still proceed when global positional cues are disrupted  <cit> . and whereas inducers of ecm production such as activins, tgf-βs and bmps have been shown to act early in the limb chondrogenic pathway  <cit> , it is unclear how they exert their effects in a patterned fashion.

in amniotes, such as birds and mammals, the formation of condensations and their differentiation occur in a proximodistal order  <cit> . in both the fore and hind limb buds a single proximal structure, the stylopod, develops first, followed by two parallel elements, the zeugopod, and a distal series of regularly spaced digits, the autopod. any candidates for the early-acting determinants of precartilage condensation must be expressed in accordance with this timetable.

here we report on the role of a class of endogenous lectins with β-sandwich folding known as galectins  <cit>  in the morphogenesis and patterning of limb condensations. attention was drawn to these molecules for their demonstrated roles in mediating cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions and eliciting potent biosignaling  <cit>  as well as for the unsurpassed capacity of glycans  to store biological information, embodied in the concept of the sugar code . we pursued the galectins in more detail when we found that a subset of them was expressed in a condensation-associated fashion earlier than any previously described molecules.

galectins are frequently found within the extracellular environment , and mediate and regulate cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion  <cit> , key processes in the formation of condensations. despite the widespread occurrence of β-galactosides on cells, galectins are known to target distinct glycoconjugates, with their spatial organization in membrane microdomains playing a decisive role  <cit> .

galectins are widespread among metazoans although the number of galectins varies widely between species. in contrast to amphibians, such as xenopus, which has  <dig> galectins  <cit> , and mammals, where the complexity of the galectin network is even higher  <cit> , galectin expression in the chicken is confined to five completely characterized genes  <cit> . this represents a major advantage in gaining insights on functional divergence/overlap among these homologous proteins in the limb-forming system.

the five members of the chicken galectin  family are assigned to three groups with characteristic structural features: the three homodimeric proto-type proteins cg-1a, cg-1b and cg- <dig>  most closely related to mammalian galectins- <dig> and - <dig>  respectively, the chimera-type cg- <dig> with a collagenase-sensitive stalk, and the tandem-repeat-type cg- <dig> with two different lectin domains covalently connected by a linker, related to mammalian galectin- <dig> .

cg-1a crystallizes as a homodimer with a substantial interface area  <cit> . in gel filtration after purification from chicken liver it runs completely as a homodimer  <cit> , the structure of which has been confirmed by ultracentrifugation  <cit> . the monomeric status of cg- <dig> has also been confirmed by gel filtration and ultracentrifugation  <cit> .

by comprehensive analysis we found that the genes specifying cg-1a and cg- <dig> are expressed at elevated levels during the initiation and early stages of condensation formation in chicken limb precartilage mesenchyme in vitro and in vivo. the corresponding proteins also appear in a condensation- and early cartilage nodule- and primordia-specific manner, with binding reactivity to the labeled cgs exhibiting the expected condensation association, but significant differences in specificity of localization.

addition of these lectins obtained by recombinant production has dramatic and opposite effects on condensation in vitro, with cg-1a enhancing and cg- <dig> suppressing the process. these effects are borne out in vivo, where exogenous cg-1a induces ectopic skeletal elements and exogenous cg- <dig> inhibits formation of normal elements. experiments involving inhibition of function further confirm that the two galectins are antagonists of each other. however, cg-1a and cg- <dig> also upregulate one another's gene expression at the mrna level. to resolve the apparent paradox of the mutual antagonism and cooperation of these molecules we looked more closely at the direct effect of the proteins on precartilage mesenchymal cells. in a real-time turbidimetric agglutination assay we found that cg- <dig>  though not adhesive in its own right, interferes with the direct cell-cell adhesion mediated by cg-1a. our findings suggest that morphogenesis of individual condensations can be brought about by the action of cg-1a, but that condensation patterning depends on a multiscale local-autoactivation-lateral-inhibition network comprising cg-1a and cg- <dig> 

RESULTS
galectin expression in limb bud mesenchyme in vitro
the previous characterization of the complete panel of cgs affords the opportunity to comprehensively study expression profiles. we first measured the relative levels of gene expression of all cgs in high density monolayer "micromass" cultures of freshly dissociated uncondensed leg precartilage mesenchymal cells by quantitative real-time pcr  of reverse-transcribed mrna. of the five cgs, the levels of expression of the prototype cg-1a and the tandem-repeat-type cg- <dig> were found to be several-fold higher than that of cg-1b and cg- <dig>  both in the freshly dissociated cells and in the micromass cultures. the efficiencies of amplification of cg-1a, cg-1b and cg- <dig> were similar, and that of cg- <dig> about  <dig> percent higher . the substantially higher amplification levels of cg-1a and cg- <dig> compared to the other galectins thus represent real differences in mrna expression levels. the expression of cg- <dig> was negligible during the stages of condensation formation and patterning. evidently, gene expression among cgs is differentially regulated with a preference for one of three homodimeric proteins  and the only tandem-repeat-type cg . we thus focused on cg-1a and cg- <dig> and assayed for their expression at various points along the developmental time-table of micromass cultures, during which the mesenchymal cells undergo focal condensation and then differentiate into cartilage nodules.

cg-1a gene expression increased about 7-fold within the first two days of culture, i.e., during the period of condensation formation . the cg- <dig> mrna level rose as well, but not as sharply as that of cg-1a  . message levels of both then steadily declined to about 15%  and 20%  of their expression maxima by the fifth and sixth day of cultures, by which time the condensations had differentiated into nodules of cartilage. the period of condensation patterning and morphogenesis was thus temporally associated with the maximal expression levels of both cg-1a and cg- <dig> 

we next visualized the spatial distribution of mrnas specific for cg-1a and cg- <dig> in vitro by in situ hybridization of 2-day cultures with gene-specific digoxigenin-labeled riboprobes. cg-1a and cg- <dig> mrnas were both detected with strong signal intensity within cells that were part of the condensations, as well as in a small number of scattered, isolated cells in the intercondensation mesenchyme . control cultures, incubated without a probe or with "sense" riboprobes, failed to show any staining, confirming the specificity of the hybridization reaction.

the presence of cg-1a protein in leg bud micromass cultures was monitored at various stages of development  by indirect immunostaining using an antibody preparation free from cross-reactivity to any other cg. cg-1a was strongly localized in a spot-like pattern in cultures in which the condensations were in the process of forming , already formed , or had already differentiated into cartilage . the immunostaining for cg- <dig> protein in vitro had a similar nodular pattern . the intensity of the staining increased and its spatial localization became more specific as the condensations grew larger and the cultures matured.

galectins are early and specific markers of precartilage condensations
in order to confirm that the galectins were specifically localized to the condensations, micromass cultures that had been incubated for two days and subsequently fixed for staining were treated with anti-cg-1a antibody and with dylight 594-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody to monitor localization of cg-1a . the same cultures were processed with fitc-labeled peanut agglutinin , a plant lectin, and with dapi to mark the nuclei . the glycan moiety to which pna binds is a known marker for precartilage mesenchymal condensations  <cit> . we found that cg-1a and glycans reactive with pna colocalized in the 2-day condensations. the same field viewed by phase-contrast optics  showed that the stained condensations were surrounded by non-condensed mesenchyme, which, significantly, stained very sparsely with pna and for cg-1a.

monitoring the reactivity with pna is one of the earliest-described methods for detection of limb precartilage mesenchymal condensations in vivo and in vitro  <cit> . both pna and the antibody against cg-1a stained the earliest detectable condensations at  <dig> h of incubation . staining for cg-1a as well as cg- <dig> was also observed as early as  <dig> h of incubation . although morphological condensations have not yet appeared in such early cultures, the cg-1a- and -8-dependent staining is enhanced compared to the surrounding mesenchyme in patches of a similar spatial scale to condensations. we infer that these patches, which at this stage are only relatively, not specifically, enriched in cg-1a and cg- <dig>  are the early primordia of the future condensations, and ultimately cartilage nodules. these "proto-condensations" are not reactive with pna , making cg-1a and cg- <dig> the earliest markers thus far reported for condensing precartilage mesenchyme.

in order to determine if the enhanced staining of cg-1a/- <dig> in condensations was due to increased protein level in condensed cells or an artifact of higher density at these sites, we co-immunostained cultures for each of the two cgs and for cell nuclei, using dapi. the ratio between mean fluorescence intensity within and outside condensations was calculated individually for the galectins and for dapi. the mean intensity of cg-1a and cg- <dig> fluorescence in condensation mesenchyme after normalization to intensity of their staining in non-condensed cells was  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold that of dapi fluorescence in condensations, respectively after the latter had been normalized to staining of non-condensed cell nuclei . thus, both galectins were preferentially present in cells that participated in leg condensation morphogenesis. similar results were obtained with myoblast-free wing bud mesenchyme .

cg-1a and cg- <dig> are expressed in condensations of developing limb buds
using labeled cg-1a- and cg-8-specific riboprobes, the spatial organization of mrna production was assayed in leg buds of 5-6-day chicken embryos. in 5-day leg buds mrnas of both cg-1a and cg- <dig> were concentrated strongly in the zeugopod region, staining both the premuscle masses and cartilage primordia. in contrast, staining was relatively sparse subjacent to the apical ectodermal ridge  . in 6-day leg buds the staining for digit primordia made them discernible from the relatively clear interdigital tissue . this is consistent with our in vitro findings , where the condensations contained cg-1a-specific mrna, while the pericondensation mesenchyme did not.

in sections of early developing leg buds at 3½-days , cg-1a protein was present throughout the mesoblast , but sparse in the somatopleural mesenchyme underlying the leg bud and the contiguous flank , and in the region subjacent to the aer. the spatial pattern of cg-8-specific staining in 3½-day leg sections was similar to that of cg-1a .

in 5-day leg-bud sections , cg-1a-specific staining was more intense in the tibiotarsal  and fibular condensations than in the surrounding uncondensed mesenchyme . the prospective autopod area was relatively devoid of stain except for a crescent-shaped focus in the posterior part, representing the condensation of the fourth digit . the corresponding regions of 5-day limbs stained less distinctly for cg- <dig> . the perichondrium and the outer circumferential part of the stylopod also showed positivity for both cg-1a  and cg- <dig> .

in 6-day leg bud sections stained for cg-1a protein , the stylopod, which had been sectioned along a plane orthogonal to its long axis, showed very sparse staining in its central region , which consisted of cartilage at this stage. premuscle masses in the mid-leg region showed intense staining of fusiform cells for cg-1a. in the autopod region, the third and fourth digits could clearly be discerned on the basis of intense cg-1a staining  and moderate staining for cg- <dig> in their distal crescents , in the nascent joints at their proximal ends, and in the perichondria .

perichondrial and digital crescent staining of both cg-1a and cg- <dig> rendered the digit primordia discernible from the non-condensing tissue between the leg bud ectoderm and the precartilage primordia, and interdigital mesenchyme, which was not positive for either cg-1a or cg- <dig> . staining was strong in the prospective region of the "fifth digit" . here, the precartilage cells condense and differentiate into cartilage only to regress later  <cit> . digital primordia  show round mesenchymal cells and no fusiform myoblasts or tendinocytes. the in vivo staining of cg-1a is consistent with our in vitro results. that is, the interdigit and interstitial mesenchyme, which corresponds to the intercondensation mesenchyme in vitro, stained minimally compared to the intense cg-1a signal and moderate cg- <dig> staining intensity in prospective and differentiated cartilage primordia in vivo and in condensations and nodules in vitro. the "humeral crescent" and some of the differentiated chondrocytes in the stylopod region of a 5-day wing bud stained heavily for cg-1a , also consistent with in vitro results on myoblast-free wing mesenchyme.

binding reactivity for cg-1a and - <dig> is generally localized to condensations
using biotinylated cg-1a and cg- <dig> as probes, the spatial localization of accessible sites for cg-1a and cg- <dig> were probed in leg-bud sections at various developmental stages. in early 3½-day leg sections, the staining of cg-1a-binding sites closely corresponded spatially with the localization of the proteins; in particular, they were found throughout the core of the leg bud and were absent in the flank region and subjacent to the aer . in 5- and 6-day leg sections the spatial localization of cg-1a binding reactivity corresponded generally with that of cg-1a itself  with intense staining in cartilage primordia, digit perichondria and in vivo condensations  relative to interstitial and subridge mesenchymal cells . however, the interdigit cells also stained almost as intensely as the digit perichondria . the staining for accessible sites of cg- <dig> binding  was more uniform.

in vitro, binding of biotinylated cg-1a was in evidence by about  <dig> hours of culture  and localized strongly to condensations in 2-day cultures . this raised two questions:  which is the first to exhibit patterned expression, cg-1a or the ligand to which it binds? and  does one of these molecules influence the expression of the other? whereas cg-1a stains protocondensations in 9-hour cultures , the staining for accessible binding sites at this stage was very sparse . treatment of cultures with exogenous cg-1a, however, increased the area of reactivity and the staining intensity .

the staining with biotinylated cg- <dig> as probe was more diffuse than that with labeled cg-1a, with a discernible presence in non-condensing cells and slightly more intense staining in condensations . in contrast to staining for cg- <dig> protein  the higher density of cells in the condensations probably accounts for the slightly higher staining intensity of cg- <dig> binding activity in these foci. treatment of cultures with exogenous cg- <dig> had no effect on the spatial pattern of accessible cg-8-binding sites . to determine whether the detected binding was dependent on the lectin site we tested the effect in presence of lactose. indeed, the binding reactivity was inhibited when the fixed cultures were incubated with a mixture of biotinylated galectins and lactose .

cg-1a increases condensation number and causes fusion of condensations
probing the tissue level and cellular localization of cg-1a shows that it is mostly present on the surfaces of and between cells within the precartilage mesenchymal condensations in vitro and in ovo  <cit> . this pattern suggests that it may have a role in the morphogenesis of the condensations. to address this, we added cg-1a in increasing amounts to freshly prepared leg micromass cultures and assayed for alteration in condensation patterning by staining the cultures fixed on the third day with pna. below  <dig> μg/ml cg-1a, there was no discernible change in pattern. at  <dig> μg/ml, the number of condensations increased and their mean size decreased  compared to untreated control cultures . when the concentration was increased to  <dig> μg/ml, adjacent condensations began to fuse . addition of cg-1a did not increase the diameter of the micromass cultures, nor did it lead to overgrowth of the monolayered cells.

we also took advantage of the blocking capacity of the antibody preparation. cultures treated with  <dig> μg/ml polyclonal anti-cg-1a antibody, grown for three days, fixed and stained with dapi to visualize the condensation pattern, exhibited a decrease in both the size and number of condensations, and the condensations were spaced further apart .

using a separate approach, small interfering rna oligonucleotides directed against cg-1a-specific mrna were transfected by lipofection into cells of freshly prepared leg mesenchymal cultures. these cultures were grown for three days along with mock-treated counterparts, using oligonucleotides with a scrambled sequence, and these were also fixed and stained with dapi. the decrease in expression level of cg-1a due to silencing was assessed both by indirect immunofluorescence  and by qrt-pcr . there was no change in condensation pattern between the control using mock transfection and untreated cultures. in contrast, condensations in sirna-treated cultures decreased in number as well as in size, and were spaced further apart .

in order to quantitate the effect of cg-1a addition and inhibition  in vitro, three variables were measured: mean condensation number, mean condensation size and mean inter-condensation distance. the condensation number upon cg-1a addition and inhibition was  <dig> -fold and  <dig> -fold that of control, respectively . the mean inter-condensation distance upon cg-1a addition was  <dig> -fold that of control and upon anti-cg-1a antibody addition,  <dig> -fold that of control . the mean condensation size with cg-1a addition was lower , whereas with cg-1a inhibition  it was not significantly altered . the change in condensation number  and size  after cg-1a knockdown by rnai were consistent with cg-1a antibody treatment, although, unlike the latter, the former did not significantly alter the mean inter-condensation distance .

to determine whether our in vitro results had relevance in vivo, cg-1a was injected between days  <dig> and  <dig> into the wings of  <dig> chicken embryos. the injections were performed between the second and third digit primordia  and also in the prospective digit mesenchyme. the right wings of  <dig> control 6-day embryos were subjected to injections of bovine serum albumin . by 8½ days, the cartilage pattern visualized by alcian blue staining showed no change in either the control untreated  or bsa treated wings. of the  <dig> experimental embryos, seven survived, and there was no change in wing phenotype in one of them. in four of the cg-1a-injected wings, however, there was an ectopic cartilage element between the second and third digit primordia . in the other two wings fusion between the phalange and the metacarpal was observed . there were no such fusions in control 8½-day wings .

cg-1a sirna  mixed with the transfection agent lipofectamine was injected into the uncondensed wing autopod field of 5-day embryos, which were grown until 7½ days, fixed and stained for cartilage. the wings of five embryos injected with control oligo were all similar in cartilage morphogenesis to the untreated counterparts. injection of the cg-1a sirna into the autopod, however, resulted in lack of any digital primordia  in comparison to the developing cartilage primordia in the counterpart untreated wings  in three of four embryos in which the injections were made.

treatment with exogenous cg- <dig> decreases condensation number and size
leg bud micromass cultures were treated with  <dig> μg/ml cg- <dig>  grown for  <dig> days, and fixed and stained with pna. in these cultures, there was a decrease in the number and size of the condensations  compared to control cultures . the mean condensation number of treated cultures was  <dig> -fold that of the control value , and the mean size of the condensations and the mean inter-condensation distance were  <dig> -fold  and  <dig> -fold  that of controls, respectively. although we found that addition of exogenous cg- <dig> at several-fold the concentration used here induces apoptosis in these cultures, we saw no evidence of reduction in the diameter of the micromasses nor denuded areas in the micromass cell monolayer with this treatment.

treatment of cultures with  <dig> μg/ml anti-cg- <dig> antibody , in contrast, resulted in a significant increase in mean condensation number . the condensation number in treated cultures was  <dig> -fold that of the control value , and the mean size of the condensations and the mean inter-condensation distance were both  <dig> -fold that of control values .

in vivo, cg- <dig> was injected into the right wings of embryos between days  <dig> and  <dig>  which were then grown to days 7- <dig>  of  <dig> injected embryos, seven survived. in 3/ <dig> cases the injection resulted in complete absence of cartilage primordia , and in 4/ <dig> cases, shortening of the zeugopod elements ). the reduction in zeugopodial element length was on the average  <dig> percent of the control value .

cg-1a and cg- <dig> constitute a positive gene expression feedback loop
since galectins can affect gene expression , we next tested for a potential effect on this level. the gene expression of cg-1a was assayed by qrt-pcr in cultures treated with  <dig> μg/ml cg- <dig> at  <dig> hours. we found a 4-fold increase in mrna level due to the treatment . injection of cg- <dig> into the autopod of 5-day wing buds in ovo also led to ectopic interdigital cg-1a rna expression on day  <dig>  compared to uninjected counterpart wings . the upregulation in gene expression of cg- <dig> upon treatment with  <dig> μg/ml cg-1a in 18-hour cultures was 6-fold . thus, even though cg-1a and cg- <dig> had opposite effects on the condensation pattern, they were actually upregulating each other's gene expression. this suggested that their effect on the pattern occurred at a level different from transcriptional regulation per se.

cg-1a aggregates limb cells directly and cg- <dig> antagonizes aggregation
in general, galectins are potent adhesion/growth-regulatory effectors with cell-type selectivity, positively or negatively affecting cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions and also influencing gene expression of matrix components, as shown for human galectin- <dig>  <cit> . thus, cg-1a may also affect condensation-related functions indirectly by influencing the expression, transport or degradation of cell adhesion or ecm molecules. in order to determine whether cg-1a or cg- <dig> presence influences condensation morphogenesis and patterning we designed an in vitro agglutination assay . when  <dig> μg cg-1a was added to a constantly stirred suspension of freshly dissociated 5-day leg autopod cells, they underwent aggregation . this aggregation was inhibited by lactose but not by maltose used as osmolarity control, indicating that the precartilage cell aggregation by cg-1a is dependent on its lectin site. cg- <dig>  or its n-terminal domain, both present in solution as monomers  <cit> , when added in similar concentrations, did not bring about any cell aggregation. the cg-1a-induced aggregation, when traced in real time, rose sharply upon addition of the galectin and then gradually plateaued by  <dig> min . when cg-1a was added to cells that had been pre-exposed to cg- <dig> or its n-terminal domain, the aggregation that resulted was less than half of that caused by cg-1a alone . the presence of cg- <dig> thus impaired the aggregability by cg-1a. when the treatments were reversed and cg- <dig> was added at various points after cg-1a-dependent aggregation had begun, the aggregation ceased or dropped to about half the aggregation levels brought about by cg-1a alone .

discussion
this paper establishes a causal association between avian limb skeletogenesis and a class of cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion modulating gene products, the galectins. of the three major interrelated processes in limb skeletal development, i.e., the morphogenesis of precartilage condensations  <cit> , the spatiotemporal patterning of the condensations  <cit> , and the specification of the identity of each skeletal element  <cit> , we here demonstrate that cg-1a and cg- <dig>  are involved in at least the first two processes.

classic experiments by zwilling  have shown that randomized limb cells, when re-introduced under the limb ectoderm, are able to give rise to a skeleton. when cultured on plastic at high densities, dissociated early-stage limb bud cells organize themselves into regularly spaced condensations , and later cartilage nodules, and thus replicate key events in morphogenesis occurring during limb skeletal development in vivo . it was therefore reasonable to assume that both the formation and spatiotemporal patterning of limb condensations is dependent on local cell-cell interactions and ensuing signaling processes  <cit> . in this context, an orchestration of expression of glycans along with counter-receptors  is an attractive concept, which guided us to the analysis of galectins, known for marked developmental regulation .

the cg-1a activity reported appears to underlie the observations in a study from nearly three decades ago  <cit>  describing enhancement in the number of chicken limb precartilage condensations in vitro by a lectin from adult liver. our initial studies of cg-1a expression, which suggested that this galectin was expressed earlier in vitro than fibronectin  mrna and proteins were spatially and temporally associated with the formation of condensations in vitro. by tracing the localization of these galectins back to when they first appear within proto-condensations, we confirmed that they are indeed the earliest condensation-associated proteins reported so far.

the gene and protein expression profiles of both cgs were associated with precartilage mesenchymal condensations and early cartilage primordia in vivo. similar to in vitro results, cells which did not participate in forming the cartilage primordia  were negative for cg-1a- or cg-8-specific mrna and protein. our use of an ectoderm-depleted, muscle-free limb precartilage mesenchymal population  <cit>  in in vitro experiments permitted us to track the expression of galectins in a pure cell lineage independently of tissue interactions. whereas no relevant data were available previously on the tandem-repeat-type cg- <dig>  cg-1a has been analyzed immunohistochemically in embryogenesis, where it is especially strongly expressed in myogenic tissue and skin  <cit> .

expression of galectin binding sites in condensing limb mesenchyme
galectins, by definition, have binding affinity towards galactose-containing glycans. as with mammalian galectins, the 4'- and 6'-oh groups of galactose serve as key contact sites  <cit> . cg-1a preferentially targets multivalent glycans with n-acetyllactosamine termini when probed with free glycans and glycoproteins  <cit> . the observation of a gradient of decreasing binding constants during saturation of a multivalent ligand can underlie high-avidity cell aggregation even at low galectin loading  <cit> . the measurement of dissociation kinetics under zero-force conditions corroborated the relevance of galectin- <dig> in transient cell interactions  <cit> . regarding natural glycoconjugates, developmental regulation of cg-1a-reactive glycans was noted in liver  <cit> . with respect to the biochemical nature of galectin-reactive determinants, mammalian galectins are also known to bind glycomimetic peptides and distinct motifs  independent of the lectin site  <cit> . while elucidation of the biochemical structure of the cg-1a and cg- <dig> ligands in condensing leg mesenchyme was not addressed here, we assayed the spatial pattern of accessible sites by using these galectins, after activity-preserving biotinylation, as markers. the use of endogenous lectins as probes has clear advantages over glycophenotyping with plant lectins in providing information of potential functional significance. we found different patterns of localization for the accessible binding sites of cg-1a and cg- <dig>  the binding reactivity of cg-1a was condensation-specific, its temporal expression lagged behind that of cg-1a, and was apparently subject to induction by cg-1a itself. in contrast, accessible sites for cg- <dig> were present both in condensing and non-condensing mesenchyme and were unaffected by cg- <dig> addition in vitro.

role of galectins in precartilage condensation
we next examined if perturbing galectin concentrations will affect condensation morphology and pattern. we found that cg-1a and cg- <dig> had opposite effects on the condensation pattern: whereas addition of cg-1a increased the number and spatial density of condensations, cg- <dig> decreased both. interestingly, the addition of either galectin resulted in a decrease of mean condensation size. we confirmed these effects in vivo as well: injection of cg-1a into the developing wing mesenchyme resulted in extra digits or fusion of existing digits. the injection of cg- <dig>  in contrast, impaired the development and/or size of the cartilage primordia. significantly, inhibition of the function of one galectin brought about a similar phenotype in vitro as the addition of the other, i.e., cg-1a inhibition was equivalent to cg- <dig> addition and vice versa. the relationships between the various types of treatment are shown schematically in figure  <dig> 

we also found in isolated pure populations of precartilage mesenchymal cells that cg-1a and cg- <dig> constitute a positive feedback loop at the gene expression level, i.e., they upregulate each other's expression. this finding might seem to conflict with the fact that cg-1a has an inductive effect and cg- <dig> an inhibitory effect on condensation formation. this apparent contradiction was resolved by probing the interaction between cg-1a and cg- <dig> by an aggregometry assay that provides evidence for the direct effect of galectins on limb precartilage cells. we found that cg-1a by itself was able to aggregate dissociated 5-day leg cells within two minutes. given this rapid response, it is likely that cg-1a acts in a direct manner to mediate adhesion between cells. the developmental relevance of these rapidly forming aggregates is suggested by a recent study in which cells identical to those used here were permitted to recover from trypsinization and levitated in an ultrasound trap. such cells formed aggregates via their native attachment moieties, also within two minutes, and contained detectable amounts of the chondrogenic transcription factor sox <dig> in their nuclei within three hours  <cit> .

cg- <dig> behaved differently from cg-1a in the aggregometry assay. not only did it not aggregate cells, it also interfered with the ability of cg-1a to do so. the basis for cg-8's effect may be due to its sharing a common ligand for one of its two domains with cg-1a, thus blocking cg-1a's binding without mediating cg-1a-like cross-linking. this would be analogous to the functional divergence in post-binding events known from human galectins- <dig> and - <dig> competing for the same ligand  <cit> . alternatively, distinct binding sites of the two galectins may be close enough on the cell surface for the non-aggregatory cg- <dig> to cause steric hindrance of the binding of the aggregatory cg-1a. although it is formally also possible that cg-1a and cg- <dig> may interact directly to form a complex, this may require special conditions, as in solid-phase assays  <cit> . given that the n-terminal domain of cg- <dig>  gives the same results in our assay as full-length cg- <dig>  we favor the hypothesis that the n-terminus of cg- <dig> and cg-1a share a common ligand and compete with each other for binding.

different ligand specificity and/or cross-linking capacity can account for non-overlapping binding profiles of cg-1a and cg- <dig>  we suggest that the opposing roles of cg-1a and cg- <dig> in mediating precartilage condensation in vitro and in vivo are due to the cell-protein and protein-protein interactions reflected in the results of aggregometry assay and may occur by any of the hypothesized mechanisms. interestingly, our preliminary evidence shows that the other cgs , which are expressed in condensing precartilage mesenchyme , are able to aggregate 5-day leg bud cells by one-third to half the extent of cg-1a. this implies that the expression and accessibility of binding sites for cgs is differentially regulated, and this in turn may regulate the ability of the cgs to cross-link cells. it also shows that the aggregability of cg-1a is not a generic property of proto-type galectins but is a product of orchestrated expression dynamics of both components of the cg-glycan recognition system.

a dynamical schema for limb patterning based on galectins and their binding sites
we propose that the difference in regulation and spatial distribution of binding sites for cg-1a and cg- <dig>  in concert with the lectins' properties, underlie the spatial patterning of the condensations. local elevation of homodimeric, and thus cross-linking, cg-1a will simultaneously induce the cells to aggregate and favor further presentation of its ligand. this will increase the affinity of the extracellular environment within the condensations for cg-1a, effectively limiting its diffusion. cg-1a will also induce the expression of cg- <dig>  but since cg- <dig> binding reactivity is uniformly distributed throughout the precondensed field of cells, cg- <dig>  unlike cg-1a, will spread by diffusion from its sites of production . by interfering with the cell-adhesive function of cg-1a in regions peripheral to the incipient condensation, where cg-1a is sparse, cg- <dig> acts as a long-range lateral inhibitor of condensation formation. since cg-1a is a local activator of condensation by also indirectly inducing its own expression via the positive feedback loop with cg- <dig>  the two galectins may constitute the core molecules of a locally auto-activatory laterally inhibitory  network  <cit>  that can mediate pattern formation of limb skeletal elements  <cit> . computer simulations based on a partial-differential-equation representation of cells incorporating this network, using biologically plausible parameter choices, indeed exhibit quasiperiodically spaced "condensations" as well as responses to the addition of exogenous "cg-1a" similar to those seen in our experiments .

finally, we speculate on the possible relevance of our findings to limb development in non-avian tetrapods. all documented tetrapod species have orthologs of the avian cg- <dig> gene, and one or more homologs of cg-1a . in chickens, cg-1a  has a paralogous gene cg-1b . based on the rates of amino acid substitutions, which establish the basis for the unique redox-dependent shape changes of cg-1b  <cit> , in relation to the likely evolutionary pathway, duplication of an ancestral cg- <dig> gene into cg-1a and -1b genes was calculated to have occurred around divergence of birds and mammals  <cit> . in non-avian and non-reptilian tetrapods  the single cg-1a homolog, known as galectin- <dig>  is actually an ortholog of cg-1b based on its chromosomal location. the anolis lizard genome, like chicken, has two galectin-1-like genes, orthologs of cg-1a and cg-1b, suggesting that the duplication of an ancestral galectin- <dig> gene occurred after the phylogenetic split between saurians and mammals, but before evolutionary pathways of birds and lizards diverged. significantly, using in situ hybridization with a cg-1a-specific probe, we have localized cognate gene expression in the prospective digit primordia of pogona vitticeps  embryos .

given that galectin-1-/- mice show no skeletal abnormalities  <cit> , it seems unlikely that galectin- <dig> acts exclusively in place of cg-1a in mediating mammalian limb development. however, compensatory mechanisms in the complex galectin network have so far not been studied in ko models. the identity of the early inducer of mammalian limb mesenchymal condensations thus still needs to be determined, and our results point toward analysis of galectins. given that mammals have at least four other proto-type galectins, any one of them with the property of specifically aggregating precartilage limb mesenchymal cells and interacting in a positive feedback expression loop with a cg-8-like protein, such as human galectin- <dig>  a matricellular protein known to modulate cell adhesion , could potentially substitute for cg-1a. this interplay can constitute a similar limb-patterning mechanism in mammals.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that a regulatory network consisting of the galectins cg-1a and cg- <dig> and their respective cell surface binding moieties, operating at the levels of gene expression and protein-protein interaction, organizes avian limb bud mesenchyme into discrete skeletal elements. this network acts earlier than other known determinants or markers of skeletal pattern formation. its ability to rapidly pattern randomized cells into regular arrangements of condensations in vitro is indicative of its self-organizing dynamics and of its independence of any limb bud signaling centers, prepatterns of transcription factors, or other early-expressed molecular gradients.

