BACKGROUND
identifying gene regulatory networks is an important problem in biology. there have recently been many advances in this area in terms of tools for collecting and analyzing large-scale genomics data. many of these datasets, from microarrays and next generation sequencing, quantify the expression levels of all genes in a given genome. genome-wide time-series data, in principle, allow reverse engineering of the gene regulatory relationships by studying the temporal patterns of regulators and target genes. however, this can be a difficult problem due to the large number of genes  being measured, which typically far exceeds the number of observations. also, the number of actual regulators for a particular gene is only a small fraction of the number of possible regulators.

a popular method for inferring gene regulatory networks from time series data uses dynamic bayesian networks 
 <cit> . dbn methods estimate a probabilistic graphical model, given the time-series data. dbn methods work well, but the network size that they can handle in practice is limited because of their computational cost.

ordinary differential equations  are alternative methods for constructing networks
 <cit> . these methods are deterministic rather than statistical, although ode methods can be combined with statistical methods. dbn on local networks within a larger ode model inference method have been used, for example
 <cit> .

another class of methods is based on regression models in which parent nodes  are inferred for each target gene. vector autoregressive models have been proposed for inferring causal links between genes. often this takes the form of a model selection problem, and methods such as the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator 
 <cit> , elastic net
 <cit> , and bayesian model averaging 
 <cit>  have been used
 <cit> . morrissey, et al.
 <cit>  implemented a markov chain monte carlo  sampler for a fully bayesian formulation of the autoregressive model.

mutual information methods have been used extensively on genetics data
 <cit> , but usually for steady-state rather than time-series data. these methods are typically non-directional. recently, mutual information methods have been extended to analyze time-series data and produce directed networks
 <cit> . mutual information methods have the advantage of being able to identify nonlinear relationships.

our contributions
we present a new approach using bayesian model averaging  for variable selection from time-series gene expression data. our new method offers the following advances over our previous work
 <cit> : 

• we develop a new algorithm called scanbma that searches the model space more efficiently and thoroughly than previous algorithms. it is much faster than previous implementations of bma for a large number of predictors, resulting in running time comparable to that of lasso. it allows inference for networks of thousands of genes to be completed in minutes on a standard laptop computer.

• we transform the time-series data to reduce spurious correlations. specifically, we remove the effect of a gene on itself by subtracting the mean expression level for each gene at each time point and then using the residuals from a regression of its expression at the current time point on its expression at the previous time point.

• we use zellner’s g-prior
 <cit>  for the regression parameters and show that using the g-prior to compute posterior probabilities out-performs our previous effort using the bayesian information criterion .

• we address the scalability of network inference methods. our new implementation produces running times of minutes compared to hours or even days for some competing methods, thus offering substantial improvements.

we also carried out extensive empirical studies of our new method. specifically, we compared our new method, scanbma, to other network construction methods in the literature, namely lasso, the mutual information methods mrnet 
 <cit> , clr 
 <cit>  and aracne 
 <cit> , and also dynamic bayesian networks  when the latter were computationally feasible.

we benchmarked the performance of our approach, scanbma, using two datasets. the first dataset measures the gene expression levels over time of  <dig> yeast segregants perturbed with the drug rapamycin. the second dataset consists of simulated time-series data from the dream <dig>  challenge. for the yeast dataset, we found that our method outperformed competitors and previous analyses in recovering regulatory relationships previously reported in the literature. for the dream <dig> data, for which no prior information was available, our method performed comparably to other methods, while producing more compact networks. finally, the scanbma algorithm presents a substantial improvement in running time over previous implementations of bma. the method is implemented as the scanbma function in the networkbma bioconductor software package.

RESULTS
method outline
in scanbma, network inference is formulated as a series of variable selection problems in which parent nodes  are inferred for each target gene. the bma framework accounts for model uncertainty in variable selection by averaging over the posterior distributions from multiple models, weighted by their posterior model probabilities
 <cit> . a challenge of bma is to efficiently select a set of models to be averaged over. scanbma uses a greedy approach to explore the model space and uses the occam’s window principle
 <cit>  to eliminate unlikely models.

we previously developed a supervised framework to integrate external data sources, including co-expression, genome-wide binding, sequence polymorphism, physical interaction, genetic interaction, and literature curation data
 <cit> . using a training set consisting of approximately  <dig> known regulatory relationships in the literature, we computed prior probabilities of regulatory relationships across all candidate genes and regulators. these prior probabilities were then used to compute the posterior probabilities of of candidate regression models. we used zellner’s g-prior
 <cit>  to specify the prior for the model parameters in scanbma. we developed an expectation-maximization  algorithm to estimate the prior variance parameter g.

before the regression step, we apply a univariate measure  to rank candidate regulators for each target gene using these prior probabilities of regulatory relationships. the parameter nvar controls the number of top regulators used in the regression step of each target gene. we have performed empirical studies to study the effect of and estimate the optimal nvar.

assessment
a number of metrics have been used to evaluate the quality of inferred networks. we focus on a few that compare the inferred network with a gold-standard network of true edges. one measure that we use is the precision of the inferred network, equal to the number of true positives divided by the total number of edges in the inferred network. precision is important to researchers because an experiment to verify relationships identified in exploratory work can be expensive. thus, the more confident we can be when identifying relationships, the better. in light of this, we also look at the area under the precision-recall curve . this gives a more comprehensive view of network quality and does not require that a threshold be chosen for the posterior probability of an edge or for the number of edges included. we also look at the area under the roc curve , which is widely used to assess the quality of networks.

due to incomplete knowledge in real data, we use a partial assessment based on the yeastract database
 <cit> . this is a literature-curated repository of regulatory relationships between known transcription factors and target genes in yeast, based on more than  <dig>  literature references. due to incomplete knowledge in yeast biology, the lack of an edge in yeastract is not hard evidence of the absence of a relationship between two genes, although it is used as such in our evaluation. in contrast, the true underlying networks from the simulated dream <dig> data are known, so that an absence of a true edge is a false negative and a presence of a non-existing edge is a false positive.

results: yeast time series data
table
 <dig> summarizes the assessment results for different methods applied to the yeast dataset. our new scanbma method with nvar =  <dig> had a precision of  <dig> , much higher than any other method, including our previous method, ibma
 <cit> . the area under the roc curve  for scanbma was also much better than for the competing methods. note that for random guessing, the expected auroc is  <dig>  and the expected auprc is  <dig> . for these data, the mutual information methods clr and mrnet produced very large networks — nearly half of the number of possible edges, which is not concordant with what is known about regulatory networks of this type.

auroc is the area under the roc curve, auprc is the area under the precision-recall curve, and tp and fp are the numbers of true positive and false positive edges inferred, respectively. thus tp +fp is the number of edges in the inferred network and precision = tp/. scanbma was applied to the transformed data using the informative edge prior and zellner’s g-prior for the model parameters. the superscript indicates the value of nvar. expected precision and auprc from random guessing is  <dig> .

table
 <dig> compares the preferred version of scanbma with four other versions, each of which lacks one of the components of our final method. this table shows that each component contributes to the accuracy of our final network. as shown by
 <cit> , the incorporation of the informative prior yields the largest increase in performance, but the other components also contribute. the use of the g-prior reduces the number of false positives, while the data transformation substantially reduces the size of the inferred network.

for the priors, inform refers to the informative prior, while guelzim refers to the prior probability of  <dig> / <dig> for all possible relationships.

the precision-recall curves for the different methods on the yeast data are shown in figure
 <dig>  this figure shows the quality of the scanbma network even beyond the 95% posterior inclusion probability cutoff. the precision stays high through a large range of recall, whereas for the other methods it quickly drops to the level of random guessing. the figure also shows that nvar =  <dig> performs better than nvar =  <dig> 

when analyzing gene networks where the number of nodes is in the thousands, computation time can be an important consideration. we compared scanbma with the other methods on the yeast data by running each method on  <dig> target genes under controlled conditions to find the average cpu time per gene.

table
 <dig> shows that scanbma with nvar =  <dig>  i.e. considering all other genes whose expression varied as potential regulators, is within a factor of  <dig> of lasso, the fastest of the other methods. some of the mutual information methods, on the other hand, are much slower, with mrnet taking about  <dig> times longer than scanbma. table
 <dig> also shows that scanbma produces a substantial improvement in computational efficiency over our previous method ibma
 <cit> , especially when nvar is large. dynamic bayesian network methods were not included in the comparison because they analyze the entire network at once and do not scale well enough to be run feasibly on large network datasets such as the yeast data.

scanbma was run with g-prior, transformed data, informative prior. superscript indicates value of nvar.

results: simulated dream <dig> data
table
 <dig> summarizes the results of the competing methods for the dream <dig> 10-gene networks. for the dream <dig> networks, we were able to add the dynamic bayesian networks method, as implemented in the ebdbnet r package
 <cit> , to the comparison because the networks are small. scanbma again performed best among the methods, particularly in terms of the areas under the roc and precision-recall curves, even though no external information was available. however, the extent of scanbma’s superiority to other methods, notably lasso, was smaller in this case than for the yeast data, reflecting the lack of external information.

scanbma was run with the original data. the true positive  and false positive  columns are totaled across all  <dig> networks. there are  <dig> true edges across the  <dig> networks.

the precision-recall curves from the various methods are shown for the first of the five 10-gene networks in figure
 <dig>  figure
 <dig> shows the actual networks returned by each method in comparison with the true network. the scanbma network resembles the true network fairly well. in particular, the compactness of the scanbma network is apparent, particularly when compared with lasso and mrnet. the small number of false positives may be useful in focusing the attention of the biologist on edges of high interest when searching for new regulatory relationships.

the results of the methods for the dream <dig> 100-gene networks are summarized in table
 <dig>  for these networks, the mutual information methods mrnet and clr performed best in terms of the area under curve measures. scanbma was not quite as good by these measures, but its precision was much higher than that of any other method. figure
 <dig> illustrates the precision-recall curves for the various methods, showing increased precision across a broader range for scanbma.

scanbma run with original data. the true positive  and false positive  columns are totaled across all  <dig> networks. there are  <dig>  true edges across the  <dig> networks

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented a bayesian model averaging method for inferring gene regulatory networks from time series data. it incorporates external information in a principled way via the prior edge probabilities, transforms the data to reduce spurious correlations, and uses zellner’s g-prior for model parameters, with g estimated from the data. we have introduced a new algorithm, scanbma, to search the model space efficiently. our method infers compact networks with higher precision than the competing methods we have assessed, important features for further analysis in searching for new regulatory relationships.

we found that our method outperformed previous methods as well as lasso and mutual information methods on yeast time-series data. in addition, our method performed comparably to competing methods, including dynamic bayesian networks, on simulated data from the dream <dig> challenge, even in the absence of prior information. the networks from scanbma are also similar in size to the target networks.

