BACKGROUND
variability is an inherent feature of the cardiac interval time series reflecting joint modulation of sinoatrial pacemaker activity by sympathetic and parasympathetic systems. autonomic influences on heart rate variability  are readily apparent in autopower spectra computed from short records  of electrocardiographic r wave to r wave  intervals. such spectra typically exhibited peaks in two distinct regions, one a low frequency  region, located between  <dig>  and  <dig>  hz, the other a high frequency  region located at the breathing rate and associated with changes in r-r interval durations during the ventilatory cycle, i.e., the respiratory sinus arrhythmia   <cit> . while lf activity is considered to represent sympathetic efferent cardiac innervation and hf activity due to parasympathetic efferent cardiac innervation, this functional separation is not totally supported by experimental evidence that suggested joint modulation of either region  <cit> . even though interactions between sympathetic and parasympathetic systems can occur, conditions of imposed stress may alter one or the other of the spectral regions, indicating selective activation of the sympathetic or parasympathetic system. for example, stimulation of peripheral chemoreceptors by hypoxia augmented activity in the lf region  <cit> , whereas activation of central chemoreceptors by hypercapnia augmented hf activity  <cit> . hypoxia-induced elevation of sympathetic efferent neuronal activity is of interest because it may play an etiological role in the genesis of human cardiovascular disease  <cit> .

animal models of adult human disease in which hypoxia is thought to play a significant role, e.g., the obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, have relied upon long-term exposures to chronic-intermittent hypoxia in order to reproduce the hypertension associated with untreated obstructive sleep apnea  <cit> . however, lengthy stimulus exposures are unsuitable for cardiovascular studies in large developing mammals because they would be separated from their mothers during the exposure periods, thereby disrupting established feeding and sleeping schedules. further, prolonged periods of stimulation may not be required to produce changes in physiological function. for example, several recent studies in neonatal swine showed that exposure to a short protocol  of intermittent hypercapnic hypoxia was sufficient to evoke cell death in brainstem regions involved in cardiorespiratory regulation  <cit> . these findings raised the possibility that changes in neuronal circuits of neonatal piglets underlying cardiorespiratory control could occur following brief exposures to intermittent hypoxia . hence, one objective of the present study was to determine whether or not exposure to short-term ih would increase lf activity in hrv spectra, and consequently increase lf/hf ratios, the latter an index of the relative contributions of sympathetic and parasympathetic modulation to hrv  <cit> . a second objective was evaluate the extent to which right stellate ganglionectomy would alter lf activity and lf/hf values in hrv spectra. the latter objective will be pursued because anatomical studies in swine showed that sympathetic efferent innervation of the sinoatrial node originated from peripheral ganglionic sites, i.e., middle cervical and stellate ganglia bilaterally  <cit> . we hypothesized that baseline hrv spectra would exhibit increased activity in lf region and increased values of lf/hf ratios, reflecting exposure to ih on the previous day or days, and that such an effect would occur in both intact and right stellate ganglionectomized animals. a change in hrv spectra of such ganglionectomized animals, indistinguishable from sham operated litter mate controls, would demonstrate hypoxia-induced, functionally equivalent activity in anatomically distinct sympathetic efferent cardiac nerves.

experiments were carried out using awake pigs since this species has been shown by us and others to be suitable for long-term monitoring of cardiovascular activity  <cit> . further, the use of an awake animal model avoided anesthetic related effects on hrv; for example, anesthetized rats exhibited an inverse rsa wherein r-r intervals during inspiration had longer durations than those of expiration  <cit> . piglets exposed to ih were either those with right stellate ganglionectomy , or sham  operated litter mate controls. rsgx was selected because animals with this type of denervation are distinguished from control animals by their characteristic change in cardiac chronotropy, q-wave to t-wave  interval prolongation  <cit> . a third group comprised animals from different litters who did not receive ih stimulation. this control  group was used to evaluate changes in hrv spectra due to passage of time. r-r interval time series of con animals were also used to determine the relationships between interval durations and the ventilatory cycle because con animals were likely to exhibit a more stable cardiac time series than those exposed to hypoxic stimulation.

RESULTS
telemetry recordings  were obtained from  <dig> animals,  <dig> animals each in the sham and rsgx treatment groups, and  <dig> animals in the con group. ventilatory frequency during baseline recordings did not differ significantly between treatment groups and ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> breaths per minute, with rsgx animals exhibiting a tendency to breathe more rapidly than other animals. as expected, rsgx animals exhibited significantly longer durations of r-r, q-t, and corrected q-t  intervals than those of sham or con animals .

*interval durations of rsgx animals at baseline were significantly longer than those of either sham or con groups.

†within groups comparisons of interval durations, baseline vs. hypoxia, showed significant decreases in durations during hypoxia in rsgx and sham animals.

statistical evaluation of hrv spectral features, areas of lf or hf regions, and lf/hf ratios, showed no effect of daily exposures to ih in either rsgx or sham treatment groups, neither was there any effect of passage of time on hrv spectra of con animals. hence, all statistical comparisons described below were made using data accumulated over the four baseline days

baseline hrv spectra
examination of hrv spectral features showed many similarities despite differences in treatment groups. frequency locations of lf and hf peaks in hrv spectra were similar in each treatment group . examination of representative hrv spectra showed that hf activity was generally greater in magnitude than lf activity . the area of hrv spectra encompassed by hf activity was usually larger than that of lf activity regardless of treatment group . the predominance of hf activity in hrv spectra was quantified by comparisons of lf/hf ratios in each treatment group, median values computed over four baseline days were less than unity in all treatment groups, with rsgx animals exhibiting the lowest values . a marked departure from the general trend of hf dominance was observed on baseline day three for sham group animals when a lf/hf ratio greater than unity was noted . this finding was due to a marked increase in lf area accompanied by a decrease of hf area of similar magnitude . this one time occurrence was sufficiently large to account for the finding of significance between rsgx and sham animals . nevertheless, the latter result cannot be attributed to ih exposure because neither rsgx nor sham animals had either lf or hf areas that differed statistically from those of con group animals .

ventilation-related changes in r-r interval durations
the observation that hf peaks in hrv spectra were present at the same frequency locations as those in vent spectra was taken as an indication of ventilatory modulation of cardiac r-r intervals. nonetheless, the finding that peaks in hrv and vent spectra occupy the same frequency locations does not yield information regarding the phasic influences of ventilation on r-r interval durations. the temporal dispersion of r-r intervals across the ventilatory cycle was examined in seven con animals that had vent signals with well-defined boundaries between inspiratory and expiratory portions of the ventilatory cycle . figure 4a shows a time series of r-r intervals for one animal on each of four successive baseline days , and demonstrates marked fluctuations in r-r interval durations on all baseline days except day one . the oscillatory patterns represented shortening and lengthening of r-r interval durations during inspiratory and expiratory segments, respectively . the autopower spectra of figure 4b showed that hf activity dominated spectra on days two through four when changes in r-r interval durations had marked oscillatory patterns , whereas only low frequency activity occurred on baseline day one when r-r interval durations exhibited little variation. r-r interval durations were evaluated by selecting recordings on one baseline day and then sorting r-r interval durations according to time of occurrence in the ventilatory cycle as depicted in figure 4d. figure 4c shows median r-r interval durations in each ventilatory segment. r-r intervals that occurred during expiratory phases or during the expiratory to inspiratory transitions had significantly longer median durations  than those of either inspiratory phases or inspiratory to expiratory transitions . also, durations of r-r intervals in the expiratory to inspiratory transition were significantly longer than those of expiration; however, no such difference was noted between inspiratory r-r intervals and intervals in the inspiratory to expiratory transition.

changes in cardiac intervals and hrv spectra during ih
rsgx and sham animals had similar changes in cardiac chronotropy during hypoxia. both groups of animals exhibited decreases in r-r and uncorrected q-t interval durations during hypoxia that differed significantly from their respective baseline values . however, the magnitudes of such changes were similar within each group, yielding nearly identical q-tc interval durations . likewise, comparable changes were also noted in hrv spectra that were computed during either the 8th or 9th episode of hypoxia on each baseline day for each rsgx and sham animal. the hrv spectra of figure  <dig> illustrate activity in the lf region of a rsgx animal and a sham animal during a representative hypoxic episode on each exposure day. it is noteworthy that levels of lf activity during hypoxia were comparable in hrv spectra of rsgx and sham animals. while both groups of animals showed significant increases of lf activity during hypoxia compared to baseline activity, the relative change in activity from baseline was similar in each group . a comparison of hf activity during baseline and hypoxia was not possible since activity in the hf region was usually not observed due to the relatively high ventilatory rates  observed during hypoxic episodes.

*low frequency area during hypoxia was significantly larger than that of baseline, i.e, normoxia.

discussion
we hypothesized that ih would evoke changes in cardiac beat-to-beat dynamics of neonatal swine such that indices of sympathetic activation, increased lf areas and lf/hf ratios greater than unity, would emerge over the course of the ih protocol. intermittent hypoxia did not alter any index of hrv spectral activity whether piglets were intact, i.e., sham group, or had undergone rsgx. in fact our finding that lf areas of sham animals were significantly larger than those of rsgx animals was found to be a result of increased lf activity on a single day; despite such an occurrence lf areas of sham animals were not different from those of con animals who breathed room air. such similarity in regulation of cardiac chronotropy was also apparent during hypoxic episodes. during ih, rsgx and sham animals had similar increases in lf activity of hrv spectra and similar durations of q-tc intervals. these findings supported the hypothesis that a stressor recruited sympathetic efferent neuronal activity from contralateral intrathoracic neurons to affect the sinoatrial node  <cit> . additionally, this residual sympathetic innervation could have altered activity of postganglionic parasympathetic neurons that innervated the sinoatrial node as demonstrated in in vitro studies of right atrial ganglionic neurons in neonatal swine  <cit> .

the observation that conscious neonatal piglets exhibited changes in r-r interval durations during baseline conditions, indicative of rsa, is novel, but not unexpected as rsa is a prominent feature of r-r interval time series in a number of different mammalian species including human infants and adults . such a pervasive feature suggests a common neuroanatomical organization  <cit> . in fact, we and others have shown that the organization of the brainstem vagal motor complex in piglets was similar to that of other species, with cardioinhibitory neurons located in the nucleus ambiguus  <cit> . electrophysiological studies in felines showed that cardioinhibitory neurons in the nucleus ambiguus exhibited inhibitory postsynaptic potentials during inspiration followed by depolarization and action potentials during early and late expiration  <cit> . likewise, whole cell recordings of nucleus ambiguus neurons in an en bloc neonatal rat brainstem preparation revealed an inspiration-related inhibition that was associated with marked increases of gabaergic and glycinergic inhibitory postsynaptic currents  <cit> . the aforementioned studies provided strong support for a neural origin for rsa that involved phasic interactions between brainstem neurons involved in shaping central respiratory activity and those providing parasympathetic efferent preganglionic outflows to postganglionic neurons innervating sinoatrial tissue. hence, the progressive increase in r-r interval durations of piglets during the time course of expiration  may be viewed as representative of the expiration-related depolarization exhibited by feline nucleus ambiguus neurons  <cit> . our finding that r-r intervals with the longest durations occurred at the expiratory to inspiratory transition and those with the shortest durations at the inspiratory to expiratory transition may simply represent species and/or maturational differences in durations and intensities of inhibitory and depolarizing currents. it is also likely that age-related differences in organization of the respiratory phases may have influenced the durations of r-r intervals. for example, we did not observe phrenic activity in earlier studies of neonatal cats or piglets  <cit>  that corresponded to post-inspiration phrenic discharge  during which cardioinhibitory neurons in mature cats fired action potentials  <cit>  an absence of post-inspiratory activity could mean that the temporal course of inspiration-related inhibition in the neonatal piglet is different, and this difference could explain the temporal dispersion of r-r intervals across the respiratory cycle. the absence of post-inspiratory activity suggested that inspiration-related inhibition included the transition zone between inspiratory and expiratory phases. in fact, our finding that r-r interval durations were shortest during this transition supported that idea. a change in the timing of phasic inhibition would be accompanied by changes in the temporal features of expiration-related depolarization such that it might include the beginning of the inspiratory phase, thereby, accounting for the occurrences of r-r intervals with the longest durations at the expiratory to inspiratory phase transitions. further such an overlap of expiration-related depolarization with the onset of inspiration would delay the appearance of phasic inhibition of cardioinhibitory neurons as indicated by the observation that significant shortening in durations of r-r intervals occurred first during mid-inspiration . the foregoing neural schema, while speculative, provides a reasonable explanation for the respiratory-related differences in r-r interval durations noted in this study.

a shortcoming of our investigation was that we did not fully evaluate the sources of rsa by application of ganglionic blockade. nevertheless, substantial evidence for a neural origin for rsa was provided by animal and human studies that showed marked reduction of hf activity after parasympathetic blockade  <cit> . however, the possibility that mechanical effects of respiration, i.e., changes in intrathoracic pressure and/or cardiac filling, contributed to rsa cannot be discounted since rsa has been demonstrated in studies of transplanted human hearts, albeit at a much reduced level compared to normal control subjects  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study provided important information regarding autonomic modulation of hrv during the first month of life for the piglet, a time frame generally accepted as equivalent to periods of vulnerability during the first six months of human life  <cit> . first, the equivalence of lf activity in sham and rsgx animals on baseline days and during episodes of intermittent hypoxia demonstrated that functionally appropriate regulation of cardiac chronotropy could be attained by recruitment of residual intrathoracic sympathetic ganglionic neurons. second, the presence of rsa in the cardiac time series of developing mammals has important functional consequences. rsa has been hypothesized as a mechanism whereby changes in r-r interval durations occur at appropriate times in the ventilatory cycle so that ventilation to perfusion ratios are optimized, making for efficient exchange of pulmonary gases as demonstrated in adult humans and dogs  <cit> 

