BACKGROUND
species are a fundamental unit in biological studies and their robust delimitation is essential to many fields of evolutionary biology, particularly systematics, biogeography, and conservation biology. lineage separation and divergence form a temporal process that may render populations monophyletic, reproductively isolated, ecologically divergent, and/or morphologically distinctive. these properties serve as operational criteria for systematists to delimit species and they can occur at different times or orders during speciation. de queiroz  <cit>  proposed that at the root of all modern species concepts is the general agreement on the fundamental nature of species: species are separately evolving metapopulation lineages. the perspective that species are lineages, and that multiple criteria should be used to identify them, has been termed the general lineage species concept  <cit> . applying this lineage-based framework to species delimitation shifts the focus from a single operational criterion and increases the importance of sampling multiple lines of evidence. species delimitation is notoriously difficult when alternative criteria delimit incongruent species boundaries, but this is to be expected in recent radiations . evaluating multiple criteria not only increases our ability to detect recently separated lineages, but also can provide stronger support for lineage separation when they are in agreement  <cit> .

the difficulty in recognizing species and their limits  is particularly compounded on islands. because most islands are considerably younger terrestrial systems than continental areas  <cit> , there has generally been less time for the completion of speciation processes. time is an important factor for incomplete lineage sorting because the existence of ancestral polymorphism and differential extinction thereof can cause bias in phylogenetic inference  and the identification of distinct lineages . furthermore, the tendency for island colonizers to quickly fill available habitat often leads to species that are ecologically isolated but not considerably diverged genetically, potentially leading to hybridization if mating barriers are broken down due to secondary contact . the evolutionary processes of incomplete lineage sorting and hybridization cause the "species problem" to be compounded on young, volcanic islands. hawai'i is the longest archipelago on earth and has developed linearly in a sequential fashion from a volcanic hotspot  <cit> . recent study of the extant high islands has shown that the terrestrial biota evolved over the last 29- <dig> ma  <cit>  and that they harbor the highest degree of endemism of any known flora  <cit> . the species richness of the hawaiian islands also contributes to the polynesian/micronesia biodiversity hotspot  <cit> . difficulties in delimiting species is not restricted to angiosperms on the hawaiian islands , but has also been highlighted in hylaeus bee  <cit>  and spoon tarsus drosophila  <cit>  studies.

an excellent group within which to address the evaluation of species boundaries based on various delimitation criteria is the hawaiian pritchardia  radiation. pritchardia is economically important as a widely cultivated ornamental palm  <cit> , displays high endemism, and is a conservation priority for the state of hawaii . pritchardia is one of the most species-rich plant genera in hawaii  <cit>  and contains  <dig> currently recognized, primarily single-island endemic species . the genus also occurs on small islands in the eastern pacific . based on the most recent phylogenetic results pritchardia is monophyletic and sister to copernicia, although definitive generic relationships among copernicia, pritchardia, and washingtonia were uncertain due to gene-tree incongruence  <cit> . previous work has also shown that the north american and caribbean lineage leading to pritchardia colonized the eastern pacific and then dispersed to hawaii between  <dig> - <dig> million years ago . although no explicit species concept was applied, hodel  <cit>  recently revised pritchardia using morphological data. hodel  <cit>  noted that character states were often difficult to define because pritchardia morphology is highly labile based on environmental conditions . accurate estimation of species limits is important to understanding the evolution and radiation of pritchardia species and is essential to conservation efforts on the hawaiian islands.

species concepts can address both the evolutionary patterns consistent with evolution along lineages and the evolutionary processes that are fundamental in maintaining distinct lineages . under the phylogenetic species concept i , species are defined as "the smallest aggregation of populations  or lineages  diagnosable by a unique combination of character states in comparable individuals" . to apply psci, fixed  character-state differences are used as evidence to infer that gene flow has ceased between the sampled populations in population aggregation analysis . an alternate version of the phylogenetic species concept  requires exclusivity to recognize a species and differs from psci by basing species recognition strictly on monophyletic groups . a third alternative is the genotypic cluster species concept , which defines species as genetic groups with few or no intermediates between them. the gsc can be implemented using a variety of clustering algorithms or assignment tests. looking across species delimitation criteria allows for the implementation of the general-lineage species concept where the greater the number of criteria satisfied by a putative lineage, the more likely it is to represent an independent evolutionary trajectory  <cit> .

adaptive radiations are difficult evolutionary scenarios to evaluate because phylogenetic lineages may be so recently separated that each species' alleles have not coalesced since the time of speciation  <cit> . among recently diverged species, genealogies inferred from independent genomic regions are likely to disagree due to the differential sorting of ancestral polymorphism into daughter lineages such that each inferred gene tree might differ from the species tree . because estimation of a coalescent species tree explicitly models incomplete lineage sorting, its comparison with the simultaneous-analysis  <cit>  allows for the inference of hybridization from any incongruence between the two topologies when only orthologous alleles are sampled.

in this study we aim to provide a comprehensive assessment of species diversity in pritchardia using a multifaceted approach and independent sources of plastid, nuclear, and morphological data to assess three species-delimitation criteria - monophyly, the absence of genotypic intermediates, and diagnosability using mutually exclusive character states. we test whether currently recognized pritchardia species merit taxonomic recognition as distinct evolutionary lineages, particularly with respect to the accumulation of evidence in favor of their delimitation. we also take advantage of the power of the coalescent to infer the species tree to understand potential conflicts in our results that can be introduced by incomplete lineage sorting and/or hybridization.

RESULTS
gene-tree incongruence was detected among five of the seven loci for the resolution of the sister group of pritchardia and among two of the seven loci for the sister group of hawaiian pritchardia . the analysis  <dig>  dataset comprised seven genes and five microsatellite loci for  <dig> individuals;  <dig> characters are variable and  <dig> are parsimony-informative within pritchardia . application of pscii to the pritchardia relationships in our a <dig> matrix indicated that the three currently recognized species of eastern pacific pritchardia  are each distinct evolutionary lineages. despite low branch support, hawaiian p. affinis, p. kaalae, and p. remota were resolved as unique monophyletic groups and satisfy the pscii criterion. a monophyletic group of p. bakeri from pupukea, o'ahu was also resolved and likely represents population structure within the ko'olau mountain range. a clade that included a subset of p. glabrata individuals and another clade that included a subset of p. perlmanii individuals were resolved, consistent with each of these being distinct evolutionary lineages according to the pscii criterion.

the  <dig> pritchardia species sampled in the analysis  <dig>  matrix was reduced to  <dig> by deleting wildcard taxa identified from comparisons of the adams and strict consensus trees . the reduced a <dig> matrix has  <dig> parsimony informative characters. the eastern pacific pritchardia species p. pacifica and p. mitiaroana were resolved as part of a basal polytomy within pritchardia, but there was strong support for monophyly of p. mitiaroana . pritchardia thurstonii was well supported  as the sister species to the hawaiian clade, which was strongly supported  as a monophyletic group. pritchardia aylmer-robinsonii and p. remota were strongly supported as sister species , consistent with their synonymy. pritchardia affinis and p. maideniana were well supported  as sister taxa, also consistent with recent synonymy, and p. hillebrandii was weakly supported  as its sister species. pritchardia hardyi and p. viscosa were also weakly supported  as sister species.

we explicitly modeled incomplete lineage sorting through the use of a multispecies coalescent tree for the sequence data . the topology did not have any mutually well-supported  conflicts with the a <dig> or a <dig> trees. the congruence between methods indicates that the trees used for species delimitation  and for inference of inter-specific relationships  is not biased by patterns of lineage sorting. the *beast species tree resolved four moderately supported groupings of hawaiian individuals not seen in the comparable a <dig> analysis , although this may be due to inherent differences between parsimony and bayesian tree reconstruction and jk support vs. posterior probabilities  <cit> . the recently synonymized p. affinis into p. maideniana, p. aylmer-robinsonii into p. remota, and p. limahuliensis into p. napaliensis  <cit>  were each resolved as monophyletic groups. although the posterior probabilities for these cases of synonymy were modest , these three taxonomic changes based on morphology  <cit>  are consistent with our molecular results.

significant p-values indicating disequilibrium were detected in the '90' microsatellite locus for two populations  and no evidence for stutter, large allele dropout, or null alleles was detected at any of the loci based on 99% confidence intervals. structure analyses resulted in mean lnp values that appeared to plateau when graphed in structure harvester, making it difficult to identify the most likely k value for the number of genetic groups present in the data. therefore the Δk method was applied and the highest probability for the number of groups that individuals were assigned to  was  <dig>  = - <dig>  Δk =  <dig> ). upon visualization of population assignments from across the structure iterations, the presence of genetic intermediates between pritchardia species was evident . levels of admixture were particularly high in areas of sympatry such as in the makaleha and namolokama ranges in kaua'i where up to five species overlap in geographic distribution  and in the ko'olau mountains of o'ahu where three species are sympatric . genetic subdivision and little admixture between species were detected among p. affinis, p. aylmer-robinsonii, p. beccariana, p. forbesiana, p. hardyi, p. lowreyana, p. munroi, and p. schattaueri and these eight groups meet the necessary criterion for species delimitation according to the gsc of high probability of assignment to their respective genetic groups . however, the individual q matrix of assignment to groups shows that p. beccariana, p. forbesiana, and p. lowreyana do not represent distinct evolutionary lineages according to the gsc because they do not group as unique clusters; with other individuals in the q matrix having >  <dig>  pp of falling within those groups. although the  <dig>  cut-off is arbitrarily defined, the maximum values from the q matrices show a discontinuous distribution where individuals have a membership coefficient of >  <dig> , while the remaining have <  <dig>  with few in between. therefore, based on our data, only p. affinis, p. aylmer-robinsonii, p. hardyi, p. munroi, and p. schattaueri meet the necessary and sufficient criteria as distinct evolutionary lineages without intermediates according to the gsc .

monophyly, as required by the phylogenetic species concept ii, is shown as parsimony jackknife branch support. genotypic clusters are labeled with their inferred genetic group and their estimated membership coefficient. diagnosability to satisfy the phylogenetic species concept i was determined by paa

four distinct lineages were identified within pritchardia microsatellite data using paa,  <dig> in the sequence data and  <dig> in morphology, although individuals with missing data for diagnostic characters were left out of aggregations to avoid collapsing otherwise distinct groups . for example, in the sequence data seven terminals had missing data for diagnostic characters and were arbitrarily assigned to a single group rather than collapsing the otherwise diagnosable groups. due to differential sampling only the individuals sampled for the sequence dataset were used to perform paa across the microsatellite and morphological data. in the three datasets we generated for this study,  <dig> lineages were indentified that are diagnosable and satisfy the psci. of the  <dig> psci species, unique combinations of character states support  <dig> currently recognized pritchardia species .

discussion
the hawaiian islands have an unparalleled number of well-studied examples of adaptive evolution because of their high ecological heterogeneity, volcanic origin, and isolation from the nearest continental land mass  <cit> . despite the limited time available for diversification in comparison to ancient landmasses  <cit> , the hawaiian islands have the highest degree of endemism of any known flora  <cit> . within the hawaiian islands, many angiosperms show evidence for recent and rapid radiations, which frequently make species delimitation difficult . we applied three species-delimitation criteria to identify evolutionary lineages in hawaiian pritchardia. robust species delimitations are important for pritchardia because many of the currently recognized species are of conservation concern and threats continue to increase due habitat degradation and invasive herbivores and competitors  <cit> .

we applied the criterion of monophyly to test whether currently recognized pritchardia species are distinct evolutionary lineages using pscii. maximum parsimony  analysis of the a <dig> matrix revealed support for p. affinis, p. glabrata, p. kaalae, p. perlmanii and p. remota as clades . although these are weakly supported lineages, they satisfy the monophyly requirement of pscii  <cit> . despite its popularity, monophyly as inferred from a phylogenetic tree may be a poor indicator of whether evolutionary lineages are distinct in the presence of gene flow  <cit>  or due to the error associated with randomly sampling few individuals from a complex underlying genealogy  <cit> . furthermore, decoupling hybridization from incomplete lineage sorting on a phylogeny is difficult in recently diverged species because both produce the same pattern of few to no polymorphisms between morphologically identifiable species  <cit> .

the genotypic cluster criterion defines species as "distinguishable groups of individuals that have few or no intermediates when in contact" . a bayesian assignment test was used to quantify the degree of admixture  between species. although issues can arise with imperfect geographical sampling, especially in cases of isolation by distance or environmental gradients , strong signal for the delimitation of p. affinis, p. aylmer-robinsonii, p. hardyi, p. munroi, and p. schattaueri was detected with high probability of assignment to unique populations. a lack of intermediates satisfies this species criterion and these five groups are distinct evolutionary lineages according to the gsc. on the other end of the speciation spectrum, sympatric species appear to have ongoing gene flow among lineages where the probabilities of membership among some heterogeneous individuals and populations were shared , particularly in the mountains of kaua'i and o'ahu.

under the criterion of diagnosability, species are identified as the smallest aggregation of populations diagnosable by a unique combination of character states  <cit> . using paa,  <dig> lineages were identified as diagnosable and although they conform to psci as independent lineages, we do not advocate their formal recognition as species. rather, our goal was to implement the general lineage species concept using multiple species-delimitation criteria to reach a more stable taxonomic solution for the hawaiian pritchardia. furthermore, paa can be highly sensitive where incomplete sampling of characters, individuals within populations, or populations can each lead to incorrect assessment of species  <cit> . in our hawaiian pritchardia data, the nucleotide sequence matrix had 24% percent missing or ambiguous data, which was mostly due to a lack of sampling in the malate synthase  gene . the microsatellite and morphological matrices had only  <dig> % missing data. between one and six individuals were sampled per population with an average of  <dig>  individuals and  <dig>  populations per species in the nucleotide sequences of the a <dig> matrix. between one and  <dig> individuals were sampled per population with an average of seven individuals and two populations per species for the microsatellite matrix. the morphological matrix comprised character states that were fixed within currently recognized species and were not typically scored from the actual specimens used in the sequence-based and microsatellite analyses. additionally, ten of the morphological characters were derived from species descriptions  <cit>  rather than herbarium material. certainly no study is immune to these types of weakness, but we recognize that undersampling of individuals within populations and populations within species have affected the paa results in this study by over-splitting and thus increasing the number of apparent species.

distinct evolutionary lineages of pritchardia
as currently defined, pritchardia species are primarily recognized by their geographic distributions and a suite of morphological characters  <cit> . yet when considering distinct evolutionary lineages identified in this study, none of the pritchardia species satisfy all the species-delimitation criteria that we applied. some species-delimitation criteria recognize more lineages than others in part because criteria are met at different times during cladogenesis  <cit> . furthermore, when considering the amount of data used in the application of each criterion to infer species delimitations in hawaiian pritchardia we found the method that uses the most data, paa, was the most powerful because it recognized the greatest number of splits.

seven pritchardia lineages satisfy two species-delimitation criteria . the taxonomic status of p. affinis and p. remota are discussed in the interpretation of the a <dig> and coalescent species trees . pritchardia lanaiensis and p. elliptica were recently synonymized into p. glabrata  <cit> , yet our results are inconsistent with this designation because of the diagnostic grouping of all p. glabrata sensu stricto individuals in paa .

pritchardia hardyi, p. munroi, and p. schattaueri are all distinct lineages based on the species-delimitation criteria of a lack of intermediates and the presence of diagnostic character states. these results are consistent with hodel's  <cit>  description of morphological autapomorphies that define each of these three independent lineages. pritchardia kaalae is identified as an independent lineage based on the formation of a monophyletic group and the presence of diagnostic character states. despite its distinction as an independent lineage, p. kaalae appears to have significant levels of admixture based on the structure results, particularly with waianae and central ko'olau  populations of p. martii . admixture may be indicative of the pritchardia-dominated ancestral forest of the extensive o'ahu plain that spanned the waianae and ko'olau mountains and facilitated gene flow between ranges  <cit> . the once-contiguous palm forest likely formed an isolation-by-distance-based cline of gene flow, and extinction of the intervening lowland populations may have subsequently formed reproductively isolated lineages.

eleven pritchardia lineages satisfy only one species-delimitation criterion . some of these pritchardia lineages may be recognized as independent due to the sampling artifacts described above. this is particularly a concern with p. gordonii and p. woodii, which were only sampled for morphology, and p. hillebrandii, which was not sampled for the sequence data. future efforts to tease apart distinct evolutionary lineages in pritchardia should focus on these particular groups, as well as areas of sympatry, with increased sampling of both individuals within populations and of populations within species.

sister-group and inter-specific relationships of pritchardia
in previous studies the sister group of pritchardia has been inferred to be either copernicia  or washingtonia . our study is consistent with previous work showing the close relationships among the three genera . in the a <dig> and a <dig> matrices, copernicia and washingtonia together are inferred to be the sister group to pritchardia with strong support .

we formed composite terminals  <cit>  from the a <dig> matrix where taxa were combined at a level for which monophyly is assumed a prior thereby reducing missing data. sequence data was augmented with allozyme and morphological data to construct the a <dig> matrix for simultaneous analysis of inter-specific relationships . the a <dig> matrix did not incorporate potential hybrid lineages because of the terminal omission iterations and was compared to the coalescent species tree to assess effects of incomplete lineage sorting. in the a <dig> tree, p. thurstonii is sister to the hawaiian clade, which is well supported as monophyletic  and consistent with bacon et al. . zielger  <cit>  proposed the sister relationship between fijian and hawaiian pritchardia based on his hypothesis of an adaptive shift in fruit size upon colonization of the hawaiian islands. the sister relationship between fijian and hawaiian angiosperms has also been noted in cyrtandra  <cit>  and pittosporum  <cit> , but not in taxa that ultimately descended from american ancestors  <cit> , such as pritchardia.

the strongly supported sister relationship p. aylmer-robinsonii and p. remota  is consistent with their synonymy  <cit> . excluding p. remota from nihoa and ni'ihau, the backbone of the hawaiian clade is a trichotomy. weak support was provided for a sister relationship between p. hardyi and p. viscosa , which had been previously suggested based on their flat leaf blades, the density of lepidia on the abaxial surface of the leaf, and their stiff leaf tips  <cit> . hodel  <cit>  also identified a close relationship between p. maideniana  and p. hillebrandii based on morphological aspects of the lepidia and inflorescences, for which we inferred a well-supported p. maideniana sensu lato  that was weakly supported as sister to p. hillebrandii .

the coalescent-species-tree approach has been suggested to be a more accurate estimation of lineage splitting than concatenation because it can model the stochastic forces that drive population divergence  <cit> . yet missing data and other issues with species-tree estimation such as mutational and coalescent variance can have detrimental effects on modeling incomplete lineage sorting . another important consideration with species-tree estimation is that species are defined a priori and the coalescent model assumes species are monophyletic. this can be highly unlikely in recent radiations where ancestral species are still extant. despite these issues, the advantage of directly modeling intraspecies polymorphism and incomplete lineage sorting makes species-tree estimation an important approach to data exploration in the identification of evolutionary lineages, especially in rapid species radiations  <cit> .

the coalescent-species-tree topology provided moderate branch support for three clades that are consistent with recent synonymy . the species tree identified p. flynnii and p. waialealeana as sister taxa, which together are sister to p. minor . lastly, individuals planted by early hawaiian naturalist george munro in lana'i city, lana'i had been hypothesized to represent the extinct p. elliptica lineage , but are here shown to be consistent with a p. marti source from o'ahu  and separated from p. elliptica individuals collected from natural populations in kunoa valley by eight branches, one of which is highly supported . secondly, the species tree was used to test for congruence with the simultaneous-analysis a <dig> topology. because the two distinct methods generally resolved the same well-supported clades, we can infer that the extrapolation from the gene trees to the phylogenetic tree is likely accurate in the simultaneous analysis. this is not to say that the process of lineage sorting has not occurred, but rather we have no evidence that it has confounded the species-level relationships inferred from the simultaneous-analysis tree.

incomplete lineage sorting, the tempo of radiation, and hybridization in pritchardia
the identification of distinct evolutionary lineages is a necessary precursor to the delimitation of species  <cit> . satisfaction of multiple species criteria can ensure accurate, stable, and uncontroversial species delimitations . for taxa of conservation concern, accurate identification of lineages may facilitate management efforts by focusing on distinct species, rather than ambiguous groups. our results, which are based on data from both the plastid and nuclear genomes, show little sequence differentiation among most pritchardia species. the lack of differentiation may be due to incomplete lineage sorting, the tempo of the pritchardia radiation, and/or hybridization between sympatric species, and distinguishing between these factors can be difficult.

incomplete lineage sorting is one hypothesis for gene-tree incongruence and a lack of resolution within island radiations. differential lineage sorting can bias species inference and may be further compounded by the estimated long generation time for other tropical understory palms that have undergone island colonization . large ancestral effective population sizes have been hypothesized from fossil evidence and pritchardia has been shown to be the dominant component of pre-human quaternary forests on the hawaiian islands . despite this, coalescence times for hawaiian pritchardia species are likely to be shorter than their continental tribal counterparts. congruence between the simultaneous and species-tree analyses together with information on coalescence times suggests that differential lineage sorting did not drive current diversity patterns within pritchardia.

a general trend emerging from this and other phylogenetic studies on the hawaiian flora is the difficulty in estimating relationships among woody and long-lived groups . another example is hawaiian pritchardia. aside from the sympatric species, the lack of resolution may be caused by the insufficient time for divergence between lineages. because of the age of the oldest extant hawaiian island  and because the pritchardia colonization of the hawaiian islands was estimated to occur between  <dig> - <dig> ma , an average of three new species would have had to form every million years to account for the  <dig> currently recognized species in the radiation. clearly this rapid rate of cladogenesis has not allowed for much divergence within the hawaiian pritchardia radiation.

we also suggest that hybridization has played a key role in the diversification of hawaiian pritchardia lineages from geographic regions of sympatry of kaua'i  and o'ahu . removing wildcard terminals through the use of adams consensus trees may be biased towards deletion of hybrids given that they are expected to be resolved as basal lineages  <cit>  and our iterative exclusion process is consistent with the exclusion of hybrids because 66%  of the excluded terminals were from areas of high sympatry such as in the makaleha and namolokamain ranges in kaua'i and in the ko'olau mountains of o'ahu. examination of the character conflict present was hampered by a general lack of resolution in the gene trees . despite this, review of the parsimony-informative sequence characters revealed six polymorphisms found on both forward and reverse sequence reads that suggest introgression in two genes given how different the alleles are . although widespread hybridization has been observed in cultivation  <cit> , it has been difficult to detect in the field due to the high phenotypic plasticity that characterizes pritchardia  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the ability to hybridize is common among island species  and has likely been a major force in shaping other hawaiian angiosperm lineages such as metrosideros  <cit> , pittosporum  <cit> , and silverswords . outside of the lack of reproductive barriers or incompatibility mechanisms, anthropogenic change on the archipelago may have caused a breakdown of species boundaries. for example, native hawaiians cultivated pritchardia species in coastal settlements and although they had a variety of ethnobotanical uses , the leaves and fibers were primarily used for thatching. the movement of plants by humans could have introduced new genotypes into existing coastal native species and admixed with other cultivated species. also, the likely extinction of natural pollinators and dispersers and the introduction of invasive species that generally have higher mobility and efficiency  <cit>  may also facilitate gene flow between populations and species.

research at the interface of population genetics and phylogenetics is greatly expanding, as seen in the increasing numbers of publications on coalescent methods to infer species trees . a limitation to the current implementations of species-tree methods is the assumption of lack of gene flow among lineages, yet in empirical studies this assumption is often violated, especially at the taxonomic level these methods are designed for. although there are methods that model gene flow as well as the coalescent , these approaches do not provide an estimate of a species tree under a model of divergence with gene flow and may be less powerful than species-tree estimates because they require such strong priors . to best address species delimitation in rapid radiations, especially in island groups like pritchardia palms, methods that allow for simultaneously capturing vertical and horizontal inheritance of genetic information are needed, but are not yet available .

