BACKGROUND
high throughput genomics technologies are now providing the raw data for genome-level or systems-level studies  <cit> . at the same time, the avalanche of data also poses many new challenges. the shift to genome scale studies in evolutionary biology, for instance, has led to many interesting, but often controversial studies. many branches in the tree of life are still the subject of intense discussions, and simply adding more sequences has not resolved the inconsistencies  <cit> . in prokaryotes, phylogenetic incongruencies are often assumed to be the result of lateral gene transfers, but the frequency of these events has been challenged recently  <cit> . in eukaryotes, the ancestral relationships between the major eukaryotic kingdoms  <cit> , as well as many more recent clades such as fish or mammalian  <cit> , are also hotly debated. it has been suggested that at least some of the conflicting results from evolutionary analyses are due to differences in the models and methodologies used to test the original hypotheses, e.g.  <cit> , as well as errors in the input sequences  <cit> .

high throughput biological datasets are notoriously incomplete  <cit> , noisy and inconsistent and dna or protein sequences are no exception. the dna sequences produced by next generation sequencing  technologies or low-coverage assemblies pose particular problems  <cit> . a number of recent studies have investigated the rate of errors in these new genome sequences and their impact on the accuracy of downstream analyses  <cit> . in the context of proteome studies, the dna sequencing errors are further confounded by inaccuracies in the delineation of the protein-coding genes. coding regions are mostly predicted by automatic methods, but the relationship between genes, transcripts and proteins is complex and automated genome annotation is not completely accurate. thus, ten years after the publication of the human genome, the exact number of human protein-coding genes is still unknown  <cit> . furthermore, recent analyses have shown that, even for those genes that have been identified, the complete exon/intron structure is correctly predicted for only about 50-60% of them  <cit> . in eukaryotic genomes, the situation is also complicated by widespread alternative splicing events, which affects more than 92-94% of multi-exon human genes  <cit> .

to what extent do these quality issues affect our understanding of the evolutionary events shaping modern organisms? although sequence errors are essentially ignored in most genome-scale analyses, some studies have addressed certain aspects of this question. for example, hubisz and coworkers  <cit>  investigated the impact of dna sequencing errors in low-coverage genome assemblies on inferred rates and patterns of insertion/deletion and substitution on the mammalian phylogeny. schneider et al.  <cit>  showed that the estimated amount of positively selected genes in genome scale analyses may be inflated by the presence of unreliable sequences.

here, we have investigated the impact of erroneous protein sequences, resulting from either dna sequencing errors or inaccurate prediction of exon/intron structures, on evolutionary analyses and the detection of important genetic events. we concentrated specifically on duplication events, which are known to be an important source of functional diversity  <cit>  and where there has been a great deal of debate about the long term fate of duplicated genes. two main models have been proposed for the evolution of novel gene function associated with gene duplication. the neofunctionalization model predicts the evolution of a new function in one of the duplicates, with accelerated evolution of the deconstrained copy compared with the copy that retains the ancestral function. the subfunctionalization model implies the division of the ancestral functions among the duplicates and does not make any prediction about the symmetry or asymmetry of sequence evolution. although individual cases of both modes of evolution have been reported, the relative frequency of the different scenarios in nature is still not clear  <cit> .

to some extent, the evolutionary fate of duplicated genes depends on the duplication mechanism. after tandem duplications or large-scale  duplications, both gene copies retain the same genome context. in contrast, after segmental duplications or retrotranspositions, one of the gene copies retains the ancestral genome position while the other copy is relocated elsewhere. it is generally expected that the gene copy that retains the genome context will be more conserved, and thus will be more likely to retain the ancestral functions  <cit> . the hypothesis is that newly duplicated genes that have been transposed to new chromosomal locations experience a new genomic and epigenetic environment, modifying the expression and/or function of the genes.

in this work, we have searched for duplication events that contradict this hypothesis, in order to quantify the effect of protein sequence errors on our ability to accurately identify unusual evolutionary histories. the goal was not to identify an exhaustive list of duplications, but to establish a reliable test set of events that could be used for the error analysis. using the well-studied human genome as a reference, we identified  <dig>  homologs in  <dig> high coverage vertebrate genomes from the ensembl  <cit>  database that were located in a region with local synteny . we then identified  <dig> cases where another homolog of the reference human gene was found elsewhere in the vertebrate genome with significantly higher sequence similarity than the syntenic homolog. in other words, we identified  <dig> gene triplets, composed of one human reference gene and two corresponding gene copies from another vertebrate genome , that might indicate putative asymmetric evolution after duplication  events where the less similar gene copy retained the ancestral gene-neighbourhood. to determine what proportion of these putative aed events may be due to erroneous protein sequences , we identified potential sequence errors in the gene triplets and showed that the majority  of detected aed events are in fact false positives. a gene ontology  functional analysis highlighted a number of go categories that are over-represented in the true positive gene set, which were masked before filtering of the erroneous sequences.

RESULTS
estimation of sequence error rates
we predicted protein sequence errors, resulting from genome sequencing errors and exon/intron prediction errors, in the  <dig> high coverage vertebrate genomes  from the ensembl database, using a previously published method  <cit> . first, we constructed multiple sequence alignments  for each of the  <dig>  human protein sequences defined by the human proteome initiative  and their potential vertebrate homologs. the sequences in the alignments were then clustered into more similar subgroups and errors were predicted if discrepancies were observed between one sequence and its close neighbours, for example between human-chimpanzee or between fish genomes. the error detection protocol was thus used to identify lineage-specific insertions, deletions or sequence segments, which are inconsistent with the conservation information in the msa. finally, we calculated the rate of sequence errors found in all  <dig>  msas . the msas contained a total of  <dig>  protein sequences and  <dig>  potential sequence errors, giving an estimated sequence error rate of at least  <dig>  errors per sequence. the total number of sequences with at least one potential error was  <dig> . thus, on average 41% of sequences were predicted to be erroneous.

protein sequences were obtained from the ensembl database version  <dig> 

the observed error rates were not homogeneous across the different species. lower rates were observed for the human and mouse proteomes, with 30-31% erroneous sequences, as might be expected for these well studied organisms. among the non-human primate proteomes considered here, lower error rates were estimated for the orangutan , compared to the chimpanzee  and especially the rhesus macaque . the relatively high error rate for the macaque is not surprising since the macaque genome in ensembl version  <dig> is a preliminary assembly using whole genome shotgun  reads from small and medium insert clones. on the other hand, the relative error rates in chimpanzee and orangutan are more surprising. both the chimpanzee and orangutan genomes have been sequenced to 6x coverage, but in a recent study of primate genome assembly quality, the chimpanzee genome assembly was estimated to be of higher quality  <cit> .

nevertheless, the same study found that about 70% of inferred errors in the orangutan genome were clustered in the  <dig> % of the assembly that is of low quality, implying that > 96% of the assembly could be considered of high fidelity. we found the highest error rates in the opossum, chicken and fish proteomes, with > 45% erroneous sequences. although these genomes have all been sequenced to high coverage, the lack of a well annotated reference genome from a closely related model organism may result in lower quality protein sequence prediction.

the predicted protein sequence errors were then characterized according to two different factors:  the nature of the error, i.e. insertion, deletion or suspicious segment and  the position in the sequence, i.e. at the n/c-terminus or within the sequence. figure 2b shows the proportion of the different errors observed. the most commonly found error was the presence of a suspicious sequence segment, possibly representing a mispredicted exon. at the n- and c- termini, deletions were observed more frequently than extensions. although this may be due in part to the protocol used to detect sequence errors, it may also reflect the difficulty of predicting the first and last coding exons. in contrast, internal insertions were more common than internal deletions, suggesting that more internal errors were due to the over-prediction of introns as coding sequences, rather than the under-prediction of exons.

comparison of similarity and synteny based homologs
putative orthologs were predicted for each of the  <dig>  human proteins based on the msas of the human reference sequences and related sequences from the  <dig> vertebrate genomes. two different approaches were implemented. first, the sequences from each organism with the smallest evolutionary distance were identified based on pairwise alignments extracted from the msas, and denoted "highest similarity homologs". second, "syntenic homologs" were defined based on the local gene order conservation. the genome coverage achieved by the two methods is shown in figure  <dig> and table s <dig> in additional file  <dig>  the highest similarity homologs covered 80% of the  <dig>  genes in the  <dig> vertebrate genomes, ranging from 89% in chimpanzee to 68% in zebrafish. as expected, a smaller proportion  of homologs was found with locally conserved synteny, including 77% of chimpanzee genes and only 3% of zebrafish. although our definition of locally syntenic regions is relatively stringent, we observe a comparable coverage to other existing methods. for example, we found 51% of mouse genes to be syntenic with human, compared to 59% using the method developed by  <cit> . other more refined methods have been developed, such as syntenator  <cit> , that use less stringent criteria to define conserved syntenic regions. by allowing more gene mismatches and gene insertions/deletions, syntenator aligned 79% of mouse genes with human.

we then investigated whether the gene that is most similar on the sequence level is also the gene that shares the same gene-neighbourhood . of the  <dig>  similarity homologs identified in the  <dig> vertebrate genomes,  <dig>  were found in locally syntenic regions. in mammals, this represents 69% of the highest similarity homologs. this is less than that estimated in a previous study  <cit> , where  <dig> % of inparanoid orthologs in human, mouse, rat and dog were found in syntenic regions, most likely due to our stricter definition of local synteny. on the other hand, only 1% of the identified syntenic homologs  were not identified by the similarity-based approach. as expected, a generally higher level of disagreement was observed for more divergent genome pairs. nevertheless, in human-chicken comparisons, the synteny method identified the same homolog as the similarity approach in  <dig> % of the cases. fewer consistencies were observed in human-fish comparisons , possibly due in part to the whole genome duplications in the fish lineage, resulting in a larger number of paralogs.

asymmetric evolution events
we then examined in more detail the  <dig>  gene triplets , where the syntenic homolog was not the same as the highest similarity homolog. to avoid including chance outcomes caused by very similar rates of sequence evolution of these homologs relative to the human sequence, we identified significantly different rates of evolution at the 95% confidence level . of the  <dig>  gene triplets, a total of  <dig> corresponded to evolutionary scenarios where the syntenic homolog  evolved significantly faster . a complete list of the  <dig> gene triplets is available in table s <dig> in additional file  <dig>  the alternative scenario for asymmetric evolution where the remote copy evolved faster than the synteny copy is not detected by our protocol. since in this case the homologs defined by similarity and synteny would be the same.

these may indicate putative asymmetric evolution after duplication  events where the less similar gene copy retained the ancestral gene-neighbourhood.

effect of erroneous sequences on prediction of asymmetrical evolution
the  <dig> gene triplets identified above, consisting of the human reference sequence, the highest similarity homolog and the synteny homolog, constitute a reliable test set representing potential asymmetrical evolution events. to study the impact of errors on the prediction of aed events, we identified erroneous sequences in this test set. figure 4a shows the number of events that are assumed to be artifacts since at least one of the sequences was predicted to be erroneous, as well as the number of remaining 'true' events. of the  <dig> gene triplets, only  <dig>  do not contain erroneous sequences and may correspond to true events, while a total of  <dig>  are putative artifacts.

as might be expected, the proportion of artifactual events varies with the different genomes studied, depending on the percentage of erroneous sequence detected . for example, 19% of chimpanzee and 24% of mouse predicted events are due to artifacts, while this figure increases significantly for the draft macaque and chicken genomes . it is interesting to note that a larger proportion of artifacts are observed in the orangutan genome than in the chimpanzee, even though the orangutan genome is predicted to contain less sequence errors than the chimpanzee .

in order to validate the putative protein sequence errors leading to artifactual aed events, we investigated the  <dig> predicted sequence errors in the human reference sequences and their syntenic homologs. the results of the analysis are shown in table  <dig> and examples of the different errors detected are provided in additional file  <dig>  the majority  of the erroneous sequences resulted from dna sequencing or assembly errors, characterised by the presence of 'n' characters in the dna sequences. for the remaining  <dig> protein sequence errors, we searched for the missing protein fragments in the corresponding dna sequences. for errors involving missing segments ,  <dig> of the  <dig> missing segments were detected and we therefore concluded that the error was due to an inaccurate gene structure prediction. in the case of sequence errors corresponding to inserted segments ,  <dig> of the  <dig> inserted segments were conserved in closely related organisms, although  <dig> of them had one or more stop codons. finally, we manually verified the transcript evidence in ensembl for all  <dig> insertions in gene sequences with no genome errors, as well as for the  <dig> unconserved deletions. of these,  <dig> protein errors were not supported by any transcript information and  <dig> errors were due to the alternative splicing variants reported for homologous genes. only  <dig>  of the  <dig> putative protein sequence errors were identified as false positive predictions, since a transcript was found corresponding to the affected sequence segment.

putative errors were estimated by analyzing the corresponding gene sequences. athe total number of protein sequence errors included in the analysis. bthe number of errors resulting from genome sequencing or assembly errors. cthe number of missing segments detected in the corresponding gene sequences. dthe number of errors resulting from alternative splicing variants reported for homologous genes. ethe number of inserted sequence segments detected in the gene sequences of homologous proteins. the number of these inserted sequence segments with at least one stop codon is given in brackets. fthe number of errors supported by transcript evidence, i.e. false positive  error predictions. gthe percentage of the total number of putative errors that were invalidated by the analysis.

detailed analysis of sequence errors leading to artifactual aed events
to investigate whether the sequence errors leading to artifactual events were enriched for a particular type, we classified the errors into  <dig> types as described above. we then calculated the proportion of the different error types found in the gene triplets corresponding to the  <dig> predicted aed events . in the human reference sequences, only  <dig> errors were predicted, as might be expected since the human genes have been very widely studied. the majority  of the human sequence errors were found at the n/c termini, with the exception of a small number of internal sequence segments that were labeled as being suspicious.

when all the sequences in the gene triplets were pooled, no significant enrichment was observed in the frequency distribution of the different error types causing artifactual events, compared to the background distribution observed in all the sequences . the goodness-of-fit was measured using a likelihood ratio chi-square statistic . nevertheless, different error types were observed when the syntenic and highest similarity homologs were considered separately. for example, artifactual events were observed more frequently if the syntenic homolog, i.e. the gene copy that retained the genome neighbourhood after duplication, contained suspicious segments. in contrast, n- and c-deletions in the highest similarity homolog, i.e. the gene copy that was relocated, were more likely to cause artifacts.

the orthology prediction method used in the ensembl project, based on a phylogenetic gene tree approach, finds the correct 1-to- <dig> orthology relationship between the human and macaque copg proteins. unfortunately, many other orthology databases are less successful. for example, in the inparanoid database , the ensembl human copg and macaque copg <dig> sequences are in the same orthologous cluster, while no human ortholog is found for the macaque copg sequence.

functional analysis of asymmetrical evolution events
in order to investigate the effect of filtering the erroneous sequences on the subsequent functional analysis of asymmetrical evolution events, we conducted a gene ontology  term enrichment analysis. specifically, we investigated the  <dig> aed events detected in this work, where the local syntenic homolog was observed to evolve more rapidly than the relocated highest similarity homolog. at this stage, we excluded  <dig> events where the human reference sequence had more than one exon, but the relocated homolog had only one exon, since they are likely to be non-functional pseudogenes. for comparison purposes, we used two gene lists:  gene list  <dig> corresponding to the remaining  <dig> detected events, including both artifactual and putative true events and  gene list  <dig> corresponding to  <dig> putative true events only . the two gene lists were then analyzed for enrichment of go terms using the amigo  <cit>  web server, using the complete set of human genes as the background set and default parameters . the results of the amigo analyses were also submitted to the go-module  <cit>  web server, in order to reduce the complexity and identify 'key' go terms .

comparison of go term enrichment analysis for  gene list  <dig> corresponding to  <dig> predicted asymmetrical evolution events, including both artifactual and putative true events and  25o true events obtained after filtering the erroneous sequences. go terms for biological processes were found with p < 10- <dig> using amigo and then filtered with go-module . terms that are specific to only one gene list are highlighted in bold.

gene list  <dig> was enriched in  <dig> key go terms, including a number of vertebrate specializations , but also some fundamental eukaryotic processes . for example, the term 'rna biosynthetic process' is found with a p-value of 5e- <dig>  involving  <dig>  of the  <dig> genes in the list. however, only  <dig> of these  <dig> key go terms are associated with the true events in gene list  <dig>  thus, the remaining  <dig>  enriched go terms are probably false positives resulting from the artifactual events. furthermore, and perhaps more importantly, important key go terms associated with the true events are not enriched in gene list  <dig>  notably neurogenesis related functions. after filtering of gene triplets with erroneous sequences, gene set  <dig> was enriched in  <dig> key terms, including neuron differentiation functions, and response to the environment.

discussion
several recent studies have highlighted the prevalence of errors in genes predicted from genome sequences  <cit> , particularly in eukaryotic genes. the situation is further complicated by the fact that multiple transcript variants are often expressed by the same gene. nevertheless, orthology and paralogy, which are fundamental concepts for most evolutionary analyses, are generally defined at the gene level. many systems, including ensembl compara  <cit> , simply select the longest transcripts to represent a gene, although there is no guarantee that the longest predicted transcripts in different organisms are equivalent. some authors have specifically addressed these issues by defining relationships at the transcript level  <cit>  or by using processed transcription units, i.e. a combination of all overlapping sequence variants in the genomic region  <cit> . nevertheless, these remain partial solutions only and do not resolve all problems.

these quality issues may lead to inaccurate or erroneous conclusions if they are integrated indiscriminately in downstream evolutionary or functional analyses. as an example, when annotating a new genome, gene structure data is often transferred from the genome of a closely related species, e.g., many chimpanzee genes in the ensembl database were predicted based on comparisons with human transcript data. these gene sequences were then used to perform genome-wide scans for positive selection  <cit> . although more positively selected genes were identified in chimpanzees compared to human, it has been suggested that the majority of the signals may be due to errors in the original sequences or in the gene alignments  <cit> . thus, we have a vicious circle, where the gene sequences that provide the starting point for most evolutionary analyses are themselves generally predicted based on evolutionary information.

protein sequence error rates
we detected erroneous protein sequences based on discrepancies in the conservation of vertebrate protein msas. the sequence errors may result from  dna sequencing errors,  badly predicted introns/exons,  different splicing variants predicted in different organisms. we estimated the frequency of erroneous sequences to be at least 41%, although some genomes are more error-prone than others, depending on factors such as sequencing coverage or the availability of a well annotated genome from a closely related organism.

in this study, we only considered sequences from the ensembl database and we used cross-comparisons between species to identify discrepancies. however, ensembl may produce predictions that are consistent across organisms, i.e. may reproduce the same errors in different genomes or propagate intron/exon structures. thus, our estimate of the average sequence error rate is probably conservative. another recent study  <cit>  showed that the ensembl compara sequence prediction method correctly identified only 55% of coding transcripts exactly.

identification of evolutionary events
our main goal was to determine to what extent these erroneous sequences affect subsequent evolutionary analyses. we focused on a specific event: gene duplication and the evolutionary fate of paralogs, since gene duplication is often assumed to be the most important source of new functions.

since duplication events where the local copy has evolved more rapidly may indicate unusual evolutionary scenarios, innovations or adaptations, we specifically searched for examples of such asymmetric evolution events. our approach involved the identification of reliable aed events that could be used as a test set for estimating the impact of sequence errors. we therefore designed a stringent protocol where we included only high coverage genomes and used the well studied human genome as a reference. we then identified putative orthologs in  <dig> vertebrate genomes, based on either sequence similarity or local synteny conservation. the similarity-based method used a very simple model of sequence evolution, in order to avoid bias towards one particular model. nevertheless, this model clearly oversimplifies the complex evolutionary processes involved, and in the future, it would be interesting to investigate the effect of a more realistic model of sequence evolution on aed detection, once sequencing/annotation errors have been removed. we also used a strict definition of local synteny, which led to lower genome coverage in the ortholog prediction step. for the detection of asymmetric evolution, we used a simple measure of amino acid divergence and specified a high significance threshold that would ensure only reliable predictions. nevertheless,  <dig> putative aed events were identified that were then used to perform an in-depth investigation of the effect of sequence errors.

impact of sequence errors
we compared the syntenic and highest similarity homologs and identified cases where significantly faster evolutionary rates were observed in the syntenic homolog, i.e. the gene copy that retained the genome neighbourhood after duplication, compared to the relocated highest similarity homolog. initially,  <dig> aed events were identified, of which  <dig> similarity homologs were potential retropseudogenes with a reduced exonic map. the majority  of the remaining detected events corresponded to erroneous sequences and only  <dig> represented putative true aed events. thus, we conclude that care should be taken when performing genome-wide scans to search for genes with unusual patterns, since outlying genes are more likely to be due to artifacts in the input sequences than the result of true evolutionary events. furthermore, our in-depth study revealed some of the mechanisms by which errors in the input sequences are propagated during the event prediction. for example, a badly predicted internal segment in one of the homologs results in an increased evolutionary distance to the human reference sequence, while a loss in the more variable n/c-terminal regions artificially reduces the distance. these observations provide guidelines for future error detection and correction strategies that will hopefully allow us to reduce the impact of the sequencing errors.

in asymmetric evolution, one duplicate evolves or degrades faster than the other and often becomes functionally or conditionally specialized. in this context, the accurate detection of the 'functional' homologs, i.e. protein pairs that play functionally equivalent roles  <cit> , is critical. we have shown that orthology assignment and the detection of important genetic events are severely impacted by the high proportion of errors in the initial set of protein sequences, even in high coverage genomes. the errors in the initial data are accumulated and amplified in the higher-level analyses. our estimated rate of 41% erroneous protein sequences leads to 57% errors in aed event prediction and, in the subsequent gene ontology  functional analysis, 75% of the enriched terms are in fact false positives.

the false positive terms in the functional analysis can be very costly to investigate experimentally and a reduction in the false discovery rate is clearly desirable. they are also sufficient to mask some of the true functional enrichments. after filtering the artifactual events corresponding to erroneous sequences, the remaining aed events were enriched in a number of go categories, including neuron differentiation and response to external stimuli. interestingly, human-specific duplicates evolving under adaptive natural selection also include genes involved in neuronal and cognitive functions, as well as response to inflammation or stress  <cit> . similarly, gene families involved in copy number variations  are enriched for similar categories, including interactions with the environment, neurophysiological processes and brain development  <cit> . a recent study suggested that the relationship between cnvs and positive selection may play an important role in the emergence and evolution of species-specific traits in primates  <cit> . genes in many of these categories are thus thought to be important in evolutionary adaptation and to be particular targets of natural selection.

CONCLUSIONS
up to half of all protein sequences in today's genome databases contain erroneous insertions, deletions or suspicious segments. the high error rates have profound implications, not only for the analysis of protein functions, interaction networks, biochemical pathways or disease phenotypes, but also for our understanding of life's evolution.

the putative sequence errors identified here lead to a significant number of false positives in the detection of asymmetric evolution events, which, if ignored, are sufficient to obscure their true functional significance. we have looked at one important event, asymmetric evolution after duplication, but the effect of protein sequence errors is likely to be similar for other types of events. this might explain many of the contradictions observed in many recent evolutionary studies, aggravating the effects of differences in source data, methodology and planning of experiments  <cit> .

exploitation of the new genome data is clearly challenging, due to the size of the data sets, their complexity and the high level of noise, and the situation is not likely to improve with low coverage genomes becoming the norm. as a consequence, data cleaning tools and robust statistical analyses will be essential for its reliable interpretation. with as many as 50% erroneous sequences, the simple removal of this data will result in the loss of too much information. it will be necessary to validate and correct the sequence errors and ideally, propagate these corrections to the public databases. some recent efforts have been undertaken to address these issues  <cit> , but additional work will be essential to reduce the impact of error and to extract the true meaning hidden in the data.

the alternative is an escalating process where systematic errors are accumulated at each level of the analysis, generating artificially high rates of unusual event predictions and eventually leading to an 'error catastrophe', where the noise overwhelms the true signal.

