BACKGROUND
a group of fatal transmissible neurodegenerative diseases, including creutzfeld-jakob disease , bovine spongiform encephalopathy , chronic wasting disease  and scrapie, is caused by an unusual infectious agent that has been termed prion  <cit> . prions consist of an aberrant isoform  of the normal cellular prion protein . prpc is a cell surface glycoprotein expressed in neurons  <cit>  and other cell types  <cit> . the precise physiological function of the cellular prion protein is not known yet. prpsc differs from prpc in its higher content of β-sheet structure  <cit> , its partial resistance to protease digestion  <cit> , and its tendency to form large aggregates  <cit> . prpsc propagates by converting the cellular prion protein to the prpsc conformation  <cit> . prpsc aggregates accumulate predominantly in the central nervous system , and definitive diagnosis of prion diseases currently relies on the post mortem detection of prpsc in cns tissue by immunohistochemistry, western blotting, or elisa  <cit> . transmission studies indicate that prions may also be present in blood, potentially allowing for ante mortem diagnosis, but the sensitivity of the currently available analytical methods is insufficient for the detection of the extremely low prion titers that can be expected in body fluids  <cit> .

here, we report the development of a method based on kinetic differences between seeded and unseeded aggregation of prion protein that allows the detection of prp aggregates in blood down to attomolar concentrations by flow cytometry.

RESULTS
detection of synthetic prion protein aggregates in serum or plasma
kinetic differences between seeded and spontaneous polymerization of peptide monomers can be used for the detection of amyloid β-protein aggregates in the cerebrospinal fluid of alzheimer's disease patients  <cit> . here, we extend the principle of seeded polymerization to the detection of prion protein aggregates.

while trying to establish conditions for the labeling of synthetic prion protein aggregates with a fluorescently labeled prion protein probe, we observed that the formation of prion protein aggregates proceeds much less efficiently in serum or plasma  than in pbs . this inhibition is probably caused by interactions of the prion protein probe with serum proteins.

next, we found that the addition of preformed prion protein aggregates to plasma can partially overcome this inhibition . the preformed aggregates presumably function as seeds that facilitate the formation of new aggregates in the inhibitory environment of plasma. the seeds stimulated the formation of prion protein aggregates at all concentrations tested, from  <dig> nm  to 10- <dig> nm  . the average ratio of event counts in seeded samples to those in samples without seeds was  <dig> . the number of events, however, was not proportional to the seed concentration, but remained relatively constant over the whole concentration range. thus, the seed-dependent formation of prion protein aggregates can be used to detect extremely low amounts  of spiked prion protein aggregates in blood.

analysis of serum from clinical-stage, bse-positive cattle
studies demonstrating the transmission of prion diseases by blood transfusion suggest that prions are present in the blood of afflicted animals and people, even at pre-symptomatic stages of the disease  <cit> . we used the method of seed-dependent fibril formation to analyze serum from six confirmed cases of clinical-stage, bse-positive cattle and four controls. based on the spiking experiments described above, our hypothesis was that any prpsc aggregates present in serum may act as seeds for the formation of easily detectable amounts of labeled prp aggregates, whereas in the absence of seeds the formation of prp aggregates would be inhibited. the serum samples from bse-positive cattle and controls from healthy cattle were incubated with  <dig> nm of a fitc-labeled bovine prp probe at 37°c for  <dig> h with continuous shaking, followed by analysis in a flow cytometer. all six bse-samples could be clearly distinguished by a population of events that was absent in the controls .

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a method based on seed-dependent prp fibril formation that shows promising results in differentiating a small number of bse-positive serum samples from healthy controls. more samples need to be tested in order to validate its potential as an ante mortem diagnostic test for bse and other prion diseases.

