BACKGROUND
nf-κb is a family of transcription factors that plays a critical role in regulating genes involved in cell proliferation, apoptosis, innate immunity, and inflammatory responses. nf-κb is activated by a range of physical and chemical signals including cytokines and bacterial  and viral products  <cit> . deregulation of the nf-κb system is implicated in many diseases including cancer . understanding the specificity and the temporal nature of nf-κb responsive gene expression is therefore not only of physiological interest but of crucial clinical importance.

functional nf-κb is assembled through homo- or heterodimerization of the five subunits: p <dig> , relb, c-rel, p105/p <dig>  and p100/p <dig> . the classical dimer p65:p <dig> is ubiquitously expressed and is the primary mediator of inflammation  <cit> . nf-κb dimers reside in the cytoplasm sequestered by inhibitor proteins, e.g. iκbα , until a signal cascade is activated that leads to phosphorylation, ubiquitinylation and subsequent degradation of the inhibitor. as a result, the dimer translocates into the nucleus where it binds to dna and triggers transcription of target genes. one of the target genes is the inhibitor itself creating a negative feedback loop. if the stimulus remains, repeated inhibitor degradation and re-synthesis can lead to oscillations of nuclear translocations. further regulation mechanisms dampen the oscillations and finally lead to termination of the signaling cascade  <cit> .

oscillations of nf-κb subunit nuclear translocation have been observed in single cells using fluorescence live-cell imaging  <cit> . additionally, similar repeated cycles of dna binding activity have been shown using the electrophoretic mobility shift assay  in a range of cell types  <cit> . in cell populations oscillations can be asynchronous due to phase interval heterogeneity in single cells  <cit> . dynamics of nuclear translocation or dna binding can vary in response to different stimuli: while a sustained tnfα stimulus induces oscillations, a short pulse of tnfα leads to a single peak of activation  <cit> ; lps elicits, via secretion of tnfα and the subsequent overlap of the two signaling pathways , a very heterogeneous response, with some cells displaying only one cycle of nuclear translocation, while other cells display oscillations or persistent nuclear translocation  <cit> . these observations have raised the possibility that nf-κb activation dynamics could determine gene activation specificity. indeed, different frequencies of stimulation with tnfα induce different gene expression patterns  <cit> .

while oscillations have been shown in response to tnfα  <cit> , the topoisomerase ii inhibitor etoposide  <cit>  and lps  <cit>  they have not yet been investigated during infection with live bacteria. the observation that oscillations occur in response to bacteria - being single units that naturally occur in infections - would be an important indication that they are physiologically relevant processes.

although there are several methods to measure nf-κb activation, only some are suitable for investigating the dynamics of this signaling system. commonly used tools for general nf-κb analysis are reporter plasmids, in which an nf-κb binding site drives the transcription of reporter genes like enhanced green fluorescent protein  or luciferase. stable cell lines with these constructs are commercially available  and similar constructs have been successfully used in analysis of other oscillators such as the circadian clock  <cit> . however, these constructs and cell lines measure transcriptional responses accumulated after activation and therefore do not necessarily reflect the immediate translocation of nf-κb subunits to the nucleus in real time. in addition, many reporter constructs respond to several nf-κb dimers and do not report the activity of one particular nf-κb dimer.

biochemical approaches like emsa have been used successfully to detect oscillations in the temporal response of nf-κb  <cit> . these experimental observations have also been simulated in a multivariable mathematical model of nf-κb activation dynamics  <cit> . although useful, biochemical approaches are time consuming and the protein extracts used for analysis average the potentially asynchronous responses of single cells.

since activation of nf-κb is marked by the translocation of nf-κb subunits from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, many groups have used high-content image analysis of fixed and immunostained cells  <cit> . other studies have followed the dynamics of nf-κb activation in live cells using fluorescent protein fusions  <cit> . using the latter technique, nelson and co-workers were the first to show nf-κb oscillations at a single-cell level  <cit> .

here, we combined high-content automated fluorescence imaging of nf-κb protein subunit fusions with the stability of monoclonal cell lines to analyze the real-time dynamics of nf-κb activation within single cells. we have generated lentivirally transduced monoclonal cell lines expressing p <dig> fused to gfp that can be used in any microscopic analysis including high-throughput automated microscopy and live-cell imaging. using these cell lines, we show inducer-specific temporal control of p65-translocations and, for the first time, oscillations in response to infection with the bacterium h. pylori. these experimental data were also used to construct a simplified mathematical model of nf-κb signaling regulation.

RESULTS
a high-throughput assay for monoclonal cell lines expressing p65-gfp
to analyze p <dig> nuclear translocation within a large number of cells, we developed an automated high-throughput assay using image analysis. first, we generated monoclonal p65-gfp expressing variants of the human alveolar epithelial cell line a <dig> , the human gastric epithelial cell line ags  and the mouse fibroblast cell line l <dig>  via lentiviral transduction. expression of p65-gfp in comparison to that of endogenous p <dig> was similar in a <dig> sib <dig>  but increased sevenfold in the ags sib <dig> and l <dig> sib <dig> cell lines . to determine the number of virus integration sites, the long-terminal repeat  region  of the integrated lentivirus was pcr amplified. the a <dig> sib <dig>  ags sib <dig> and l <dig> sib <dig> cell lines contained approximately four, six and ten integration sites, respectively. successful sequencing of six sites revealed most were located in non-coding sequences and thus had no obvious influence on nf-κb signaling . using various inducers, we then tested the utility of the cell lines to detect nuclear translocation of p <dig>  in non-stimulated cells, p65-gfp was mainly localized to the cytoplasm, whereas upon stimulation with tnfα , p65-gfp translocated into the nucleus .

for the automated image analysis assay, cells were seeded into 96-well plates, stimulated for the optimized time, fixed and nuclei stained with hoechst. images of cells were acquired using automated microscopy. cell nuclei were detected and the surrounding cytoplasmic area set using image analysis software . to provide quantitative analysis of the nuclear translocation of p <dig>  cells were then depicted on dot plots and gated according to various predefined parameters: we used perimeter and circularity of nuclei to gate for nuclear size and circularity, standard deviation of gfp signal to gate for homogeneity of gfp signal, and intensity of nuclear and cytoplasmic gfp to gate for cells with nuclear p <dig> . numbers of cells with mainly nuclear p <dig> or cells with mainly cytoplasmic p <dig>  were counted and percentages of cells with mainly nuclear p <dig> per well calculated . this threshold-based assay gave the clearest and simplest representation of the nuclear translocation. furthermore, applying this read-out, the distribution of the response can also be displayed, giving a more detailed representation of intermediate translocations .

comparison of parental and p65-gfp cell lines
mathematical models have predicted that ectopic expression of nf-κb subunits could alter the dynamics of the signaling module  <cit> , while experimental data have shown that this is not necessarily the case  <cit> . therefore, we compared nf-κb activation in parental, non-transduced cell lines with p65-gfp expressing cell lines. western blot analysis showed both cell lines exhibited very similar patterns of iκbα degradation over a period of  <dig> minutes after stimulation with tnfα at  <dig> ng/ml or  <dig>  ng/ml . however, while the overall degradation pattern is comparable, the p65-gfp expressing cell lines seem to be slightly faster in restoring iκbα to baseline levels . therefore, we do not completely exclude the possibility that expression of the p65-gfp fusion slightly alters signaling dynamics. the degradation of iκbα in parental and p65-gfp expressing cell lines corresponded well to the percentages of cells with nuclear p <dig> calculated using the automated p65-translocation assay .

stimulus-specific temporal control of p65-gfp translocations
using the monoclonal p65-gfp cell lines, it became apparent very quickly that there was no uniform response to tnfα, but that each cell line had a distinctive pattern of nf-κb activation. to further characterize this specificity, we analyzed the response of the cell lines to different inducers: the cytokines tnfα and interleukin 1β , the bacterial cell wall component lps and the bacterium h. pylori . cells were seeded in 96-well plates, activated by the respective inducer, fixed after the indicated time and p65-translocation was quantified by automated microscopic and image analysis.

the resulting profiles were highly specific regarding cell lines and inducers . the main characteristics were:  the ability to recognize a stimulus depended on the cell line. none of the human epithelial cell lines tested responded to lps, whereas the mouse fibroblasts were unresponsive to h. pylori, suggesting strict stimulus specificity, probably due to differences in functional receptors or signaling pathways present in the respective cells.  temporal profiles were stimulus specific. a <dig> exhibited damped oscillations after infection with h. pylori, but stable translocation after stimulation with tnfα or il-1β. stable translocations in response to tnfα were verified by live-cell imaging of a <dig> cells .  the percentage of activated cells, but not the temporal profile, was variable to the dose of the inducer. a reduction in the dose of il-1β in ags or tnfα in l <dig> led to a reduction in percentage of activated cells.  thresholds were cell-line specific. low-dose challenge of ags with il-1β produced low percentages of activated cells, while the same doses yielded a full response in a <dig> and l <dig> cell lines.  the duration of the response varied between cell lines. a <dig> generally showed much longer responses, implying more amplification of the signal or fewer dampening mechanisms in this cell line.  only minimal background p65-translocation activity was observed in all cell lines .

bacterial infection induces oscillations of p65-gfp
we observed damped oscillations of p <dig> translocation in response to h. pylori using the high-throughput assay . this bacterium is equipped with a type four secretion system  capable of injecting its cytotoxicity associated protein a  as well as bacterial peptidoglycan into its infected host cell. consistent with previous studies that employed a variety of techniques to analyze h. pylori-induced nf-κb activity  <cit> , the oscillations shown here were dependent on a functional tfss but not on caga or other factors possibly secreted into the medium by bacteria or cells .

oscillations visible in cell populations  can result from either damped oscillations on the single-cell level or a high cell-to-cell heterogeneity, with some cells showing only one cycle of transclocation. to investigate this question, we analyzed bacterial infections on a single-cell level using live-cell imaging. ags sib <dig> cells were infected with h. pylori at a multiplicity of infection  of  <dig> and stained with a live dye. interestingly, cell attachment of a single bacterium appeared to induce full p65-gfp translocation . to characterize any induced oscillations, we compared the average gfp intensities of nine cells from one experiment. individual cells were activated at different time points, each roughly  <dig> min after the attachment of one or more bacteria . when we mathematically aligned the different oscillations for the first peak, remarkable features became apparent: while the first peak seems fairly synchronous in all cells, the second peak and its interval are variable . analysis of a further  <dig> cells under various experimental conditions , revealed that while the majority of cells exhibited the expected damped oscillations , the opposite was also possible  . peak intervals measured in  <dig> cells were between  <dig> and  <dig> minutes, with the most frequent intervals being between  <dig> and  <dig> minutes . taken together, our observations reveal a moderate cell-to-cell variability in h. pylori-induced p <dig> nuclear translocation oscillations.

modeling oscillations after bacterial infection
to address these differential responses , we then used our experimental data to develop a one-variable model of temporal regulation of nf-κb signaling . while previous approaches model transcription regulation in more detail  <cit> , our model simplifies the process of protein synthesis by using a time delay to describe the effect of nf-κb-induced transcription on iκbα protein level . this model was able to predict damped nuclear translocation at the single-cell level . we also integrated our observations that activation of single cells do not necessarily occur simultaneously  and thus could influence dynamics visible at the population level. we know that p <dig> translocation relies on contact between bacteria and cells. these activations comprise discrete events dependent on the time required by bacteria in solution to reach cells. accordingly, at a high moi, initial contact events will occur in a rather synchronized manner, while at a low moi, initial contacts will occur more asynchronously. approximating the variability in activation onset, we simulated population dynamics for bacterial infections with an moi  <dig> and 1: the former led to an almost synchronized activation in which oscillations were also visible at the population level, whereas the latter resulted in masking of oscillations at the population level . most importantly, we could confirm the simulation with experimental data using ags sib <dig> cells and automated microscopy , thus highlighting the power of this cell system to unify population and single cell analyses.

discussion
here we describe a simple and cost-effective method amenable to high-throughput applications that combines the use of p65-gfp expressing monoclonal cell lines with automated microscopy and analysis to provide synchronous real-time analysis of nf-κb activation dynamics at a single-cell and population level. by applying this system, we reveal a single bacterium is apparently sufficient to induce translocation of p65-gfp. moreover, we show single cellular variabilities in nf-κb dynamics, indicating the interplay of multiple parameters in the regulation of nf-κb.

there are many different oscillatory systems  <cit>  and expression of fluorescent fusion proteins has been a useful tool to study dynamics of these oscillatory, and also non-oscillatory, signaling systems  <cit> . oscillations in nf-κb signaling have previously been shown using a variety of techniques and cell types  <cit> . to analyze oscillations on a single-cell level, most previous studies have relied on transient protein expression  <cit>  and discrepancies in oscillation synchrony between population and single-cell analysis has been discussed to result from different expression levels of the fusion protein in single cells  <cit> ; however, experimental data has shown this is not necessarily the case  <cit> . most importantly, nf-κb oscillations and heterogeneity in peak intervals are comparable between different studies using transient expressions  <cit> , clonal cell lines   <cit> , stable expression on the endogenous level  <cit>  or a gfp-p <dig> knock-in mouse model with endogenous p <dig> levels  <cit> . moreover, the reported oscillations match the moderate asynchrony observed here .

advantages of the assay systems presented here are the lentiviral transduction of the p65-gfp expressing gene and its stable integration into the cellular genome. this not only avoids continued selection pressure for maintaining gene expression but allows the establishment of well-defined cell lines. virus integration into the host cell genome is statistically unlikely to disrupt any relevant gene functions; however, this can be ascertained by sequencing the integration sites. consistently, a comparison with the parental cells showed little influence of ectopic expression at the level of iκbα degradation . moreover, the assay system requires no extra material, avoiding unnecessary addition of experimental variables and making it highly cost-effective. lastly, the method exhibits high sensitivity as background activity levels are very low .

the p65-gfp carrying lentivirus itself also offers interesting features for future approaches: not only can it be used to generate any other cell line desired but, as lentiviruses can even infect non-dividing cells, it can be applied to the transduction of primary cells. notably, one can influence the expression level of p65-gfp by varying the copy number of viruses per cell, i.e. using higher virus titers would lead to high numbers of integrated copies per genome and thus to higher expression levels.

here, we observed inducer- and cell line- specific signatures of nf-κb response patterns . the p65-gfp protein exhibited either oscillating translocation or rather stable activation; the percentage of activated cells varied with the dose of the inducer. both observations are generally consistent with previous findings  <cit> . stimulus-specific temporal control of nf-κb activation has also been observed in mouse embryonic fibroblasts  using emsas: when stimulated with tnfα they displayed oscillatory behaviour, but when stimulated with lps they displayed stable behaviour. the stable activation could be attributed to a positive feedback that leads, via the secretion of tnfα, to an overlap of two signaling pathways, both oscillatory when isolated but leading to stable activation when overlapping  <cit> . live-cell analysis of single cells revealed that the stable activation observed on the population level was due to the highly heterogenous responses of single cells resulting from a noisy paracrine tnfα signal  <cit> . possibly a similar mechanism lays beneath the stable activation observed here after tnfα or il-1β induction, but as tnfα leads to a single translocation in a <dig> with the stimulus remaining in the medium, it seems unlikely that a potential feedback loop in this case involves tnfα. the same applies to the stimulation with il-1β.

nf-κb oscillations have been observed in cell culture models using relatively high doses of inducers such as tnfα  <cit>  and lps  <cit> . data presented here show, for the first time, oscillations in response to bacterial infection and that a single bacterium seems to be capable of inducing p <dig> translocation. therefore, oscillations are likely to occur in infections in vivo. as with other inducers of nf-κb such as tnfα  <cit> , h. pylori infection elicited a moderate cell-to-cell variability in p <dig> oscillations . future experiments will clarify whether the observed variations of peak intervals in single-cell oscillations are due to stochastic transcription of the iκbα gene, as suggested recently  <cit> , or can be attributed to the strength of induction and/or repeated infection by individual bacteria, as likely found during bacterial infection in vivo.

based on these experimental data, we developed a simple mathematical model of nf-κb signaling temporal regulation. while our model of the nf-κb cascade may appear somewhat simplifying and might have been formulated in a much more elaborate fashion  <cit> , we were not aiming for a detailed representation of the mechanisms or potential mechanisms leading to oscillations. rather our goal was, given the experimental fact of oscillations, to correlate single-cell observations and population events derived from two different experimental approaches  <cit> . mathematical modeling will be an important tool for linking observations on different levels of granularity and using different technologies  <cit> . in our situation a more complicated model of the single cell probably would not improve our understanding of the collective observations. integrating our observations that oscillations of single cells can be masked at a population level by asynchronous stimulations, each stimulation being a discrete event dependent on moi, we demonstrated the unique ability of our cell model to indicate differential dynamics at the population and single-cell levels. data generated using the clonal cell lines could be used to refine and broaden our and similar mathematical models by providing experimental details of population and single-cell level oscillations within different cell types.

CONCLUSIONS
owing to the crucial roles that nf-κb plays in inflammation, immunity and cancer, both the pharmaceutical industry as well as research groups are actively pursuing the discovery of new compounds that modulate nf-κb  <cit> . the cell lines and the high-throughput microscopic assay presented here could be of considerable value for these efforts, providing a highly cost-effective method to identify and further analyze promising novel factors using one system; for instance, an rnai-based screen could identify factors that prolong or inhibit dampening of oscillations, thereby opening new avenues of therapeutic discovery and understanding of disease. analysis of temporal profiles of nf-κb activation in infections can unravel sequential activations and even provide indications for the inducing stimulus  <cit> . furthermore, the combination of novel live-cell imaging technologies with mathematical modeling at the single-cell and cell-population level may lead to a better mechanistic understanding of the host-pathogen interaction governing infections.

