BACKGROUND
due to their unique magnetic properties, superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles  represent a well-known and effective nanosystem for applications in biomedical and biotechnological research. in fact, mnp are being developed as drug carriers
 <cit> , imaging agents
 <cit> , analytical probes
 <cit>  and recyclable support for enzyme immobilization
 <cit> .

compared with chemical catalysis, enzyme-mediated reactions allow for more specific chemo-, regio-, and stereo-selectivity in organic synthesis
 <cit> . however, long-term stability and recyclability of enzymes have been considered the main limitations to their extensive utilization
 <cit> .

recently, several nanoparticles have been employed to improve traditional enzyme immobilization methods in order to enhance loading, activity and stability of enzymes and to reduce the biocatalyst costs in industrial biotechnology
 <cit> . in particular, mnp-based immobilization of enzymes presents several advantages, including  high surface-to-volume ratio offered by nanosize magnetic beads,  good dispersibility,  easy separation of enzymes from the reaction mixture, and  reuse by applying an external magnetic field
 <cit> . one of the crucial points in protein immobilization on nanoscale solid surfaces is that structural modifications may occur, which could affect protein activity and stability to different extents depending on the protein and the conjugation strategy
 <cit> . for this reason, there has been an increasing interest in developing new reliable approaches for the immobilization of enzymes on magnetic nanoparticles
 <cit> . however, although great efforts have been made for this purpose, the actual effect of immobilization on enzyme functionality is still poorly understood. furthermore, no such studies involving enzymes from extremophile microorganisms have been carried out so far.

extremophilic enzymes hold great promise in industrial biotechnology, as they can often be used under non-conventional harsh conditions, which may result in substrate transformations that are not achievable with normal enzymes
 <cit> .

in this work, we investigated the effect of mnp bioconjugation on the catalytic properties of a thermostable carboxypeptidase from sulfolobus solfataricus . cpsso is a heat- and pressure-resistant zinc-metalloprotease consisting of four identical 43 kda subunits
 <cit> . the catalytic and kinetic mechanisms of cpsso have been well established and were confirmed by a 3d model that was developed and validated in the past years
 <cit> . cpsso exhibits nonconventional catalytic properties that are useful in several synthetic processes. first, it removes any amino acid from the c-terminus of short peptides, with the sole exception of proline, and also hydrolyzes n-blocked amino acids, thus acting as an aminoacylase
 <cit> . second, despite its remarkable thermophilicity, it maintains a significant fraction of its maximal activity even at room temperature. finally, cpsso maintains a significant activity in solvent mixtures even at high content of organic fraction
 <cit> . these peculiar properties highlight the biotechnological potential of this enzyme, in particular to achieve the synthesis of n-blocked amino acid in organic media.

RESULTS
synthesis of ni2+-functionalized silica-coated magnetic nanoparticles 
high-quality magnetite nanocrystals were synthesized in organic solvents and transferred to water phase using tetramethylammonium hydroxide  as previously described
 <cit> . next, the water-soluble iron oxide nanoparticles were individually coated with a 10 nm thick silica shell by reaction with tetraethoxysilane  in aqueous ammonia and further reacted with the chelating agent icptes-nta and nicl <dig> 
 <cit>  resulting in fully armed ni2+ functionalized nanoparticle . the overall synthesis procedure is summarized in figure 
 <dig>  in figure 
 <dig>  tem images show that the final size of simnp was 30 ± 3 nm with a magnetic core of 10 ± 1 nm, indicating a homogeneous sample of silica-coated magnetic nanoparticles. hydrodynamic diameter of simnp in ethanol was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm, as determined by dynamic light scattering, which remarkably increased to  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm as a consequence of nta functionalization. such a difference accounts for a transient loss in nanoparticle stability forming small aggregates after reaction with icptes-nta. however, stable nanoparticle dispersion was recovered after ni2+ chelation, resulting in hydrodynamic size of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm. zeta-potential  of simnp, ntasimnp and nintasimnp in water was also investigated. simnp and ntasimnp were negatively charged , the second being more negative due to the presence of nta carboxylic groups. the capture of ni2+ ions by the external carboxylic groups of nta resulted in a more positive charge in nintasimnp . the amount of ni2+ ions captured by ntasimnp was quantified by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry , resulting in 41 ng ni per mg nanoparticles.
sso 
immobilization on nintasimnp.

immobilization of cpsso on nintasimnp
cpsso protein containing 6 × his tag was produced in escherichia coli and purified by ni-chelate affinity chromatography, as previously described
 <cit> . subsequent ni2+ capture by nta groups of ntasimnp promoted the active ni2+-nta affinity-oriented immobilization of his-tagged cpsso . the conjugation reaction was performed at room temperature by incubating nintasimnp  with purified cpsso . the resulting mnp-cpsso was isolated from unreacted cpsso by centrifugation and washed three times. by measuring the amount of protein found in the supernatants after the enzyme binding process, we determined an amount of cpsso immobilized on nanoparticles of 150 μg per mg of mnp-cpsso. the average cpsso loading was estimated to be about  <dig> molecules per nanoparticle. to check that the conjugation reaction occurred specifically to ni2+ and his tag, cpsso was incubated in parallel with non-functionalized nanoparticles . then, reaction mixtures were washed, and bound and unbound cpsso determined enzymatically. non-specifically bound activity was only  <dig> % of that bound through the ninta linker . these data confirm that cpsso immobilization is mediated by the interaction between ni2+ and his tag. after immobilization, cpsso substantially retained its activity, as shown by comparison of equal amount of free and bound cpsso .

assessment of the catalytic stability of mnp-cpsso
the catalytic stability of free and conjugated cpsso was analyzed by monitoring the inactivation profiles of the samples incubated in aqueous solution at three different temperatures  and, subsequently, in the presence of organic solvents, i.e. dimethylformamide  or ethanol, at different water ratios.

as expected, cpsso was fully active after 30 min incubation at 75°c in aqueous buffer, while mnp-cpsso proved to be less stable . no significant differences were observed in the stability of free and conjugated enzyme at 40°c . functionality profiles obtained at 25°c showed that free cpsso gradually lost its activity resulting in a complete inactivation after 96 h. in such a case, however, enzyme conjugation led to a substantial increase in stability, up to 85% of initial activity being retained after 96 h . a tentative interpretation of these results is presented in the section discussion.

the inactivation profiles obtained at 40°c and different concentrations of dmf indicate that cpsso gradually lost its activity by increasing the organic component in the solvent mixture, while the nanobioconiugate retained 80% of residual activity even in the presence of 80% dmf . the results obtained in the presence of ethanol at 40°c and various concentrations are of particular interest. the inactivation profiles show that cpsso had a residual activity of 50% after 6 h, which decreased to 20% after 24 h incubation . however, mnp-cpsso revealed a significantly improved stability in ethanol at the different tested concentrations compared with free cpsso, up to 80-90% of residual activity after 6 h, and 70% after 24 h incubation in 80% ethanol being retained.

synthesis of n-blocked amino acids promoted by mnp-cpsso
preliminary experiments were carried out in order to select the water-cosolvent system and the chemical-physical parameters most suitable to promote the synthesis of n-blocked amino acids by cpsso, using arginine and benzoate as a model system . our results show that the best rate of benzoyl-arginine  synthesis was obtained in 70% ethanol at ph  <dig>  and 40°c after 6 h of incubation, using  <dig> u ml- <dig> cpsso,  <dig>  m benzoate and  <dig>  m arginine . next, ba synthesis was performed using both free cpsso and mnp-cpsso under the aforementioned optimal conditions. by taking advantage of the remarkable enzyme stability in organic solvent, higher ethanol concentration  and a longer incubation time , were also tested. the results obtained after a 6-h incubation  show a similar synthetic rate for free and conjugated enzyme in 70% ethanol. however, at higher ethanol concentrations, only mnp-cpsso could synthesize appreciable amounts of ba, although in much lower yields. remarkably, when the synthesis was extended to 24 h, higher yields were observed, with the sole exception of unbound cpsso in 70% ethanol. in particular, at 70-75% ethanol, far better yields were attained when using mnp-cpsso . under all adopted conditions, no detectable enzyme activity was found in the reaction mixture after removal of the mnps .
sso
-catalyzed synthesis of an n-blocked amino acid.

the activity of nintasimnp was retained without significant drop in functionality for three-times recycled uses in comparison with the initial activity, comparable with other systems of similar efficiency
 <cit> .

discussion
in our ongoing effort in designing innovative approaches for the orientation-controlled conjugation of proteins on metal-based nanoparticles for biotechnological and biomedical applications
 <cit> , we have recently investigated the modulation of the structural properties of the immobilized protein from a biophysical point of view
 <cit> . in the present paper, we report the results of a study conducted on a hyperthermophilic enzyme, namely cpsso, aimed at determining the effect of its immobilization on superparamagnetic nanoparticles on the biological activity of the enzyme.

the nanobioconjugate was obtained by affinity-oriented immobilization of his-tagged cpsso on silica-coated magnetic nanoparticles functionalized with ni-nta groups . the procedure for the synthesis of nintasimnp is illustrated in figure 
 <dig> and the resulting functionalized fe3o4@silica core-shell nanoparticles gave a stable dispersion in aqueous environment, as determined by dynamic light scattering analysis.

an important requirement for protein immobilization is that the matrix should provide a biocompatible and inert environment, i.e. it should not interfere with the native structure of the protein, which would thereby compromise its biological activity. thus, we measured the enzymatic activity of free and immobilized cpsso and confirmed that its activity was preserved after conjugation. next, we evaluated the protein activities in an aqueous milieu to assess the effect of conjugation on the stability of the hyperthermophilic enzyme in dependence of the temperature. noteworthy, in this respect, is the substantial stability at room temperature of mnp-conjugated cpsso, unlike the free enzyme, which should make it possible to perform transformations without the use of energy for heating or cooling the reaction environment, otherwise needed for maintaining enzyme stability. in a theoretical perspective, this might be rationalized on the basis of the following considerations. as free enzyme undergoes inactivation at 40°c and 25°c, but not at 75°c, in agreement with our previous report
 <cit> , this fits with the “cold denaturation” pattern, which is believed to be a general phenomenon in protein chemistry
 <cit> . in the case of free cpsso, optimum stability temperature might be at, or close to 75°c, as significant inactivation was previously observed at 85°c
 <cit> . in contrast, the conjugated enzyme was essentially stable at 25°c and underwent progressive destabilization on increasing temperature, suggestive of a substantial downshift of the stability optimum. based on enzyme activity decay constants determined at the three temperatures, we assessed an activation enthalpy  of enzyme inactivation around 150 kj · mol- <dig> for the conjugated enzyme, well below values close to 500 kj · mol- <dig> determined for the free form
 <cit> . as the enzyme retains its activity after conjugation, it must retain its overall structure as well. thus, the dramatic drop in Δh‡ of bound with respect to free enzyme, is suggestive of major conformational constraints of the transition state as a result of immobilization. this is confirmed by an activation entropy value  close to zero , to be compared with  <dig>  kj · mol-1 k- <dig> of the free enzyme
 <cit> .

it is well-known that enzyme immobilization generally results in increased stability toward the denaturing effect of water-soluble organic solvents
 <cit> . also, it is believed that such polar solvents first strip water from the surface of the protein, then strongly compete for intramolecular hydrogen bonds, with resulting protein unfolding
 <cit> . in the case of cpsso, the conjugation quite likely limits its conformational flexibility, as above outlined, which may partially prevent the solvent from penetrating the protein interior. the stronger effect of dmf with respect to ethanol fits well with its higher polarity and “denaturing capacity”, as previously defined
 <cit> . remarkably, we found that at 40°c the conjugated enzyme was even more stable in 80% ethanol than in water.

improved stability of mnp-cpsso in organic solvent is relevant to possible industrial applications of the enzyme as a biocatalyst in synthetic reactions carried out in organic environment. in particular, also thanks to its broad substrate specificity, cpsso could be an ideal candidate as a biocatalyst for the synthesis of n-blocked amino acids in water-cosolvent mixtures following the thermodynamic method. actually, we previously found that the enzyme is capable of both hydrolyzing n-blocked amino acids in aqueous solution
 <cit> , and catalyzing the synthetic reaction in organic solvents
 <cit> , irrespective of the amino acid involved . the presence of organic solvents in solution is in fact deemed necessary to shift the equilibrium toward the formation of the peptide bond, due to their generally low dielectric constant and the consequent prevalence of undissociated forms of carboxylic and amino groups, which are indeed the reactive species in amide linkage formation
 <cit> . it is worthwhile to be mentioned, in this respect, that at 70-75% ethanol, mnp-cpsso catalyzed significant synthesis of benzoyl-arginine  , which is promising for possible industrial applications, whereas the free enzyme’s performance was very poor under the same conditions. the lower levels of ba produced in 75% and 80% compared to 70% ethanol, are likely due to enzyme inhibition by the organic solvent. in fact, it is well known that the kinetic parameters, kcat and km, are strongly affected by organic solvents
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we developed a nanobioconjugate of cpsso immobilized on silica-coated magnetic nanoparticles, which exhibited enhanced stability in aqueous media at room temperature as well as in different organic solvents. the improved stability in ethanol paves the way to possible applications of immobilized cpsso; in particular, our results show that the enzyme could be employed as a biocatalyst for the synthesis of n-blocked amino acids. another potential application might be amino acid racemate resolution, a critical and expensive step in chemical synthesis. this could be accomplished by chemically synthesizing n-blocked racemic amino acid mixtures, followed by cpsso-catalyzed selective hydrolysis of the blocking group from the l-enantiomer.

