BACKGROUND
nuclear receptors  regulate homeostasis, differentiation, metamorphosis and reproduction in metazoans. members of the nuclear receptor superfamily are characterized by a modular structure. typical nrs contain an n-terminal a/b domain, a c domain , a d domain  and an e domain . the most conserved region in nrs is the dbd, which contains two zinc finger motifs . there is a conserved sequence element in the dbd, called the p-box, which confers target dna binding specificity. another moderately conserved region is the lbd  <cit> . two highly conserved regions are present within the lbd. the first region is called the signature sequence of lbd , from the c-terminus of helix  <dig> to the middle of helix  <dig>  <cit> . the second conserved region is helix  <dig> which contains the activation function core motif  that is required for transcriptional activation and co-regulator recruitment. nrs regulate transcription through binding to the promoter region of their target gene by the dbd and activation or repression of mrna synthesis through co-regulators bound to the lbd  <cit> .

recently, we isolated three partial cdnas of nuclear receptors which contain two dbds in the flatworm schistosoma mansoni  <cit> . typical nrs only have a single dbd with a lbd, unusual nuclear receptors are known only to have one dbd without a lbd  <cit>  or to posses a lbd without a dbd  <cit> . to determine the modular structure of these novel nuclear receptors , cdnas encoding the entire open reading frame  of sm2dbd-nrs were isolated. by data mining, additional 2dbd-nrs were identified in species of mollusca, arthropoda and other species of platyhelminths. the phylogenetic relationship of 2dbd-nrs was constructed, the origin of 2dbd-nrs and their role in understanding metazoan phylogeny is discussed.

RESULTS
a novel nr modular structure: a/b-dbd-dbd-hinge-lbd
cdnas of three s. mansoni 2dbd-nrs  were isolated. each cdna encodes a large protein: sm2dbdα,  <dig> amino acids; sm2dbdβ,  <dig> amino acids and sm2dbdγ,  <dig> amino acids . each protein exhibits a modular structure characteristic of the nuclear receptor superfamily with a divergent n terminal a/b domain, a hinge region and a less well conserved lbd. remarkably, each possesses two dbds in tandem . thus the a/b-dbd-dbd-hinge-lbd organization represents a novel nr modular structure. all the members of this novel group have been placed in a new subfamily, nr vii.

the lbd is conserved in all three proteins from helix  <dig> to helix  <dig>  the consensus signature sequence of the lbd , xxxxxxx)  <cit> , is conserved in each of them . a putative af <dig> activating domain core , designated ΦΦxeΦΦ, where Φ represents a hydrophobic amino acid  <cit> , is highly conserved in sm2dbdα and sm2dbdβ, but not in sm2dbdγ. in sm2dbdγ, a glutamine is located in the position which is normally conserved for a glutamic acid . sm2dbdα contains a large f domain. the function of the f domain, which is known to be present in some but not all nuclear receptors, is not well known . the hinge region of each protein is unusually large . this trait has been observed in other schistosoma nrs  <cit> . the role of such a large hinge region is yet to be determined.

identification of 2dbd-nr in other organisms
by an extensive search of whole genomic sequence  databases extracted from ncbi, three 2dbd-nrs were found in the freshwater turbellarian schmidtea mediterranea, two were found in the mollusk lottia gigantean  and one was found in the crustacean daphnia pulex  . no 2dbd-nr or any sequence encoding a p-box sequence of ceackk, which is unique to the first dbd of 2dbd-nr , was found in sponge , cnidarian , arthropod insects, sea urchin or vertebrate sequence data bases. one additional 2dbd-nr was found in the turbellarian dugesia japonica in the ncbi est database .

sequence analysis and phylogenetic tree construction
alignment of the deduced dbd sequences showed that all 2dbd-nrs possess a p-box sequence, ceackk, in the first dbd, and the p-box sequence, cegckg, in the second dbd . a blast search against all available databases showed that the p-box sequence ceackk is not present in any other nr. this unique p-box present in the first dbd of 2dbd-nrs suggests a novel target dna specificity may exist for the first dbd. the p-box sequence of second dbd, cegckg followed by the amino acid sequence ffrr  is identical to that of most members in nr subfamily i  suggesting that 2dbd-nrs may have a close functional or evolutionary relationship with receptors in nr subfamily i.

both maximum likelihood method and bayesian inference analysis show that the first dbd of 2dbd-nrs belongs to one monophyletic group and the second dbd belongs to a separate monophyletic group . the results suggest that 2dbd-nrs originated from a common ancestor gene. both the first and the second dbd are sister groups to members of nr subfamily i, suggesting that the common ancestral gene of 2dbd-nrs was close to a common ancestral gene of nr subfamily i genes and the extra dbd was gained by a recombination event . another phylogenetic tree was constructed employing lbd sequences, the same result was obtained . the mrna sequences reported here were deposited in genbank under the accession numbers: sm2dbdα , sm2dbdβ  and sm2dbdγ 

protein-protein interaction
nrs can regulate transcription as a homodimer or as a heterodimer with retinoid × receptor , another nuclear receptor. to determine whether 2dbd-nrs may form dimers and to begin to define the quarternary structure of 2dbd-nrs, the interaction of sm2dbdα, smrxr <dig> and smrxr <dig> was evaluated in a yeast two hybrid system.

yeast transformed with psv40/p <dig> , psv40/plamin c , pgbk-sm2dbdα-c-f/pact-smrxr <dig>  pas-smrxr1-c-f/pgad-sm2dbdα, pgbk-sm2dbdα-c-f/pact-smrxr <dig>  pas-smrxr2/pgad-sm2dbdα and pgbk-sm2dbdα-c-f/pgad-sm2dbdα grew on sd/-trp-leu plate as expected . if sm2dbdα interacts with smrxr <dig>  smrxr <dig> or with itself, the gal <dig> binding domain fusion partner bound to the gal <dig> uas element will interact with the gal <dig> activation domain to drive transcription of the reporter gene. yeast co-transformed with pgbk-sm2dbdα-c-f/pgad-sm2dbdα grew on sd/-trp-his-leu plus  <dig> mm 3-at, indicating that sm2dbdα can act as a homodimer. yeast co-transformed with pgbk-sm2dbdα-c-f/pact-smrxr <dig>  pgbk-sm2dbdα-c-f/pact-smrxr <dig> or pas-smrxr1-c-f/pgad-sm2dbdα and pas-smrxr2/pgad-sm2dbdα did not grow on sd/-trp-his-leu plus  <dig> mm 3-at plates, indicating that sm2dbdα did not interact with smrxr <dig> nor smrxr <dig> . the positive control plasmids, psv40/p <dig>  grew on sd/-trp-his-leu plus  <dig> mm 3-at plates while the negative control plasmids, psv40/plamin c did not . the results show that sm2dbdα can interact as a homodimer, but can not interact with smrxr <dig> nor smrxr <dig>  as a strong dimer interface is known to be located in the lbd  <cit> , gst pull-down experiments were performed . the results verified that the lbds of sm2dbdα can form a homodimer in vitro.

nuclear receptors act on target genes by recognizing and binding to specific dna core motifs in the promoter region of target genes via their p-box motif located in the dbd. the dna core motif is a typical consensus hexameric sequence aggtca called a half-site. when nrs bind to the half-site as a dimer, two p-boxes and a repeat of half-site, with different orientations and spacings between the half sites, are required. 2dbd-nr can interact as a homodimer indicating that four p-boxes may be involved in dna binding, thus a novel mechanism of dna binding, which requires two independent pairs of half-site repeats, or four half-site repeats, each with unknown orientations and spacing, are predicted to exist to allow 2dbd-nr to bind to target dna cis-elements. the protein of the first dbd, second dbd and the first dbd with second dbd were tested for their ability to bind to a direct repeat, an everted repeat and palindromes of the half-site aggtca with 1– <dig> nucleotide spacings by electrphoretic mobility shift assay . no binding compared to controls was observed . however, as the flanking sequence of the aggtca motif and the spacing between half sites also determines the protein binding to the dna element, further experiments will be performed using different sets of templates and by determining dna binding sites using a pcr/emsa-based approach.

evolution of 2dbd-nrs
metazoan phylogeny is still under debate  <cit> . in the traditional view based on morphological and embryological characteristics, bilateria comprise acoelomates , pseudocoelomates  and coelomates   <cit>  . a second view based on molecular data  support the bilateria as comprising three clades: deuterostomia, lophotrochozoa and ecdysozoa  <cit> . in the molecular phylogeny scheme, nematodes and arthropods are grouped into ecdysozoa, while flatworms and mollusks are grouped into lophotrochozoa . in an attempt to explain the origin of the ancestor 2dbd-nr, both metazoan phylogenies were considered.

if the traditional phylogenetic scheme is correct, 2dbd-nrs originated in a common ancestor of the bilateria, because 2dbd-nrs were found in both acoelomates  and coelomates  . the 2dbd-nr was lost in pseudocoelomates  after the split of pseudocoelomates and coelomates . as 2dbd-nrs have not been found in deuterostomes, they were lost in the deuterostome lineage after the split of protostomes and deuterostomes .

if the molecular phylogeny hypothesis is correct, there were two possibilities for 2dbd-nr origin. the 2dbd-nr might originate in a common ancestor of protostomes, since 2dbd-nrs were identified both in lophotrochozoans  and in ecdysozoans  . the other possibility is that 2dbd-nr might originate in a common ancestor of the bilateria and was lost in the deuterostome lineage after the split of protostomes and deuterostomes. 2dbd-nr is absent in nematodes suggesting that this gene was lost after the split of the nematodes and arthropods. in arthropods, no 2dbd-nr was found in insects suggesting 2dbd-nr was lost after the split of insects and crustaceans .

the phylogeny of the platyhelminths has itself been under debate . the platyhelminths have always played a central role in hypotheses concerning metazoan phylogeny and evolution. recently, many platyhelminth flatworms, previously regarded in the traditional phylogeny as basal bilaterians , are now placed within the lophotrochozoan protostomates . furthermore, the acoelomorpha  are no longer considered part of the platyhelminths but are still considered basal bilaterians  <cit> . certainly, further studies on nuclear receptor evolution in these taxa can contribute to our understanding of the evolution of the metazoa and bilateria, especially as nuclear receptors have been identified in sponges  <cit> , a group that is hypothesized to have given rise to the hypothetical metazoan ancestor  <cit> .

the duplication of 2dbd-nrs was deduced from phylogenetic analysis employing the first and the second dbd sequences as a unit. maximum likelihood method and bayesian inference were performed and the same result was obtained . since the results show that there is only one arthropod, mollusk and platyhelminth 2dbd-nr orthologue, the duplication of the ancient 2dbd-nr first occurred after the split of arthropods, mollusks and platyhelminths . the absence of a 2dbd-nr in the insect and nematode lineages supports this hypothesis, since it is likely that there was less of a chance for all earlier duplicated genes to be lost in all the animals in which no 2dbd-nr was found. the analysis also showed that 2dbd-nrs underwent two rounds of duplication in a common ancestor of the platyhelminths that eventually gave rise to three genes. the 2dbd-nrα and 2dbd-nrβ are considered the most recently duplicated, since the orthologue of 2dbd-nrγ is found in crustacea and mollusca . interestingly, a single gene is found in the crustacean, one duplication event occurred in mollusks and two duplications occurred in the platyhelminths.

s. mansoni bacterial artificial chromosome  clones containing sm2dbdα  were identified by screening the s. mansoni chor- <dig> bac library. bac clones containing sm2dbdβ  and sm2dbdγ  were identified by blast searching databases of s. mansoni bac ends and verified by pcr. sm2dbdα, sm2dbdβ and sm2dbdγ were localized on chromosomes by fish using bac dna as the probe . the results show that sm2dbdα localized to chromosome  <dig>  sm2dbdβ is located on sex chromosomes z and w and chromosome  <dig> indicating that there are two copies of sm2dbdβ. however, there are other possibilities. it could be a fourth gene. however, we do not think that it is a fourth gene as we should have found it in our search of the genome sequence. it might be a pseudogene or a second copy of the 2dbdβ gene. we favor a second copy of the genes as the probe hybridizes to the euchromatic region of the z and w. however, we cannot rule out that it is an artifact due to hybridization of a repetitive sequence in the bac clone. sm2dbdγ is localized on chromosome  <dig>  in figures 9a and 9c a repeat sequence in the bac clones that commonly hybridizes to the w chromosome is shown as well. the results suggest that 2dbd-nrs duplicated among different chromosomes in a common ancestor of the platyhelminths.

analysis of the nr superfamily, mainly in drosophila and vertebrates supports the hypothesis that evolution of nuclear receptors occurred by two serial rounds of duplication  <cit> . the duplication of 2dbd-nrs suggests that certain nr genes have undergone recent duplication in invertebrates after the divergence of various clades within the bilateria. our previous study of s. mansoni nrs supports this hypothesis  <cit> . nrs in insects seem to have undergone extensive gene loss. for example, a recently identified estrogen receptor in the mollusk aplysia californica  <cit>  and two thyroid hormone receptors in the platyhelminth s. mansoni  <cit>  are missing in the insect genera drosophila and anopheles. to address the importance of gene duplication in nr evolution, more invertebrates nr complements await to be analyzed.

developmentally regulated expression
quantitative real-time rt-pcr was performed to evaluate mrna expression of sm2dbdα, sm2dbdβ and sm2dbdγ. normalized gene expression   <cit>  was standardized to the relative quantities of s. mansoni α-tubulin. sm2dbdα was detected in secondary sporocysts, cercariae, 21-day schistosomules, 28-day schistosomules, female and male worms. sm2dbdβ was expressed relatively high in eggs, secondary sporocysts, cercariae and male stages. sm2dbdγ was only detected in cercariae and 28-day worms. the results indicate that the three genes are developmentally regulated and thus have a role in different development stages . it is of note that sm2dbdγ, the putative ancestral gene is only expressed in  <dig> of the developmental stages studied and that both sm2dbdα and sm2dbdβ show sex-specific gene expression.

CONCLUSIONS
a protein modular structure containing an ab domain, two dna binding domains in tandem, a hinge region and a ligand binding domain  represents a novel nr modular structure, and is named 2dbd-nr. 2dbd-nrs were identified from mollusks, arthropods  and flatworms. 2dbd-nrs may act as homodimers. 2dbd-nrs share a common ancestor gene which possessed an extra dbd that likely resulted from a recombination event. 2dbd-nrs were found in flatworms, mollusks and arthropods whose phylogeny is still under debate  <cit>  . further studies of 2dbd-nr gene subfamily may contribute to our understanding of gene duplication as an evolutionary force and to the phylogeny of the metazoa. the conserved zinc finger motifs in each of the two dbds are the most readily recognized features of 2dbd-nrs. the p-box sequences in the first dbd and the second dbd give members of the 2dbd-nr their unique feature. this feature makes 2dbd-nrs an interesting gene subfamily for studies of metazoan phylogeny.

