BACKGROUND
humans have a limited capacity to regenerate, and thus, severe injuries result in unsightly scarring, loss of function and disfigurement . some vertebrates, however, possess remarkable capacities to regenerate complex body parts following injury . for example, certain newts and salamanders completely regenerate limbs, tails, jaw, and eye lens following removal . frogs, particularly during their larval tadpoles stages, have remarkable capacities to regenerate tissues following traumatic injury . despite ongoing investigation, we still lack a clear molecular understanding of the mechanisms and pathways responsible for vertebrate appendage regeneration.

in recent years, the xenopus tadpole tail regeneration model has emerged as a powerful system for the study of vertebrate appendage regeneration . the xenopus tadpole tail represents a particularly interesting regenerating appendage, as it contains many axial and paraxial tissues, including the spinal cord, notochord, dorsal aorta, and skeletal muscle, of which all regenerate following amputation. elegant studies using this model have uncovered important roles for fgf, wnt, bmp and tgfβ signaling during tail regeneration  <cit> . in addition, this system has been valuable in elucidating additional mechanisms involved during tissue regeneration, such as the role of extracellular components, apoptosis, transcription factors and electrical signals  <cit> . given the complexity of regeneration, however, it is likely that many important genes and cellular processes during xenopus tail regeneration remain unknown.

the primary aim of our study, therefore, was to measure gene expression changes during regeneration of the xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail in a genome-wide fashion. in particular, we sought to create a gene expression data set to serve as a resource in identifying the genes and processes involved in tail regeneration of this species. although a similar study has been done previously in x. laevis, we chose to pursue this study in x. tropicalis, since this system contains more advanced genomic resources  <cit> . for example, unlike x. laevis, x. tropicalis is diploid and possesses a sequenced genome, making most genetic analyses simpler  <cit> . notably, the sequenced genome of xenopus tropicalis facilitated the creation of a genome-wide affymetrix microarray chip based on more than  <dig>  million ests and gene models from the x. tropicalis genome  <cit> . despite these extensive genomic resources, tail regeneration in x. tropicalis had not been previously documented  <cit> .

here, we characterized the regenerative response that follows tadpole tail amputation in xenopus tropicalis. we then catalogued the changes in the mrna transcriptome during three different phases of regeneration using the affymetrix xenopus tropicalis genome array in biological duplicate, and thus, created a novel mrna transcriptomic resource examining vertebrate wound healing and regeneration. ultimately, the xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail regeneration model, transcriptomic dataset, and the subsequently identified genes and processes implicated during regeneration will help facilitate current and future studies of vertebrate appendage regeneration.

RESULTS
the xenopus tropicalis tadpole has the capacity to regenerate its tail
since tail regeneration in xenopus tropicalis had not been previously described, we initiated this study by characterizing the regenerative capacity of this model following tail amputation . we amputated the tails of pre-metamorphic tadpoles  and found that within one week, 95% of tadpoles regenerated tail appendages . at seven days post amputation, the interface between the original tail and the regenerated portion of the tail was still discernible under bright field microscopy, due to a difference in optical density between the original versus regenerated portions of the tail . hence, we sought to address whether this apparent difference was due to a qualitative difference between the original tissues versus the regenerated tissues in the tails. we therefore stained the tails with acetylated tubulin and 12/ <dig> monoclonal antibodies, which recognize differentiated neurons and skeletal muscle, respectively. to detect the vasculature, we created a transgenic xenopus tropicalis line that transcribes egfp under the control of the murine tie- <dig> promoter. we found that this line expresses egfp in the three major tail blood vessels , fin vasculature, as well as a small subset of circulating blood cells .

using these resources, we found that the regenerated tails differ in certain respects, compared to non-amputated tails. the most obvious difference in the regenerated portion of the tail was the loss of segmentation of somitic muscle and intersomitic axons , a phenomenon also reported in x. laevis  <cit> . the interface between the regenerated and unwounded vasculature also showed an increased amount of blood vessels in the regenerated portion . the regenerated vasculature was found to be functional as defined by a return of circulation to the dorsal aorta, posterior cardinal vein, and dorsal anastomosing vessel .

at one month post amputation, we observed that the regenerated tail was able to grow in size similar to a non-amputated control tail . however, the normal, chevron patterning of the muscle did not return to the amputated portion of the tail . furthermore, at one month post amputation, we found that the perpendicular extending "branched" pattern of neurons in a non-amputated tail was replaced by neurons running parallel to the tail body in the regenerated tail . this replacement of "branched" by parallel patterning was also seen in fin vasculature of the tail . despite this, however, the tails regained total functionality, and the tadpoles were able to swim indistinguishably to non-amputated sibling tadpoles. taken together, these data show that the xenopus tropicalis tadpole has the capacity to regenerate its tail appendage following amputation and restore full functionality, although tissue patterning of the regenerated tail is not identical to the non-amputated tail.

characterization of the early, intermediate, and late phases of tail regeneration
we next sought to characterize the early , intermediate  and late  phases of tail regeneration  <cit> . assessment of gross morphology  showed that by  <dig> hpa, bleeding had ceased in all tails, and that by  <dig> hpa, 65% of tails possessed a  <dig> μm or greater amount of nascent tissue distal to the notochord . by  <dig> hpa, all tails showed a regenerating notochord and spinal cord . at  <dig> hpa, the average notochord length had doubled, and 85% of tails possessed melanophores in the regenerated portion of the tail .

we next assessed the presence of an inflammatory-like response following amputation, a response known to occur during tail and limb regeneration  <cit> . our approach was to use the neutrophil granule histological stain, sudan black  <cit> , or whole-mount in situ hybridization for mmp <dig>  a marker gene for myeloid cells  <cit> . these data showed a marked increase in sudan black and mmp <dig> staining from  <dig> to  <dig> hpa that was largely concentrated in muscle-bearing portion of the tail  sudan black and mmp <dig> staining cells remained at  <dig> hpa  but diminished by  <dig> and  <dig> hpa . these data suggest that an inflammatory-like response is activated by  <dig> hpa and remains for several days.

we then addressed cell proliferation by staining regenerating tails with a monoclonal antibody against phospho-histone h <dig>  a marker of cells undergoing mitosis  <cit> . immunohistochemistry using this antibody showed relatively few dividing cells at  <dig> and  <dig> hpa at the site of amputation . however, by  <dig> hpa, a localized increase in dividing cells was detected at the site of amputation , a pattern that continued at  <dig> and  <dig> hpa . these data demonstrated a localized increase in cell proliferation at the site of amputation during the intermediate  and late  phases of tail regeneration.

we next sought to assess the timing of overt regeneration of the nascent neural, vascular, and muscle tissues. using the acetylated tubulin monoclonal antibody, we detected spinal cord regeneration  and axons  at  <dig> hours post amputation . these neurons projected axons into the distal most portion of the regenerating tail. to address the vasculature, we imaged the mtie-2::egfp transgenic line and found that by  <dig> hpa,  <dig> of  <dig> tails examined had an egfp positive "clot" at the injured portion of the dorsal aorta, possibly originating from the egfp positive cells present in the blood circulation in this line . blood vessels extended into the regenerating tail tip between  <dig> and  <dig> hpa . lastly, new skeletal muscle cells began to differentiate between  <dig> and  <dig> hpa .

in summary, characterization of the early, intermediate, and late stages of x. tropicalis tail regeneration pointed to distinct biological activities in these time periods: an inflammatory-like phase by  <dig> hpa , a cell proliferation phase beginning  <dig> hpa , and a regrowth phase of differentiated tissues, such as neurons, notochord, muscle and vasculature by  <dig> and  <dig> hpa .

transcriptomic analysis of the early, intermediate, and late stages of tail regeneration
we next endeavored to catalogue the changes in the transcriptome through the early, intermediate, and late phases of regeneration using the affymetrix xenopus tropicalis genome array. our approach was to collect rna from the site of amputation/regeneration during the early, intermediate, and late stages of tail regeneration as well as an equivalent t0h reference sample . we repeated this experiment twice, using different pools of tadpole tail tissues. the resulting four array groups are referred to by their mean post amputation collection time: t0h , t6h , t24h , and t60h . microarray analysis was carried out using the mas <dig>  algorithm and two-sample t-tests, resulting in both a p-value and the more stringent q-value for each probe set   <cit> .

as a first step in our analysis, we sought to assess the similarities between the arrays in a global fashion. to establish relationships and compare variability between replicate arrays, principal component analysis  was used. pca was chosen for its ability to reduce the effective dimensionality of complex gene-expression space without significant loss of information  <cit> . we performed pca mapping with our eight arrays  and found that, importantly, equivalent array duplicates clustered with one another . this analysis also showed that the most significant gene expression changes occurred between the t0h vs t6h and the t6h vs t24h time periods . in contrast, the t60h vs t24h array were almost indistinguishable using these analytical conditions. the largest number of significant gene expression changes and the largest fold change magnitudes occurred in the t6h vs. t0h comparison; there were  <dig> targets that possessed an over 5-fold change  accompanied by a q-value of under . <dig> in the t6h vs t0h comparison, while only  <dig> targets fit these stringency conditions in the t60h vs. t24h comparison .

in order to analyze the array experiment, we next annotated the array using a modified blast approach and successfully enriched the annotation nearly twofold . analyzing this new annotation, we found a considerable amount of gene target redundancy in the array. of the  <dig>  targets in the array, we found that there were  <dig> unique refseq protein ids . from these, we next created a data set that included the most significant target for each refseq protein id and analyzed the expression activity of these targets throughout the four measured time points . these data showed that ~45% of genes targets showed at least one expression level change of greater of less than  <dig> fold between successive time points. we further analyzed and validated some of the most dynamically expressed genes in a later section of this manuscript.

using these annotations, we compared our x. tropicalis array results to data previously reported in a cdna macro-array analysis of x. laevis tail regeneration  <cit> . to link the nibb x. laevis clones used in the macro-array analysis carried out by tazaki et al. , we first performed protein-protein tblastx searches of the nibb clones against the most recent ncbi protein databases. in this way, we linked  <dig> of the  <dig> nibb clones reported in the previously published cdna macroarray  <cit>  to targets in our affymetrix array using common gene homologues. the tazaki et al.  data examined gene expression at  <dig> hours and  <dig> hours post amputation versus a  <dig> hour post amputation control. we compared these expression level change values to their closest equivalent in our array experiment, namely, the expression level changes stemming from our t24h vs t0h and t60h vs t0h comparisons. these analyses showed that, out of the  <dig> x. laevis comparisons,  <dig>  and  <dig>  x. tropicalis comparisons were in agreement in terms of up or down regulation . moreover, the highest fold upregulated fgf gene in our array data was fgf <dig>  which we also validated with by rt-qpcr and whole-mount in situ hybridization , consistent with findings in x. laevis  <cit> . these data strongly suggest that the molecular mechanisms responsible for tail regeneration are conserved between the allotetraploid x. laevis and the diploid x. tropicalis.

taken together our data represent a characterization of the transcriptomal changes which occur during the early, intermediate, and late phases of tail regeneration, thereby creating the most comprehensive catalogue of gene expression data examining xenopus tail regeneration to date. the entire array dataset can be found in the miame compliant standard to the array express database .

validation and analysis of highly significant array targets
we next chose to validate by rt-qpcr five targets possessing a q-value <  <dig>  and at least a two-fold expression level change. three of the targets chosen for validation possessed the highest significant magnitude changes in their respective groups ; the other two possessed a more modest fold change of ~2-fold . for rt-qpcr, new rna samples were collected in biological triplicate at  <dig> h,  <dig> h,  <dig> h,  <dig> h,  <dig> h,  <dig> h, and  <dig> hours post amputation. resulting qpcr gene ct values were compared to ct values of reference gene rps <dig>  the comparison of gene expression values to another reference gene rpl <dig> yielded similar results . by normalizing array and rt-qpcr expression values with regards to their t0h values , we found that  <dig> of  <dig> of these targets with q-value <  <dig>  possessed a strong quantitative correlation between array and rt-qpcr derived expression values . we also assessed the expression of these genes by whole-mount in situ hybridization: these data showed upregulations of leptin, xmenf, pdgfa, and xcyp26a in agreement with the array and rt-qpcr results .

we next sought to analyze all highly significant targets contained in the array dataset using clustering and gene ontology   <cit> . target validation using rt-qpcr  led us to examine all targets in our array dataset with high significance  and dynamic expression level changes . applying this stringency to the array data produced a list of  <dig> probe sets , which were then grouped into  <dig> clusters with regards to their similar expression changes through the array time course . to determine whether these clusters represented functionally similar genes, we examined bp  and mf  go term representation between each gene cluster and the entire array using the david bioinformatic database  <cit> . four of the twelve clusters were over-represented with at least three go terms accompanied by a p-value under 1e- <dig> and a false discovery rate under  <dig>  . cluster  <dig>  a group of targets that showed upregulation in the t6h array, was over represented with genes involved in the immune/defense response; these data were in agreement with our analysis of the early phase of regeneration using sudan black staining and mmp <dig> in situ hybridizations . similarly, cluster  <dig> were over represented with genes implicated in the cell cycle and dna replication during the intermediate phase of regeneration; these data were in agreement with our results on cell proliferation . also, cluster  <dig>  which showed downregulation during the intermediate and late phases of regeneration, was over represented with genes associated with muscle differentiation; this result is probably due to the fact that the tissue collected for these array samples possessed proportionally less differentiated muscle tissue than the t0h and t6h arrays . finally, cluster  <dig>  which showed a downregulation during the early, intermediate, and late regeneration phases, was over represented with genes associated with organic acid metabolism.

systematic analysis of metabolic processes
our initial, unbiased analysis of the most statistically significant array targets led us to a cluster that were over represented with genes involved in organic acid metabolism . given that only  <dig> of the  <dig> targets in that cluster actually possessed the "organic acid metabolism" go term, we wondered if all genes involved in "organic acid metabolism" would show a similar pattern of gene regulation. hence, we next took a biased approach and asked if other intracellular metabolic processes would show concerted patterns of regulation during tail regeneration. for this reason, we systematically examined the expression profiles of all intracellular metabolic processes present in our array data set.

our approach for pan-array intracellular metabolic processes analysis was to link each gene to its respective metabolic processes as defined by the gene ontology consortium  <cit>  and screen these metabolic processes for their average log <dig> expression profiles through t6h, t24h and t60h arrays. in total, this approach led to the examination of  <dig> intracellular metabolic processes . in this method of analysis, unlike the analysis shown in figure 4d, the  <dig> gene targets that entailed "organic acid metabolic process" did not show a marked change in expression level during regeneration .

we then decided to focus our attention on the intracellular metabolic processes that were upregulated during the early to intermediate phases of tail regeneration, a time when the immune response is evident and cells begin to proliferate, but precede the overt regeneration of differentiated tissues . in total,  <dig> processes were upregulated in the t24h vs t0h comparison  and we were interested to find that "hydrogen peroxide metabolic process", "superoxide metabolic process", "nadp metabolic process", "nicotinamide metabolic process", "oxygen and reactive oxygen species metabolic process" were amongst the top ten most upregulated processes in the t24h vs t0h comparison .

intriguingly, nicotinamide, nadp, and the generation of reactive oxygen species  and hydrogen peroxide are connected via the generation and subsequent oxidation of reduced nicotinamide adenosine dinucleotide phosphate, also known as nadph . to further assess whether genes governing the nadph metabolic pathway were activated following tail amputation, we assessed via whole-mount in situ hybridization the expression of the nadp/h synthetic genes shown in figure 5b, of which g6pd, nadk, me <dig>  me <dig>  idh <dig>  and idh <dig> showed expression changes following tail amputation and during regeneration using this technique . we confirmed the expression level changes via rt-qpcr of nadk and g6pd, and these data showed an upregulation of ~9-fold  and ~6-fold  by  <dig> hours post amputation . the modulation of these nadp/h related genes suggest a role for nadph dependent metabolic processes during tail regeneration.

discussion
at the initiation of this study, the regenerative capacity of the xenopus tropicalis tadpole tail had not yet been reported, though one study had shown that, like x. laevis, x. tropicalis can regenerate its lens following removal  <cit> . the primary aims of this report, therefore, were to characterize tail regeneration in x. tropicalis and create a transcriptomic resource that would allow the identification of genes and processes that are modulated during vertebrate tissue repair and regeneration. here, we have shown that in a manner that appears very similar to x. laevis, the x. tropicalis tadpole tail can also regenerate its tail, including notochord, spinal cord, skeletal muscles and the major blood vessels .

in order to examine the regeneration of the vasculature, however, we established a new transgenic line, the mtie-2::egfp transgenic line. analysis of regenerated vascular and neuronal tissue demonstrated that both the fin axons and blood vessels adopted a "parallel" morphology. furthermore, we found that neurons extend axons in this "parallel" manner to the distal most portion of the regenerating tail by  <dig> hpa. these data suggest a possibility that the neurons, which extend further into the regenerating tail, provide guidance to the regenerating blood vessels, as has been suggested during development  <cit> . the distal, pioneering activity of the nerves during regeneration is consistent with their critical role during limb and tail regeneration  <cit> .

while x. tropicalis and x. laevis frog species are thought to have diverged at least  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , our data suggest a strong similarity in gene expression during the tadpole tail regeneration between these two species. however, one advantage of x. tropicalis as a model is its sequenced genome, which facilitated the generation of a comprehensive affymetrix genome array. using this resource, we examined the mrna transcriptome of the early, intermediate, and late phases of x. tropicalis tail regeneration, identifying over  <dig> highly dynamic genes.

despite the large number of genes found in this analysis, it cannot be considered a completely comprehensive study, as it is based on duplicate arrays from pooled samples obtained at four different time points. a more comprehensive microarray analysis would have required analysis of many more samples from individual animals during various stages of tail regeneration. this, however, was not possible as we are able to isolate rna only once from each tadpole. in light of this, we instead pooled samples of tail tissue for each array, which allowed an average analysis of many individual animals in duplicate. a deeper, more comprehensive analysis of the transcriptome would require a higher number of arrays, and possibly, a means to extract mrna at multiple time points of regeneration from single individuals.

an example of how this genome-wide array helped identify novel genes involved in tail regeneration was leptin, a gene, which lacked est evidence in xenopus tropicalis. nevertheless, the leptin gene possessed the highest significant upregulation in the t6h vs. t0h array comparison in our array dataset. leptin, first discovered in mice and dubbed "the obesity gene", due to the phenotype presented in mutant mice  <cit> , has subsequently been shown to act as a chemokine, which regulates metabolism. leptin has also been shown to act as an angiogenic factor during wound healing and is potent activator of jak/stat signaling, acting downstream of the leptin receptor . moreover, xenopus and mammalian leptin appear to function in physiologically similar ways e.g. by influencing feeding behavior as well as stimulating cell proliferation in the developing limb  <cit> . it remains to be determined to what extent leptin acts as an angiogenic factor, a growth factor, or a modulator of energy consumption during tail regeneration.

another intriguing result from the array experiment was the identification of cyp26a, a gene encoding a p <dig> cytochrome that metabolizes retinoic acid. retinoids are important signaling molecules and morphogens implicated in a wide variety of developmental and regenerative processes, including x. laevis limb regeneration  <cit> . while cyp26a possessed the greatest significant decrease in fold change in the t6h vs t0h array comparison, it also showed a striking increase in expression in the t60h vs t24h array comparison. this dynamic regulation, which we validated via rt-qpcr, suggests that a tightly controlled regulation of retinoic acid levels is important during regeneration. in the embryo, cyp26a has been previously shown to be important in the establishment of boundaries and give positional information to developing tissues, as well as interacting and modulating the fgf pathway  <cit>  .

yet another interesting gene identified in our screen was xmenf. transcripts for this gene showed rapid upregulation following wound healing, peaked during early regeneration, and then decreased during tail regeneration. the exact function of xmenf is currently unknown, though in xenopus embryo, xmenf expression is upregulated prior to gastrulation, and in combination with xenopus nodal related  <dig> , can potentiate the induction of ventral mesoderm in the animal cap cells  <cit> . intriguingly, the xmenf, and closely related xenf, do not appear to possess mammalian orthologues  <cit> .

go analysis of highly significant gene targets identified the modulation of genes involved in aspects of metabolism following tail amputation. reanalysis of array data with a focus on intracellular metabolic processes identified the modulation of a set of genes that regulate the generation of nadp/h. this focused, meta-analysis demonstrated the utility of our x. tropicalis microarray dataset as a resource for the identification of genes and biological processes that are modulated during vertebrate appendage regeneration. the oxidized and reduced forms of nadp are known to be important in a wide variety of biological processes  <cit> . for example, the oxidation of nadph by the nadph oxidase complex  is a critical step in the generation of reactive oxygen species , which can regulate several processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation  <cit> , and the inflammatory response  <cit> . conversely, nadph is also essential in the maintenance of the endogenous antioxidant defense mechanisms e.g. the regeneration of reduced glutathione  from oxidized glutathione   <cit> . moreover, the nadp+/nadph ratio, along with other redox couples, helps define the redox state of the cell, which has long ranging consequences on gene transcription, protein activity, and phosphorylation.

CONCLUSIONS
this report is the first to show that the x. tropicalis tadpole, like x. laevis, is a powerful vertebrate model for the study of appendage regeneration. the sequence genome of x. tropicalis allowed genome-wide transcriptomic characterization of multiple phases of tail regeneration thus producing a novel and extensive resource for identifying genes and processes important during appendage regeneration. it is hoped that discoveries made in the xenopus model will facilitate the development of novel therapies that will promote healing and regeneration in humans.

