BACKGROUND
massively parallel sequencing technology can be used to efficiently interrogate multiple targeted genomic regions for clinically relevant mutations  <cit> . the use of short unique sequence indexes, or barcodes, increases sequencing throughput and allows analysis of multiple samples in a single sequencing run. application of this technology will allow cost-efficient screening of genes known or suspected to harbor clinically relevant pathogenic mutations. while small mutations are readily detectable with current analysis platforms  <cit> , methods for the identification of copy-number variants  are not well established for targeted data. the ability to detect the full spectrum of mutations is critical to the success of targeted sequencing projects.

current methods for detecting structural variation from massively parallel data use either paired-end mapping or depth of coverage methods . paired-end mapping methods perform well for mate-pair sequence data and have the advantage of identifying both balanced  and unbalanced  structural variation. comprehensive cnv scanning using paired-end mapping requires mulitple insert sizes and the presence of paired tags that bridge the breakpoint of the event. this approach is widely used in the assembly of whole genomes but cannot be applied to targeted enrichment protocols, as hybridization-based capture methods for massively parallel sequencing typically require small insert fragments  <cit>  and breakpoints of structural variants may lie outside of targeted regions.

depth of coverage methods do not require breakpoint capture or have specific size restrictions, yet such methods are hampered by low signal to noise ratio due to sparse sampling  and sampling bias based on sequence gc-content, bait coverage, and other factors affecting capture efficiency. further, depth of coverage methods require cross-sample normalization and comparison in order to deal with variation in coverage across genomic regions and samples. we previously showed that a basic depth of coverage approach performs well to identify cnvs from high-coverage  targeted sequence data <cit> . depth of coverage methods have achieved higher signal to noise by averaging data across a genomic region <cit> , however, doing so results in a loss of the ability to detect smaller mutations. in addition, depth of coverage methods are poor at localizing breakpoints  <cit> .

here we describe a method that combines cnv detection through high-resolution depth of coverage analysis with call confirmation through partially-mapped reads. this allows for the identification of dna gain or loss even where breakpoints are outside the targeted regions, and exact breakpoint characterization where breakpoints are within the targeted regions. by combining these orthologous approaches, cnvs of any size can be identified from targeted high-throughput sequence data with a low false-positive rate.

RESULTS
our method uses two independent approaches, depth of coverage and a scan for partially-mapped reads at cnv edges. we implemented a straightforward depth of coverage algorithm and internally validated cnv calls by looking for a signature of partially-mapped reads that confirm the cnv breakpoints where possible. partially-mapped reads are defined as high-quality full length  reads where the best alignment to targeted regions is a perfect match less than  <dig> bases in length. a minimum match length of  <dig> bp was used for this analysis. where partially-mapped reads match to a cnv edge, it is assumed that the unaligned portion of the read maps to sequence flanking the other breakpoint and the partially-mapping reads can be aligned to each other to form a consensus sequence that flanks the breakpoint. for example, in the case of a deletion, the partially mapped reads will correspond to sequence flanking the deleted region, giving the exact breakpoints of the cnv. partially-mapped reads map to the reference sequence differently for gains and losses, as described for paired-end mapping methods of cnv detection  <cit> . where cnv breakpoints lie within non-targeted sequence, partially-mapped reads are unavailable and depth of coverage is the only evidence used for cnv calling.

our data were massively parallel sequence reads from a capture design that targets genomic sequence across  <dig> genes which are known to predispose to high risks of breast and ovarian cancer <cit> . a total of  <dig> kbp sequence was targeted in  <dig> samples concurrently, running  <dig> samples per lane on an illumina gaiix instrument. sequencing was performed with a standard multiplex  <dig> ×  <dig> paired-end reads using truseq sbs chemistry and analyzed with illumina scs <dig> /rta  <dig>  and the demultiplexing script within casava http://www.illumina.com. single base coverage was calculated based on the number of tags for each sample overlapping each base across targeted regions. figure  <dig> illustrates the regional variation in raw coverage and the increase in signal-to-noise ratio after cross-sample normalization for a representative diploid region of brca <dig>  resulting in ratio values that closely cluster around one in a region with no cnvs in the samples analyzed.

we obtained median raw coverage of 350× across the  <dig> kbp of targeted sequence . low coverage regions were primarily gc-rich, consistent with other targeted sequence data <cit> , and account for the majority of bases excluded from screening for structural variation.  <dig> % of targeted bases had median coverage of at least 10×, permitting high-confidence detection of single base and short indels for nearly all sequence assayed. in order to estimate the effect of random noise on the false-negative rate, we simulated data where one cnv of  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp, or  <dig> bp was present within  <dig> mb of sequence and tested for detection of the cnv across varying signal-to-noise ratios . this analysis indicated that our methods can detect a  <dig> bp cnv with 87% sensitivity at a signal-to-noise ratio of  <dig>  a criteria met by > <dig> % of the bases targeted in this experiment, and a  <dig> bp cnv with 80% sensitivity at signal-to-noise ratio of  <dig>  a criteria met by  <dig> % of the bases.

in the samples that passed quality control , we identified a total of  <dig> cnvs  in four genes through depth of coverage analysis that passed minimum coverage and z-score requirements and were confirmed by sanger sequencing or mlpa . for losses, one homozygous deletion and four hemizygous deletions were detected, with no reads from the homozygous deletion and median ratio across hemizygous deletion regions between  <dig>  and  <dig> . for single copy gains, median duplication ratios were between  <dig>  and  <dig> . a triplication was also observed with a ratio of  <dig> , demonstrating that ratio accurately reflects copy number. all samples were previously tested for cnvs in brca <dig> and brca <dig>  and we correctly identified all known mutations and generated no false positive calls in these genes.

a size reflects minimum size, as breakpoints are located within flanking repetetive sequence

b for homozygous deletion, no reads are present within region

cnvs identified within high-risk breast and ovarian cancer genes targeted by this experiment. calls were made via depth of coverage  and confirmed with partially-mapped read analysis  where possible.

after applying depth of coverage methods to detect cnv regions, we mapped sequence reads at the edges of the events to confirm the calls and identify exact breakpoints. this process requires that at least one breakpoint be within unique targeted sequence, as targeted capture generates sequences only over targeted regions and non-unique short sequence tags are difficult or impossible to map accurately. of the  <dig> cnvs, four deletions were predicted to have at least one breakpoint in unique sequence. using a signature of partially-mapped reads, we confirmed these calls and identified exact breakpoints for all four events . while we identified no duplications with edges in unique sequence, duplications will produce a similar signature to deletions and can be confirmed using the same process.

the first deletion, of  <dig> bp, removes an exon of brca <dig> . we confirmed a  <dig> bp homozygous deletion in brca <dig>  that matches a known indel , indicating that our method is sensitive to small cnvs. the final two deletions mapped to the same pten coordinates and overlap with a known cnv previously identified by array comparative genomic hybridization  . in comparison to acgh methods, we were able to resolve exact breakpoints for this  <dig> bp polymorphic deletion . importantly, mapping sequence tags to the breakpoints allowed exclusion of a large number of false positive calls. all seven cnvs with breakpoints predicted to be within repetitive non-targeted sequence were validated by sanger sequencing or mlpa. in the  <dig> kbp in  <dig> samples there was one cnv called that could not be confirmed. this  <dig> bp duplication could not be verified through sequence mapping or sanger sequencing and is a likely false positive. breakpoint resolution via partial read mapping reduced the number of false positives to a single duplication across  <dig> samples and  <dig> kbp.

discussion
targeted high-thoughput sequencing data is used to produce high-coverage  sequence data on specific regions of the genome. targeted regions are often non-contiguous, as in the case of coding sequence capture or interruptions due to repeat sequences. we created a method that is specific to high-coverage, non-contiguous sequence data for robust cnv detection from targeted sequence data. our method does not require sequencing across cnv breakpoints , but leverages sequence level data for exact cnv characterization where breakpoints are within targeted regions. using a test dataset of regions that contribute to inherited breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility, we identified  <dig> mutations , localizing  <dig> mutations to exact genomic breakpoints. the minimum size for a cnv that we detected was  <dig> bp, and there was only one suspected false positive among all samples that passed quality control.

our method has several advantages over previous methods used to detect cnvs from high-throughput sequencing. while sequence-based cnv signal  is preferable over relative coverage, sequence data is unavailable in targeted data whenever the cnv breakpoints are not in the targeted region. this introduces a major issue for methods that rely on sequence-based data for cnv detection . additionally, as described earlier, paired-end mapping strategies are not currently applicable when targeted enrichment is used. in comparison, relative depth of coverage is problematic due to local variation in coverage within samples and variation in coverage across samples. this leads to problems with false-positive signal when scanning for regions that depart from expected diploid coverage. this issue can be partially addressed by averaging read depth across a genomic region , however, doing so reduces the ability to detect small mutations. by combining ortholgous algorithms, we eliminated from consideration a large number of false-positive cnvs called by depth of coverage methods where no signal of partially-mapped reads was present. the ability to computationally resolve the majority of false-positive calls permitted us to use high-resolution analysis even where signal-to-noise ratio was intermediate. in addition, depth of coverage analysis has the benefit of producing a quantitative estimate of copy-count, as demonstrated by the clear distinction between duplication and triplication ratios.

the major limitation of depth of coverage methods arises in duplicated genomic regions, such as segmental duplications or smaller regions of homology between genomic regions. within such regions, the expected ratio for deletions and duplications is relative to the copy count in the genome. for depth of coverage, a copy number change from two to one  or two to three  produces a strong signal, however, copy number changes in duplicated regions of the genome produce weaker signal that can be easily overwhelmed by noise. for example, variation between samples will overwhelm the signal of a change from six copies to five, where the expected ratio would be  <dig> . as such, we limit analysis to unique regions of the genome. in addition, depth of coverage methods do not detect balanced structural variation.

the methods we describe here were optimized for multiplexed high-coverage data, but we expect the fundamental approach will be applicable to experiments with a larger volume of targeted sequence, such as exome capture. while we used multiplexed data from a relatively small number of targeted bases, the method we describe is scalable and could be used on any dataset where signal-to-noise ratio allows reliable depth of coverage cnv calling. where local variation is too high or coverage too low, average coverage across a genomic window can be used instead of single base coverage, although this lowers resolution to the size of the window used. however, scanning across the window for partially-mapped reads as we do here would still permit exact cnv breakpoint characterization when breakpoints are in targeted sequence.

CONCLUSIONS
targeted massively parallel sequencing permits screening of genomic regions for multiple samples simultaneously, and thus is a powerful and cost-effective tool for characterizing mutations in contexts where multiple genes or pathways are involved <cit> . we demonstrate that a combination of depth of coverage and analysis of partially-mapped reads allows detection with high-confidence of cnvs within unique sequence, to a resolution of  <dig> bp. furthermore, we demonstrate that ratio can be used to estimate absolute copy number and that depth of coverage alone is sufficient for cnvs where breakpoints are not represented within targeted regions. the method we describe here is robust, yet simple to implement; while we employ specific mapping and segmentation algorithms, the overall framework is amenable to improvement and variation in the algorithms as massively parallel sequencing technology progresses.

