BACKGROUND
the ability to measure messenger rna  expression levels of thousands of genes simultaneously gave an enormous boost to biological research since the introduction of microarrays approximately  <dig> years ago. microarrays, however, are designed for comparative studies and provide only limited information about absolute gene expression levels  <cit> . this limitation comes from differences in hybridization efficiency, as well as differences in cross-hybridization background among millions of array probes and is difficult to account for. this limitation, however, is largely negligible for comparative, rather than absolute, expression level analyses, explaining the enormous utility of microarrays for a large spectrum of biological studies. still, accurate estimation of absolute transcript levels is central to a number of applications. technically, it would allow combining mrna expression measurements produced by different platforms  <cit> . biologically, knowledge of absolute transcript levels within cells and tissues would allow direct comparison to other measurements from the same biological system, thus providing a basis for systematic evaluation and modelling of regulatory processes  <cit> . another important area of application is splicing. in humans, as well as in other species, a great proportion of transcriptome complexity is thought to arise through alternative splicing of exons within a single genomic locus. in humans, for instance, at least 47% of genes show evidence of alternative splicing with nearly  <dig> isoforms per gene, on average  <cit> . currently, however, identification and quantification of individual transcriptional isoforms is a major challenge. accurate estimation of absolute expression levels of individual exons and exon junctions would greatly facilitate reconstruction of all transcript isoforms simultaneously present in the samples studied  <cit> .

in the last few years, several novel high-throughput sequencing technologies producing millions of sequences per single sequencing run have emerged  <cit> . one application of these technologies is transcriptome sequencing, also known as rna-seq  <cit> . such an approach has several advantages over microarray technology, including the ability to detect novel transcripts and transcript isoforms, distinguish between closely related paralogous sequences, and quantify expression in a "digital" rather than "analog" manner  <cit> . it remains unclear, however, whether rna-seq can provide accurate estimates of absolute transcript levels. previous studies have shown that sequencing reads density tends to vary along the length of a transcript – an observation that indicates rna-seq is not bias-free  <cit> . biases, such as preferential selection/exclusion of certain sequences, could potentially take place during adapter ligation step, pcr amplification, and/or sequencing itself. in fact, differences in ligation efficiency have been already demonstrated in high-throughput sequencing experiments  <cit> . still, the effect these biases may have on estimation of the absolute transcript levels is currently unknown. several recent studies have compared transcript expression levels measured in human and mouse samples using both conventional microarrays and rna-seq  <cit> . in all cases the expression levels showed good agreement between the two technologies with correlations ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . still, correlation between the methods is lower than the correlation between technical replicates within each method , leaving a large proportion of differences between the methods unexplained. in this study, we use gene expression levels measured using a third technology – shotgun mass spectroscopy – to assess the relative accuracy of the two transcriptome quantification approaches with respect to absolute transcript level measurements.

RESULTS
here, we measure absolute gene expression levels in human brain samples using three different methodologies: affymetrix gene microarrays, high throughput sequencing , and mass spectrometry-based label-free proteomics. among different brain regions, we have chosen cerebellar cortex due to its relative histological homogeneity, facilitating the dissection procedure and reducing biological variation due to tissue heterogeneity  <cit> . all cerebellar tissues used in this study came from individuals that suffered sudden death for reasons unrelated to the brain, and mrna quality was high and comparable across all samples .

mrna measurements by arrays and sequencing
we first determined whether we could reproduce the agreement between mrna expression estimates measured by microarrays and by rna-seq reported in other studies. for this purpose, we collected mrna expression data in two independent cerebellar samples, each containing pooled mrna from  <dig> adult human individuals, using both methodologies . none of the individuals was shared between the two pools. using affymetrix human exon  <dig>  st arrays, we found  <dig>  and  <dig>  genes with mrna expression above the detection threshold in the first and the second pooled samples, respectively . out of these genes, the vast majority  was expressed in both samples. further, gene expression values in the two samples were highly correlated  . for rna-seq, we sequenced each of the two pooled samples twice, resulting in a total of  <dig> , <dig> sequence reads that could be mapped to the human genome . in this dataset,  <dig>  out of  <dig>  annotated known protein-coding genes  were represented by at least two independent sequences and  <dig>  by at least  <dig> . although the total number of sequences differed among the four sequencing experiments , gene expression levels estimated by sequence coverage showed high positive correlation between both the biological and the technical replicates . thus, in agreement with previously published studies, gene expression measurements show relatively little variation within each method  <cit> .

in further agreement with previous observations  <cit> , we find reasonably good positive correlation between gene expression levels estimated by the two methods. namely, we observe person correlation's r =  <dig>   in a set of  <dig>  genes with mrna expression detected above background in at least one of the two samples by both techniques . the strength of the correlation was similar when the two samples were considered individually . further, the strength of correlation did not depend much on the sequence coverage and the array detection cutoff, or on the type of correlation test used .

next, to test whether biological variation among samples would substantially reduce correlation strength, we compared expression levels determined by rna-seq in two pooled samples to the microarray data obtained from different individuals. for this purpose we used expression measurements obtained using affymetrix exon arrays in  <dig> individual adult human cerebellar samples, none of which were included in the two pooled samples . using these data, we find that correlations between microarray and rna-seq expression measurements were reduced only slightly, both for the average expression of the  <dig> individuals  and for each of the individual measurements . in general, since individual measurements from all  <dig> samples were highly correlated, combining any number of individuals did not influence the result . thus, individual variation among adult human cerebellar samples did not have much influence on the correlation between microarray and rna-seq measurements.

assessing mrna measurements accuracy with proteomics data
despite the observed agreement between microarray and rna-seq expression measurements, the correlation is not perfect leaving a relatively large proportion of total expression variation  unexplained. in order to evaluate which methodology provides better estimates of absolute mrna expression levels, we compared the two sets of mrna expression measurements to a third dataset: protein expression data from adult human cerebellum. protein data were collected using 2d-lc ms/ms from four individual samples, each with two experimental replicates . in these data, we could identify  <dig>  peptides corresponding to  <dig>  genes with peptide identification fdr set to  <dig> % . out these genes,  <dig>  represented by at least two peptides were included in the following analysis.

biologically, mrna and protein expression levels cannot be expected to correlate perfectly due to post-transcriptional regulation. nonetheless, positive correlation between protein and mrna expression levels has previously been shown in a variety of systems from bacteria to mammals, with correlation coefficients ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>   <cit> , thus indicating that mrna and protein expression levels are not fully independent. further, since technical and stochastic variation are extremely unlikely to result in better correlation between mrna and protein expression measurements, we argue that the technology resulting in better correlation must provide more accurate measurements.

in agreement with previous results, we find only moderate correlation between protein and mrna expression levels when using microarray measurements . using rna-seq expression measurements for the same set of genes, we find substantially higher, albeit moderate, correlation . the difference between the two mrna quantification methodologies was significant  and consistent for both samples, as well as for their average, and did not depend on the sequence coverage depth, detection cutoff, or type of the correlation test used . further, using microarray data from five individual samples instead of the two pooled samples gave similar results . again, correlation strength between protein and microarray measurements, as well as that between protein and rna-seq, was consistent among all samples and did not depend on the sequence coverage depth, detection cutoff, or type of the correlation test used . notably, we consistently find better correlation between mrna and protein data using rna-seq measurements, even though the same four individuals were used for both proteomics and microarray measurements . thus, individual or technical variations do not explain the better agreement between rna-seq and protein expression measurements among samples used in this study. finally, excluding all exons shared by multiple isoforms and calculating transcript expression using the highest level or the mean of all isoforms did not change the result . taken together, our results indicate that, following standard microarray and rna-seq methodology, rna-seq provides a better estimate of observed protein levels than microarrays.

we note that our method assesses the general accuracy of these two techniques and is not developed as an approach for verifying individual gene expression measurements in a specific experiment. instead, it demonstrates which technique, rna-seq or microarrays, provides more accurate expression estimates as a methodology. further, our method estimates relative, rather than the absolute accuracies of the two techniques. using rna samples with known concentrations spiked into the total rna samples would provide a more direct way to assess the techniques' accuracy. still, even though our results are limited to a particular array type and the sample preparation protocols used, they should reflect the general relationship among the three methodologies. in all three techniques, we estimate gene expression levels using standard sample preparation and processing procedures. further, in all three techniques, an expression signal was calculated over the entire gene length, rather than at a particular transcript part. the affymetrix microarrays used in this study, human exon arrays, contain probes distributed over the entire gene length  <cit> . in rna-seq and shotgun proteomics, measurements are not restricted to predefined probes and, therefore, could potentially detect sequences and peptides corresponding to any location within a gene. further, for both microarrays and rna-seq, we used random primers for the first-strand cdna synthesis, thus ensuring approximately uniform coverage along the transcripts . indeed, analysing the distribution of expression measurements along genes, we find approximately uniform distribution for all three techniques . as this results in a greater total expression signal for longer genes, we used gene expression measures independent of gene length for all three techniques: average sequence coverage for rna-seq, average expression level of all detected array probes for microarrays, and average copy number of all detected peptides for proteomics . thus, our results should reflect the general relationship between gene expression measurements obtained by the three techniques using comparable and standard procedures.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we used protein expression measurements to evaluate the accuracy of two mrna quantification methods: microarrays and rna-seq. our results show that using standard microarray and rna-seq protocols, rna-seq provides better estimates of absolute transcript levels. this is particularly encouraging given that the original methodological focus of high throughput sequencing is genomic rather than transcriptomic studies. thus, methodological adjustments improving accuracy of transcript level estimation by high throughput sequencing might be possible. our results indicate that rna-seq is already the technique of choice for questions relying on accurate absolute transcript level measurements.

