BACKGROUND
conformational variability in proteins arises from a subtle interplay of a combination of environmental factors and intrinsic propensity of amino acids in different sequence contexts. this diversity often provides a route for monitoring protein activation and permits functional promiscuity. the magnitude of conformational diversity noted in proteins ranges from the side-chain fluctuations to a partial/complete change in secondary structures and even rearrangements of the tertiary structure. various terms are used to describe this phenomenon  <cit>  and can be confirmed with the availability of data from various related disciplines like protein folding, nmr and fast kinetics. it is a well established that the local sequence-to-structure mapping is not one to one over the entire sequence space  <cit>  though there are numerous examples of highly structurally conserved local sequence patterns. certain type of sequences can adopt either an α-helical or a β-sheet conformation and a limited number of substitutions can convert an α-helical protein to a predominantly β-sheet protein  <cit> . other studies have also demonstrated that several different contexts such as change in ph  <cit> , alteration of the binding ligand  <cit>  or site-directed mutations  <cit>  induce the structural transition between an α-helix and a β-strand or random coil. it has been confirmed that this conformational switch from α-helix to β-sheet/β-hairpin structure plays a significant role in the misfolding diseases as in amyloid fibril formation  <cit> . a detailed analysis of the relative magnitudes of the context-dependent factors on the conformational preferences of these ambivalent sequence fragments is important for reliable local structure prediction.

both experiments and statistical analysis  <cit>  confirm that different amino acids have different propensities for α-helix or β-strand formation. quantifying these propensity scales provides local sequence information for predicting secondary structures. however, both experimental and theoretical study  <cit>  have shown that the peptides having identical sequences may adopt different secondary structures in different proteins. determining the rules which govern the structural ambivalence of these sequences and analyzing the contribution of intrinsic propensity, sequence context and environmental factors to the conformational preference of such sequences may have important implications in the pathogenesis of amyloid diseases including alzheimer disease and designing de novo proteins. ambivalent sequences are also suggested to be one of the reasons behind upper limit of prediction accuracy for secondary structure prediction  <cit> .

the structurally ambivalent sequences were first reported by kabsch and sander  <cit>  who predicted protein structures based on sequence homology. they investigated the structural significance and adaptability of short sequence homologies by searching  <dig> proteins of known three-dimensional structures. these sequentially identical proteins adopt different secondary structures, each sequence occurs once as an α-helix and once as a β-strand. subsequent studies  <cit>  confirmed this observation by scanning a larger database with lower percentage of sequence identity. however, a systematic identification and classification of the sequence patterns, conformational preferences of these structurally ambivalent segments and their corresponding flanking residues largely remain unexplored.

this work aims to assess the degree of conformational variability of these ambivalent sequence segments quantitatively in known protein structures and examines the factors that affect their respective preferences for a particular type of backbone conformation. in this work, we analyze the α-helices  from non-redundant database and map them to proteins belonging to all classes of scop database to find identical sequences. earlier studies have shown that ambivalent sequences arise from different structural classes  <cit> . in this study, we have mapped helical sequences generated from a non-redundant data base into different scop classes to find helices which are conserved in certain proteins but change into non-helical structures in others. unlike previous studies we have considered a relatively wide range of sequence lengths, both short and long to portray the pattern of variation of the different physico-chemical properties from the conserved helices to the variable helices, i.e., those which have different conformations in different proteins. we also identify the helical sequences which partially switch their conformations. although partially ambivalent sequences were reported earlier, no detailed analysis of their physico-chemical properties are done. to our knowledge this is the first detailed analysis, which reflects the trend of variation of the different physico-chemical properties ranging from the conserved to variable helices through partially variable helices. the residues flanking the helical and their corresponding non-helical sequences are also analysed to record anisotropic amino acid distributions in the n- and c-termini. most of the conserved and some of the variable helices are found to adopt the same fold in both non-redundant and scop database. detailed molecular dynamics simulation results show that the variable helices retain their helical conformations after simulation. the corresponding non-helical conformations show large deviations from their initial structure by adopting helical or partially helical conformations. the short conserved helices are found to retain their conformations while longer conserved helices fray into two or more number of shorter helices. the selection of a large database makes the results free of database biases and inconsistent parameters.

RESULTS
population of helices with different degree of conformational variation
the may  <dig> release of pdb select  <cit>  consists of  <dig> helices. of these,  <dig> helices are mapped on to the scop database   <cit>  with different degree of conformational variability. length distribution of these helices plotted against the percentage conformational transition in the scop database in figure 1a reveals that the shorter peptide sequences  switch readily from helical to non-helical conformations. since the longer helices consist of more hydrogen bonds, the transition to non-helical conformations is energetically expensive, leading to the conservation of these helices in the chosen database. figure 1b shows the number of helices in %  in different conformational shift bins. the figure shows that a large number of helices  are conserved helices and record no conformational shift . the number of helices decreases as extent of conformational shift increases with very few helices beyond 30% conformational shift . however, number of variable helices with 100% conformational shift are comparable to the number of helices present in the 10% and 20% conformational shift bins . detailed analysis shows that for conserved helices  the sequences are in same scop fold for both non-redundant and corresponding scop database in 92% cases and in same scop domain in 90% cases. the corresponding values for variable helices  are 7% and 6% respectively.

conserved and variable helices have different preference of amino acids
conserved helices always retain their structures when they are mapped from the non-redundant database to different scop classes while the variable helices undergo a complete transition to non-helical conformations in the scop database. the relative frequency of occurrence of the ith amino acid in variable/conserved helices j is depicted as normalized conformational parameter  in figure  <dig>  this normalization is with respect to the frequency of occurrence of the corresponding amino acid in the non-redundant database.

  cpij=fijfi=nij/∑i=120nijni/∑i=120ni 

where nij and fij are the number and fraction of finding ith amino acid in given secondary structure j while ni and fi are the number and fraction of finding ith amino acid in the non-redundant database. according to chou-fasman scale  <cit> , m, q, w are helix forming residues which show a distinct propensity for conserved helices as compared to the variable helices, while v reveals a completely opposite trend. for all other amino acids conformational parameters for both conserved and variable helices are either higher or lower than  <dig>  reflecting respective preference or aversion. although bulky side chain of w was hypothesised to be the cause behind its low frequency in ambivalent helical sequences  <cit> , the reason behind their low occurrence in these type of sequences is yet to be fully understood. it might be possible that high occurrences of m, q, w in conserved helices impart extra stability, which is not present in case of variable helices, leading to a change in their conformation.

in accordance to the earlier observations, a, i, l, v  <cit>  prefer to occur in variable helical sequences. these residues have unspecific hydrophobic interactions, which permit a greater number of possible orientations in a hydrophobic environment and they are structurally ambivalent. variable helices have high frequency of g and p in comparison to the conserved helices. these residues are considered to be strong helix disruptors and hence their higher frequency of occurrence in variable helices is clearly understood. cysteines tend to form disulfide bonds imparting higher stability to the sequence fragment. cysteines have a very low frequency of occurrence in variable helices rendering the flexibility needed for the transition to non-helical structures. this observation is consistent with the earlier studies  <cit> . frequencies of occurrence of other amino acids are also found to be similar with the previous results  <cit> . however, aspartic and glutamic acids show notable deviations. both these amino acids are found to have higher frequency of occurrence in variable helices compared to conserved helices which is in conflict with the earlier observations  <cit> . in both conserved and variable helices, the propensity of glutamic acid is higher  than that of aspartic acid , which dictates their intrinsic preference for helices  <cit> .

conformational parameter of amino acids varies with respect to the percentage ambivalency of the helical sequences
though partially ambivalent sequences are reported earlier  <cit> , but surprisingly there is no detailed analysis of their sequence properties. here we have performed a systematic analysis of the amino acid distribution in different sequences with different degrees of ambivalency depicted as the percentage conformational shift from helix to non-helical structures. figure  <dig> depicts the conformational parameters of all amino acids in the ambivalent sequences plotted as a function of their respective percentage ambivalency. it is interesting to note that up to approximately 50% conformational shift, the values of the conformational parameters of all amino acids remain almost similar. c, g, m, p exhibit maximum deviation in the conformational parameter values above 50% structural ambivalency. g and p are the helix breaking amino acids which exhibit a considerable increase in the values of conformational parameters when 50% residues of the helix change to a non-helical conformation. cysteines are found to decrease rapidly when 50% conformational shift occurs from a helical structure. a very similar trend is observed for methionine.

flanking sequences have different distributions of the amino acids near the two termini of variable helices
flanking sequences follow different amino acid distribution patterns for the helical and the corresponding non-helical conformations in variable helices. the flanking residues play an important role in determining the conformation of ambivalent sequences  <cit> . this has been also demonstrated experimentally  <cit> . here we have considered up to four residues flanking each termini of the variable helices to plot the distribution of the flanking amino acids for n- and c-termini in figure  <dig>  to our knowledge this is the first report where the flanking amino acids are differentiated as n-terminus flanking and c-terminus flanking residues. amino acids follow distinctly different distribution patterns in both flanks of the variable helices. since helices are initiated and terminated by different amino acids, a difference in the amino acid distribution in two flanks of the ambivalent sequences is not surprising. a common example is alanine, whose frequency of occurrence is higher in residues flanking n-terminus of non-helical conformations than in helical conformations whereas in the c-terminus flanking sequences it has almost similar frequency of occurrence for both helical as well as non-helical conformations. a completely opposite trend can be observed in case of glycine. this non-equivalence termini dependent difference in the distribution patterns of the flanking residues of helices and non-helical structures may be observed for other amino acids too. in accordance to earlier studies  <cit>  glycine and proline are found to have high preferences  for sequences flanking ambivalent helices establishing their role as helix breakers. the frequency of most of the other amino acids in the flanking sequences are different to that found in similar studies on chameleon sequences  <cit> . however, it should be noted that the method of determining ambivalent sequences is quite different in this analysis as compared to the earlier ones. previous studies  <cit>  highlighted similar sub-sequences which are found to adopt both helix and strand conformations in different proteins of the non-redundant database, while in this work the helical sequences of varying lengths found in the non-redundant database of proteins are mapped into various scop classes to analyze the pattern of partial/complete conservation/variation across the same folds. this study may have a significant implication on the structural diversity linked with the conservation of the function or fold. we have also plotted the conformational parameters of the amino acids in the flanking sequences of the conserved helices in figures  <dig> for comparison. except cysteine and methionine at n-terminus and tryptophan at c-terminus all other amino acids have similar values of conformational parameters for the flanking sequences of both the variable and conserved helices.

flanking sequences possess different environment
variable helices in both helical and non-helical conformations are found to possess similar solvent accessibility which is in accordance with the earlier studies  <cit> . to explore the local environment of the residues, the solvent accessibility of the sequences flanking helices and non-helical conformations is determined. the solvent accessibility for a given residue x is calculated with the dssp software  <cit> , which is normalised with respect to the maximum solvent accessibility found in gly-x-gly. figure  <dig> depicts the fraction of these flanking sequences with average normalised solvent accessibility. however, it is rather interesting to note that the flanking residues have different solvent environments for helical and non-helical conformations towards n- and c-termini. residues flanking n-terminus of helices have lower solvent accessibility than its analogue in non-helical conformations, while a completely opposite trend may be observed for the c-terminus flanking residues. for the sake of comparison, we have also plotted fraction of sequences flanking conserved helices with respect to different average normalised solvent accessibility in figure  <dig>  variable and conserved helices exhibit a similar pattern towards n-terminus while they are completely different towards c-terminus.

variable helical sequences try to retain their helical conformation
molecular dynamics simulations are performed for a few representative conserved and variable helices with an explicit water model. for variable helices, simulations are performed for both proteins where the particular sequence is in helical and non-helical conformation respectively. these proteins are chosen randomly from the database for simulation such that we have at least one representative protein chain from each scop class. variable helices are simulated by different protocols viz., simulation of the target chain, simulation of the target chain by constraining all other chains, simulation of the whole protein. most of the results are provided in the additional file  <dig>  and additional file  <dig> . the final conformations of the variable and conserved helices are similar for both  <dig> and  <dig> nano second simulations which indicate that the conformations corresponding to these sequences have marginal dependence on simulation time. here we discuss representative simulations both for a variable helix in helical and non-helical conformations and for a conserved helix.

in contrast the conformations of conserved helices are found to be length dependent. figure  <dig> shows the structure of the protein chain 1bh8b before and after simulation. this protein chain consists of four conserved helices located between residues numbered 3- <dig> , 19- <dig> , 36- <dig>  and 72- <dig> . figure  <dig> shows the time evolution of the helices for all residues of 1bh8b. secondary structure evolution with respect to time for the four helices separately can be found in figure s <dig> . the results show that the shorter conserved helices are rigid in nature and tend to retain the helical conformation during the simulation period while the longer conserved helices partially break into smaller helices. from additional file  <dig>  it is found that these shorter helices have similar conformation after  <dig> and  <dig> nano second simulation. the longer helices show marginal differences in the structures with respect to simulation time. the zimm-bragg helix-coil transition theory  <cit>  relates the helix content of a polypeptide to three parameters: s, the intrinsic helix-forming propensity of an amino acid; σ, the constant for nucleating the helix; and n, the number of peptide units in the polypeptide. hence, longer helices should be more stable than the shorter ones. however our molecular dynamics studies reveal an exactly opposite trend with the longer conserved helices being more labile compared to the shorter counterparts. this observation may be rationalized by a gain in the conformational entropy which outweighs the favorable energetic interactions in longer helices  <cit> . other results provided in additional file  <dig> and additional file  <dig> also confirm this observation.

though partially ambivalent sequences are observed previously  <cit>  no detailed studies on them are reported. figure s <dig> and figure s <dig>  depict the behavior of the partially ambivalent helix in proteins 1nqjb and 1nqdb respectively. the sequence lkekenndssdk is a helix at positions 4- <dig> in the all beta protein 1nqjb , but looses 75% of its helical structure at positions 7- <dig> in the partially ambivalent protein chain 1nqdb. after  <dig> nano seconds of simulation in presence of solvent, the helical conformation in 1nqjb changes to a partial helical structure, while its sequence analogue in 1nqdb, which has a predominantly non-helical conformation remains unchanged. the result shows that the partially ambivalent helix retains its structure and does not drift to a completely non-helical one. the fact that partially ambivalent helices conserve their original structures may be explained by an optimal balance of the energy and conformational entropy associated with the partially helical structures.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, conserved and variable helices are identified by mapping a given helical sequence from the non-redundant database to identical sequences in the scop database. some helices retain their conformation when mapped in the scop database while others exhibit a complete/partial transition to the non-helical conformations. this complete/partial structural variability is depicted by molecular dynamics simulations in explicit solvent which reveal that the helical conformations of the variable helices remain intact. the non-helical conformations change either to helical or partially helical structures. simulation results of the conserved helices are found to be length dependent, with the shorter helices retaining their conformations and the longer helices breaking into two or more shorter helices. this structural variation is markedly different from the true helix-coil transition in the sense that in this case a given sequence is ambivalent and naturally exists in two different conformations in two different proteins. the amino acid distributions are found to follow completely different patterns for conserved helices and variable helices which may account for the ambivalent nature of the variable and partially ambivalent helices. we report a detailed structural analysis of the ambivalent sequences and find that the amino acid propensities show a marked deviation from their respective values when the sequences are approximately 50% ambivalent. the flanking sequences in both helical and non-helical conformations have distinctly different amino acid preferences and this difference is anisotropic i.e. the n-terminus flanking residues exhibit different amino acid preferences compared to that of the c-terminus flanking sequences. the solvent accessibility results also reveal a similar trend. from this analysis, we conclude that the two flanks of ambivalent sequences possess anisotropic amino acid propensities which may be dictating their preferences for either helical or non-helical conformations.

