BACKGROUND
the increased availability and lowered costs of various massive parallel sequencing technologies have resulted in a dramatic expansion of fully sequenced plastid genomes  <cit> . there are currently  <dig> plastome sequences listed at ncbi’s organelle genome resource website  and half of them have been made available since  <dig>  their structure, gene order and gene content is generally highly conserved across most flowering plants, where most plastomes have two copies of a highly conserved inverted repeat  and two conserved single copy regions . however, there are some well known and striking exceptions from these conserved plastome structures in several photosynthetic angiosperm lineages, such as the geraniaceae  <cit>  and campanulaceae  <cit> .

considerable advances have recently been made in the development of genomic resources for the clover genus , with the publication of the genome assembly  <cit>  and analyses of the transcriptome  <cit>  of red clover . subterranean clover  is known to have an unusual plastid genome structure  <cit> . firstly it lacks one copy of the inverted repeat, but that is a character shared with a large group of papilionoid legumes  <cit> , designated the inverted repeat lacking clade . secondly its plastome has undergone more than a dozen rearrangements, i.e. translocations and/or inversions, compared to the plastid genome of medicago truncatula  <cit> . however, highly rearranged plastomes also occur in the related tribe fabeae, represented by lathyrus sativus and pisum sativum  <cit> . finally, and very unusually, its plastome contains about fourfold the amount of repeated dna compared to related legume species and is consequently about 20 kb longer  <cit> . a recent study has shown that this unusual repeat-rich plastome structure is not unique to t. subterraneum  <cit> . however, the extent to which this is a widespread feature of trifolium species, or characteristic of a restricted part of the genus trifolium still needs further investigation. to answer this question, we performed a low coverage whole genome shotgun sequencing of nine strategically sampled trifolium species and were able to assemble eight plastid genomes. these plastomes were then analysed to elucidate the phylogenetic distribution of plastome variation in the genus.

RESULTS
plastome assembly and structural variability
the plastomes of three sequenced trifolium species, trifolium boissieri, t. strictum and t. glanduliferum, were tractable, assembled easily and had no unusual structure, at least in the context of related species in the inverted repeat loss clade , such as species of the tribe fabeae   . the remaining six trifolium species had plastome structure similar to t. subterraneum , containing several short repetitive regions, which made them refractory to assembly . however, with one exception we were able to assemble all of them successfully, using careful analysis of the paired-end sequences   . the exception is t. pratense. the plastome structure of t. pratense appears to be highly complex and we were unable to complete a full assembly of it using the methods employed in this study. it is clear that this plastome contains several repeated regions, similar to t. subterraneum. we were, however, able to put together three large plastid contigs for t. pratense, with a combined length of 121 kb, which were annotated with dogma  <cit>  and used for phylogenetic analysis . we generated well supported plastome assemblies for the remaining five “difficult” species and verified them using mapping information from the paired end illumina reads . we ensured that the entire assembly had sufficient coverage  and that the placement of adjacent plastid regions were supported by the mapping of paired end reads. however it is important to note, that despite these careful quality checks, assembly of some regions that have a particularly high frequency of repeats should remain provisional. consequently these are deposited on genbank as “unverified”.figure  <dig> 
gene map of two
trifolium
plastid genomes and dotplots illustrating repeated regions. gene maps  and dotplots  of trifolium boisseri
 and trifolium meduseum
. the gene maps shows the postions and translation direction of protein coding genes, trnas and rrnas in the plastid genome. the dotplots illustrate repeated sequences within the plastomes, identified by blastn, where aligned sequences are shown as lines. since the plastomes are aligned to themselves, the entire plastome is represented as a long and uninterrupted diagonal line. shorter lines and dots, that fall either above or below the long line are repeats.
summary illumina sequencing accessions and plastome assembly information of
trifolium
species



species  
no trimmed reads  
plastome length 
genbank accession
herbarium voucher

medicago truncatula












t. semipilosum

an asterisk marks plastome sequences newly reported in this paper. only a partial assembly of t. pratense was possible with our data .

*sd: standard deviation.

**estimations from  <cit> .



phylogenetic distribution of the refractory species
the six trifolium species with plastomes that were refractory to assembly differed markedly from the three species that were tractable for assembly. furthermore, the six species and the previously sequenced t. subterraneum and t. repens all belong to the same clade within trifolium, which we call the “refractory clade”, comprising subg. trifolium sections lupinaster, trifolium, tricocephalum, vesicastrum and trifoliastrum .the remaining three species, which have plastomes that assembled readily, are all outside this clade and represent subgenus chronosemium and subgenus trifolium section paramesus . molecular dating analysis of the refractory clade revealed that it originated, i.e. had a most recent common ancestor , about  <dig>  –  <dig>  mya. the refractory clade has therefore had a considerable amount of time in which to accumulate a high diversity of repeat patterns. this compares to estimated mrca ages of  <dig>  mya for trifolium subgenus trifolium and  <dig>  mya for the genus trifolium as a whole. the phylogeny in figure  <dig> was inferred using maximum likelihood from a concatenated matrix of  <dig> protein coding plastid genes, with a combined aligned length of just over 48 kb. all nodes have 100% bootstrap support and the topology is consistent with the most recent phylogenetic treatment of trifolium  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
a maximum likelihood phylogeny of
trifolium
. phylogenetic relationships among the trifolium species, generated from a concatenated matrix of  <dig> protein coding plastid genes with a combined aligned length of  <dig>  characters. the black dot marks the clade with plastomes refractory to assembly and the black vertical lines indicate the plastome size categories.the age of the most recent common ancestor  of the refractory clade is estimated to be  <dig>  –  <dig>  million years old. all nodes have a 100% bootstrap support.



the nature of the duplicated regions
the amount of repetitive sequence in the trifolium plastomes ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig>  % . this was based on a reciprocal blastn search, where each plastome was used as the query and subject . not surprisingly, plastomes belonging to the refractory clade contained about 5– <dig> times more repetitive dna than trifolium species in subgenus chronosemium and subgenus trifolium section paramesus. repetitive regions larger than 300 bp were subjected to a blastx search, in order to determine whether they contained any protein coding regions. a protein database was compiled of all annotated genes from the trifolium plastomes. about 60% of the longer repetitive regions did not show significant  similarity to any protein coding regions. the remaining 40% of showed similarity to one of the following plastid genes: clpp, psaj, psbk, psbn, rpl <dig>  rpl <dig>  rpob, rps <dig>  rps <dig>  ycf1and ycf <dig>  indicating that at least partial duplication of genic regions has occurred. patterns of genic duplication are highly variable, and no genes were found to be duplicated in more than two species. all repetitive gene regions consisted of only a partial reading frame and no duplicated genes were found with the entire reading frame intact in more than one copy. however a small number of gene duplicates appeared to have relatively large portions of open reading frames  that appeared to be intact . a blastx search of repetitive regions revealed that psaj, psbk, psbn, rpl <dig>  ycf <dig> and ycf <dig> had instances where they are 100% intact over  <dig> – 30% of the length of the corresponding complete orf.

instances of gene loss
the trifolium plastomes have undergone some gene loss. accd appears to missing from plastomes in the following sections of the subgenus trifolium: trifolium, tricocephalum, vesicastrum and trifoliastrum. this is in agreement with previous reports  <cit> . our broad phylogenetic sampling shows that the plastid copy of accd is also still intact in trifolium lupinaster .

discussion
the phylogenetic distribution of plastome types
two types of plastomes were observed among the trifolium species in this study. three species had no unusual structure in the context of irlc plastomes, which are known to have numerous rearrangements . the six remaining species had enlarged, repeat-containing plastome structure similar to t. subterraneum and t. repens . these had several repeated regions and were  <dig> – 21 kb larger compared to medicago truncatula, t. boissieri, t. strictum and t. glanduliferum . furthermore, we observed a strong phylogenetic clustering of these larger, more repeated plastomes. they comprise a single clade  and, strikingly, all the sampled species of this clade have the unusual repeat-rich plastomes. the north-american section involucrarium also belongs to this clade , and is therefore likely to have similar “refractory” plastomes, although this has yet to be confirmed. this clade contains about  <dig> species or roughly 70% of the genus, which has a total of roughly  <dig> species. the evolutionary success of the clade with the repetitive plastomes leaves no doubt about the functional effectiveness of these plastomes despite their unusual structure.

potential causes of genome instability and functional significance of the repeat regions
some regions within the t. subterraneum plastome have been suspected to be of bacterial origin by lateral transfer  <cit> , however those regions are not repetitive. the repetitive regions seem to be of plastid origin, as our blastn and blastx searches to ncbi’s nucleotide collection  and non-redundant protein sequences , did not indicate any obvious non-plastid sequence. a more recent study found no evidence of any bacterial dna in plastid genomes of several trifolium species  <cit> . repeated sequences have been associated with the plastid rearrangements in other angiosperm lineages, such as the campanulaceae  <cit>  and geraniaceae  <cit> . however, it is clear that plastomes can be highly rearranged without being highly repetitive, such as pisum sativum and lathyrus sativus   <cit> .

it is not yet known what has caused repeated sequences to evolve within the plastomes of the trifolium refractory clade although it is likely that this is under the control of nuclear genes. plastid reorganization is a common process and there is evidence that reorganized molecules may comprise around 1% of the plastid complement of plant cells  <cit> . this variation may be caused by either homologous recombination  acting on perfect repeats of >50 bp, or microhomology-mediated break-induced replication  acting on microhomologous repeats of <30 bp  <cit> . various nuclear genes are known to be important in maintaining plastome stability through recombination control and surveillance, and these are therefore candidate genes for genome instability in certain lineages. the reca gene has an important role in homologous recombination and there are plant copies that localize to the chloroplast  <cit> . plastid-targeted whirly genes are known to promote plastome stability, apparently by preventing build up of abnormal molecules produced by mmbir. arabidopsis plants lacking functional copies of relevant atwhy genes show increased accumulation of abnormal plastid dna with irregular duplications, deletions and circularization events  <cit> .

most of these abnormal plastid forms are deleterious and transient, not contributing to plastid evolution in the majority of plant lineages. an important consideration therefore is not the genomic changes that cause an increased frequency of plastome reorganization, but what genome changes allow such major plastome changes to persist without being eliminated as deleterious. it may be that certain plastid genes are particularly sensitive to genome rearrangements and their removal to the nuclear genome makes the plastid genome more permissive to rearrangement. the plastid gene accd for instance, known to be essential for plant development  <cit>  and with recombinationally active repeats  <cit> , has been moved to the nucleus independently in two lineages with highly rearranged plastomes: campanulaceae  <cit>  and trifolium  <cit> .

one possible consequence of having repeated sequences in a circular molecule, such as the plastid genome, is that if recombinationally active they could potentially allow intramolecular recombination of the plastome into subgenomic molecules much in the manner of the plant mitochondrion, which is rich in recombinational repeats. this has been suggested as a reason for the repeat richness of certain algal plastomes  <cit> . the trifolium plastomes are much less rich in repeats than chlamydomonas, or than the mitochondrial genome of land plants, but it is nevertheless interesting to consider the idea that the repeat accumulation in trifolium plastomes is being driven by the advantage of maintaining substochiometric populations of specific orfs in cellular subpopulations  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
although we have sampled only a relatively small number of species in a large genus, the results are nevertheless striking. we show that the t. subterraneum-type plastome, i.e. containing large amounts of repetitive dna, is phylogenetically restricted to a single core clade of the genus , comprising five of the eight recognized sections within trifolium. furthermore it is ubiquitously present in all members of this clade in our sample. it is thus reasonable to suppose that this may be the characteristic plastome of this core clade. trifolium is a large genus of c.  <dig> species, and these five sections contain slightly over  <dig> species, or about 70% of the genus. there are therefore likely to be abundant exemplars of this unusual plastome type, at varying degrees of evolutionary relatedness, available for future functional and evolutionary studies.

