BACKGROUND
the ability of the nervous system to modify its output in accordance with experiential demands is a central tenet of neuronal plasticity. for many years, the view of critical periods permeated our beliefs; almost dictating that plasticity beyond such epochs was, at best, minimal. the seminal experiments of merzenich, kaas and colleagues  <cit>  have proved instrumental in moving the field beyond this restrictive mindset by showing that the central representation of the skin surface is subject to dramatic modification following peripheral nerve injury in adult primates. on the foundation of these observations, great strides have been made in understanding the mechanisms  <cit>  and extent  <cit>  of this phenomenon. these findings have generalized beyond sensory systems and collectively have been interpreted as reflective of fundamental properties of the nervous system.

while physiological techniques are frequently used to characterize topographic organization of central maps, the underlying anatomical correlates have not been thoroughly investigated. using intracellular injection techniques, thalamic axons have been reported to innervate a much broader sector of cortex than necessary to represent typical receptive field size, suggesting the existence of "latent" inputs  <cit> . disinhibition is a strong candidate as the primary mechanism during the immediate phase of somatotopic reorganization following nerve injury  <cit> . while unmasking of latent inputs may account for a portion of the overall reorganization  <cit> , modification of central maps is neither complete immediately following nerve injury  <cit>  nor dependent on a single mechanism  <cit> . moreover, topographic reorganization appears to be permanent in nature  <cit> , while at least some neurochemical changes have shown to be relatively transient  <cit> . together, these observations suggest that alterations in the underlying anatomical connectivity might provide a stable platform for the maintenance of modified somatotopy.

in this study, we report our examination of neurons in two cortical layers; spiny stellate cells in layer iv, as this is the primary input target of thalamocortical axons; and pyramidal neurons in layer ii/iii, as supragranular changes have been shown to precede somatotopic modification in the granular cell layer  <cit> . we predicted that dendritic arborization in the affected areas would be altered following peripheral nerve injury, providing an anatomical correlate of the functional changes. if the anatomical correlates of physiologically-defined changes can be readily observed, our understanding of the mechanisms underlying such changes would be greatly enhanced.

RESULTS
layer ii/iii pyramidal neurons
we found a greater number of intersections in the distal halves of dendritic arbors of pyramidal cells in deprived relative to control cortex. for basilar dendrites, there is a  <dig> % increase in the number of intersections in the distal arbors of deprived cells relative to control cells . likewise, we find an  <dig> % increase in total basilar dendritic length in the distal sectors of deprived cortical pyramidal cells, compared to control neurons . for apical dendrites, there are  <dig> % more intersections in distal portions of the arbors of deprived cells relative to controls . finally, the average length of the distal apical dendrites of deprived pyramidal cells is  <dig> % greater than in controls .

layer iv spiny stellate cells
a largely comparable set of outcomes were found for spiny stellate cells in layer iv. for the distal sectors of basilar dendrites, there are  <dig> % more intersections in arbors of deprived relative to control neurons . similarly, the overall average length of distal basilar dendrites is  <dig> % longer in deprived stellate cells compared to controls . for the distal apical dendritic arbors, deprived stellate cells have, on average,  <dig> % more intersections than are found in control neurons . conversely, while the distal apical dendrites of deprived neurons are  <dig> % longer than controls, on average, this difference is not statistically significant .

differential effects of deprivation on basilar versus apical dendrites
deprivation of a specific region of somatosensory cortex by nerve transection clearly had a detectable effect on the distal portions of both the basilar and apical dendrites of both layer ii/iii pyramidal cells and layer iv spiny stellate cells. the data also support the contention that the basilar dendrites of both cell types were more profoundly affected by deprivation than were their apical dendrites. the magnitudes of the deprivation effects are more pronounced in basilar than in apical dendrites .

discussion
general observations
in the present experiments, we investigated whether changes in dendritic morphology of neurons in deprived somatosensory cortex are correlated with the well-documented topographic reorganization that follows peripheral nerve injury in adult primates. our general findings were that in deprived cortical areas, dendritic arbors were expanded distally, while being unaffected proximally. this pattern was found for both the basilar and apical dendrites of layer iv spiny stellate and layer ii/iii pyramidal neurons, though the effects were more pronounced for the basilar dendritic arbors, a difference that is consistent with previous reports  <cit> . measures of dendritic length and the frequency of intersections, both well accepted metrics of dendritic arborization, yielded generally similar patterns of observations. these anatomical changes could well provide the means by which the functional changes in map topography proceed. alternatively, they could reflect generic neural responses to deprivation per se, and have little or nothing to do with the functional reorganization.

does nerve injury-induced reorganization reflect the strengthening of normally latent inputs?
previous research has shown that the spread of thalamocortical arbors is much broader than necessary for the expression of typical receptive field size in primary somatosensory cortex  <cit> . because of this disparity between the grain of the cortical topographic map  <cit>  and the far more extensive thalamocortical anatomy, we have suggested that all parts of thalamocortical arbors cannot be equally effective in conveying suprathreshold receptive field information to the cortex, and that changes in synaptic efficacy could sustain the topographic plasticity that follows peripheral nerve injury  <cit> . our observations of subthreshold, latent inputs to the cortex  <cit> , and the emergence of their expression when dominant inputs are attenuated  <cit>  lend support for this idea. moreover, these presumptive latent inputs are largely prevented from gaining expression in cortex when nmda glutamatergic receptors are blocked  <cit> . such a blockade could prevent reorganization by preventing changes in the strength of existing synapses , by interfering with neurite outgrowth  <cit> , or both. in any event, such latent inputs become evident only when the normally expressed, dominant inputs are somehow weakened – via pharmacological disinhibition  <cit> , nerve injury  <cit> , or use-dependency  <cit> . the data reported here are consistent with this notion, and suggest that distal sectors of the dendritic arbor may be selectively innervated by these latent inputs.

our observations that distal regions of apical dendrites, which clearly reside in upper cortical layers, are modified come as no surprise. previous work has shown that layer iv spiny stellate cells act primarily as intracolumnar signal processors; while pyramidal cells integrate both horizontal and top-down information  <cit> . supragranular layers appear to be particularly fertile to altered stimulation patterns as cortical reorganization occurs initially in the outermost layers of cortex, followed later by changes in the granular cell layer  <cit> . measures of astrocytic recruitment mirror this outside-to-inside temporal progression of experience-dependent reorganization as well  <cit> . the selective elaboration of distal regions of the dendritic arbor is also consistent with data that implicate intracortical pathways as playing a major role in cortical reorganization  <cit> , though, clearly, the contribution of bottom-up processes cannot be discounted  <cit> .

is reorganization a secondary consequence of other mechanisms/processes?
while morphological changes may be less likely to account for acute changes in somatotopy after nerve injury, restructuring of the underlying anatomy could well correlate with the longer-term, persistent changes in cortical topographic maps. the modifications of distal dendritic regions reported here may be interpreted from at least three possible, non-exclusive, perspectives. first, expansion of the distal arbor may be a homeostatic response to a reduction in stimulation frequency/pattern following nerve injury. progressive elaboration of the distal arbor might be an attempt to maintain optimal stimulation levels, and, thus, normal interneuronal trophic relationships. the altered somatotopy could be construed as simply the epiphenomenonal consequence of the activation of a homeostatic response. second, the elaboration of the distal arbor may be a general property of the nervous system, a mechanism that permits the brain to respond in a dynamic and adaptable manner  <cit> . this supposes that the functional changes in cortex that follow nerve injury are adaptive, and that has not been convincingly demonstrated. third, the observation that changes occur distally may simply reflect the fact that areas relatively distant to the soma are more vulnerable/susceptible to changes, regardless of the adaptability of such changes  <cit> . the reliability of progressively distal changes independent of dendritic location  is certainly consistent with this idea. while these possibilities are not mutually exclusive, and certainly not all-inclusive, we believe that expansion of the distal arbor reported here is reflective of the altered activation pattern following nerve injury and serves as a long-term trace of this modified stimulation pattern.

CONCLUSIONS
considering the range of survival durations following nerve injury in the current study, the observation of modifications to both layer iv spiny stellate and layer ii/iii pyramidal neurons was not unexpected. while this broad survival range may have "smeared" our snapshot with respect to the temporal integration of anatomical changes, our intention was simply to determine whether morphological changes were occurring at any point during the reorganization process. our data clearly indicate that the anatomy in affected cortical areas is subject to modification and that the morphological changes observed may be related to the functional reorganization revealed electrophysiologically. we have begun experiments to better refine the temporal window in which these changes become evident.

in sum, we have shown that just as the functional responsiveness of the mature primate nervous system is susceptible to change, so is the underlying anatomy. our observations that the anatomical changes appear to be either potentiated in, or possibly restricted to, distal regions of the dendritic arbor provide additional insight into the mechanisms involved in the physiological changes. further research will be instrumental in determining the exact role that the underlying anatomy plays in this complex reorganization process.

