BACKGROUND
micrornas  are small  functional rna species that provide a newly appreciated layer of gene regulation with an important role in development, cellular homeostasis and pathophysiology. mirnas are encoded in the genome and transcribed primarily in a pol ii-dependent manner  <cit> , although pol iii-dependent transcription has also been reported  <cit> . roughly half of the known human micrornas are found in intergenic regions of the genome, suggesting production of unique primary transcripts  containing one or more mirna hairpins under the control of independent promoter elements. the overwhelming majority of the other ~50% map to previously annotated intronic regions of protein coding genes, while a small number are even found within exons. the relationship between intragenic mirnas and their host genes presents many unique questions regarding genomic organization, transcriptional regulation, processing and function.

the genomic organization of intragenic mirnas exhibits a strong directional bias, such that these species are predominantly oriented on the same strand of the dna as that of the host gene. the directional bias may prevent steric interference between rna polymerases transcribing the host gene and the mirna gene  <cit> ; however, the existence of individual antisense mirna genes and mirna gene clusters argues that the primary evolutionary pressure for the positional bias is co-regulation of the intronic mirna and the host gene. indeed, microarray analyses supports the hypothesis that intronic mirnas are usually expressed in coordination with the host gene mrna in human tissues  <cit> , strongly suggesting that co-transcription from the host gene promoter is the most common transcriptional mechanism under normal conditions. this assumption has lately successfully been employed to identify new mirna targets  <cit> . however, recent findings demonstrate that transcription of a subset of intronic mirnas in h. sapiens can be initiated from internal promoters within operons independently from the host gene  <cit> , suggesting that utilization of internal promoters must also be considered a viable alternative strategy for intronic mirna gene transcription.

large portions of mirna processing are understood . in brief, a ~ <dig> nucleotide stem-loop precursor pre-mirna is excised from a relatively long primary mirna transcript, followed by export from the nucleus via exportin- <dig> in a ran-gtp-dependent manner. in the cytoplasm, pre-mirnas are further processed into a ~22-nt mirna/mirna* duplex. in the case of intronic mirnas, early steps in the mirna biogenesis pathway are complicated by the requirement for proper pre-mrna splicing and mature mrna assembly of the host message. recent bioinformatics and experimental work demonstrates that intronic mirnas can be processed from intronic regions co-transcriptionally  <cit>  prior to the splicing reaction  <cit> . interestingly, recent work suggests that several intragenic mirnas undergo post-transcriptional regulation  <cit> , and defects in this process have been associated with tumor development  <cit> . the nature of the differences in mirna processing and associated defects between intergenic and intragenic mirna species is not currently elucidated.

mirna target recognition in mammals is mainly mediated via imperfect watson-crick base-pairing to cognate sites primarily located in the 3'-utr of mrna targets. predicted and validated mirna targets include a functionally diverse suite of genes that include many transcription factors and cell signaling proteins, suggesting a role for mirnas in regulatory feedback loops  <cit> . intragenic mirnas present unique regulatory possibilities based on functional relationships with their host genes. it has been speculated that intronic mirnas may directly target their host message or regulate transcription factors, in what is commonly designated "first-order" or "second-order" negative feedback, respectively  <cit> . recently published work  <cit>  demonstrates that mir- <dig>  encoded in an intron of the apoptosis-associated tyrosine kinase  gene, targets several genes that are functionally antagonistic to the aatk protein. therefore, mir- <dig> serves the functional interest of the host in this case via a higher-order positive feedback system that downregulates expression of aatk repressors and enforces neuronal differentiation downstream of the kinase.

in the current manuscript, large-scale bioinformatics analyses of human intronic mirnas related to genomic organization and characterization of mirna host and target genes are presented. we identify characteristics of host genes and predicted targets, and present evidence that intragenic mirnas may act as negative feedback regulatory elements of their hosts' interactome .

RESULTS
we integrated genomic and transcriptomic information to analyze properties of intragenic mirnas themselves, their host genes, as well as their targets. we used all known mirnas , all known human transcripts , six different and highly established mirna target prediction algorithms, as well as the gene and pathway annotation ontologies go and kegg.

classification of mirnas
based on mapping mirna genomic coordinates to genomic position of all known genes and their exons and introns , we could classify mirnas into three classes: intergenic, exonic, and intronic . for h. sapiens,  <dig> mirnas were located within intronic regions, and  <dig> within exonic regions of known genes. we also classified mirnas from other species . interestingly, organisms that have a well-annotated set of protein-coding genes present distributions that resemble that of the mirna distribution in humans, showing 33-48% of intronic mirnas and  <dig> -6% of exonic mirnas . on the other hand, organisms containing a smaller number of annotated genes presented a higher number of intergenic mirnas , some of which however may become intragenic as more genes will be identified in these organisms. additional file  <dig> contains details of mirnas classification, their genomic position and host genes.

intragenic mirnas are found in many different species. however, the distribution of intra- and intergenic mirnas differs. these numbers are obtained by crossing mirna genomic coordinates with known transcript coordinates .

positional bias of intragenic mirnas
the orientation of the gene for an intronic mirna depends significantly on the transcription direction of its host gene  as shown in table  <dig>  we found that  <dig> % of host genes had mirnas in the first five introns. also, we confirmed that the observed distribution differs significantly from the expected distribution within the first five introns .

characterization of host genes
assuming, as is widely accepted, that intragenic mirnas share a common regulatory control with their host genes, we can infer functional aspects of this class of mirnas by characterizing features of those host genes. to confirm that the position of mirnas has a particular bias, and is not the result of chance, we randomly sampled genes that matched the set of mirna host genes  and compared the positions of host, target, and randomly sampled genes. the findings are summarized in table  <dig>  host genes are almost three times longer than the randomly sampled cohort and have more introns. when comparing the intron size in different positions , we found that the first five 5' introns are significantly longer, consistent with our previous finding that most host genes' intronic mirnas are found in the 5' introns .

host and target genes display similar properties, compared to a set of control genes, including increased length, higher number of total introns, longer 3'utrs and higher frequency of "au-rich elements" .

gene expression can be pre- and post-transcriptionally controlled through regulatory motifs in their 3'-utrs. even though regulatory mechanisms are not well understood, two important concepts include regulation through mirnas, and the role of adenylate/uridylate-rich elements  in mediating mrna decay, which plays a significant role in cancer development  <cit> . we first compared the length of the 3'-utrs of host genes to the length of 3'-utrs of the random sample. host genes have 40% longer 3'-utrs . in a second step, we counted occurrences of the pentamer auuua in these regions, normalized by the length of the 3'-utrs. we found significantly more are units in host genes than in the random sample . since recently mirna target genes have been shown to be larger than non-target genes  <cit> , we analyzed total lengths and lengths of 3'-utrs  <cit>  for host genes predicted to be targeted by their intragenic mirna and the remaining host genes separately. no significant difference in lengths between the two groups of host genes was observed , but genes in both groups were longer than genes in the control group .3'-utrs were longer in host genes predicted to be targets of their intronic mirna than in host genes not predicted to be targets  and control genes . in contrast, the 5'-utrs of host genes were not significantly longer than the ones in the control group .

the go biological process  and kegg are ontologies that associate genes with, cellular processes and biochemical pathways, respectively, including disease pathways. when surveying gobp for overrepresentation of mirna host genes in certain categories, we found significant enrichment in gene regulatory, metabolic, neurogenic, and cytoskeletal processes, which reflects the broad range of diseases with which mirnas have been associated  <cit> . additionally, we found that host genes were overrepresented in several signaling pathways, such as the mapk, erbb, vegf, and the calcium signaling pathway.

genomic properties of target genes
we looked at genomic properties of a high-confidence set of targets for hosts of intronic mirnas  that would give us a set of similar size as the host genes. we then randomly sampled refseq transcripts to match chromosome and strand distribution as a control set and performed the analysis analogously to the analysis of genomic properties of the host genes themselves. table  <dig> summarizes the results, revealing that the predicted targets have properties that are highly similar to those of host genes.

relationship between intragenic mirnas and host genes
we found that approximatelly 20% of intragenic mirnas  are predicted to target their own host by at least two methods. this number is significantly higher than would be expected by chance alone . furthermore, we assessed the robustness of our approach by following the above procedure while applying a voting method as the gold standard. we assigned each of the target prediction methods to one of two groups of equal size  and required at least one vote from each group to consider that a prediction of a mirna-host interaction. tarbase did not contain a single instance of mirna-host interaction, so it was excluded from the analysis. although the numbers of mirnas predicted to target their own host varied , depending on which group they had been assigned to, in each case the observed number was significantly higher than would be expected by chance . given that host genes that were predicted to be targets of their intragenic mirna have longer 3'-utr regions, statistical significance of the number of hosts being targeted by their intronic mirnas was assessed by repeated creation of sets of non-host control genes with similar 3'-utr distribution . in line with our previous observations, the number of hosts predicted to be targeted by their intragenic mirnas  was significantly higher than expected by chance .

in order to test the hypothesis that intronic mirnas might act as regulators even in the global functional context of a negative feedback loop circuitry, the kegg pathway analysis was extended to identify targets within the respective biomolecular pathway. we defined the target coverage as the number of genes within a pathway that were predicted targets  of mirnas residing in host genes within that pathway, over the total number of genes in the pathway. to check whether the observed target coverage could be expected by chance, the original genes contained in the pathway were replaced by a set of randomly sampled genes and the expected target coverage of intronic mirnas with host genes in a particular pathway was calculated. the distributions of expected target coverage for three signaling pathways are visualized in figure 1c. at a false discovery rate  of 10%,  <dig> out of  <dig> pathways with which host genes were associated showed a significant overrepresentation of targets in the hosts' pathways . interestingly, many signalling and malignancy-related pathways ranked high.

 <dig> out of  <dig> pathways containing host genes show a significant overrepresentation of targets within the pathway at a fdr of 10%. host genes that were predicted targets of their own mirna were removed from the count. interestingly, the list of pathways contains many pathways crucial for development and signal transduction, or associated with neoplastic transformation.

implications for cancer pathogenesis
integration of major kegg pathway information with expression data from two publicly available datasets  <cit>  helped us investigate the idea of loss of negative feedback circuitry.

kegg id " <dig> - prostate cancer" contains a single known mirna host , and it is not predicted to be targeted by its intronic mirna . the correlation between the expressions of host and predicted targets involved in the pathway were calculated. figure  <dig> shows a simplified representation based on the kegg pathway information. host and corresponding targets are color-coded, where the green oval indicates the host, akt <dig>  and yellow, orange, and red indicate whether two, three or four methods agreed on the target prediction. in line with the hypothesis of an interactome feedback circuitry, predicted targets of hsa-mir- <dig> appear to be in close proximity and in functional synergy with its host. a similar target pattern is displayed by both mirnas, hsa-mir- <dig> and hsa-mir- <dig>  in the non-small-cell lung cancer pathway .

the correlation between host and target expression levels is shown in a two-bar plot. the first bar, labeled "n", represents the correlation between host and target in normal tissue. the second bar, labeled "t", represents the correlation between host and target in cancerous tissue. in the prostate cancer dataset, seven of the fifteen targets are more negatively correlated in healthy tissue than in cancer. in four cases , we could observe a significant negative correlation in normal tissue, which was either non-significant or was significantly positive in cancer. a similar pattern could be observed in the non small cell lung cancer pathway.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
since the first discovery of mirnas, our understanding of biogenesis and regulation has exponentially grown. in the recent past, it has been estimated that mirnas that reside in intronic or exonic regions of other genes may be the dominating class  <cit> . however, functional aspects of intragenic mirnas are still largely unknown.

it is generally believed that both host and mirna share regulatory control  <cit> , although a recent study found that transcription of roughly 30% of intragenic mirnas may be initiated independently  <cit> . after mapping mirnas to known genes, we found that most intronic mirnas are oriented in the same direction as their host gene, significantly more than would be expected by chance. several hypotheses related to this preferential orientation have been suggested. first, most of intragenic mirnas may not present their own promoter and be dependent to the transcription of their host gene. second, mirnas may present their own promoter, and directional bias may prevent physical interference between rna polymerases transcribing the host gene and rna polymerases transcribing the mirna gene  <cit> .

baskerville and bartel identified significant correlation between the expression levels of intronic mirnas and their host genes, suggesting co-regulation  <cit> . we furthermore found that more than half of intronic mirnas are found in the 5' regions of their host genes, where introns are firstly excised. it is well known that transcriptional activity is higher towards the 5' region of a gene  <cit>  and also that regulatory motifs tend to reside in these regions  <cit> . from a functional perspective, these findings may suggest dependency between host and mirna transciption. in order to characterize the relationship between intronic mirnas and their hosts, we identified properties of the set of host genes, as well as a set of high confidence targets. whereas golan et al.  <cit>  showed in a recent work that intronic mirna density is lower in large host genes, we provided evidence that the class of host genes in general is significantly longer and contains more and larger introns. this increases transcriptional efforts for the cell and is considered a characteristic of tightly regulated genes  <cit> . interestingly, these features can also be found in a high-confidence set of targets , which may support the idea of mirnas as regulators of their own host genes. additionally, the 3'-utrs of host genes predicted to be targeted by their own mirna are significantly longer, exposing the message to more regulatory control mechanisms, such as targeting by mirnas or are mediated mrna decay. interestingly, host genes contain significantly more ares. many of these properties have been shown to be features of proto-oncogenes and the sum of these findings may suggest tight regulatory control of these genes  <cit> . surveying gobp and kegg pathways, we found host genes to be associated with metabolic, biosynthetic, gene regulative processes, and signaling pathways. these categories capture major functional aspects of mirnas in general, as is reflected by mirna involvement in diseases such as cancer  <cit> , muscle disorders  <cit> , or neurodegenerative diseases  <cit> . we then assessed predicted targets, using agreement between six distinct prediction algorithms and a database of validated mirna targets as a measure of confidence. first, we identified  <dig> mirnas predicted to target their own host. interestingly, more of these mirna-host gene pairs are conserved than of the remaining mirna-host gene pairs . recently, sun et al. validated the predicted interaction between hsa-mir- <dig> and its host egfl <dig>  <cit> . by integrating kegg pathways with these predictions, we observed for  <dig> of the  <dig> pathways that host genes were associated with a higher number of targets within the pathway than would be expected by chance alone. a visual representation of the targets of akt2's intronic mirna hsa-mir- <dig>  for example, showed how components of many protein complexes involved in the signal transduction of growth factor signalling may be potential targets of hsa-mir- <dig> . the combination of these findings indicates that intragenic mirnas may play a role in interactome feedback circuitries, as visualized in figure 1d, as an additional security switch for genes requiring narrow control. a subset of up to 20% of intragenic mirnas may directly regulate the host expression . moreover, intragenic mirnas display targeting patterns that appear not only to influence their hosts' expression levels, but also their functional environment. the observation that structural properties of a set of high-confidence-prediction target genes, such as long 3'-utrs, length, and number of ares, resemble those of host genes emphasize the concept of regulation of interacting gene products in highly restricted settings.

the subset of intragenic mirna host pairs where the mirna is predicted to target its own host shows a tendency to be more conserved. however, statistical significance can only be shown for conservation between human and chicken .

loss of negative feedback control systems is a well-known mechanism by which cancer develops. blenkiron and coworkers  <cit>  recently suggested that mirna processing might be disturbed in cancer. if expression levels of intragenic mirnas are reduced, as observed by some authors  <cit> , subsequently important signalling pathways may lose inhibition and this may facilitate uncontrolled cell growth. in a recent study, tavazoie et al. analyzed six mirnas that were significantly under-expressed in breast cancer lm <dig> cells, as compared to normal breast tissue. four of these mirnas were intragenic  <cit> . the authors reported that loss of the intronic mirna hsa-mir- <dig>  which resides in intron  <dig> of its host gene mest, led to increased migration and invasion rates and hence increased metastatic capacity. additionally, they could show that hsa-mir- <dig>  significantly reduced proliferation of breast cancer cells. likewise, hsa-mir- <dig> has been shown to be downregulated in chronic myloid leukemia through bcr/abl  <cit> , and silencing its host gene ptk <dig> inhibits leukemogenesis  <cit> . a similar pattern can for example be found for hsa-mir- <dig> and fgf <dig>  <cit> .

changes in mirna biosynthesis such as those found in cancer can interfere with the coordination of expression of mirna and host. thus, a negative correlation between expression levels of host and genes targeted by its intragenic mirna in normal tissue  and a less negative or even positive correlation in cancerous tissue might be expected. this phenomenon was observed in two distinct datasets in different malignancies . a key to pathogenesis of both entities is the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/akt signaling pathway, deregulation of which has been reported in several cancers, including prostate cancer  <cit> , lung cancer  <cit> , ovarian cancer  <cit> , breast cancer  <cit> , and colon tumors  <cit> . whereas noske et al. discovered that silencing akt <dig> through rna interference leads to reduction in ovarian cancer cell proliferation  <cit> , maroulakou and coworkers reported accelerated development of polyoma middle t and erbb2/neu-driven mammary adenocarcinomas in mice after akt <dig> ablation  <cit> . although these findings would appear to be contradictory at first, they can be explained by an intragenic mirna-driven negative regulatory loop that is disturbed in cancer. whereas in the first experiment akt <dig> was targeted on mrna level , in the second experiment both host mrna and mirna  were downregulated, and therefore may have disabled a potential negative feedback regulation by hsa-mir- <dig> 

one must remember, however, that regulatory networks are far more complex in reality than what we are currently able to model. transcription factors, enhancers, silencers, and epigenetic modifications play major roles in cancer development and may influence correlation among expression levels of hosts and targets. also, target prediction methods are error prone, and at this point we can only speculate about the true nature of events and therefore plan to conduct further experiments in which the hypotheses presented can be tested. for example, by integrating different target prediction methods, roughly 20% of intragenic mirnas were predicted to target their own host. though this number is significantly higher than expected by chance, it still does not cover the majority of mirnas. for one, this number may underestimate the true number of mirnas targeting their own host due to limitations of target prediction methods. additionally, it has lately been shown that transcription of one third of intronic mirnas can be initiated independently of the host's transcription  <cit> , in which case direct feedback cannot be claimed. also, we only investigated feedback on the level of direct mirna-host interaction and on the order of the interactome based on the kegg database. however, knowledge about interaction of proteins is still limited and cotranscription of host and mirna may enable more complex mechanisms. limitations to current knowledge may also justify, why a significant fraction of predicted targets in do not show the expected behaviour. indeed, cyclin e and e2f in figure  <dig> show opposite behavior than what we would expect. neither of these genes might actually be a target of hsa-mir-641; there may also exist stronger regulating elements that control their expression, or the primary mode of silencing in that specific situation may be through translational repression. nevertheless, it is interesting how key molecules in two different datasets displayed predicted correlation patterns.

further experiments and biological validation of computational evidence presented here may have great implications, especially in cancer therapy. modern therapies usually target central molecules, such as akt and pi3k with some success. however, these techniques control only single elements in a cascade of complex signalling events. in summary, our findings encourage more focused research on intragenic mirnas and their targets.

