BACKGROUND
aversion: painful and non-painful stimuli
identification of potentially harmful stimuli is necessary for the well-being and self-preservation of all organisms. organisms with relatively simple nervous systems  display motivated approach and avoidance behaviours to rewarding and aversive stimuli, respectively, implying the existence of some evolutionarily conserved mechanisms  <cit> . aversive stimuli are those which an organism will generally expend energy to minimize or avoid  <cit> ; in this context, aversion is operationally opposite to reward  <cit> . however, the strength of aversive stimuli and the context in which they occur can produce a variety of psychophysical  and behavioural  responses. while recent work has suggested the existence of a common aversion-related network of brain regions responsible for the basic processing of aversive stimuli  <cit> , this work focused only on studies involving non-painful stimuli and studies including painful stimuli were not considered; as such, it is unclear if those results extend to pain-related processing.

pain-associated brain activity
pain, which typically results from activating the nociceptive system , is experienced across mammals and is critical for survival  <cit> . studies in humans and non-human animals have generally supported the notion that pain is processed differentially in the brain according to affective  and sensory  dimensions . nonetheless, the assumption that this network  is specifically activated by painful stimuli has been questioned  <cit> . using fmri in humans, mouraux et al.  uncovered strong support for the notion that the typical regions of the pain matrix are largely involved in salience processing  <cit> . they showed that multimodal non-painful aversive stimuli and painful stimuli activate similar regions in the mcc, insula, thalamus, and sensory cortex and that the bold signals in these regions correlated largely with the perceived saliency of the stimulus .

studies suggest shared regions for pain and non-pain aversion
while much work has identified pain as a uniquely important experience , numerous studies using non-painful aversive stimuli  have implicated many of the same cortical and subcortical regions  <cit> , suggesting that the processing of various painful and non-painful aversive stimuli require many of the same neurobiological substrates. in this regard, human studies have been key to understanding the role of cortical regions . alternately, studies in animals have highlighted the importance of subcortical areas such as the periaqueductal grey, hypothalamus, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, nucleus accumbens/ventral striatum and ventral tegmental area  <cit> . while prior work has identified a network of regions involved in non-painful aversion-related processing  <cit> , it nonetheless remains unclear which, if any, of those identified areas are also involved in processing painful stimuli.

systematic translational analysis of aversion-related circuitry
the present hypothesis is that there exists a core aversion-related circuit involved in processing aversive stimuli regardless of whether they are painful or non-painful. in an analogical sense, this network would be similar to the basic underlying  circuitry identified in the field of reward  <cit> . prior meta-analyses in humans have outlined core regions associated with pain processing  <cit> , and some animal work has even suggested the existence of an overlapping pain and non-pain-related aversion network  <cit> . nonetheless, no investigations have used both human and animal data to directly explore the possibility of a shared network for pain- and non-pain-related processing.

to this end, a translational cross-species approach was used to identify the core components of the potential aversion-related network. more specifically, our first aim was to compare brain activations to the passive reception of painful aversive stimuli in healthy adults  to those in rodents . secondly, we aimed to compare the results on pain-related processing to those gathered previously on the processing of passive non-painful aversive stimuli in humans  and animals   <cit> .

our main hypothesis is that aversive stimuli, regardless of origin  or perception , are processed largely by a common network of brain regions. however, some areas may be more  involved in different aspects of pain- and non-pain-related aversive processing. the use of a meta-analytical approach allows for the clear distinction of areas which have been identified reliably across numerous studies – in comparison to individual studies which may have low power and a higher probability of reporting false positive activations  <cit> . the incorporation of animal studies allows for a cross-species comparison and ensures that especially subcortical areas, which may be important for aversion-related processing, are identified. studying these areas in humans has proven difficult given limitations in optimal imaging resolution and the correct interpretation of subcortical activations   <cit> . importantly, this translational approach allowed for the direct comparison of the overlap between areas identified in pain and non-pain aversion studies.

RESULTS
pain-related activation in humans  and rodents 
results of the meta-analysis revealed a general pain-related brain circuitry involving the bilateral insula, mid cingulate cortex , postcentral gyrus , precentral gyrus , secondary/supplementary motor area , and thalamus . additional extent-based clusters, extending from regions with peak activations, were also noted in the anterior cingulate cortex , posterior cingulate cortex , dorsomedial prefrontal cortex , bilateral operculum, bilateral supramarginal gyri, right ventrolateral orbitofrontal cortex , right rostral temporal gyrus , right hippocampal/parahippocampal area , inferior frontal gyrus, dorsal striatum , cerebellar cortex, and midbrain and rostral pons .

as revealed by a systematic review of the non-human animal literature which is summarized in table  <dig>  all of these areas have also been implicated in animal studies of pain, with the exception of areas corresponding to the supramarginal gyrus and rostral temporal gyrus. additional subcortical areas, not predominantly found across human studies, have also been noted and include the amygdala, bilateral hippocampus/parahippocampal areas , septal area, nucleus accumbens , bed nucleus of the stria terminalis , piriform cortex, and retrosplenial cortex, as well as areas of the midbrain , superior  and inferior  colliculi, habenula , raphe nuclei, pretectal area, and red nucleus) and of the brain stem , parabrachial nucleus , locus coeruleus ). for individual study details and inter-study comparisons, see additional file 1: table s2a.

results are ordered by the number of studies reporting specific activations; percent of studies reporting activations is used for comparative illustration. for individual study details and inter-study comparisons, see additional file 1: table s2a.

non-pain-related aversive brain activation in humans and other animals
as published previously by hayes & northoff , the meta-analysis results of human neuroimaging studies using passive non-painful aversive stimuli implicated brain circuitry involving the amygdala , anterior insula , ventrolateral orbitofrontal cortex , hippocampus , and parahippocampal gyrus , dorsal striatum , rostral temporal gyri , and thalamus . extent-based clusters were also noted in the anterior and middle cingulate cortex , dorsomedial prefrontal cortex , secondary motor area , and midbrain   <cit> .

animal studies involving non-painful aversive stimuli implicated all of the same regions shown in humans, except the rostral temporal gyri specifically . in addition, subcortical areas such as the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis , habenula , hypothalamus , nucleus of the solitary tract , nucleus accumbens , periaqueductal grey , parabrachial nucleus  and septal nuclei were also noted. for individual study details see additional file 1: table s2b.

results are ordered by the number of studies reporting specific activations; percent of studies reporting activations is used for comparative illustration. for individual study details and inter-study comparisons, see additional file 1: table s2b. reprinted with permission from frontiers in integrative neuroscience  <cit> .

comparison between pain- and non-pain-related activations in humans and animals
conjunction and contrast analyses in humans
a conjunction analysis of the human meta-analysis results for pain- and non-pain-related aversive stimuli revealed a common network of brain areas including: mcc, posterior cingulate cortex , ai/claustrum, right vlofc, dmpfc, right rtg, sma, thalamus, right hipp/parahipp, dorsal striatum, and midbrain . we used the conservative minimum statistic resulting in the intersection of  <dig> voxels at the cluster-based fwe corrected level  <cit> . while all clusters are displayed in table  <dig>  only those greater than  <dig> voxels were considered in the discussion. the percentage of overlapping voxels in the present study accounted for 24% of pain-related activations and 35% of aversion-related activations.

results of mkda analysis: overlap for painful and non-painful stimuli highlighted in the bottom row of figure  <dig>  all results are family-wise error rate whole-brain corrected at p <  <dig> . only clusters > <dig> voxels were considered.

in addition to the activation of this common network, the presentation of painful compared to non-painful stimuli  resulted in additional unique activations in the primary and secondary sensorimotor cortices, posterior cingulate cortex , the bilateral operculum , cerebellum, and the rostral midbrain  and rostral pons .

alternately, non-painful > painful aversive stimuli resulted in unique activations in the amygdalae and left hemisphere vlofc, rtg, and hipp/parahipp. in addition, extended activation clusters unique to non-painful stimulus presentation were noted for the more anterior portions of the acc , the dmpfc, a more anterior portion of the pcc/posterior mcc, an area encompassing the hypothalamus and dorsal  and ventral striatal  areas, left sma, and bilateral vlofc .

comparison to non-human animals
while a conjunction analysis was not performed across non-human animal studies , the pattern of activation seen in humans was reflected in these studies. the general pattern of brain activation between humans and animals appears to be maintained, as is generally reflected by the relative percentage of studies reporting such activations . for instance, a large percentage of animal studies have reported cingulate activations in pain-related studies  which is mirrored by the large activation in the pain  meta-analysis; in comparison, a majority of animal studies have reported amygdala activations in response to non-painful aversive stimuli , which is reflected by the large activation in the non-pain  meta-analysis results.

additional subcortical regions of importance  have also been noted in animals . most seem to be involved in general aversion-related processing  while this investigation suggests that some may be involved more in pain-  or non-pain-related  processing. results for overlapping and non-overlapping activations across species are illustrated in figure  <dig> 

discussion
the present work aimed to further define a network of brain regions involved in the general processing of aversive stimuli  using a cross-species translational approach. a direct comparison was made between studies investigating the passive reception of painful versus non-painful aversive stimuli in humans  and rodents .

firstly, it was found that regions associated with the processing of painful aversive stimuli  and those noted previously with non-painful aversive stimuli  are similar across humans and other animals . the value of including animal data is that they help support and extend the results noted in humans . secondly, it was shown in humans  and other animals  that most regions show spatially overlapping involvement for the processing of both painful and non-painful aversive stimuli.

together, these data strongly suggest the existence of a core aversion-related network of brain regions which include cortical  and subcortical  areas. lastly, although a core aversion-related network was identified, both painful and non-painful stimuli activate additional regions which appear to be non-overlapping, although this is discussed further below .

areas activated by painful and non-painful aversive stimuli are similar across species
results from the pain-related meta-analysis  and animal literature review  are consistent with prior human  <cit>  and animal studies  <cit> . similar regions were noted here, including: bilateral insula, mcc, primary and secondary motor and somatosensory cortices, vlofc, hipp/parahipp, ds, thal and midbrain. it is also worth noting that our results are nearly identical to another recent human meta-analysis on pain  <cit> . additional, mainly subcortical, areas identified across animal studies included the amyg, bnst, hab, hyp, nac, nts, pbn, pag, sc, ic, and septal nuclei. brain imaging techniques may be limited by low subcortical resolution , however some fmri studies focusing on this level  have corroborated their involvement in human pain processing .

as reported previously  <cit> , non-painful aversive stimuli result in consistent activations in humans  and other animals . the main activations to non-painful aversive stimuli across species include: amyg, acc, vlofc, dmpfc, secondary motor cortex, hipp/parahipp, ds, rtg, thal, and midbrain. additional subcortical activations, identified most consistently in animal studies , included the bnst, hab, hyp, nts, nac, pag, pbn and septal nuclei. these results are also consistent with prior studies across species looking at aversion-related concepts such as fear  <cit> , threat  <cit>  and social punishment  <cit> ).

together, these findings suggested the involvement of similar regions in pain- and non-pain-related aversive processing . however, the specific substrates involved remain unclear as does whether the apparent spatial overlap involved in both processing types reflects an actual overlap in function. iannetti and mouraux  have argued that the so-called pain matrix  may be misleading. while the pain matrix is activated reliably across studies , and the magnitude of its response is highly correlated with the intensity of pain perception  <cit> , there is, nonetheless, presently no evidence that any single brain region or clearly defined network is devoted to the processing of pain.

iannetti and mouraux   subsequently suggested that, instead of pain-specific processing, this system may be better regarded as a multimodal network related to the detection of saliency  <cit> . the notion that this network is largely multimodal is supported by prior work demonstrating activations in these regions regardless of the sensory modality in which the aversive stimuli were presented  <cit> . as well, this notion is further supported by the present findings that painful stimuli  show overlapping activations with mainly non-tactile, non-painful, aversive stimuli. in particular, in a series of fmri experiments, mouraux et al.  showed that most of the activations related to painful stimuli appear to also be involved in non-painful processes  <cit> .

in another recent example, fmri work by moulton et al.,  showed similar overlapping between activations related to non-painful  and painful  aversive stimuli in the cerebellum; these signals were correlated with many of the same regions noted in the present study   <cit> . interestingly, it is difficult to assess the cerebellum’s potential involvement in general aversion-related processing given that it is often overlooked in imaging studies and most animal studies use painful shock-tone pairing to investigate its role. as such, while its role in general conditioning mechanisms is well established , fewer studies have looked at non-pain-related aversive stimuli .

as the frequent occurrence of similar brain activity appeared to be further supported by the initial cross-species results above, the second aim of this study was to specifically compare the potential overlap between pain- and non-pain-related activations in humans and other animals.

aversion-related stimuli activate a common core network
the conjunction analysis of pain- and non-pain-related aversion studies in humans  and the systematic review in animals  revealed a common core aversion-related network consisting of mcc, pcc, ai/claustrum, right vlofc, dmpfc, sma, right hipp/parahipp, thal, ds, and midbrain . additional, mainly subcortical, areas were noted in animals including the amyg, bnst, hab, hyp, nac, septal nuclei, nts, and pbn. this core, cross-species, aversion-related network  suggests that passively received aversive stimuli are, at least in part, processed in a similar way using similar neurobiological substrates.

identified consistently here, both the cingulate  and bilateral ai have been implicated in many functions though there is still much debate on whether a basic role for these regions exists. for instance, research in humans and other animals suggests they are involved in detecting and processing errors  <cit> , in reward-related processing  <cit> , and in adaptive decision making  <cit> . in fact, given the roles that these, and other, regions play across various networks , it is possible that they are active participants in many underlying processes. for instance, various lines of evidence in humans and primates have implicated the anterior portion of the mcc as being especially key for the integration of negative affect, pain, and cognitive control . moreover, despite our attempt to reduce the impact of cognitive processes by limiting our studies to those involving passive stimuli, it is important to note that implicit cognitive processing  may contribute to the activations noted across species.

involvement in salience network
for instance, it has been suggested that main role of the acc might be learning and predicting the outcome of actions, regardless of valence  <cit>  – essentially a processor and predictor of salient/behaviourally relevant sensory stimuli. a human imaging meta-analysis on the role of the insula also suggested that the ai may be an integrator of salient stimuli  <cit> . the notion that the cingulate and ai are involved in salience processing is also in line with the experimental findings of mouraux et al.  and downar et al.   <cit> , as is the involvement of the pcc  <cit>  and the somatosensory cortex . they found that the bold signal in these regions corresponded best to the saliency of the aversive stimulus, and not whether it is painful or non-painful . indeed, the indication that an upcoming stimulus will be painful  has been found to potentiate signals in traditional pain-related regions   <cit> . along with resting state data showing that the ai is functionally connected to the pacc/mcc  <cit> , these studies strongly support the notion of the cingulate  and ai as being involved in salience processing  <cit> .

other regions identified in the present study may also be involved in processing salient stimuli, particularly in the preparation and/or initiation of motor control. structures such as the ds and sma appear to process preparatory defensive actions  related to escaping potential threats  <cit> . in general, however, the ds responds to the expected value of stimuli  and may be important in changing expectations based on past and present contexts  <cit> . the pag also responds to highly salient  stimuli, is a well-known source for descending control over spinal pain pathways  <cit> , and appears to be involved in autonomic-somatomotor integration related to orchestrating defensive behaviours  <cit> . this integration is achieved via its close connections to thal, hyp, amyg, pfc, and other brain stem nuclei involved in autonomic processing   <cit> .  considered together, the cross-species data noted here suggest that the core regions in general aversive processing may be involved in processing salience information. this is in line with the findings from mouraux et al. , who suggested that these regions form a salience  network  <cit> .

involvement in interoceptive network
the ai and acc/mcc are also considered key components of a circuit mediating interoceptive awareness. studies have shown that both the insula and acc/mcc are involved in processing the interoceptive awareness of stimuli , while animal studies have demonstrated similar roles . menon and uddin  take a network perspective describing these regions as core components of a salience network which act as integrators of overlapping networks   <cit> . additionally, the authors posit that the activity of these hub regions and the interaction between them may be involved, partly, in choosing/switching between relevant task-related and resting state networks . the notion of the acc/mcc and insula as a key integrator network is also supported by others  who have noted functional connectivity between ai-pacc/mcc  and between insula-mcc .

involvement in resting state networks
the baseline activity of the brain is essential in determining the relative stimulus-induced activation in both animal and human studies. as such, how the baseline is defined conceptually and experimentally may ultimately affect the results . as noted in the methods section, most of the animal studies included here necessarily use between-subjects measures, whereas the human neuroimaging studies typically use within-subjects measures – suggesting that the baselines may be quite different. as such, caution should be taken when interpreting the results across species. nonetheless, the animal neuroimaging studies included here  are able to help bridge the gap somewhat and their findings are congruent with the other studies. moreover, human imaging studies are more often including a baseline  period in their designs , which results in the identification of baseline or resting state brain activity.

given the apparent overlap and interactivity between these resting state regions  and exteroceptive/salience regions, some authors have recently explored their potential relationship. for example, one recent study investigated the potential relationship between resting state activity  and emotion- and intero-/exteroceptive-related activity  <cit> . they demonstrated that increased activity in the default mode regions  during rest was associated with decreased emotional perception ability, without any noted relationships to the perception of intero-/exteroceptive stimuli. this raises the question of whether the activity, particularly in the mcc, is selective for salience or rather for value-related processing . moreover, it questions whether different regions of the cingulate  are involved separately in processing salience-, emotion-, and interoceptive-related information .

involvement in valuative network
finally, recent reviews of the reward literature for both humans  <cit>  and animals  <cit>  describe many of the same regions noted here for the aversion-related network. this raises the issue of whether, and to what degree, the core aversion-related regions noted in the present study are involved in aversion-specific  processing. if both aversion- and reward-related activity are found equally in these regions, this would provide further support of a salience network. however, if different regions are involved in each, and/or to different degrees, this would suggest the existence of interacting, or even separate, neural networks for processing value-related information. while there are, to our knowledge, no meta-analyses or systematic reviews outlining the similarities and differences for reward- and aversion-related brain activity, a number of studies  have suggested that perhaps both salience-selective and value-selective processing occur in both overlapping and separate networks.

for instance, many animal  and some human studies  have implicated the nac in coding both aversive and rewarding states. lammel et al.  showed that among dopamine cells of the vta there appear to be many distinct  populations defined by receptor/channel type, activity, location and density, and axonal projections  <cit> . another study demonstrated that while the dopaminergic modulation of the basal ganglia’s direct striatonigral and indirect striatopallidal pathways are involved in both processing types, primary activation is shifted to the indirect pathway during aversion-related processing  <cit> . furthermore, single-unit acc recordings in four humans viewing emotional pictures showed that of cells responding, most were selective for general aversion-related stimuli – although some cells responded to both aversive and rewarding stimuli  <cit> . these findings help explain how a regional population of cells can contribute to differential processing .

taken together, these results support the existence of a core group of brain regions involved in basic aversion-related processing ; the inclusion of non-human animal data has helped confirm and further extend these findings . the evidence suggests that components of this network are involved in processing various types of information . future neuroimaging studies should consider parsing, for instance, value and salience  as has been attempted in some behavioural experiments  <cit> . though the focus has been on the overlap between pain- and non-pain-related aversive processing, it should be noted that some activations  appeared to be selective for painful over non-painful stimuli . these activations are discussed briefly in the following section.

differential activations related to painful and non-painful aversive stimuli
although a core network of brain regions for the processing of painful and non-painful aversive stimuli was identified, the areas of activation noted in the human meta-analysis do not overlap completely. in fact, there are a number of regions which appear to be unique to painful or non-painful stimuli. specifically, painful stimuli resulted in unique activations in the primary and secondary sensory cortices, the pcc, bilateral operculum/mid and posterior insula, and cerebellum. non-painful aversive stimuli resulted in unique activations in the amyg, l vlofc, l rtg, and l hipp/parahipp as well as additional extended activations in the pacc, dmpfc, hyp, posterior mcc, ds/vs, and bilateral vlofc. similar subcortical regions were identified in animal studies of both pain- and non-pain-related processing . nonetheless, from the animal studies included here, a few areas are noted in only pain-  or non-pain-  related studies.

the differences may in fact be unique, thus providing unique neural signatures for painful and non-painful aversive stimuli. however, there are alternative explanations for these apparently unique activations which seem more tenable. firstly, the differential weighting of activations  may help explain the absence of activations in human studies on pain  compared to non-pain aversion. secondly, as the analysis of imaging studies on pain and non-pain aversion were limited to the passive reception period, this is equivalent to taking a temporal snapshot of brain activity. while intended to be similar across pain and non-pain studies, this snapshot may in fact reflect unique brain processing for two types of stimuli differentiated by their timing properties .

differential weighting
that nearly all regions were noted in both animal studies of pain and non-pain aversion  supports the notion that entirely unique activations for either are rare or unlikely. however, a differential weighting of activations may be reflected in the ranking of regions in animal studies , which generally reflect the core regions noted in the human meta-analysis . for instance, the amygdala is activated more consistently in non-pain imaging studies, whereas the cingulate and sensory cortex appear more involved in pain studies . however, these rankings  should only be considered illustrative, as animal studies typically choose regions a priori . findings for a set of regions may lead to a disproportionately higher investigation rate by other researchers, which can inflate or mask the relative importance of some regions . nonetheless, most animal studies included here investigated ≥ <dig> brain regions, and the results are similar to those in humans and other animals . for instance, the amygdala is known to be more involved in assessing the expectation  of aversive stimuli  <cit>  – though see  <cit>  for an fmri study in which long stimulation periods of pain perception resulted in amygdala activation. another study by guimarais et al.  showed that increasing the time interval between a predictive tone and a shock changed the involvement of some structures in rats  <cit> . for instance, at ~5 s intervals, the mpfc became more active, whereas at longer  intervals, dorsal hippocampal activity became necessary for learning about the aversive stimulus. nonetheless, it is difficult to compare the results from animal studies directly to those in human imaging , and further study on the temporal aspects of aversive processing should be undertaken.

strengths and limitations
the greatest strength of the current work is its translational nature. the inclusion of animal studies has two main advantages. firstly, they help to support the findings from human imaging and add insight regarding subregional differences and underlying mechanisms. secondly, they underscore the involvement of many subcortical regions which are generally underreported in imaging studies . we believe using this approach somewhat offsets the potential selection biases which may be found across human imaging studies  and animal studies .

the strict and narrow criteria used in both human and animal studies allowed for a clearer interpretation of results . these criteria were used to isolate, as clearly as the present methods allow, the period of brain activation during which acute aversive stimuli are present  – thus, attempting to separate this period from others . it is in this sense that we have attempted to identify a network associated with aversion-related processing . nonetheless, it is worth pointing out again  that the inference of a temporal relationship between regional activations relies heavily on the inclusion, and exclusion, of appropriate studies. ultimately, the identification of such networks through meta-analyses and systematic review should be used as the basis for testing future hypotheses regarding co-activation.

this approach also shed some light on one inherent and important limitation of meta-analyses – particularly those using human imaging studies. while some neuroimaging studies do report subcortical activations in aversion-related processing , their relative scarcity means some subcortical regions may not be noted in the final meta-analysis results. this absence of activation likely also extends to highly variable cortical regions. the corollary is that meta-analysis results underscore the most consistent nodes of activation across studies , while regions not identified may still be active  components – findings that are made clearer through animal studies looking directly at brain tissue.

although the results of the animal studies outlined in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  should be considered illustrative due to reporting and researcher interest biases and the lack of a whole-brain approach , most studies investigated at least  <dig> brain regions. in fact, only  <dig> of the  <dig> non-pain-related studies  <cit>  and  <dig> of the  <dig> pain-related studies  <cit>  focused on  <dig> or less regions. in addition, none of the pain-related studies focused solely on the cingulate , and only  <dig> studies from the non-pain-related aversion studies  <cit>  focused solely on the amygdala . although the issue of selection bias and the reporting of positive data  cannot be fully accounted for, taken together, the animal and human data allow for a more confident interpretation regarding the inclusion of brain areas involved in aversion-related processing.

CONCLUSIONS
the results from this translational approach strongly suggest that humans and animals have a common core aversion-related network, consisting of similar cortical and subcortical regions. this work extends from previous work  <cit>  by demonstrating that most of the regions typically associated with a pain network are involved in the generalized processing of all aversive stimuli to some extent. while saliency may be an integral factor to which this network responds, it seems unlikely that it should be thought of as a saliency detector – particularly given the apparent incomplete overlap of activations for painful and non-painful stimuli, as well as for that of rewarding stimuli. the differential weighting found between pain-  and non-pain-  related processing suggests that aversion-related concepts may rely on the use of similar substrates  but to varying degrees and perhaps over different timescales – thus underscoring the need for the investigation of spatio-temporal dynamics within this network.

