BACKGROUND
rdx and tnt are both important ordnance constituents often found coexisting in the environment  <cit> . a considerable number of studies have shown that tnt and rdx are highly toxic to soil invertebrates  <cit> . however, these two compounds appear to differ markedly in their modes of toxicological action. tnt is lethal to the earthworm eisenia fetida with an lc <dig> of  <dig> mg/kg soil  <cit> , whereas rdx reduces juvenile production  without causing lethality at concentrations up to  <dig> mg/kg soil  <cit> . in contrast to tnt, which causes oxidative stress  <cit> , rdx is known to act on the central nervous system causing seizures in humans and animals  <cit>  and inducing neurotoxicological symptoms such as rigidity and ataxia in earthworms  <cit> . sublethal doses of tnt affected the nervous system, caused blood disorders similar to methemoglobinemia, and weakened immunity in e. fetida  <cit> . however, the toxicological mechanisms of rdx as well as interactions between rdx and tnt are still largely unknown in earthworms.

earthworms were described by aristotle as “the intestines of the earth” and have been used as bioindicators for soil contamination  <cit> . in the present study, we investigated the sublethal transcriptional response in e. fetida exposed to a mixture of rdx and tnt in comparison to worms exposed to tnt or rdx alone. we performed earthworm reproductive toxicity tests and measured gene expression in exposed and unexposed worms. we hypothesized that worms exposed to rdx, tnt or a mixture of these two compounds would show toxicant-specific gene expression profiles. our objectives were to  identify earthworm genes affected by tnt and rdx singly or in combination;  examine the interactive effects between tnt and rdx by comparing their gene expression profiles; and  gain some mechanistic insights into the toxicological modes of action for exposures to mixtures of tnt and rdx.

RESULTS
adult worms were exposed for  <dig> d to  <dig> mg tnt/kg soil,  <dig> mg rdx/kg soil, or both. the tnt or rdx concentration was each selected to target an ec <dig> of the cocoon production endpoint . our results of cocoon counts are consistent with the target value for these two compounds . we observed no statistically significant effects on mortality and growth. reproduction endpoints were determined at  <dig> d and significant decreases in cocoon/juvenile counts were recorded in treated samples. the mixture of tnt and rdx inhibited offspring production more than tnt or rdx alone did .

gene expression was examined in five biological replicates per treatment, that is, one worm from each of the five replicate samples per treatment using  <dig> earthworm cdna microarrays and a balanced interwoven loop design  <cit>  . two mixtures of stratagene alien® mrnas were spiked into the worm mrna samples  for quality assurance of cdna synthesis, labeling and hybridization as well as for monitoring the procedure and power of statistical analysis in deriving differentially expressed genes. all the  <dig> features on the array were treated as individual genes although each cdna and control spots were duplicated on the array. we adjusted the confidence level of the false discovery rate and the maximum allowable false discovery genes within the two-class comparison algorithm implemented in brb array tools  so that the alien® mrnas that were spiked in two different treatments  at a ratio of  <dig> or  <dig>  would consistently show up on the significant gene list, while those at a ratio of  <dig> would not . under the selected conditions , we identified  <dig> and  <dig> significant genes in the rdx- and mixture-treated worms, respectively, without any alien spike  <dig> , suggesting no false positive from the spike-in mrnas. in the two treatments added with the same alien® mrna spike-in mix , we identified  <dig> significant genes including  <dig> spots of alien spike  <dig> and  <dig> spots of negative controls , which is reasonable given the large number of significant genes called and the selected inference conditions. therefore, the use of the spike-in rnas allowed us to identify at least two-fold expression difference between treatments in our dataset at an acceptable false discovery rate. this practice also validates the statistical program used for array data analysis and gives us a higher confidence in the inferred significant genes.

to further increase the inference stringency and to down-select a smaller number of genes for future experimental validation, we applied the following criterion: the expression of a gene must show statistically significant difference between the treated and the control at both duplicate spots to be inferred as a differentially expressed gene. after applying this criterion, we identified  <dig> significant differentially expressed genes in tnt treated worms,  <dig> in rdx treated worms, and only  <dig> in mixture treated worms in comparison with the controls  . three genes were significantly altered by all three treatments,  <dig> genes were common between tnt treated and rdx treated worms, and  <dig> genes were unique to the three treatments. the expression of all  <dig> inferred significant genes is shown in figure  <dig> and is also given in additional file additional file 3: table s <dig> along with their annotation information. both multidimensional scaling analysis  and hierarchical clustering  of the  <dig> earthworm mrna samples using the significant gene set indicate the greatest distance between the tnt treatment and the control treatment. samples from the control and tnt treatments form two well separated clusters with samples from the rdx and mixture treatments forming a third unresolved cluster . these results suggest that gene expression profiles of tnt treated worms are most distinct from those of the controls and that those of rdx and mixture treated worms cannot be separated. the differences in gene expression profile between the three explosive treatments largely come from the degree of alteration of the  <dig> significant genes as evidenced by the high correlation in both absolute and relative mean expression . only in very few occasions , genes altered by tnt exposure showed an opposite direction of regulation by the rdx or mixture treatment. however, none of these cases reached a degree of statistical significance and  <dig> out of  <dig> cases occurred in one of the duplicated spots ).

discussion
we profiled gene expression in earthworms exposed to tnt , rdx  or a mixture of these two explosives using a 4k cdna microarray. consistent with our earlier study  <cit> , we identified genes related to multiple pathways being affected by tnt: genes involved in oxygen transport and iron homeostasis , blood coagulation and fibrinolysis , muscle contraction and cell motility , immune response , antioxidant response , calcium signaling , protein degradation . we also observed differential expression of quite a few transcripts which were not detected previously. putatively, these transcripts are involved in not only some previously identified pathways , but also many other important pathways not previously identified ). these newly identified pathways include ribosomal structure, translation, posttranslational modification, protein turnover, protein transport, non-lysosomal protein degradation, protein-protein interaction, protease inhibitors, energy homeostasis, glycolysis, and many signal transduction pathways . in support of our previous findings of adverse neurological effects, we observed significant changes in the expression of several genes involved in notch and agrin signaling pathways which block neuronal differentiation  <cit>  and regulate acetylcholine receptors in neuromuscular junctions  <cit> , respectively.

all chemical treatments caused significant reduction in reproductive output. hence transcripts related to reproductive functions are of considerable interest in order to link effects on the gene expression level to phenotypic effects. among the  <dig> significant genes, there is one transcript putatively coding for echinonectin involved in oogenesis. echinonectin, a dimeric galactosyl-binding protein found deposited to the inner side of the sea urchin egg's hyaline layer   <cit>  may be related to cocoon laying processes in earthworms. down-regulation of this transcript may contribute to the reduced cocoon and juvenile counts in treated worms.

there is a novel differentially expressed transcript similar to myeloid differentiation factor  <dig>  containing a toll/interleukin- <dig> resistance  domain ). presence of this transcript suggests that earthworms may possess components of toll or toll-like receptor signaling pathways in contrast to current views  <cit> . it has been shown that the tir domain is required for caenorhabditis elegans resistance to microbial pathogens  <cit> . our data suggests that this gene was down-regulated in all treated worms ), implying that exposures to explosives had weakened the innate immune system in e. fetida, consistent with our earlier findings  <cit> . further work is currently underway to identify other toll-related genes and establish this highly conserved pathway in e. fetida.

surprisingly, the microarray data indicate that tnt exhibited the greatest effect on earthworm gene expression with the vast majority of the  <dig> significant genes significantly changed by tnt but not the mixture of tnt and rdx ). the greater impact of tnt on gene expression as opposed to the mixture is the reverse of the additive effect seen in reproductive toxicity results where the mixture has a far greater effect . while tnt exposures dominated expression effects, the mixture did have a greater impact on a few genes whose expression was not significantly affected by tnt or rdx ). furthermore, the mean values for expression of several other genes  and additional file additional file 6: table s4) are correlated with cocoon production and hence appear to reflect an additive effect. for instance, a two-tailed t-test suggests that the expression of transcripts putatively coding for ferritin heavy chain polypeptide  <dig>  a chitinase, and dopamine β-monooxygenase was more depressed in the mixture-treated worms than in tnt or rdx-treated worms ). the highly conserved gene ferritin plays an important role in gametogenesis, fertilization, or early embryonic development  <cit> . while the mean expression of ferritin, chitinase, and dopamine β-monooxygenase was correlated to the additive toxicity effect we have observed ), we are unable to identify genes that can mechanistically account for the apparent additive effect between tnt and rdx on reproduction. this may be in part due to a failure to capture gene expression changes leading to critical reproductive events that may have occurred prior to the time when the worms were sampled. in particular, earthworms are hermaphroditic , and their reproductive activities are complex and involve sequentially mating, sperm exchange, egg fertilization and cocoon deposition. failure to capture these events may also be due to the nature of the cdna array because the cdna libraries used cover only a fraction of the e. fetida genome  <cit> . genes related to reproductive activities such as fertilization in earthworms  may be underrepresented on the microarray, as is exemplified by the apparent absence from the array of annetocin, a gene involved in the induction of egg-laying behavior through its action on the nephridia in e. fetida <cit> . a significant problem with earthworm libraries, a non-model organism, is that many cdnas remain unidentified. among the  <dig> significant genes, 68% have poor  or no blastx matches. the poorly characterized transcripts constitute two-thirds of the total unique sequences in our libraries  <cit> , a major obstacle in linking gene expression to toxicological endpoints with ecological or physiological relevance . we are now making more efforts toward transcriptome-wide sequencing and annotation in e. fetida.

CONCLUSIONS
both toxicity and gene expression results indicate that tnt and rdx, singly or jointly cause adverse effects in e. fetida. we identified transcripts putatively coding for echinonectin, ferritin heavy chain polypeptide  <dig>  chitinase and dopamine β-monooxygenase that can link reproductive toxicological endpoints with gene expression. although the mixture of tnt and rdx caused an additive impact on reproductive endpoints, expression of the  <dig> inferred significant transcripts was affected more by tnt than by rdx or the mixture. rdx showed an antagonistic effect with tnt on the expression of the majority of the  <dig> differentially expressed transcripts. we also identified a novel gene involved in toll signaling pathway that was previously thought non-existent in the oligochaete earthworms. however, only a relatively small number of well-characterized earthworm genes have been spotted on our microarray. more efforts in sequencing, annotation and construction of gene regulatory networks are needed to better understand the interactions between genes involved in different biological processes or pathways. gene expression in earthworms should also be profiled at the specific and well-defined physiological states to catch the genes relevant to the assayed toxicological endpoints.

