BACKGROUND
the process of regeneration, or the replacement of lost body parts, has long captured the interest of biologists. while early experiments on crayfish  <cit>  and hydra <cit>  demonstrated the remarkable abilities of some animals to develop lost parts anew, it is also clear that many animals, including humans, do not possess such abilities. the ability to regenerate is thought to have been lost over the course of evolution in many animal lineages  <cit> . despite recent advances in knowledge of the molecular and developmental basis of regeneration in a variety of animal systems  <cit> , little is currently known about the developmental and evolutionary mechanisms that drive loss of regeneration ability  <cit> . understanding this phenomenon requires a comparative approach and the identification and development of animal systems that show variation in regeneration ability among closely related species.

the naid annelids are among a small number of documented groups in which regeneration ability varies among close relatives  <cit> , making them a good model for studying the loss of regeneration. naids  are a group of small aquatic oligochaete worms, many of which can reproduce asexually by fission  <cit> . many naids, including pristina leidyi, possess excellent regeneration abilities, being able to regrow both their heads and tails after amputation. following amputation, tissues at the wound site actively proliferate and form a regeneration blastema  which ultimately differentiates to give rise to regenerated structures  <cit> . the ability to regenerate anteriorly and posteriorly is thought to be ancestral for the clade. however, recent experiments indicate that head regeneration ability has been lost at least three times within the naids, allowing multiple independent comparisons between regenerating and non-regenerating species  <cit> . the degree of loss of the regeneration machinery can vary between lineages, suggesting that different developmental mechanisms may underlie independent evolutionary losses of regeneration  <cit> . thus, in the naids, evolution has crafted an ideal experiment for investigating loss of regeneration.

much recent work on the developmental basis of regeneration has focused on the role of signaling pathways, such as the wnt pathway, in recruiting stem cells and promoting morphogenesis in regenerated tissues  <cit> . in order to investigate the role of signaling pathways and other molecules in variation of regeneration ability, genomic resources are needed for the naids. recent advances in high-throughput sequencing and bioinformatic analyses have made transcriptome sequencing feasible for discovering novel genes in non-model systems.

 <dig> pyrosequencing, with sequence reads now approaching the length of traditional sanger sequences, is ideal for transcriptome sequencing in a model that lacks a sequenced genome  <cit> . while the sequencing depth of  <dig> is modest compared to that of other deep sequencing technologies,  <dig> does offer depth orders of magnitude above what can be obtained via sanger sequencing  <cit> . in addition, recent versions of the newbler assembler from  <dig> allow for assembling sequences from cdna, grouping presumptive gene isoforms together. here, we describe the sequencing and assembly of a full run of  <dig> gs flx sequencing with titanium reagents from the regenerating annelid p. leidyi.

RESULTS
genome size estimation
we estimated the genome size of p. leidyi and four other naid species currently used in comparative regeneration studies  <cit> . using feulgen densitometry analysis, we estimated a c-value of  <dig>  pg for p. leidyi and c-values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  pg for the four other naid species . previously published estimates for two naid species are  <dig>  and  <dig>  pg, and the mean of values reported for oligochaetes is ~ <dig>  pg   <cit> . thus, the genome size of p. leidyi is typical for this group.

construction of a partially normalized cdna library
in order to maximize the discovery of genes in p. leidyi, we constructed a partially normalized cdna library from mixed-stage regenerating and fissioning material . regeneration and fission are highly similar processes that are thought to be evolutionarily related in these animals, with fission hypothesized to have evolved by co-option of regeneration  <cit> . although the two processes are developmentally very similar, several studies have also demonstrated clear differences between the two  <cit> . we thus chose to include material from both regeneration and fission for this study to facilitate future studies of both processes. furthermore, because p. leidyi worms fission continuously when well fed, we wanted to include fission material in this transcriptome as it represents a "baseline" process in these animals.

rna was extracted from whole worms at multiple time points between the initiation of regeneration and its completion and from unamputated worms that were actively undergoing fission. cdna was synthesized with an oligo-dt primer and a mint full-length reverse-transcription kit. pcr assays indicated that the dried spirulina powder used as food was not metabolically active and could not be detected by rt-pcr in the cdna sample .

a portion of the cdna library was subjected to normalization using a duplex-specific nuclease  in order to avoid repetitive sequencing of highly expressed genes  <cit> . normalization efficiency was assayed using agarose gel smears and qpcr of select highly and lowly expressed genes . highly expressed genes from non-normalized cdna, visible as distinct bands on the agarose gel, were absent or greatly reduced in the normalized cdna sample . furthermore, levels of select genes known to have high  or low  expression during p. leidyi regeneration, as previously determined by rt-pcr, were compared between normalized and non-normalized cdna samples . the two highly expressed genes, pl-β-actin and pl-α-tubulin, showed a reduction in transcript levels of over an order of magnitude upon normalization, while the proportional representation of the three lowly expressed genes increased in the library after normalization. taken together, these data indicate successful normalization of the cdna library.

the overall amount of cdna is greatly reduced during normalization, making pcr amplification necessary to produce a sufficient quantity of cdna for  <dig> sequencing. because pcr has its own biases, particularly against large amplicons, we pooled an unamplified, non-normalized sample with a normalized sample in a 1: <dig> ratio to increase the representation of longer transcripts . this pooled cdna library was used for  <dig> pyrosequencing.

 <dig> pyrosequencing and transcriptome assembly
the combined cdna library was sequenced using a  <dig> gs flx sequencer with titanium reagents, producing  <dig> , <dig> sequence reads with an average length of  <dig> nt. total sequence output was  <dig> , <dig> nt . the reads from this sequencing effort, collectively referred to as pristina454rf , have been deposited in the ncbi’s short read archive  database  <cit>  under accession # srx <dig> 

 <dig> sequence reads were assembled using the newbler assembler v <dig>   <cit> . sequence output using the cdna option of newbler v <dig>  differs from that of traditional genomic assemblers  by taking into account the possibility that multiple isoforms  of a gene may be present. overlapping sequence reads are assembled into contigs, much like traditional assemblers. however, if multiple isoforms are present, a sequence read may contain a portion that aligns perfectly with the previously constructed contig and a portion that does not . when this occurs, newbler v <dig>  breaks up the aligned sequences into multiple contigs. sequences shared between multiple isoforms are retained as unique contigs, and any adjacent variant sequences are split off as their own unique contigs. thus, a single gene isoform might be assembled into multiple contigs, and the same contig might be shared across multiple isoforms. each putative isoform identified by newbler v <dig>  is termed an isotig, and the multiple isoforms for each gene are organized into isogroups, representing putative gene loci.

newbler v <dig>  identified  <dig>  unique isotigs, with a mean length of  <dig> nt , comprised of  <dig>  unique contigs. newbler grouped these into  <dig>  unique isogroups , and the mean of the largest isotig from each isogroup is  <dig> nt .  <dig>  of the original sequence reads could not be assembled with any other sequence and remained as singletons. in total,  <dig>  unigenes  were predicted by newbler v <dig>  . using the method of susko and roger , we estimate that  <dig> % of all genes contained within the cdna sample are present in the  <dig> dataset   <cit> . at this level of sequencing, a new gene is expected to be discovered with every additional  <dig>  sequence reads. the collection of isotigs and isogroups produced by this transcriptome assembly, referred to as pristina454rf-n <dig> , can be accessed directly at the bouillabase est database  <cit> . general information about accessing and searching this transcriptome is provided at the bely lab resources webpage  <cit> .

blast analysis of  <dig> isotigs
after assembly, the  <dig>  isotigs were run through the est2uni analysis pipeline in order to provide annotations from the uniprot database and create a searchable online blast interface  <cit> . the largest isotig from each isogroup was used as a representative for subsequent blast analyses .  <dig> % of isogroups  had a significant blast hit  against the uniprot database . the vast majority of these hits matched other animal sequences , though the number matching lophotrochozoan taxa  was low , presumably due to a dearth of lophotrochozoan sequences in uniprot itself .

blast results suggest that our efforts to minimize environmental contamination were successful. blast searches against the p. leidyi isotig dataset using either a cnidarian or human 16 s sequence  retrieve isotigs matching to pristina 16s as the only hits with any reasonable significance , suggesting no metazoan contamination. furthermore, only a small number of isotigs matched prokaryotic genes   and blast searches of the p. leidyi isotigs using bacterial 16s rna from either the proteobacterium escherichia coli  or the cyanobacterium arthrospira platensis   return a very limited number of isotigs . interestingly, four of these isotigs match 16s from bacterial genera known to be common endosymbionts in animal intestines . thus, some bacterial sequences present in the transcriptome may represent the endemic gut flora of p. leidyi.

to assess how well 5’ and 3’ ends were captured in our dataset, isotigs with significant blast hits were compared to their counterparts in uniprot . the proportion of isotigs with captured ends  varies with the length of the coding sequence in uniprot. isotigs matching shorter uniprot sequences are more likely to be complete on both the 5’ and 3’ ends than isotigs matching longer uniprot sequences.  <dig> % of isotigs matching uniprot sequences of less than  <dig> amino acids are complete on both ends, while only a single isotig matching uniprot sequences greater than  <dig> amino acids is complete. in total,  <dig> % of isotigs can be considered complete,  <dig> % have captured the 5’ end,  <dig> % have captured the 3’ end, and  <dig> % have no matches against either end. while we estimate that we have captured the vast majority of transcripts in the original cdna library  and that there is no strong bias towards either 5’ or 3’ ends, it is clear that most of our unigenes consist of only partial transcript sequences. further sequencing, either in a high-throughput manner or on a targeted basis with genes of interest, will be necessary to fill in these gaps.

gene ontology analysis of  <dig> isotigs
the set of representative isotigs was also subjected to a gene ontology  analysis using blast2go in order to determine whether genes with go terms relevant to regeneration research could be identified  <cit> .  <dig>  of the  <dig>  representative isotigs were associated with go terms. significant numbers of these were associated with the biological process terms “developmental process” , “signaling” , “death” , “cell proliferation” , and “growth”  . this analysis suggests that our dataset contains many genes that are likely to be involved in regeneration. results for molecular function and cellular process go searches are provided in additional file  <dig> 

identification of candidate regeneration genes
using reciprocal blast searches between our transcriptome and publicly available sequences, we identified putative p. leidyi homologues of genes that have been implicated in regeneration in other regeneration models . the genes listed here are active in a range of regeneration processes including wound healing, blastema formation, stem cell regulation, and controlling cell proliferation and morphogenesis  <cit> . some genes were represented by multiple isogroups, likely indicating multiple unique homologs in p. leidyi. for example, there appear to be multiple homologs of wnt and frizzled in p. leidyi, which is consistent with what is known about these gene families in other annelids or lophotrochozoans more broadly  <cit> .

independent confirmation of assembled transcripts
the utility of this transcriptome will ultimately be determined by whether these assembled sequences can be independently confirmed and manipulated for further studies. because  <dig> sequencing has a nebulization step and is not performed using intact transcripts, newbler v <dig>  is unable to reconstruct with complete accuracy the actual gene isoforms present in vivo. therefore, isotigs should be treated as predicted gene isoforms that require independent confirmation, such as by pcr assay. contigs, on the other hand, already are well supported via the original sequencing and are expected to be true contiguous sequence and thus amplifiable by pcr.

we have used pcr assays to validate contigs and isotigs from our assembly for over  <dig> genes to date and discuss here results for two well-characterized isogroups as examples. one isogroup of interest  was identified via blast as a member of the piwi-like gene family, which is implicated in stem cell regulation in several systems  <cit> . this isogroup consists of two isotigs, one comprised of three contigs and the other comprised of only two of the three contigs . we were able to recover by pcr and confirm by sequencing all three contigs and one of the isotigs for this isogroup. another isogroup of interest  was identified via blast as a frizzled gene, a major receptor in the wnt signaling pathway  <cit> . the transcriptome assembly for this isogroup is more complex, as the isogroup consists of six isotigs and six contigs, with each isotig comprised of a different subset of contigs . although the genomic order of some contigs remains unclear for this isogroup, all six contigs and one of the six isotigs were recovered by pcr and confirmed by sequencing. thus, although some isotigs might be constructed as artifacts of the assembly process, pcr assays demonstrate that contigs and some isotigs can be independently validated. this indicates that this  <dig> transcriptome dataset will be highly valuable for further regeneration research.

very limited sequence data were available for p. leidyi prior to the current sequencing effort, but it is worth noting that all four developmental genes that were previously isolated and characterized in this species  <cit>  are present in this transcriptome. blast searches against the  <dig> dataset using the previously published gene sequences for pl-enpl-otx1pl-otx <dig>  and pl-nos as queries retrieved one isotig matching pl-otx <dig> and two isotigs matching each of the other three genes . alignment of transcriptome sequences to published sequences provides validation for the transcriptome assembly for all four genes . however, for pl-enpl-otx <dig>  and pl-nos, the two isotigs retrieved are non-overlapping, indicating the transcriptome sequences remain unresolved. for pl-en and pl-nos, the isotig or isotigs in the transcriptome cover most of the previously known sequence , but for pl-otx <dig> and pl-otx <dig> the transcriptome sequences represent only ~1/ <dig> of the previously known sequence . thus, although gene representation appears to be high in this transcriptome, we expect that further sequencing, either in a high-throughput manner or on an individual basis, will be necessary to determine full-length sequences of many transcripts.

expression of wnt/β-catenin pathway genes during regeneration
to further demonstrate the utility of our sequencing effort for regeneration studies, we examined the expression patterns of two genes present in the transcriptome, homologs of frizzled  and β-catenin . these genes were chosen because they are components of the wnt/β-catenin pathway, an important cell signaling pathway implicated in numerous developmental processes, including regeneration  <cit> . we identified from our transcriptome several homologs of fz  and a single homolog of β-cat . we examined expression of one of these fz homologs, pl-fza, and the homolog of β-catpl-β-cat, by whole mount in situ hybridization of regenerating and fissioning p. leidyi.

during both anterior and posterior regeneration, pl-fza and pl-β-cat are expressed strongly and specifically within the regeneration blastema, the mass of cells from which the new structures will develop . for both genes, expression becomes detectable at the wound site between  <dig> and 24 hours after amputation, around the time a blastema becomes visible, and expression then broadens as the blastema grows. expression remains high through mid-stages of regeneration, gradually fading as the blastema differentiates. pl-fza is expressed diffusely in much of the blastema but is weak ventrally and highest in a lateral band on either side of the blastema at mid-stages of regeneration. pl-β-cat shows broad and strong expression throughout the blastema. consistent with the idea that fission and regeneration are evolutionarily related processes, both genes are also expressed in new tissue developing by fission, in patterns largely similar to those during regeneration . in situ hybridizations using control sense probes yield only light diffuse staining suggestive of probe trapping. expression patterns of pl-fza and pl-β-cat are distinct from each other and from those of other genes investigated in this species, further indicating specificity of our in situ results.

our results provide the first expression data for frizzled or β-catenin genes during annelid regeneration and strongly implicate wnt signaling in p. leidyi regeneration. they also add to the accumulating data showing a close developmental relationship between regeneration and fission in these animals. more broadly, these findings demonstrate that sequences from this transcriptome can provide new insights into annelid development, setting the stage for future comparative studies of annelid regeneration.

applications for further regeneration research
this transcriptome dataset provides a valuable new resource for regeneration research in annelids. the work described here already demonstrates the utility of this dataset: our go analysis suggests that a large number of genes relevant for regeneration research are represented, our sequence confirmation assays show that putative transcripts from our assembly can be independently validated, and our expression studies demonstrate that genes expressed during regeneration are indeed present in this transcriptome and can provide new insight into annelid regeneration.

this transcriptome resource promises to accelerate regeneration research in p. leidyi and provides a stepping-stone to studies of regeneration failure in closely related, non-regenerating naid species. this dataset greatly facilitates gene discovery, allowing genes of interest to be quickly identified and characterized by rt-pcr or in situ hybridization. importantly, this resource can also provide a reference transcriptome for larger, genome-scale studies, such as high-throughput analyses of gene expression by microarrays or rna-seq  <cit> . extending these approaches to closely related regenerating and non-regenerating naid species holds great promise for elucidating the genetic basis of both regeneration success and failure.

CONCLUSIONS
this transcriptome sequencing project has produced the first genomic-type sequence data for any of the naid annelids, a promising group for understanding regeneration loss. this dataset also represents the first regeneration-based, large-scale sequence database for annelids as a whole and thus provides a valuable resource for regeneration research more broadly. our approach of using mixed-stage starting material and combining normalized/non-normalized cdna pools was successful in producing a transcriptome with high gene representation. based on blast searches for known regeneration genes and relevant go analyses matches, we conclude that our methods captured a significant number of genes that may be involved in regeneration. this transcriptome resource enabled gene expression studies that have provided novel insight into annelid regeneration, yielding the first evidence suggesting that a cell-signaling pathway important in other regenerating systems, wnt/β-catenin signaling, is initiated during annelid regeneration. thus, this dataset promises to be instrumental in determining which genes are involved in regeneration processes in p. leidyi and will subsequently inform evolution of regeneration studies in the naids as a whole.

the development of genomic resources for the lophotrochozoa  has lagged considerably behind that of other major groups of animals. with the advent of less expensive sequencing technologies and an increased appreciation of the value of non-traditional model systems, genomic resources for this group are finally becoming available. transcriptomes have recently been generated for a range of lophotrochozoan taxa  <cit> , including the highly regenerative planarians  <cit> . the growing number of genomic resources for lophotrochozoans promises to help fuel research on a broad range of questions in this large and diverse clade.

