BACKGROUND
endophytic microorganisms are conventionally defined as bacteria, archaea or fungi that inhabit plant tissues for at least a period in their life cycle, and cause no negative effects on their hosts  <cit> . they are often described as an important modulating agent of plants’ fitness, promoting the health of the host plants and their ability to adapt to environmental stresses. the promotion of host growth may occur through nitrogen fixation, enhanced availability of nutrients , suppressing pathogens, auxin production, among others  <cit> .

the factors that drive the assembly of the endophytic community have not been completely established. bacterial root colonization often starts with the recognition of specific compounds in the root exudates by the bacteria, and endophytic colonization tends to follow a stochastic pattern  <cit> . it is well known that biotic  and abiotic  characteristics can influence the assembly of the endophytic community  <cit> . using green-fluorescent-protein -labeled endophytes, johnston-monje and raizada  <cit>  demonstrated the transport of the endophytes from seeds into plant roots and tissues. also, endophytes injected into stems moved into the roots and rhizosphere, suggesting that there may be a continuing microbial community shifts within the root microbiome  <cit> . moreover, agricultural management practices introduced to the environment, such as herbicide and pesticide applications, crop management and genetically modified  plants, can also influence plant-microbe interactions and may result on a variation of the diversity, structure and richness of the microbial community that will live inside the plant.

worldwide, cultivation of gm plant is growing impressively. the reduced need for application of broad-spectrum chemical pesticides, such as in the case of maize carrying bacillus thuringiensis  insect toxin genes, is undoubtedly of great advantage  <cit> . brazil achieved, for the fourth consecutive year, the largest increase in gm crop area of ~ <dig>  million hectares compared to  <dig>  gm maize remained the second most important crop, with a total of  <dig>  million hectares for both summer  and winter   <cit> .

while the use of gm plants increases, different studies were performed to determine whether gm plants affect microbial species. nevertheless, this is still a controversial matter  <cit> . in a previous study, the bacterial and fungal communities associated with the rhizosphere of two genetically modified  maize genotypes by inclusion of transgenes were compared by culture-independent methodologies to the non-bt near-isogenic parental genotype. two different brazilian soils and three stages of plant development in two different periods of the year were included in the study  <cit> . no discernible effects of the gm genotypes, as compared to the non-bt genotype, were observed; but clear differences occurred in these rhizosphere communities between the soils and the periods of the year in which maize was cultivated  <cit> . however, the effect of host genome modifications on their endophytic microbial communities has not been considered. for this reason, this study was aimed at comparing the gm genotypes with the near-isogenic maize hybrid to consider the influence of the host genome modification in their endophytic communities. we hypothesize that the introduction of exogenous genes  in maize may alter the endophytic microbial communities associated with these plants due to a possible modification of their root exudation pattern. molecular approaches  were used to determine the structure of endophytic bacterial, archaeal and fungal communities and the composition of endophytic bacterial communities in the roots of maize genotypes, respectively.

RESULTS
structure of endophytic bacterial, archaeal and fungal communities in the roots of maize genotypes analyzed by dgge
the three maize genotypes  were sampled after 90 days of growing in cerrado soil, during the raining season in brazil. they did not show any apparent difference in growth conditions or productivity. no signs of disease or nutrient scarcity were noted .

the dgge profiles obtained from the endophytic bacterial community were found to be very similar among the two transgenic genotypes and their near-isogenic non-transgenic maize  . however, samples obtained from the control and mon <dig> were closer between each other than those obtained from tc <dig> . common bands were detected in all samples. cluster analysis corroborated the visual interpretation of the dgge profiles, where three main groups were formed: a , b  and c .figure  <dig> 
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis  fingerprints of bacterial , archaeal  16s rrna gene fragments, and fungal  internal transcribed spacer  region amplified from the dna extracted from the three maize genotypes  and their respective dendrograms constructed using the pearson correlation index. cluster analysis was performed by the unweighted pair group method with average linkages  using the bionumerics software.



endophytic archaeal community found in the two transgenic genotypes showed to be closer  between each other when compared to that of the control . in fact, the three replicates of the control were not as reproducible as observed in the triplicate samples from other communities evaluated in our study . an opposite situation could be observed when the endophytic fungal community was considered . reproducible replicates of the control were observed while those from the two transgenic genotypes were quite variable. fungal community of mon <dig> and tc <dig> showed between  <dig> to 75% similarity , suggesting little influence of the genotypes as no separate clusters were observed.

diversity of the endophytic bacterial community in the roots of the two transgenic genotypes and their near-isogenic non-transgenic maize
the dna extracted from the roots of the three maize genotypes  was used to construct nine 16s rrna gene clone libraries. more than  <dig> high quality sequences were obtained, and these sequences  were further clustered into otus with 97% nucleotide similarity.

the data obtained from the statistical analyses showed that the clone libraries covered  <dig> to 89% of the bacterial 16s rrna phylotypes that resulted from the pcr amplification using the three maize genotypes . the highest richness  and diversity  of 16s rrna phylotypes were observed in the clone libraries constructed with pcr amplification products obtained from mon <dig> and tc <dig>  respectively . however, the values obtained in both indices for the three libraries  were not statistically significant .table  <dig> 
coverage, shannon-weaver and chao <dig> diversity indices based on the bacterial 16s rrna-coding sequences in the clone libraries obtained from the three maize genotypes



clone libraries
number of clones
number of otus
chao1
shannon-weaver
coverage 
± − standard deviation of the three values obtained .



phylogenetic analyses of bacterial 16s rrna-coding genes revealed a strong relative abundance of otus associated with the phylum proteobacteria . however, the relative abundance of proteobacteria classes was different among maize genotypes. gammaproteobacteria represented the main bacterial class of tc <dig> genotype , whereas betaproteobacteria were more abundant in non-bt and mon <dig> genotypes  . alphaproteobacteria represented 1% of otus obtained from non-bt and mon <dig> genotypes, and 6% of otus in tc <dig>  furthermore, otus associated with the phylum actinobacteria were also observed in all genotypes, but corresponded to only  <dig>  to  <dig> % of the otus . some other phyla were also found in at least one of the clone libraries obtained from the three maize genotypes, such as gemmatimonadetes, bacteroidetes, acidobacteria and chloroflexi . a systematical analysis of taxonomic groups  among all genotypes was further carried out. table  <dig> gives an overview of the abundance of different bacterial groups in the clone libraries obtained. otus associated with stenotrophomonas, achromobacter and burkholderia genera were found in all clone libraries. otus associated with enterobacter and rhizobium were dominant in tc <dig> clone libraries, but not in those of mon <dig> and non-bt . in addition, otus associated with other genera were observed within each genotype; however, their relative abundances were always lower than 2%.figure  <dig> 
relative abundance of bacterial phyla and of proteobacteria classes in the clone libraries. each graph represents the sum of three libraries per maize genotype.
relative abundance of bacterial genera among transgenic and non-transgenic maize


relative abundance of bacterial genera
samples
non-bt 
mon <dig> 
tc <dig> 
chryseobacterium

flavobacterium
paenibacillus

lactococcus
ochrobactrum

ancylobacter

pedomicrobium

phyllobacterium

rhizobium

parvibaculum

paracraurococcus
achromobacter

bordetella

pusillimonas

burkholderia

limnobacter

caenimonas

comamonas

inhella

duganella

herbaspirillum

massillia

naxibacter

silvimonas
enterobacter

acinetobacter

pseudomonas

aspromonas

lysobacter

rhodanobacter

stenotrophomonas
-, not detected.

different letters in superscript, following values in percentage, indicate statistical significance differences.



mantel test analysis was performed to compare the relative abundance of the dominant bacterial community found in the different maize genotypes. although sequences associated with burkholderia were found in all libraries, their relative abundances were not statistically different among the three genotypes. on the other hand, the relative abundance of achromobacter-related otus did not differ between non-bt and mon <dig> genotypes, but it was lower in tc <dig> clone libraries . the relative abundance of stenotrophomonas-related otus was statistically different only between non-bt and tc <dig> genotypes. additionally, the relative abundances of both enterobacter- and rhizobium-related otus were higher  in tc <dig> clone libraries, when compared to those of mon <dig> and non-bt .

the principal component analysis  based on weighted unifrac distance was also performed to analyze bacterial community structure from the three maize genotypes . similar trends regarding upgma cluster analysis  were revealed. the clone libraries obtained from tc <dig> tended to separate from those of the control and mon <dig>  conversely, the clone libraries derived from the control and mon <dig> could neither be separated by first-axis nor second-axis . these results suggest that the endophytic bacterial community of the maize genotype tc <dig>  differs from the communities of the maize genotype mon <dig>  and the communities of the near-isogenic parental genotypes  of both gm maize samples.figure  <dig> 
principal component analyses  of the clone libraries. the symbols correspond to the maize genotypes: ▲ tc1507; ● mon <dig> and ■ control .



discussion
in a previous study, cotta et al.  <cit>  evaluated the possible effects of the same two bt maize plants used here, but cultivated in two different tropical soil types during two different periods of cultivation and during different plant growth stages, in relation to the diversities of their rhizospheric microbial communities. no major effects of the cry-gene-loaded gm maize plants on the bacterial, actinobacterial and fungal communities were observed. however, no data were presented concerning their endophytic microbial communities.

saxena and stotzky  <cit>  and devare et al.  <cit>  have previously presented a finding similar to those obtained by cotta et al.  <cit>  when different microbial communities of the rhizosphere of transgenic and non-transgenic maize were compared. oppositely, stuart et al.  <cit>  found that the fungal community was affected in transgenic imidazolinone-tolerant sugarcane plants. however, these effects were also related to other factors such as plant age. in fact, different studies have already demonstrated that factors like soil type, plant age, period of cultivation and field heterogeneity may interfere more in the structure and/or composition of the root associated-microbial community than the insertion of an exogenous gene in the plant .

in this study, two maize genotypes  and their near-isogenic parental genotype  were used. they were sown in the same tropical soil and field, and they had the same developmental stage during the sampling of plants. therefore, the influence of the major biotic and abiotic factors could be disregarded. although many studies have already revealed that the plant genotype is an important determinant of endophyte community formation  <cit> , the effect of host genome modification on their endophytic communities was considered here, since no previous study was available using these maize genotypes, as previously stated. only the genetically modified bt maize lines containing other bt-toxins  have been studied before, and no influence on the structure and functioning of root-associated endophyte communities was demonstrated  <cit> .

dgge profiles obtained in this study showed that the endophytic archaeal and fungal communities of the two transgenic genotypes and their near-isogenic non-transgenic maize do not seem to follow any tendency of grouping, as different patterns were erratically distributed across replicates. therefore, we can speculate that the composition of fungal and archaeal community was not specifically influenced by the plant genotypes. on the other hand, the bacterial dgge profiles showed a minor trend of grouping, suggesting that the protein exudation resulted from the transgenic events and/or secondary  changes in the genetic composition of maize plants influenced the endophytic bacterial community structure. to better characterize the composition of the endophytic bacterial community within each maize genotype, different clone libraries were constructed. the relative abundance of the main bacterial genera was significantly different between the maize genotypes, reflecting a specific relationship between endophytic community and host genome. likewise, aira et al.  <cit> , gaiero et al.  <cit>  and donn et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that plants of different species or even plant genotypes grown in the same soil harbor distinct groups of endophytes, suggesting that plants impact the microbial communities found inside their roots.

prischl et al.  <cit>  showed that members of alphaproteobacteria, actinobacteria and gammaproteobacteria were the predominant bacterial community cultivated from transgenic maize expressing bacillus thuringiensis cry proteins. within genera level, mcinroy and kloepper  <cit>  showed that the most frequently isolated members of the endophytic bacterial community in maize were enterobacter spp., followed by burkholderia spp. we found that betaproteobacteria were more abundant in non-bt and mon <dig> . on the other hand, gammaproteobacteria and alphaproteobacteria were more abundant in tc <dig> . furthermore, the relative abundance of enterobacter and rhizobium, from gammaproteobacteria and alphaproteobacteria classes, respectively, was much higher in tc <dig> when compared to other genotypes. pereira et al.  <cit>  also observed that gammaproteobacteria, within enterobacter, erwinia, klebsiella, pseudomonas, and stenotrophomonas genera were the predominant groups in association with maize roots.

different endophytic enterobacter strains have been described as plant growth promoters  <cit>  and it is plausible to consider that specific bacteria are attracted by the gm maize genotype tc <dig>  the same situation can be observed when the relative abundance of rhizobium is considered. in fact, the only difference between tc <dig> and mon <dig> genotypes is the expression of the herbicide resistance phosphinothricin-n-acetyltransferase . however, when we compared the bacterial community from the three maize genotypes, the results showed that those of tc <dig> tended to separate from those of the control and mon <dig>  therefore, either the presence of the protein pat or other minor genetic differences between the control and tc <dig> resulted from the process of obtaining tc <dig> genotype may be responsible for the selection of specific bacterial communities inside the roots of the transgenic maize – tc <dig>  nevertheless, it is still necessary to correlate the bacterial selection observed in the genotype tc <dig> at the functional level.

CONCLUSIONS
the endophytic bacterial community of the maize genotype tc <dig> differed from the communities of the maize genotype mon <dig> and of their near-isogenic parental genotypes . other studies are still necessary to determine whether either secondary differences occurring upon genetic modifications or the presence of the protein pat in the transgenic maize tc <dig> is the responsible for the selection of specific bacterial communities inside its roots. therefore, the precise impact of transgene expression on endophytic community shifts is something that needs to be further investigated.

