BACKGROUND
malate synthase catalyzes the condensation of acetyl coenzyme a and glyoxylate to form malate and coenzyme a   <cit> . along with isocitrate lyase, which catalyses the aldol cleavage of isocitrate to succinate and glyoxylate, this enzyme constitutes the glyoxylate bypass of the tricarboxylic acid  cycle  <cit> . apart from replenishing the tca cycle intermediates , the glyoxylate cycle is essential for growth on acetyl coa  as a sole carbon source by bypassing two decarboxylation steps of the tca cycle. therefore, the carbon imported in the glyoxylate cycle as acetyl is not lost as co <dig> – as would happen in the tca cycle – but incorporated into intermediates of the cycle, which are available for anabolism. the net result is the conversion of two molecules acetyl coa into one molecule of succinate. because the glyoxylate cycle includes two oxidative steps, it also provides some energy  <cit> .

recently, fischer and sauer reported that malate synthase is an important component of the phosphoenolpyruvate-glyoxylate cycle in escherichia coli, which functions under conditions of glucose hunger  <cit> . in addition, it serves an anaplerotic role in glycolate oxidation  <cit> . in several microorganisms, the glyoxylate bypass is of general importance to microbial pathogenesis. persistence of mycobacterium tuberculosis is facilitated by the glyoxylate bypass  <cit> , whereas this metabolic pathway is required for high virulence of candida albicans  <cit> . the ability of these organisms to utilize fatty acids as a carbon and energy source seems crucial to their survival in the infected host. although it is widely accepted that the glyoxylate cycle operates in bacteria, fungi, some protists, and plants, the claim that the glyoxylate cycle is functionally active in higher animals remains controversial  <cit> . in e. coli two isoenzymes have been identified: aceb encodes the malate synthase a involved in acetate metabolism whereas glcb encodes the malate synthase g  involved in glycolate metabolism  <cit> . pseudomonas aeruginosa is predicted to encode msg  but not type a  <cit> .

the expression of glcb of p. aeruginosa is upregulated during infection  <cit>  and the malate synthase activity is implicated in twitching-mediated chemotaxis towards phospholipids and fatty acids  <cit> . both elements suggest the importance of the glyoxylate bypass in the pathogenesis of p. aeruginosa. in view of possible applications in the development of novel antibiotics against p. aeruginosa, we have characterized the msg of this opportunistic pathogen endowed with strong antibiotic resistance  <cit> .

RESULTS
deletion of the p. aeruginosa gene encoding msg
the glcb gene of p. aeruginosa pao <dig> encoding msg was deleted by double homologous recombination. p. aeruginosa pao <dig> Δglcb is able to grow on rich medium , although with slightly reduced efficiency of plating, compared to the wild type strain . the deletion mutant was unable to produce colonies on medium with acetate as the sole carbon source, confirming the essential nature of the malate synthase for growth on acetate and the prediction of a single msg gene . the reduced efficiency of plating of wild type p. aeruginosa and the reduced colony size on media with acetate indicate suboptimal growth of wild type p. aeruginosa on acetate.

recombinant production and purification of msg
the msg was produced recombinantly fused to a glutathione s-transferase  tag. the protein was purified to homogeneity by subsequent glutathione affinity chromatography, proteolytic removal of the gst tag and anion exchange chromatography. approximately  <dig> mg of msg was purified per liter of culture broth. the predicted molecular weight of the fusion protein  as well as msg  corresponds well to the observed bands on gel .

influence of temperature on the activity and stability of msg
both the temperature optimum and the thermal stability of the msg activity were investigated. to achieve a higher resolution, the zone of highest activity was measured at smaller temperature intervals . maximal activity occurs at  <dig> °c ; between  <dig>  and 40°c more than 90% of the activity remains. at lower temperatures, this activity decreases steadily, but does not drop to zero. at 5°c and 15°c,  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the activity remained, respectively. above  <dig> °c the activity dropped fast and was not significantly different from zero at 65°c and 75°c  .

the thermal stability of msg was examined by preincubating the enzyme for one hour at a given temperature and subsequently assaying the enzymatic activity at  <dig> °c as described in the previous paragraph. preincubation of msg at 40°c or lower temperatures did not result in reduced enzymatic activity . after one hour preincubation at 55°c, enzymatic activity was approximately halved . higher preincubation temperatures  caused complete loss of malate synthase activity .

influence of ph on the activity and stability of msg
the ph optimum of msg was investigated using standard conditions . to eliminate a possible influence of the buffering components on the enzymatic activity, a universal buffer containing three different buffering agents  was used. the msg activity is maximal between ph  <dig> and  <dig> . at a ph of  <dig> and  <dig>   <dig> and 85% of the activity is retained, respectively. however, outside this ph range  the activity decreases fast. below ph  <dig> no activity remains .

the ph dependency of msg stability was determined by preincubation of the enzyme for one hour at a specific ph and subsequently diluting the enzyme 100-fold before assaying the enzymatic activity at ph  <dig> . stability of msg was maximal after a preincubation at ph  <dig> and  <dig> . when preincubating the enzyme in more basic buffer , the stability gradually dropped . the enzymatic activity was lost upon preincubation at lower  or higher ph values  .

msg is susceptible to inhibition by pyruvate
the inhibitory potential of pyruvate on the activity of the msg of p. aeruginosa was shown by adding a twofold dilution series of pyruvate to a constant amount of msg and a constant amount of substrate. the malate synthase activity dropped with increasing pyruvate concentration , showing that pyruvate also acts as an inhibitor of the p. aeruginosa msg.

kinetic parameters of msg
to determine the kinetic parameters of msg, the enzymatic reaction was followed over time. different combinations of substrate  concentrations were assayed, whereas the other conditions remained constant . for each combination, the velocities were determined. the msg-catalyzed reaction generated linear lineweaver-burk plots over the concentration range tested. figure 5a shows these plots with respect to glyoxylate at various concentrations of acetyl coa. since this is a two-substrate reaction, determination of the actual parameters requires a secondary plot . the formulas indicated in the figures allow calculation of kinetic parameters. the km glyoxylate, km acetyl coa  and vmax  of the p. aeruginosa pao <dig> msg are comparable to those of other malate synthases available from literature .

discussion
malate synthase is essential for the growth on acetate as a sole carbon source, which is in agreement with the prediction of a single malate synthase in p. aeruginosa. in addition, the deletion mutant shows somewhat reduced growth on rich medium, probably reflecting its anaplerotic role in the tca cycle and its role in the phosphoenolpyruvate-glyoxylate cycle, as described by fischer and sauer  <cit> . an efficient and straightforward procedure for the purification of untagged msg was developed. removal of the gst tag rules out possible interference of the tag with the enzymatic activity of the enzyme. in addition, the quantity and the purity of the tagless enzyme are suitable for crystallography of p. aeruginosa msg.

subsequently, the purified msg activity was characterized biochemically. the temperature optimum and stability show that the enzyme behaves like a typical mesophylic protein, since these parameters indicate a rapid and irreversible inactivation of msg. the reduction in thermal stability from 55°c on is in agreement with the steep decline in enzymatic activity at this temperature. after all, instability decreases the amount of functional enzyme. however, reduction in enzymatic activity at 55°c  is only partially explained by the thermal instability at 55°c . this suggests that a fraction of the protein is unfolded reversibly – and therefore temporarily inactive – before either denaturing irreversibly at this temperature or returning to its active state after cooling. the temperature optimum  and the considerable activity at lower temperatures  are in agreement with the microbial characteristics of p. aeruginosa as an opportunistic  pathogen and a common water and soil organism, respectively. with only 90% of the activity realized at the cytoplasmic ph, the ph optimum and stability of msg seem somewhat shifted to a more basic ph range. the stability analysis suggests fast and irreversible denaturation of msg outside the ph range from  <dig> to  <dig>  the optimal ph for enzymatic activity  was limited to a more narrow ph range . in combination with the slightly reduced stability at ph  <dig> to  <dig>  these data suggest that the actual ph optimum for the enzymatic activity is shifted somewhat further to a more basic ph compared to the apparent ph optimum . since the enzyme functions intracellularly   <cit> , the high activity at elevated ph is quite surprising. the reason for this remains to be elucidated, as data from other malate synthases is lacking. possibly, this pattern can be explained by the catalytic mechanism of msg and the residues involved. based on sequence similarity with msg of e. coli  <cit>  and m. tuberculosis  <cit> , asp <dig> functions as a catalytic base, abstracting a proton from the terminal methyl group of acetyl coa. the resulting negative enolate is stabilized by the positive charge of conserved arg <dig>  glyoxylate is polarized for nucleophilic attack by the magnesium ion, which is essential for enzymatic activity. after nucleophilic attack of the enolate anion on glyoxylate, the resulting malyl-coa intermediate is stabilized by mg2+ and arg <dig>  subsequently, this intermediate is hydrolyzed by a water molecule activated by glu <dig> and/or asp <dig>  as a result, the products, malate and coa, are released  <cit> . the theoretical pka's of the side chains of the catalytic residues ,  <dig>  ,  <dig>   in solution at 25°c) suggest that their charge probably remains unaltered over this ph range. however, the pka can vary considerably  depending on the local environment of the amino acid side chain in the protein  <cit> . alternatively, the charge of residues involved in substrate binding might change over this ph range. likewise, charge changes of residues crucial to the structural stability of msg could gravely affect the enzyme's structural stability at a ph outside the range between  <dig> and  <dig> and lead to  denaturation. future structural analysis of this msg might provide more insight in the exact mechanisms involved. the inhibition of malate synthase g by pyruvate is probably competitive in nature, presumably by competition with glyoxylate  <cit> .

the kinetic parameters of msg of p. aeruginosa are comparable to those of the enzymes of other organisms . since the extended straight lines in the primary lineweaver-burk plot intersect approximately in one unique point, msg proceeds through a ternary complex, which contains the enzyme in complex with both substrates, as opposed to a substituted enzyme mechanism, in which a group is transferred from the first substrate that leaves the complex before the second substrate binds. this is in agreement with the catalytic mechanism proposed for the e. coli  <cit>  and the m. tuberculosis msg  <cit>  as is the case for most enzymes with two substrates catalyzing a group transfer  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the implication of the glyoxylate bypass in the pathology of various microorganisms makes msg an attractive new target for antibacterial therapy  <cit> . what makes them especially appealing is that no genes encoding the enzymes of the glyoxylate bypass have been identified in mammals  <cit> . in addition, p. aeruginosa was shown to encode only a single malate synthase. the microbial and biochemical characterization of msg of p. aeruginosa are an important step towards the development of antibacterials targeting this enzyme to combat antibiotic resistant p. aeruginosa infections. future studies of the inhibition kinetics of pyruvate in combination with the elucidation of the crystal structure of msg in complex with substrates, products and natural inhibitors will be instrumental to develop novel inhibition strategies.

