BACKGROUND
the complex etiology and heterogeneity of mental disorders is associated with moderate effectiveness of psychoactive drugs, frequent recurrence of symptoms and high cost of therapy  <cit> . psychotropic drugs have diverse therapeutic profiles , and even a single class drugs can show high diversity of effectiveness and effects may be limited to particular sub-types of a given disorder, exemplified by the various subclasses of antidepressants  <cit> . on the other hand, drugs belonging to different therapeutic classes may have effects that are either beneficial or adverse in a particular disease. therefore, the identification of common and specific neurobiological actions of psychoactive compounds is critical to understanding therapeutic mechanisms. furthermore, comparison of drug-induced molecular profiles may provide objective criteria for a more rational classification of psychotropic drugs.

1the effective drug doses were based on the literature; the drugs were purchased from 2sigma-aldrich, 3biotrend, 4teva, 5polpharma or 6synthesized from morphine, 7class of antidepressant .

the development of maladaptive neuroplastic changes is suggested to underlie the progression of neuropsychiatric disorders  <cit> . the pattern of structural alterations in the brain is determined by the process of synaptic plasticity and is influenced by genetic, neurodevelopmental and environmental factors  <cit> . it is thought that therapeutic agents reverse disease-related alterations by reconstruction and normalization of neuronal connections in targeted brain areas  <cit> . this view is supported by the fact that the therapeutic effects of psychotropic drugs usually have delayed onset and gradually increase with time. establishment of these long-lasting changes requires gene expression and synthesis of new proteins  <cit>  in a time-dependent and region-specific manner; such changes may serve as early markers of drug-activated biological processes.

impaired control over drive and motivation is a frequent symptom in psychiatric disorders, including depression, mania and addiction  <cit> . since these conditions are characterized by disturbed monoaminergic function, most current pharmacotherapies target receptors and transporters for dopamine, serotonin and noradrenaline as well as other transmitters such as gaba and acetylcholine  <cit> . all of these transmitter systems are represented in the striatum, a brain region responsible for control of motivation, reward-based learning and decision-making  <cit> . the striatum as an evolutionarily ancient brain region reveals comparable functions and gene expression profiles between rodents and humans  <cit> . thus, despite the limitations of an animal model  <cit> , the comparison of drug-induced dynamic alterations in the rodent striatal gene expression profile provides insights into molecular mechanisms of psychotropic drug actions.

in this study, using whole-genome gene expression microarrays we identified main drug-responsive genomic networks that are regulated by  <dig> individual psychoactive drugs known to impact on one or more pharmacological targets within the striatum. this work introduces a novel approach for the classification of psychotropic drugs on the basis of gene expression profiling. to encourage further discoveries along these lines, we made freely available the entire interactive database which contains the results of the present study .

RESULTS
drug-induced transcriptional alterations in the striatum
using whole-genome microarrays , we compared striatal gene expression profiles  produced by  <dig> major psychoactive drugs at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 8 hours after acute administration . obtained data were subjected to two-way analysis of variance  with drug and time as factors . we found  <dig> drug-responsive transcripts in the striatum at the most conservative statistical threshold . after removal of genes represented more than once on the microarrays, this list contains  <dig> unique genes. for down-stream analyses we selected top  <dig> transcripts ordered by genes2mind score, which takes into account fold of change and direction of drug-induce gene expression alterations . this method was implemented in the genes2mind selection module . furthermore, we estimated total number of genes regulated by psychotropic drugs by calculation of true positives over a wide range of false discovery rates . this estimation indicated that the total number of regulated transcripts slightly exceeds one thousand . therefore, with the restrictive statistical approach we identified about 30% of drug-responsive genes in the striatum. for canonical pathway analysis we used 5% fdr threshold at which we identified most of drug-regulated transcripts . the number of genes regulated by each drugs in the time-course  is presented in additional file  <dig>  all the additional analyses and comparisons  are available at the genes2mind resource.

molecular classification of psychotropic drugs
we used hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis  of the  <dig> drug-responsive transcripts  to classify psychotropic drugs. drug-induced transcriptional signatures were distinguished between the various therapeutic groups: anxiolytics , atypical antipsychotics , opioids  and psychostimulants  . however, the expression profile of the antipsychotic drug - haloperidol was similar to that of psychostimulants and tranylcypromine. also, the effects of nicotine resembled those of addictive drugs, ethanol and opioids, more closely than other psychostimulants. antidepressants proved to be the most heterogeneous group of drugs in terms of their impact on gene expression, with mianserin, imipramine, tranylcypromine and fluoxetine displaying very diverse profiles. the gene expression profile of mianserin was most similar to those elicited by atypical neuroleptics; the profiles obtained in response to imipramine were similar to those produced by anxiolytics; and tranylcypromine generated a profile that resembled that obtained with psychostimulants. nevertheless, antidepressants that target monoamine transporters  fell into one cluster.

three main pca components explained 56% of the variance in gene expression and mapped the test drugs in three-dimensional space according to their molecular profiles . the first pca component represented the strong effects of opioids, ethanol and tranylcypromine; there were no detectable effects of diazepam and hydroxyzine. the second principal component included the full spectrum of drug-induced effects in the striatum - from substantial inhibition of gene expression by diazepam or clozapine to strong activation by cocaine and methamphetamine. the third pca component showed, on one hand, a common effect of antipsychotic drugs and mianserin, and on the other, a common effect of all three anxiolytics.

drug-induced gene expression networks
to connect effects of psychotropic drugs to inducible gene expression patterns in the striatum, we determined the correlation between loadings of the first three pca components and the level of transcriptional alterations. hierarchical clustering was used to search for drug-inducible groups of co-expressed genes . three main drug-responsive gene clusters, representing network α , β  and γ  became evident. the clusters revealed diverse drug- and time-dependent patterns of up- and down-regulation of gene expression . next, a map of the complete striatal transcriptome, based on the level of correlation between profiles of all transcripts measured using microarrays, was developed in order to depict drug-induced alterations in expression. all three drug-responsive gene clusters are located on the same branch of a tree . the clusters were clearly separated and organized in drug-regulated genomic networks . we found no other networks with distinct gene expression patterns. however, it is possible to identify subclusters of genes with moderately different profiles of expression within the three main networks .

expression of gene network α correlated with the second pca component. drug-induced changes in network α genes were bidirectional, e.g. methamphetamine induced expression of npas <dig> and egr <dig>  while diazepam inhibited it. buspirone, mianserin and risperidone induced some activity-dependent genes but down-regulated others, e.g. mianserin inhibited expression of homer <dig> by  <dig> -fold and induced fos by  <dig> -fold. the gene expression network β correlated with the first pca factor. the expression of this network was regulated to a different degree by drugs from various pharmacological groups, e.g. cdkn1a or fkbp <dig> after opioids and tranylcypromine, except that diazepam, hydroxyzine and imipramine had no effects. the expression of gene network γ correlated with the third pca component. all network γ genes were regulated by risperidone, mianserin and clozapine, in a bidirectional manner, e.g. cirbp and mtor were strongly up-regulated by atypical neuroleptics and mianserin, but down-regulated by tranylcypromine or methamphetamine.

functional description of drug-regulated gene networks
cell-type enrichment of drug-responsive genes
identification of the types of neural cells expressing genes from the α, β and γ networks was carried out by reference to publicly available data that represents cellular enrichment of individual transcripts in neurons, astrocytes or oligodendrocytes   <cit> . significant enrichment of transcripts from the expression network α was found in neurons  and under-representation in oligodendrocytes. gene network β was characterized by very strong over-representation of genes expressed in astrocytes, including the cell-type specific markers gjb <dig> and ppp1r3g. network γ genes did not show enrichment in any particular cell type although individual genes that were highly expressed in either neurons  or oligodendrocytes  were identified.

over-representation of transcription factor binding sites
the cremag database  <cit>  was used for in silico identification of molecular factors involved in the transcriptional control of the gene expression networks revealed in the present study. we found significant over-representation of sre  and cre  in the promoter regions of genes from network α. these elements are potential binding sites for the transcriptional factors srf  and creb <dig> . significant over-representation of gre  on promoter regions of genes from network β  was observed. gene network γ showed significant enrichment of binding sites for transcriptional factor nfya . two examples of genes with conserved binding sites for nfya  are per <dig> and mtor.

transcript stability of drug-responsive genes
transcript stability is related to function of the transcribed protein  <cit> . our analysis reveals substantial differences in the half-lives of mrnas belonging to the α and β networks. gene expression network α contains genes with a short mrna half-life , including very short-lived transcripts . in contrast, network β includes transcripts with significantly longer  half-lives . whole-genome screening indicated that genes with low mrna stability are frequently involved in regulation of intracellular signaling, while long-lived transcripts have a role in cell metabolism  <cit> . the median half-life of transcripts from network γ was  <dig>  h, i.e. not significantly different from the median of  <dig>  h for the whole transcriptome.

functional classification of drug-responsive genes
to characterize the transcriptional representation of biological processes, a list of genes from each gene expression network was analyzed using go . functional clusters of transcripts connected with protein map kinase phosphatase activity , rhythmic processes  and transcriptional regulator activity  were over-represented among genes from network α. the group of genes from network β was enriched in transcripts involved in lipid metabolism  and formation of adherens junctions , whereas, analysis of the novel network γ revealed the enrichment of genes connected to cell projection organization . a detailed description of the results of go classification is included in additional file  <dig> 

we did not find transcriptional regulation of genes coding main targets for psychotropic drugs, as for example dopamine receptors drd <dig> and drd1a or serotonin transporter slc6a <dig>  it is possible that promoters of these genes are not directly activated in response to the ligand binding.

canonical pathways analysis
a canonical pathways analysis was performed to investigate the functional characteristics between drug-regulated genes. to increase resolution of the analysis an extended list of transcripts was used . genes were assigned to the networks according to drug-induced profiles of alterations in expression . the canonical pathways analysis using the pathways-express identified significant biological functions altered differentially by the psychotropic drugs at the statistical threshold of p <  <dig> . the additional file  <dig> contains a list of biological pathways for each drug-regulated transcriptional network. the list of pathways for gene expression network α includes neuroplasticity-related signaling cascades mapk and erbb. the network β contains genes involved in the control of cellular metabolism via glucose regulation by adipocytokine and pparg molecular pathways. the γ network proved to be enriched in genes involved in regulation of circadian rhythm and mtor signaling pathways. additional file 8: figure s <dig> shows examples of canonical pathways enriched between drug-responsive genes .

the examples of drug-regulated transcriptional profiles
we selected genes with expression patterns representative for the identified drug-responsive transcriptional networks . in general, transcripts from network α reveal remarkable correlation in expression profile, but we also found drug-dependent diversity between particular genes.

the expression of areg is induced by psychostimulants and tranylcypromine administration. the profile of areg expression suggests that an increase in dopaminergic transmission may be directly involved in drug-induced regulation of this gene. moreover, the time-course of alterations in areg expression corresponds to pharmacokinetic properties of the drugs: we observed a strong increase in the mrna abundance of areg 1 h after injection of cocaine, 2 h after methamphetamine and 4 h after tranylcypromine. npas <dig> is induced by these three drugs in the same direction as areg, but unlike areg, npas <dig> expression is also induced by opioids and inhibited by diazepam, atypical neuroleptics as well as antidepressants that antagonize 5-ht <dig> receptors. other examples of genes with slightly different profiles are egr <dig> and arc, with expression induced by haloperidol and buspirone as well as dusp <dig> and fos, induced by haloperidol and mianserin .

drug-induced network β reveals more homogenous pattern of transcriptional alterations. genes from this network showed the largest alterations  in expression 4 h after administration of mianserin and tranylcypromine. example gene cdkn1a is activated to a different degree by all the psychotropic drugs, except for imipramine, diazepam and hydroxyzine.

network γ exhibits a pattern of gene expression changes that is connected to pharmacological properties of the drugs. transcriptional activation of cirbp is limited to mianserin, risperidone and clozapine treatment while opioids and psychostimulants seem to inhibit the expression of this gene and other network γ genes .

prediction of drug-target interactions from gene expression profiling
the comparison of gene expression profiles has been recently used as a tool for prediction of therapeutic properties of drugs  <cit> . our molecular classification of psychotropic drugs indicated an interesting profile of tianeptine. tianeptine is a tricyclic antidepressant whose mechanism of action is still not clear  <cit> . here, a linear model, based on the level of gene expression alterations induced in the striatum by drugs with well-known pharmacological properties , was used in an attempt to predict tianeptine’s molecular mechanism of action. the matrix of interactions between  <dig> psychotropic drugs and  <dig> neuropharmacological mechanisms was constructed on the basis of data in the pdsp ki database  <cit> . levels of modulation by tianeptine were predicted for each of the mechanisms. this analysis revealed that the transcriptional effects of tianeptine may involve increased activity of noradrenaline, serotonin and dopamine neurotransmission .

monoaminergic action of tianeptine
further, in situ hybridization was used to examine the anatomical distribution of drug-induced alterations in the expression of two neuroplasticity-related genes following exposure of mice to tianeptine and two other antidepressants, tranylcypromine and mianserin. patterns of tianeptine-induced expression of arc and egr <dig> in the forebrain proved similar to those produced by tranylcypromine, an inhibitor of monoamine oxidase that increases the concentrations of all monoamine neurotransmitters; both drugs induced arc and egr <dig> transcription in the striatum and neocortex . in contrast, mianserin, which affects levels of noradrenaline, but not of dopamine or serotonin, produced different effects; these included downregulation of arc and egr <dig> transcripts in the striatum. according to these profiles, we predicted that tianeptine, like other monoamine stimulants, may have a positive reinforcing effect in animals. this prediction was confirmed in the conditioned place preference test in which we observed a significant increase in time spent in the environmental context associated with tianeptine administration  . thus, both the patterns of drug-induced gene expression and the behavioral data support the conclusion that tianeptine acts as a positive modulator of monoaminergic neurotransmission.

discussion
the profile of drug-induced gene expression in the brain is determined by activity of different neurotransmiter systems and response of various types of cells. to unravel complexity of this profile we designed a detailed time-course gene expression study for eighteen psychotropic drugs belonging to all the major clinical classes. the previously published large-scale gene expression analyses were focused on a single drug  <cit> , drugs from one clinical class  <cit>  or marker genes  <cit> . transcriptome alterations induced in the brain by buspirone, bupropione, hydroxyzine or tianeptine were not analyzed so far. the study involved extraction of a pool of approximately  <dig> transcripts that are regulated by psychotropic drugs. differential transcription of different subsets of genes from this pool was observed during the first few hours after drug administration; 90% of the affected transcripts were up-regulated and the remaining were inhibited. interestingly, the majority of drug-induced transcriptional alterations dissipated within 8 hours of treatment, indicating that drug-induced changes of mrna abundance are transient. we suppose that they are then rapidly followed by protein expression and these proteomic alterations translate short-lived transcriptional drug effects into lasting structural modifications of the brain; further, we suggest that chronic drug treatment leads to accumulation of drug-induced plastic alterations that eventually become manifest as therapeutic effects.

this study was limited to transcriptional mechanisms activated in response to acute drug administration. the effects of psychoactive drugs such as anti-psychotic action, mood normalization, tolerance or addiction require repeated treatment. we have recently investigated gene expression changes at several time-points after chronic administration of heroin or methamphetamine to associate drug-induced molecular changes with long-term behavioral adaptations e  <cit> . in that work we found that effects of chronic treatment share transcriptional alterations with single administration, as for example regulation of glucocorticoid-dependent  or circadian rhythm-regulated genes . however, there were no direct correlations between transcriptional and behavioral effects of the drugs as well as no significant changes in gene expression profile after a period of withdrawal. we conclude that psychoactive drugs induce transient transcriptional program that may initiate neuroplastic alterations, but does not trigger long-term alteration in mrna abundance levels in mature differentiated brain cells.

bioinformatic analysis revealed that the transcriptional response to the psychotropic drugs tested fall into three major groups of co-regulated genes. the largest gene network, α, contains genes previously defined as being activity-dependent. the observed alterations in expression of genes belonging to the network α correspond well to drug effects on neuronal activity ; expression of genes in this network is known to depend on an interplay between the transcriptional factors creb and srf  <cit> . the gene network α includes a number of neuroplasticity-related transcriptional factors  as well as other regulators of brain plasticity   <cit> . moreover, some network α genes are involved in map kinase signal transduction pathway  which plays a pivotal role in various forms of long-lasting neuroplasticity  <cit> . the network α also contains novel genes   <cit> . these genes deserve further functional characterization with respect to drug effects. all network α genes were shown to be expressed in neurons and their mrnas were found to have relatively short half-lives. several lines of evidence indicate that the expression of genes belonging to network α is involved in the initiation of plastic alterations and long-term modulation of neuronal signaling and the diverse functions of these genes indicate that psychotropic drugs activate control points for multiple intracellular pathways  <cit> . accordingly, we suggest that, at the transcriptional level, brain plasticity is regulated through expression of molecular switches rather than of all components of neuroplasticity-related pathways.

another network identified  is strongly enriched in genes that are expressed predominantly in astrocytes and glucocorticoid response elements  in their promoter regions are overrepresented. however, while the collective function of network β genes in astrocytes remains unknown, genes from this group are implicated in glucose metabolism e.g. pdk <dig> and glucose transport e.g. slc2a <dig> as well as other metabolic processes; in addition, sult1a <dig> is involved in sulfate conjugation of neurotransmitters and certain xenobiotics and xdh plays a role in the oxidative metabolism of purines  <cit> . the network β is enriched for genes related to adipocytokine signaling pathway. this molecular cascade is an important regulator of energy intake and metabolic rate  <cit> . it thus appears that glial cells use expression of network β genes to activate a set of metabolic control points and therefore, to support the functional responses of neurons to psychotropic drugs. the relatively long half-lives of the mrnas generated from these genes most likely contribute to the regulation of neural cell metabolism  <cit> ; interestingly, patients with affective disorders often display altered brain metabolism  <cit> . glucocorticoids are key regulators of cellular metabolism and their dysregulated secretion is found in several psychiatric disorders  <cit> ; in major depression, antidepressant actions are usually first seen only after glucocorticoid secretion has been normalized  <cit> . thus, activation of glucocorticoid-dependent genes following psychotropic drug treatment may represent restoration of homeostatic control of brain metabolism.

the third psychotropic drug-inducible network, γ, that emerged from this study includes genes involved in the organization of cell projections  and the mtor pathway   <cit> . evolving evidence implicates the mtor pathway in dendrite arborization and spine morphology  <cit> . network γ may therefore serve to switch on multiple control points for morphological alterations in nerve cells. our results indicate that expression of this network in the striatum may depend on serotonin signaling, specifically the 5-ht <dig> receptor. thus, gene network γ may be involved in the mediation of the long-lasting effects of 5-ht <dig> antagonist antipsychotic drugs on the cellular level. moreover, the 5-ht <dig> blockade-dependent expression of network γ in the striatum that separates haloperidol from risperidone may be useful as a transcriptional marker for atypical neuroleptics.

the current anatomical therapeutic chemical  and world health organization  classification of psychotropic drugs is based on their clinical effectiveness. as shown by the present work, comparison of gene expression profiles can clearly distinguish between atypical antipsychotics, opioids and psychostimulants. moreover, the three anxiolytic drugs studied here show relatively similar genomic profiles despite the different mechanisms associated with their actions. interestingly, these anxiolytics and the antidepressant imipramine share a common expression profile and imipramine can act efficiently to reduce anxiety  <cit> . on the other hand, the molecular profile of mianserin differs markedly from that of imipramine while being similar to that of the atypical antipsychotics clozapine and risperidone; this may reflect the fact that all of these drugs can modulate serotonergic activity. the potential utility of the presently-described approach to distinguish between the two classes of antipsychotics is further illustrated by the finding that the typical antipsychotic haloperidol has a similar molecular profile to that of psychostimulant drugs. this most likely results from the propensity of all these drugs to upregulate activity-dependent genes in the striatum. it is important to note, however, that haloperidol and psychostimulants induce these genes in different neuronal populations and via different pharmacological mechanisms  <cit> . another observation from the present analysis is that drugs which trigger large increases in striatal dopamine and norepinephrine levels induce similar expression profiles .

in general, antidepressants proved to be highly heterogeneous with respect to activation of molecular networks. this diversity reflects their diverse pharmacological and neurobiological mechanisms of action  <cit> , as well as significant differences in the efficacy of individual compounds in the treatment of different forms of depression  <cit> . based on the present analysis of transcriptional profiles, it would appear that mianserin would be a highly effective treatment for psychotic depression, imipramine for anxiety-depressive disorders, and tranylcypromine for depression associated with anhedonia. the broad gene expression profile of fluoxetine indicates that it would be a suitable first-line treatment  <cit> .

the prediction of drug properties based on the pattern of gene expression alterations need not exactly correspond to the therapeutic profile. to form multidimensional profile of a drug or novel psychoactive compound the results of molecular analysis should be combined with binding profile and behavioral response  <cit> . the pharmacological mechanisms of action of the tricyclic drug tianeptine, indicated for depression, are not fully understood. the present genomic profiling approach appears to have the potential to identify neuronal targets for drugs with unknown mechanisms of action as well as for experimental compounds  <cit> . until now, tianeptine has been thought to act by either enhancing serotonin reuptake, modulating glutamatergic transmission and/or counteracting maladaptive stress-induced neuroplasticity  <cit> ; however, none of these mechanisms has been fully validated. the present study revealed that the transcriptional effects of tianeptine may result from a blockade of norepinephrine, serotonin and dopamine transporters; in this respect, tianpetine shares some of the dopaminergic and noradrenergic properties with its predecessor amineptine  <cit> . supporting the view that tianeptine acts primarily by modulating monoaminergic function are clinical findings that the tianeptine, has moderate addictive potential comparable to diazepam  <cit>  as well as the presently observed pattern of tianeptine-induced expression of activity-dependent genes. importantly, the lack of tianeptine-binding molecular targets suggests that the drug indirectly influences monoamine levels  <cit> . the transcriptional profile of tianeptine is not necessarily in conflict with the previously proposed mechanisms of its action as positive effects of tianeptine on both glutamatergic transmission and neuroplasticity might be indirect. however, our results suggest a change in tianeptine status from a drug acting through unknown mechanisms to an antidepressant with remarkable ability to modulate all three monoamine systems. compounds with such activity profile have been recently proposed as likely to form the basis for the development of the next generation of antidepressant drugs  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
psychotropic drugs conventionally classified as antidepressants, antipsychotics, anxiolytics, psychostimulants and opioids regulate expression of three major gene expression networks implicated in the control of neuronal signaling, brain metabolism and organization of cell projections. the patterns of drug-induced gene networks revealed here offer new valuable markers of pharmacological activation of diverse neurobiological processes and systems. in particular, the present study provides novel insights into the mechanisms through which tianeptine might exert its antidepressant action.

