BACKGROUND
insects in the order hemiptera, which includes all insects that feed exclusively or predominantly on phloem sap, currently represent the most significant challenge for agricultural pest management programs. although transgenic plants producing bacillus thuringiensis  toxin have achieved resistance to many devastating lepidopteran pests, these crops remain susceptible to infestation by aphids and other hemipterans. reduction in insecticide application, concomitant with the widespread cultivation of bt crops, has resulted in hemipteran pests being the primary insect threat in major agricultural systems  <cit> . aphid feeding causes an alteration of plant source-sink relationships  <cit> , the induction of premature leaf senescence  <cit> , secondary pathogen infection through fungal growth on aphid honeydew, and the transmission of plant viruses  <cit> . among these, virus transmission by aphids represents the greatest threat for agricultural crops. myzus persicae , which is capable of transmitting more than  <dig> plant viruses, is the world's most versatile aphid viral vector  <cit> . in particular, m. persicae is a very efficient vector of potato leafroll virus , which can lead to yield reductions of 40–70% in infected fields  <cit> . m. persicae lineages can vary considerably in their plrv transmission efficiency  <cit> , suggesting that there are lineage-specific genetic factors that influence this trait.

m. persicae has been found on hundreds of mostly dicotyledonous plant species  <cit> . given this broad host range, it is not surprising that differences in host plant utilization among m. persicae lineages are quite common, and efforts have been made to identify molecular variation that correlates with host range and reproductive life cycle  <cit> . the best-studied example of such variation is represented by the typically red-colored lineages that are able to thrive on tobacco  <cit> . these first appeared on tobacco in japan more than  <dig> years ago and have spread to all tobacco-growing regions of the world. in the united states, m. persicae has been found on tobacco since at least  <dig>  <cit> . red strains of m. persicae were first reported in the united states in  <dig>  and by  <dig> had become the dominant color morph on tobacco  <cit> . the tobacco-adapted lineage of m. persicae has been granted subspecific status, myzus persicae nicotianae  <cit> .

in the laboratory, several plant species are convenient hosts for rearing and studying m. persicae. brassica oleracea  is commonly employed as a host plant for maintaining aphid cultures. arabidopsis thaliana , a well-developed model genetic organism with a fully-sequenced genome, is readily consumed by m. persicae, and a. thaliana microarray studies have identified genes that are induced or repressed in response to m. persicae feeding  <cit> . nicotiana benthamiana, a wild relative of tobacco  <cit>  also serves as a host plant for some lineages of m. persicae. virally induced gene silencing  is particularly effective in n. benthamiana, permitting rapid screening of individual genes to study their importance in defense against m. persicae and other herbivores  <cit> . p. floridana  serves as a model solanaceous plant for studying the transmission of plrv by m. persicae  <cit> .

so far, only limited sequence information and genetic markers are available for the estimated  <dig> mb nuclear genome of m. persicae  <cit> . however, recent advances in dna sequencing make it possible to rapidly acquire information about the coding regions of any genome by building complementary dna  libraries and sequencing expressed sequence tags . here we describe the creation of such an est database from  <dig> sequenced m. persicae cdna libraries and the use of these data to make in silico predictions of differentially expressed genes, identify single nucleotide polymorphisms  between lineages, and develop probes for an oligonucleotide microarray to study aphid gene expression.

RESULTS
phenotypic characterization of m. persicae lineages
phenotypic characterization and microsatellite genotyping of lineage 2001– <dig>  which was collected in scotland, has been described previously as clone type b  <cit> . other m. persicae lineages were collected at five sites in the united states, and were characterized to determine their reproductive life cycle . of the  <dig> tested aphid lines, eight were holocyclic, five intermediate,  <dig> androcyclic, and  <dig> anholocyclic. one lineage remained unclassified because multiple replicates failed to grow. seven holocyclic m. persicae lineages and one anholocyclic tobacco-adapted lineage were genotyped with seven microsatellite markers, and were determined to be genetically distinct .

* two different fragment sizes indicate heterozygosis at this marker; null = no amplification; nd = not determined.

seven holocyclic m. persicae lineages  were tested for their ability to transmit plrv acquired from detached virus-infected leaves of p. floridana to virus-free p. floridana plants. in three independent trials, aphids of clone g <dig> transmitted plrv efficiently, whereas aphids from lineage f <dig> failed to transmit the virus consistently . in these experiments, the f <dig> and g <dig> clones exhibited similar growth rates and fecundity, suggesting that the observed differences in transmission are attributable to differences in the clones' capacity to acquire and/or transmit the virus, rather than to differences in the amount of time spent feeding on the infected or uninfected leaves. in control experiments, aphids from both lineages that were transferred from uninfected detached leaves to uninfected plants failed to transmit plrv. the usda aphid lineage, which was used as a positive control, transmitted plrv with 100% efficiency in these experiments .

afive plants per experiment; bten plants per experiment, except six plants for f012; clineages used for cdna library construction

cdna library construction and sequencing
as summarized in table  <dig>   <dig> cdna libraries representing a diversity of tissues and developmental stages were constructed from four aphid lineages . aphids were reared on host plants from the solanaceae and brassicacae families, as well as on plants with and without plrv infection. since sequencing non-normalized libraries showed a high level of redundancy, normalized cdna libraries were created to improve the rate of new gene discovery . although normalization increased the gene discovery rate, it also precluded making inferences about differential gene expression by comparing est frequencies between these libraries. altogether, sequencing of the cdna libraries produced a total of  <dig>  high quality sequencing reads, which have been submitted to genbank .

*for each library, the number of contigs and singletons is combined to indicate how many unigenes are represented in the library. as many contigs are generated by aligning ests from multiple libraries, the total number of unigenes from all libraries is less than the sum of the number of unigenes from each individual library.

sequence assembly and annotation
we identified  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons in the  <dig>  high-quality sequences. blastx  was run on all  <dig>  unigenes against a database containing all ncbi refseq proteins plus the  <dig> m. persicae proteins available at the time in genbank . a one-line annotation was generated for each contig in the following way:  if the best blast hit was for a known m. persicae protein, that annotation was used; otherwise  if there was a hit for a drosophila melanogaster protein, that annotation was considered to be most reliable; and  if there were no hits to d. melanogaster or m. persicae proteins, we used the annotation of the best blast hit. in addition, the top ten blast hits are listed for each contig in additional file  <dig>  information on the ests from which each contig is built, including genbank accession number and source library, is provided . goslim annotations  <cit>  were tabulated for each contig, and a summary of the molecular function and biological process annotation is provided for the total est collection and separately for the ests from the non-normalized libraries .

the top twenty contigs in terms of representation in the est collection can be found in table  <dig>  ranked according to the number of ests they contain. seven of the most highly expressed genes in m. persicae have no significant similarity to any proteins in the refseq database  <cit> . we compared our sequences to the mitochondrial genome of the aphid schizaphis graminum  and identified  <dig> ests likely to represent mitochondrial genes. of these,  <dig> constitute four contigs that are among the most highly expressed genes in our database .

we compared the  <dig>  est contig sequences of m. persicae with  <dig>  contigs of acyrthosiphon pisum. using blastn , there were  <dig> a. pisum contigs with blast hits in m. persicae contigs, and  <dig> m. persicae contigs with blast hits in a. pisum contigs. the low overlap between the contig sequences may be due to the fact that neither est database represents the whole transcriptome. however, it is likely that many of the contigs in one aphid which do not have homologues in the database of the other aphid species may represent genes responsible for the adaptation to specific host plants, or for other differences in physiology which have evolved since the species' divergence. there is significant similarity between predicted coding regions in a subset of m. persicae and a. pisum genes. from more than  <dig> shared contig sequences,  <dig> have greater than 95% identity in the coding region . these genes are likely to represent cellular housekeeping genes, but may also include genes which are essential for aspects of plant-insect interactions which are specific to, and common among, aphids.

comparision of m. persicae ests to other genomic data
similarity searches against other aphid ests, performed using the tblastx program , identified  <dig> unigenes with no similarities to previously described aphid ests. therefore, these unigenes represent newly described aphid cdna sequences. however, some of these sequences may arise from untranslated regions of genes, which may not be highly conserved between species. these  <dig> unigenes were subsequently compared with the nr database  using tblastx and blastx programs. a total of  <dig> unigenes had no hits at e-value <1e- <dig>  some subset of these may represent m. persicae-specific genes. the other  <dig> unigenes represent "new-to-aphids" features: genes identified in non-aphid species, which are not represented among the over  <dig>  ests from five other aphid species that were previously submitted to genbank.

blasting the  <dig> m. persicae ests previously described by figueroa et al.  <cit>  against our database revealed that  <dig> of these ests match up to  <dig> of our unigenes at e-values<1e- <dig>  based on this stringent cut-off value,  <dig> of these previously described m. persicae ests were not found in our data set – however,  <dig> of these ests have matches at e-values<1e- <dig>  indicating that they may represent closely related gene family members.

blastn  of all ests against the three buchnera aphidicola genomes available in genbank, as well as blastx  against all buchnera aphidicola protein sequences in genpept identified  <dig> sequences that are almost certainly from the bacterial endosymbiont of m. persicae, buchnera aphidicola. the top blast hit for five of our unigenes  are for b. aphidicola proteins, indicating that our filtering failed to remove a small number of contaminating bacterial sequences. no escherichia coli or saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins appeared as a top-ten blast hit for any of our unigenes giving us confidence that significant contamination from these sources is not a concern.

in silico prediction of differentially expressed genes
we used the previously described r statistic  <cit>  to identify the contigs showing the greatest differences in est abundance among four of the non-normalized libraries . a log likelihood ratio statistic was calculated that estimated the extent to which differences in gene expression correspond to the heterogeneity of the libraries. the twenty top hits of differentially expressed genes are presented with a brief description of the protein, the value of the r statistic, and the abundance of the gene in each of the four libraries . among the twenty contigs showing the highest r value, twelve represent genes that are over-expressed in the head library. none of these genes show similarities to published proteins with known function , and ten of the twelve genes were found only in head or full body cdna libraries made from m. persicae or other aphids. the six contigs representing genes that were most highly expressed in the gut library include two with no homology to genbank sequences. two other contigs show similarity to the lysosomal cysteine protease cathepsin b-n. contig  <dig> shows similarities to a structural protein from densoviruses, which have recently been described as infecting the stomach cells of aphids  <cit> . contig  <dig>  which represents a gene that is more highly expressed in the gut, shows similarity to a glutathione s-transferase . gsts belong to a large family of proteins implicated in xenobiotic detoxification, and an increase in gst activity has been associated with the adaptation to plant secondary metabolites in m. persicae  <cit> . two contigs with no homology to known genes have a significant overrepresentation of ests from aphids reared on n. benthamiana rather than a. thaliana. one of these contigs, number  <dig>  also contains five ests from the digestive tract library and none from the head library, suggesting this gene as a candidate for involvement in aphid response to tobacco-specific defenses.

ampg = digestive tract  library; bmph = head library; cmpnb = whole body library, reared on n. benthamiana; dmpw = whole body library, reared on a. thaliana; ertot = likelihood ratio statistic  <cit> .

prediction of secreted salivary proteins
in order to find aphid proteins involved in the successful infestation of host plants, we have identified cdna sequences expressed in the salivary glands that are predicted to encode for secreted proteins. these proteins may be required for the establishment of prolonged phloem feeding and suppression of plant defenses. using stringent criteria  we identified  <dig> contigs representing sequences expressed in salivary glands. subsequent in silico translation and signal peptide prediction resulted in the identification of  <dig> m. persicae proteins that may be secreted from the salivary glands . these include a total of fifteen proteins that are predicted to possess an anchor sequence , indicating that these proteins remain in the cell membrane upon secretion and might function as receptors or proteins involved in transport. for instance, the protein encoded by contig  <dig>  is a close homologue of tetraspanin 29fa in d. melanogaster, where it functions as a cell surface receptor binding protein involved in signal transduction .

snp identification and validation
snps are effective molecular markers for genetic mapping and can also be used to estimate the level of sequence divergence between lineages. using the program polybayes  <cit> , we identified  <dig>  potential snps from our est sequences. since we were interested in identifying snps that represented differences between, rather than within, lineages, we filtered our list of polymorphisms to include only those snps representing a nucleotide difference between two lineages, and exhibiting no apparent heterozygosity within lineages. this resulted in ~ <dig> polymorphisms that can serve as potential molecular markers for differentiating aphid lineages .

many of the predicted snps are represented by only a single est in one or more lineage, allowing for the possibility that observed sequence differences are artifacts resulting from an error in reverse transcription of the mrna, pcr amplification of the cdna, or the sequencing reaction. therefore, we generated a list of high-confidence polymorphisms in which each of any two lineages was represented by two or more ests with the same base at the polymorphic position. this resulted in  <dig> high-confidence snps , from which we selected a small subset to validate by re-sequencing genomic dna from m. persicae lineages usda, f <dig>  and g <dig>  eleven snps from seven contigs were selected for validation – contigs contained either one, two, or three predicted polymorphisms . no sequence differences between these lineages were detected when sequencing  <dig> bp of a control gene, ef-1α . five of the  <dig> tested snps were confirmed by resequencing . four of these confirmed snps represented differences between the two green aphid lineages, f <dig> and g <dig>  and the red tobacco-adapted usda lineage. moreover, three of these snps were in the open reading frame of contig  <dig>  which is annotated as a lysosomal cysteine protease cathepsin b-n.

contig  <dig> is one of the most highly expressed genes  and differentially expressed in the aphid digestive tract . two of these cathepsin snps represent non-synonymous, non-conservative amino acid changes , indicating a possible functional change in enzyme activity. structural modeling with the protein fold recognition program phyre  <cit>  indicates that these residues are in a conserved region in an exposed loop on the surface of the protein. one est from the second red m. persicae lineage , shared the three polymorphic nucleotides with the red usda lineage. therefore, it may be informative to genotype a wider range of red and green aphids at this locus to determine whether these polymorphisms correlate with differences in host range or life cycle between lineages. although it is tempting to speculate that this gut-specific protease is undergoing rapid evolution in order to avoid plant protease inhibitors, the small size of our snp dataset and the high  occurrence of false positives prevent us from inferring the significance of changes in this protein arising from variation between these lineages.

microarray design
the agilent earray platform was used to design a microarray based on our ests and an additional  <dig>  ests from other sources that were available in genbank , negative controls corresponding to plant and human specific genes, and positive controls representing insect housekeeping genes. the current slide layout consists of eight arrays of > <dig>  elements each, permitting comparison of two treatments with four-fold replication on each slide.

discussion
genomic comparisons
our identification of  <dig>  m. persicae ests  from  <dig> cdna libraries extends previous sequencing efforts for this species  <cit>  25-fold, and contributes to the rapidly expanding resources that are available for aphid genomics. in addition to the described m. persicae data, the genbank database contains  <dig>  ests for acyrthosiphon pisum ,  <dig> for aphis gossypii ,  <dig> for toxoptera citricida ,  <dig> for m. persicae  <cit> , and  <dig> for rhopalosiphon padi . sequencing of the a. pisum genome is ongoing  <cit> , and a comprehensive database for all aphid genomics information has been established . functional analysis of aphid genes that are identified by sequencing or expression studies will be facilitated by the recent demonstration that it is possible to silence aphid gene expression by rna interference  <cit> .

the broad selection of source material for cdna library construction  permitted sequencing of ests representing genes expressed at different developmental stages and morphs, as well as genes expressed in response to viral infection, and alternate host plant utilization. in addition, the production of separate libraries from heads, digestive tracts, and salivary glands ensured that genes of special interest to the study of plant-aphid interactions are well-represented in our database. our comparison of est frequencies between non-normalized libraries enabled in silico prediction of differential gene expression . clustering of the ests from our first few libraries  indicated a high degree of redundancy. we responded to this by normalizing all subsequent libraries, which significantly increased our rate of new gene discovery but eliminated our ability to make inferences about differential expression between libraries. therefore, it was advantageous to our project to make both types of library, preserving in some cases the natural transcript ratios present in the source tissues, and in others bringing the representation of housekeeping genes more in line with that of rarely expressed transcripts.

virus-derived genes
because aphids transmit plant viruses, and are themselves infected by entomopathogenic viruses, we searched our database for sequences with homology to known viral genes. no ests with homology to potato leafroll virus  were identified in our database, even in libraries made from aphids feeding on plrv-infected plants. this absence of plrv cdna sequences is consistent with the fact that plrv does not replicate within the aphids.

five contigs are annotated as densovirus proteins, including one predicted to be specific to the aphid digestive tract . all but one of the densovirus ests are from the usda lineage, but this could well be an artifact relating to the fact that the gut cdna library was made from this aphid strain. a densovirus has been reported to infect the anterior portion of the digestive tract of m. persicae, with infected aphids characterized by reduced size, delayed development, and decreased fecundity  <cit> . densoviruses represent potential biological pest control agents, and similar viruses from the families baculoviridae and tetraviridae have been commercialized for this purpose.

when the stringency of the blastx search was reduced to an e-value cutoff of 1e- <dig>  one unigene  has a dasheen mosaic virus  polyprotein as its best hit. dsmv is a non-persistent rna virus known to be transmitted by m. persicae  <cit> . over two-thirds of the  <dig> ests in the contig homologous to the dsmv polyprotein are derived from the salivary gland or head libraries, consistent with the fact that these non-circulative viruses are retained within the mouthparts of their aphid vectors. the relatively large number of dsmv-derived ests, which were found in seven different libraries from three lineages , is unexpected in light of the fact that this virus should not replicate within the aphids, and none of the plants used for aphid rearing showed obvious signs of viral infection. furthermore, the host range of dsmv is not known to overlap with the host plants used in these experiments.

functional significance of annotated unigenes
in cruciferous plants, myrosinase enzymes  initiate the rapid breakdown of glucosinolates into insect-deterrent hydrolysis products during herbivory. however the aphids brevicoryne brassicae  and lipaphis erysimi  have co-opted this defensive system by sequestering plant-derived glucosinolates and producing their own myrosinase as a defense against predators  <cit> . one est from our database  has significant homology to the b. brassicae myrosinase gene. although attempts to measure myrosinase activity in m. persicae have been unsuccessful, it is notable that aliphatic rather than indole glucosinolates were used as enzymatic substrates in these experiments  <cit> . aliphatic glucosinolates are recovered intact in the honeydew of m. persicae on a. thaliana, showing that these aphids are able to avoid or inactivate plant myrosinases. in contrast, a. thaliana indole glucosinolates are largely broken down within the aphids  <cit> . although this glucosinolate breakdown may occur by a non-enzymatic mechanism, it is also possible that m. persicae possesses a myrosinase activity that is specific to indole rather than aliphatic glucosinolates.

the genetic mechanisms regulating the cyclically parthenogenetic life cycle characteristic of most aphids are largely unknown. environmental cues, including shortening days, triggers development of sexual morphs in the autumn  <cit> . a gene from a. pisum, apsd <dig>  with similarity to a protein involved in amino acid transport in gabaergic neurons, is upregulated in pea aphids reared under short photoperiod conditions  <cit> . we identified one est, which we had annotated as an amino acid transporter, as being significantly similar to apsd <dig>  this est  was sequenced from the g <dig> male library, which is consistent with a role for this amino acid transporter in the development of winged sexual morphs.

m. persicae has evolved to tolerate plant allelochemicals and insecticides by diverse strategies, including amplification of e <dig> esterase genes  <cit> , point mutations in insecticide targets  <cit> , and increased activity of glutathione s-transferases in response to glucosinolates in artificial diets  <cit> . out of  <dig> contigs with significant homology to m. persicae esterases, two contigs  from our database are nearly identical to the m. persicae e <dig> esterase , whereas nine others appear to represent different genes. these nine sequences may have evolved following amplification to acquire novel functions in the hydrolysis of plant secondary metabolites encountered during the expansion of the insect's host range, or in the breakdown of newly developed insecticides. other potential detoxification genes represented in our database include  <dig> glutathione s-transferases and  <dig> cytochrome p450s .

among the  <dig> salivary gland contigs that are predicted to encode secreted proteins , approximately 62% are of unknown function. however, others could have potential function in aphid virulence based on their homology to known proteins. for instance, contig  <dig> encodes a protein that belongs to an insect-specific family that includes the yellow proteins of d. melanogaster, that are involved in cuticular development and behavior  <cit> , and the major royal jelly proteins of apis mellifera . a. mellifera proteins from this family are high in essential amino acids and comprise up to 90% of the total protein content of the jelly that is fed to developing larvae  <cit> . although major royal jelly proteins are thought to be produced in the cephalic glands of nurse bees  <cit> , another member of this protein family  was recently identified as a component of the honeybee venom  <cit> . in m. persicae, the homologous protein is less abundant, and ests were only found in the salivary gland and normalized head libraries . nevertheless, it is tempting to speculate that the protein has a virulence function in aphids. two other genes expressed in salivary glands, represented by contigs  <dig> and  <dig>  are predicted to encode secreted proteins that play a role in proteolysis, and therefore could have interesting functions in the interaction between m. persicae and its host plants. contig  <dig>  which has highest homology to a sequence of unknown function from d. melanogaster , encodes a protease-associated domain. contig  <dig> encodes a protein with homology to der <dig>  a gene involved in the degradation of misfolded proteins in yeast  <cit> .

dna sequence polymorphisms
comparison of ests from the three m. persicae lineages identified a large number of potential sequence polymorphisms which were subjected to stringent post-processing to reduce sequencing artifacts. the remaining  <dig> snps, represented by multiple ests in more than one aphid lineage , are a good data source for the identification of m. persicae genetic markers. furthermore, as suggested by the cathepsin b-n sequence data , these polymorphisms may provide clues about functional divergence of proteins in different m. persicae lineages.

however, when we re-sequenced  <dig> of these snps from genomic dna templates, only about half were confirmed , suggesting that many potential sequence differences in our est collection are the result of errors created during reverse transcription, pcr amplification, or sequencing. this highlights the importance of developing effective criteria to select a list of high-confidence snps from the large number of polymorphisms predicted by programs such as polybayes, and of validating predicted polymorphisms by re-sequencing of genomic dna.

microarray development
given the greater reproducibility of gene expression data collected with oligonucleotide microarrays, as opposed to spotted cdna microarrays, we decided to develop oligonucleotide microarrays for future studies on m. persicae gene expression  <cit> . the highest quality microarrays currently available are those fabricated by in situ oligonucleotide synthesis, a technology pioneered by agilent. when using such arrays, the number of required technical replicates is reduced because of the high degree of reproducibility between spots, allowing the user to concentrate resources on analyzing biological replicates. in addition, the high cost of purchasing synthesized oligonucleotides makes traditional custom printing of high density arrays at core facilities feasible only if many arrays will be made. there are no up-front costs to design microarrays on agilent's earray platform, and the minimum number of slides to order is one.

transcriptional profiling with microarrays is a powerful technique for identifying genes involved in the response of an organism to its environment. we anticipate that m. persicae microarrays can be used to answer a variety of fundamental questions about aphid biology and plant-aphid interactions. genes critical to the status of this insect as an agricultural pest can be identified by studying expression changes induced by different crop plants and in response to virus infection. research on aphid genes specifically expressed in salivary glands may identify proteins that prevent clogging of sieve elements or otherwise contribute to the phloem-specific feeding style of aphids. conversely, these salivary proteins likely also provide phloem-specific cues that allow plants to recognize aphid feeding and mount a defense response. microarray experiments will allow association of gene expression changes with polyphenism, the development for morphologically different individuals  that are otherwise genetically identical. analysis of gene expression in aphids feeding on artificial diets or plants with altered amino acid content can identify genes that are critical for the interaction with endosymbiotic b. aphidicola bacteria, which synthesize essential amino acids and allow aphids to survive on the otherwise nutritionally imbalanced phloem sap.

the broad host range and differences in host plant preferences among individual lineages of m. persicae are some of the more interesting aspects of the biology of this insect. gene expression differences that underlie within-species variation can be identified by microarray analysis. by sequencing cdna libraries made from aphids that were raised on both solanaceae and cruciferae, we have increased the probability that future microarray experiments performed by ourselves and others will include aphid genes that are expressed only under these particular growth conditions. evidence for such regulated gene expression comes from our non-normalized libraries, which included two genes that were overrepresented among ests from n. benthamiana in comparison to a. thaliana . dna microarray experiments will almost certainly identify additional genes with host plant specific expression patterns. further research on the function of such differentially expressed genes will illuminate adaptations that have allowed some m. persicae lineages to expand their host range to include tobacco. other m. persicae lineages, which show differences in their ability to reproduce on a. thaliana , can be studied to identify aphid adaptations for feeding on cruciferae. in addition, microarray experiments with m. persicae feeding on a. thaliana will provide the unique opportunity to simultaneously study gene expression changes on both sides of a plant-insect interaction.

given the broad range of questions that can be addressed by microarray analysis of m. persicae gene expression, the agilent microarray that we have developed will be of broad interest to aphid researchers. although the technology necessary for hybridizing and scanning synthesized agilent arrays is somewhat different from that used for experiments with spotted oligonucleotide arrays, it is available at many universities. the microarrays described here will be made available at cost to other researchers and can be obtained by contacting the corresponding author .

CONCLUSIONS
by sequencing and analyzing  <dig>  m. persicae ests, we have generated new genomic resources for this aphid species. expressed aphid genes, in particular many that show no significant similarity to genes from other organisms, have been identified. molecular markers that were found by comparing three aphid lineages will be useful not only for genotyping natural isolates, but also future genetic studies with m. persicae. the dna microarray that has been developed will permit further investigation of agriculturally and ecologically relevant transcriptional regulation in m. persicae.

to date, the lack of genomic resources for m. persicae has stood in stark contrast to the threat posed by this aphid to agricultural systems worldwide. by studying aphid gene expression responses to virus infection, different host plants, and other stresses, it will be possible to obtain a better understanding of this important biological interaction. in addition, our increasing understanding of plant molecular responses to phloem-feeding insects will be complemented by elucidation of the adaptations that allow these insects to establish compatible interactions with their host plants. further research on m. persicae gene expression responses will aid in efforts to breed crops with increased aphid resistance and will advance ongoing research into aphid ecology, evolution, and physiology.

