BACKGROUND
in drosophila melanogaster, metamorphosis is the period in development when the male and female larval forms, which display little morphological sexual dimorphism, are transformed into the reproductive male and female adult forms, which display large differences between the sexes. this complete transformation is the result of several processes : the degeneration of somatic larval structures; the generation of adult structures from cells that are found within the larva ; remodeling, death and neurogenesis of the cells in the larval nervous system; and the development of the adult gonads through interactions of both germline and the somatic tissues. identifying the genes that underlie and orchestrate this transformation, and understanding how sex-specific gene regulation is integrated into these processes will provide insight into how large-scale changes in morphology are directed at a molecular-genetic level.

metamorphosis initiates at the end of the third larval instar by a pulse of the steroid hormone ecdysone . in response to this pulse of ecdysone, the larva ceases movement and initiates pre-pupal development. progression through the subsequent pupal stages is mediated by an additional pre-pupal pulse of ecdysone that triggers pupal formation, and finally by a large pulse of ecdysone that triggers adult development . while much is known about the morphological changes that occur during metamorphosis , less is known about the gene expression changes that occur specifically in somatic and germline tissues that underlie these changes, and how sex-specific regulation of gene expression is incorporated into the developmental pathways.

insight into somatic, sexual development in drosophila is provided by the study of the sex determination hierarchy , a genetic regulatory hierarchy consisting of a sexually dimorphic pre-mrna splicing cascade that terminates with the production of sex-specific transcription factors encoded by doublesex  and fruitless  . dsx controls all morphological differences between the sexes , whereas fru is necessary for nearly all aspects of male courtship behaviors . while much is known about adult, sex-specific phenotypes caused by mutations in dsx and fru  <cit> , how dsx and fru direct sex-specific development at the level of gene expression during metamorphosis is still an open question.

previous studies have examined gene expression during metamorphosis, though the studies were limited in the number of genes assayed and in the fact that they did not distinguish between gene expression in somatic and germline tissues  <cit> . in this study, a microarray-based approach was used to examine expression from all predicted genes, in both wild type flies and flies that lack germline tissues, during metamorphosis. additionally, both the role of dsx in establishing somatic sex differences in gene transcript levels and the modes of how dsx regulates gene expression were determined.

RESULTS
here, genes that underlie developmental changes that occur during metamorphosis were identified by assaying gene expression in male and female wild type animals and animals that lack germline tissues, using a two-color, glass-slide microarray approach . the wild type animals are the canton s  strain and the animals that lack germline tissues are the progeny of female flies homozygous for the maternal-effect, recessive mutation tudor , hereafter referred to as tud progeny  <cit> . experimental samples were compared to a common reference sample consisting of rna derived from male and female cs pupae collected from all stages of metamorphosis; this approach facilitated comparisons across all the experiments . gene expression was assayed at five time points in animals collected every  <dig> hours, ranging from  <dig> hours after puparium formation  to  <dig> hour apf .

probes, numbers of replicates, and the time points assayed are listed for each experiment. chromosomal sex is indicated by xx or xy. * sex determination hierarchy experiments were all performed with a dye-swap design . † the number of genes in each experiment that is significantly differentially expressed. ** the dsx set was defined with an additional statistical test to eliminate potential false-negatives resulting from exclusion in the tra set. therefore, a gene's inclusion in the dsx set is not necessarily contingent on its presence in the tra set. for a description of the definition of the dsx set, see results and discussion and methods.

additionally, somatic, sex differences in transcript abundance for genes regulated downstream of dsx  were determined at a mid-pupal stage . microarray comparisons using rna from the following genotypes were performed: wild type males and females from two different strains , male and female tud progeny, wild type females and tra pseudomales, and wild type females and dsxd pseudomales. tra and dsxd pseudomales are chromosomally xx animals that produce dsxm, the male-specific isoform of dsx, and as a result look phenotypically similar to wild type males  <cit> . the analyses of two distinct mutant genotypes that produce dsxm in a chromosomally xx background facilitated the identification of genes that are sex-differentially expressed downstream of dsx, as opposed to differences in sex-chromosome content, and together with the analyses of two different wild type strains, reduced the identification of genes for which differential expression is due to differences in strain, or genes acting only upstream of dsx and/or tra in the sex hierarchy. additionally, gene expression was compared between intersexual male and female flies that do not produce dsx  and wild type males and females, respectively, to examine the modes of dsx-regulated gene expression .

time course experiment: gene expression during metamorphosis
the expression data from both wild type and tud progeny males and females was first analyzed to identify genes expressed in somatic and germline tissues during metamorphosis. here,  <dig>  and  <dig>  genes of the  <dig>  genes examined had expression data in the tud and wild type experiments, respectively, demonstrating that ~70%  of the predicted drosophila genes are expressed during metamorphosis . this also suggests that approximately  <dig>  additional genes are expressed during metamorphosis due to the presence of the germline in wild type males and females. our previous study examining gene expression in wild type flies found a larger percentage of genes  expressed during metamorphosis . our previous study employed a cdna microarray platform representing about one-third of the genes in drosophila. as such, it was biased for genes with high expression levels, which might account for the differences in the two studies  <cit> .

somatic sex-differential gene expression during metamorphosis
to identify genes whose transcript abundances differ between the two sexes in somatic tissues through metamorphosis, the tud progeny gene expression data was analyzed using f-statistics, conducted using limma contrasts with sex and time as independent factors . for the f-test analyses, lists of p values were converted to q values, an estimate of the false discovery rate  <cit> . two-hundred-fifty-eight genes were identified with significant somatic, sex-differential expression . similar numbers of genes were identified with male- and female-biased expression . overall, the percentage of genes with somatic, sex-differential expression during pupal stages  is similar to the number of genes displaying somatic, sex-differential expression at adult stages . in contrast, thousands of genes show sex-differences in transcript levels in the male and female germline tissues, at both pupal and adult stages .

for the  <dig> genes with somatic, sex-biased expression, moderated-t-tests were performed  <cit> , comparing gene expression in tud progeny males and females to determine at which stage the gene displays somatic, sex-differential expression . the five time points  do not have large differences in the numbers of genes with somatic, sex-biased transcript levels , with the data from the  <dig> hour time point containing the largest number of genes.

significant somatic, sex-differential expression determined using f-tests, and a t-test of means comparing expression data from male and female tud progeny. all genes listed had at least a 2-fold difference in transcript abundance between the sexes. for the full lists of sex-differentially expressed genes, see additional file  <dig>  * annotation symbol from flybase. † chromosomal arm on which the gene is located. ‡ fold change difference between the sexes. ξgo annotations for each gene as listed in flybase.

at the statistical threshold used for the t-tests ,  <dig> of the  <dig> genes identified by f-tests showed significant, somatic, sex differential-expression at a minimum of one time point. close to half of these genes  displayed somatic, sex-differential expression at only one or two time points, suggesting that they are likely to mediate discrete, sex-specific, developmental events. rna on the x  <dig>  is male-biased and one of only thirteen genes that were sex-differentially expressed at all five time points examined. rox <dig> and a gene rna on the x  <dig>  produce non-coding rnas that are components of the dosage compensation macromolecular structure  <cit> ; rox <dig> was either expressed exclusively in males or four times higher in males than females at each of the five time points examined. dosage compensation is the process in which genes on the single x chromosome in males undergo increased transcription, which results in roughly equal amounts of mrna product produced by the two x chromosomes in females . of the additional  <dig> genes  with sex-differential expression at all five time points examined , eight are located on the x chromosome. sex-lethal , the gene at the top of the sex-determination hierarchy , displays female-biased expression at four of the five time points examined. interestingly, cg <dig>  a gene with male-biased expression at four of the five time points, is a paralog of sxl  <cit> ; the product of this gene may underlie additional sex-differential splicing that regulates sex-specific development.

the differences in transcript abundances observed at each stage are due to biological differences and not poor quality data, as the microarray data showed high correlation among experimental replicates and similar numbers of genes had expression data at each time point in both sexes .

time course experiment: cluster analyses
one of the primary goals of this study was to identify genes that direct the patterning and morphogenesis of sexually dimorphic, somatic tissues. hierarchical clustering, an algorithm that groups genes based on the similarity of their expression profiles  <cit> , was performed using the five time points of tud progeny expression data to identify genes with similar expression profiles in somatic tissues. because the numbers of expected clusters were unknown, other clustering methods, including k-means clustering and self-organizing maps , were not employed. thirty-eight clusters, each with a greater than  <dig>  average pearson's correlation in gene expression profiles and containing  <dig> genes or more, were identified and further analyzed . combined, these clusters contained  <dig> genes, including  <dig> genes with alternative transcripts expressed in two clusters and four genes with alternative transcripts expressed in three clusters. there is a high degree of separation among the clusters, with an average correlation of  <dig>  between all of the clusters, demonstrating that the expression profiles for genes within a cluster are not similar to expression profiles for genes in other clusters and thus each should be considered separately in this study .

an analysis of the expression data across the five time points for the genes in each of the  <dig> clusters identified  <dig> peaks and  <dig> troughs of gene expression within the clusters . based on a re-sampling analysis, each of these  <dig> peaks and  <dig> troughs was significantly different than the average expression at all time points in the cluster from which they were identified . when wild type expression data was incorporated into the cluster analyses, gene expression profiles appear similar in wild type and tud progeny experiments, based on visual inspection ; only genes with expression in tud progeny were included in the cluster analyses. furthermore, a statistical comparison of the average tud progeny expression data to the average wild type expression data within each cluster showed that  <dig> of the  <dig> clusters had correlations > <dig> , demonstrating a high degree of similarity of expression for genes in tud progeny and wild type animals. the seven clusters with correlations < <dig>  between the average tud progeny and wild type expression data contained only  <dig> of the  <dig> genes present in the  <dig> clusters. therefore, for most genes examined, the pattern of gene expression in somatic tissues during metamorphosis does not appear to be largely influenced by the presence of the germline.

to functionally analyze these clusters, the sets of genes from each cluster were examined using the program david, which identifies overrepresented functional groups among the genes in each cluster, as compared to all the genes represented on the array platform . to confirm the david results, an independent tool that searches for enrichment of gene ontology terms  was used to assess overrepresented functional categories and gave very similar results .

gene expression during metamorphosis
at the white pre-pupal stage , the fly is transitioning from a wandering larva into an immobile pre-pupa. the pre-pupal animal initiates the major larval-to-adult transition in several discrete ways: 1) strictly larval tissues are destroyed and replaced by corresponding adult tissues , 2) imaginal discs and rings begin to give rise to adult structures including eyes, antennae, wings, legs, and genitalia , 3) histoblast nests proliferate in number and give rise to non-imaginal disc derived adult epidermal structures  <cit> , and 4) the larval central nervous system is remodeled through the destruction of some larval neurons, proliferation of neuroblasts to generate new neurons, and remodeling of some larval neuronal projections . the  <dig> hour apf time point is between the pre-pupal pulse of ecdysone, which peaks at  <dig> hour apf and triggers head eversion, and the large pupal pulse of ecdysone that initiates around  <dig> hour apf . by  <dig> hour apf the majority of larval-specific tissues are degraded and adult development is triggered . during the time between the  <dig> to  <dig> hour apf stages, the imaginal discs are still undergoing morphogenesis, but are close to their final adult form. the wings, leg muscles, abdominal bristles, abdominal muscles and internal genital ducts are all well formed, while further development of the eyes, legs, wings, thorax, and abdomen is occurring . during the later stages of metamorphosis , many of the tissues and structures developing in the pupae are close to their final adult form . by  <dig> hour apf, the pupa is within a few hours of eclosion, or emergence of the adult fly .

to understand the transcriptional basis of these complex developmental events, expression data was analyzed in the following ways: first, genes with similar expression patterns in both male and female somatic tissues were identified based on the hierarchical cluster analyses . second, clusters were identified that contained genes that either had a peak or trough of their transcript abundance at each time point . at the  <dig> hour apf stage, cluster  <dig>  has genes with peak expression and was enriched for genes that encode proteins that function in the proteosome , have cell death activities  or peptidase activities  and thus likely function in the histolysis of larval tissues. cluster  <dig>  has genes in a trough of expression and is enriched for genes whose products function in development , differentiation , and cell communication , suggesting that a large fraction of genes that function in these patterning and developmental processes are at low transcript levels immediately after pre-pupal formation.

at the  <dig> hour apf stage, the largest cluster identified, cluster  <dig> , shows peak transcript abundance . cluster  <dig> is overrepresented with genes encoding products that are annotated as functioning in imaginal disc morphogenesis , neurogenesis , programmed cell death , nervous system development , and transcription , demonstrating that at about  <dig> hour apf, many genes that drive morphogenesis and patterning have reached a peak in their transcript abundance, marking this period as critical for patterning and morphogenesis.

at the  <dig> hour apf stage, cluster  <dig> and cluster  <dig> contain  <dig> and  <dig> genes, respectively, and show peak levels only at this stage . cluster  <dig> is enriched with genes whose products function in cell organization and biogenesis , appendage morphogenesis , and pupal development , suggesting that although the rudimentary adult structures are formed, there are still many structural changes taking place. consistent with this idea, cluster  <dig> is enriched with genes whose protein products function in development , cell communication  and morphogenesis .

at the  <dig> hour apf stage, genes in cluster  <dig> , which are in a trough at the  <dig> and  <dig> hour apf stages, quickly increase in transcript levels to ultimately peak at  <dig> hour apf. cluster  <dig> is overrepresented with genes that encode products that function in the mitochondria .

one large cluster, cluster  <dig>  contains genes that showed a sharp rise in transcript levels at  <dig> hour apf, but no peaks early in metamorphosis. this cluster is enriched for genes encoding products that function in the response to light stimulus , visual perception , and rhabdomere function , all of which are critical for proper vision and development of the adult eye. on the other hand, the largest cluster, which is enriched for genes that encode products functioning in developmental processes  and peaked in transcript abundance at  <dig> hour apf, is in a trough of transcript levels at  <dig> hour apf , consistent with the idea that morphogenesis is largely complete by the pharate adult stage.

sex-biased gene expression in germline tissues during metamorphosis
genes with expression during metamorphosis in either male or female germline tissues were identified using two independent f-statistic analyses . this statistical approach also identifies genes whose expression in somatic tissues is dependent on the presence of male or female germline tissues, respectively; these two classes of genes cannot be distinguished in this study. the gene sets that are expressed within or dependent on the presence of the germline in males and females are referred to as the pupal male- and female-biased germline sets, respectively. sets of  <dig> and  <dig> genes with male- and female-biased expression in the germline, respectively, were identified . both the male- and female-biased pupal germline sets had significant overlap with genes previously identified as highly expressed in adult male and female germline tissues, respectively . five-hundred-forty-three genes identified in the pupal male germline set were on the previous study's array platform  <cit> . of those  <dig> genes,  <dig> were highly expressed in the adult male germline. similarly,  <dig> genes identified here as being expressed in the pupal female germline were present on the previous study's array platform. forty-seven of those  <dig> genes were also highly expressed in the adult female germline.

gene expression in the male germline has already initiated at the start of metamorphosis, and by  <dig> hour apf has reached its peak level of gene expression; this high level of expression lasts throughout metamorphosis . sixty-nine of the  <dig> genes in the pupal male germline set encode products that function in the mitochondria , consistent with the essential role for mitochondria in spermatid development and adult function . one-hundred-fifty-one genes  were identified that are expressed in the male germline during metamorphosis, but were not previously identified as expressed in the adult male-germline , suggesting that there is pupal-specific, male-germline gene expression that might underlie male germline development.

previously, it was observed that most genes expressed in the female germline showed the first post-embryonic peak of transcript abundance during adult stages  <cit> . however, because our previous study did not have data from pupal stages examining gene expression in each of the sexes separately, or in male and female tud progeny, we were unable to definitively identify the genes expressed in the female germline at pupal stages. the data presented here demonstrate that are a substantial number of genes with female-biased germline expression during pupal stages . between the  <dig> and  <dig> hour apf stages, the structures derived from the female genital disc establish connections with female gonadal tissues to form the female reproductive system . the development of female reproductive structures likely requires gene expression in both somatic and germline tissues. this idea is consistent with the functions of genes with pupal female germline expression, as this set is overrepresented with genes that function in developmental processes .

interestingly, the transcript level of genes expressed in the pupal female-germline also peaks in both wild type males and females and tud progeny males and females at the early stages of metamorphosis , suggesting they also play a non-sex-specific role in pupal somatic tissues. several genes encoding products annotated as functioning in the female germline  peak in transcript abundance in male and female somatic tissues at  <dig> hour apf . however, by the later stages of metamorphosis, the levels of these transcripts remain high only in wild type females and drop to trough levels in wild type males, and tud male and female progeny.

the chromosomal distribution of genes with sex-biased expression in the male and female germlines was additionally analyzed. genes expressed in the pupal male germline are underrepresented on the x chromosome and overrepresented on the left arm of the second chromosome , both of which have been shown for genes expressed in adult male germline tissues  <cit> . interestingly, genes expressed in the pupal male germline are also overrepresented on the right arm of the third chromosome .

global transcriptional profiles during metamorphosis
hierarchical clustering was performed using all the data from each microarray experiment from the time course study, rather than using the data from each gene, to determine how similar global expression patterns are between males and females. when the tud progeny expression data was analyzed, the global expression profiles of males and females from each pupal time point were most similar to each other . this was expected because very few genes with somatic, sex-differential expression were identified . a clear distinction between overall gene expression at early stages  and late stages  was observed . this is consistent with our cluster analyses , where many genes appear co-regulated at either early or late stages of metamorphosis, but not at both early and late stages:  <dig>  genes shared either peaks or troughs of transcript levels at multiple early stages  or late stages , while only  <dig> genes shared peaks or troughs of transcript levels at an both an early and a late time point.

when the wild type expression data and the tud progeny expression data were analyzed together, the clear distinction between early and late metamorphosis remained, as with the tud progeny expression data alone . as expected, male-germline gene expression has a large effect on how the global transcriptional profiles cluster, with wild type males expression data always clustering separately from wild type females and from the male and female tud progeny. this effect appears to be less substantial at  <dig> hour apf, as the global expression profile of wild type males clusters closest to the data from the other three genotypes, suggesting that at the start of metamorphosis, many genes expressed in the male germline are not as abundant during early time points. the wild type female array experiments also cluster closely to, but separately from, the tud progeny array data, with the largest differences seen at  <dig> and  <dig> hour apf. this is consistent with gene expression in the female germline increasing at the end of metamorphosis .

sex hierarchy-regulated somatic sex-differential expression
next, genes regulated by the sex hierarchy during pupal developmental stages were identified. nearly all of the sexually dimorphic tissues are either patterned or undergoing morphogenesis to bring about the adult sexual dimorphisms during pupal stages. the  <dig> hour apf pupal stage was chosen because previous studies showed that frum peaks at this stage  <cit>  and dsx shows high expression at this time  <cit> . for these experiments, the array hybridizations were performed as direct comparisons using rna from the two genotypes . genes were first identified that had sex-biased transcript levels between wild type males and females by analyzing expression data from two different wild type strains, canton s and berlin , and from tud progeny males and females . this resulted in a set of  <dig> genes . this is substantially more than was identified in the time course analysis for this time point ; however this difference is likely due to the increased number of replicates  and the decreased statistical error by directly comparing gene expression on the same array, as opposed to using a common reference rna sample.

given the larger number of somatic, sex-differentially expressed genes identified by this approach, it could be determined if there was a bias for chromosomal positions in these gene sets. genes with somatic male-biased transcript levels at the adult stage are known to be underrepresented on the x-chromosome  <cit> . there was not a similar bias for the  <dig> genes with somatic, male-biased transcript levels at the  <dig> hour apf pupal stage, but rather there was an equal distribution across all chromosomes . interestingly, the genes with somatic female-biased transcript levels at this pupal stage were overrepresented with genes located on the x chromosome . the previous study did not find any significant over- or underrepresentation on any chromosome for genes with adult somatic female-biased expression in the adult  <cit> .

genes differentially expressed as a consequence tra
next, genes were identified that were differentially expressed as a consequence of tra, a gene in the sex hierarchy that encodes a pre-mrna splicing factor required for the production of the sex-specific dsx mrna splice variants  <cit> . transcript levels in chromosomally xx flies mutant for tra  were compared to wild type female flies. the tra pseudomales produce dsxm and look very similar to wild type males. of the  <dig> genes that showed somatic sex-biased transcript levels,  <dig> genes were identified  that are also significantly different between tra pseudomales and wild type females . in this experimental design genes were required to be differentially expressed in three different genotype comparisons of male and female gene expression , precluding the identification of genes that are differentially expressed in only one strain. this is also true for the set of dsx-regulated genes identified below. as a validation of our experimental approach, sxl, tra, rox <dig>  and rox <dig> are all sex-differentially expressed in somatic tissues . only tra is differentially expressed in the chromosomally xx, tra pseudomale and wild type female comparison. this is expected as sxl, rox <dig>  and rox <dig> are not regulated downstream of tra in the sex determination hierarchy, but are regulated downstream of the primary determinate of sex, the x chromosome to autosome ratio .

of the  <dig> genes that are not regulated by tra, a large portion  may be false negatives as their expression values are significant or close to significantly different  in microarray experiments identifying genes regulated by dsx . a gene regulated downstream of dsx should also be regulated downstream of tra. another  <dig> have a q value close to the cutoff for significance in the tra microarray expression data . removing these  <dig> genes from consideration still leaves a large number of genes  that are sex-differentially expressed independently of tra. a significant number of these  <dig> genes  are located on the x chromosome. it is possible that differences in transcript levels of these genes is due to differences downstream of sxl, or x chromosome composition in males and females, suggesting that the dosage compensation process does not completely normalize expression between males and females for all genes on the x chromosome.

genes differentially expressed as a consequence dsx
next, gene expression between pupae that are transheterozygous for the dsxd allele  <cit>  – an allele that only produces the male-specific isoform  – and a dsx null deletion allele  was compared to gene expression in wild type females. these chromosomally xx, dsxd/dsxm+r <dig> pseudomales look very similar to wild type males, as they only produce dsxm. of the  <dig> genes that are sex-differentially expressed in somatic tissues and downstream of tra,  <dig> genes were identified as being regulated downstream of dsx . forty-six and  <dig> genes are more highly expressed in females and males, respectively, downstream of tra and dsx .

all genes listed had at least a  <dig> -fold difference in transcript abundance when comparing xx dsxd pseudomales to wild type females at  <dig> hour apf. for the full lists of genes regulated as a consequence of dsx, see additional file  <dig>  * annotation symbol from flybase. † chromosomal arm on which the gene is located. ‡ fold change difference between the sexes. ξgo annotations for each gene as listed in flybase.

aside from the tra gene itself,  <dig> genes were differentially regulated by tra, but were not differentially expressed between dsxd and wild type females. if genes that are close to the significance level  and genes with expression data in only one or two dsxd comparisons  are removed,  <dig> genes remain that are downstream of tra, but not dsx. interestingly, none of these genes are significantly differentially expressed in similar experiments examining frum regulation at this stage . this suggests either an alternate branch of the sex-hierarchy downstream of tra, possibly through dissatisfaction  <cit> , or the possibility of additional genes on which tra acts to sex-specifically splice their pre-mrnas, leading to differential abundance of transcripts due to differences in mrna stability.

requiring a gene to show statistical differences in expression in all direct microarray experiments yields a high confidence set of true positives regulated downstream of dsx, but will likely generate false negatives. to identify additional dsx regulated genes that might have been missed because of the stringency of having to pass multiple tests, genes were included that showed sex-differential, somatic expression, but which were not differentially expressed in the tra microarray comparisons. these genes were required to be significantly differentially expressed in the dsxd comparisons at a more stringent level  to avoid false positives. this yielded an additional  <dig> genes, with  <dig> and  <dig> showing female- and male-biased expression, respectively . this study thus identified  <dig> genes regulated as a consequence of dsx .

several of the genes with male- and female-biased expression in the dsx set with the highest fold change include those with products that might be involved in epithelial morphogenesis, imaginal disc morphogenesis or cuticle formation, based on their sequence identity. the  <dig> genes with male-biased expression contains seven such genes, including ecdysone inducible impe <dig> , miniature , and dusky-like . among the  <dig> genes with the highest female-biased expression, four encode proteins with cuticular domains , as well as obstructor-a  and abdominal a . while it has long been recognized that cuticle deposition is tied to tissue morphogenesis and both are developmental events occurring during the middle of metamorphosis, the identification of several genes likely involved in sex-specific aspects of this process had not been determined until this study.

six genes with female-biased expression regulated downstream of dsx at  <dig> hour apf have products with functions in the muscle or muscle differentiation . this suggests that aspects of pupal muscle development occur in temporally distinct manner between males and females, and that this differential timing is regulated by dsx. it is not clear is if this is due to the development of sex-specific muscles or due to differences in the developmental rate of non-sex-specific muscles between males and females.

characterization of the modes of dsx regulation
in our previous microarray study examining modes of dsx-regulated gene expression at the adult stage in head tissues, a large number of sex-biased genes were found that were either activated or repressed as consequence of dsx activity in both males and females, but the extent of activation or repression was sex-specific  <cit> . this mode of regulation was distinct from the previous descriptions of dsx-regulated gene expression based on the only known direct targets of dsx, yolk protein  <dig>  and yolk protein  <dig> . dsxf activates yp <dig> and yp <dig> expression in the female fat body and dsxm represses yp <dig> and yp <dig> expression in the male fat body tissues  <cit> .

to test if the set of genes regulated as a consequence of dsx activity contains genes that may be directly regulated by dsx, it was determined if the known dsx binding site sequences are present in the regulatory region of these genes  <cit> . we searched for the presence of two dsx binding sites in the dna sequence  <dig> base pairs upstream from the transcription start and within the first intron, for each gene in our list   <cit> . two dsx-binding sites were identified in  <dig> of the  <dig>  dsx-regulated genes, a statistical overrepresentation as compared to all genes in the genome , suggesting that a fraction of the genes identified here may indeed be direct targets of dsx. we note that in this study regulation by dsx may be direct or indirect.

to determine the modes of regulation by dsx in pupal stages, gene expression was compared between chromosomally xx and xy dsx null flies and wild type females and males, respectively . data was examined for the  <dig> genes we identified here as being downstream of dsx . fifteen genes did not have enough expression data for statistical analysis or were not significantly differential expressed in either dsx null comparison and were therefore not considered for further analysis. of the remaining  <dig> genes,  <dig> show significant differential expression  in both dsx null comparisons, which suggests regulation downstream of both dsxf and dsxm activity. the remaining seven genes  only showed significant differential expression in one of the dsx null comparisons; these seven genes may possibly be regulated downstream of one isoform of dsx, a method of dsx regulation that was previously proposed for some genes with sex-differential expression in the adult  <cit> .

of the  <dig> genes regulated as a consequence of dsx in both sexes,  <dig> of the genes had female-biased expression and were more highly expressed in wild type females and males as compared to dsx null females and males, respectively. this suggests that these genes are activated downstream of dsx in both females and males, but that dsxf activity results in more potent activation. forty of the  <dig> genes were male-biased and more highly expressed in male and female dsx null flies than in wild type males and females, suggesting these genes are repressed as a consequence of dsx activity in both males and females, but dsxf activity results in more potent repression. thus, the majority of genes that are regulated as a consequence of dsx are not regulated in the yp-like mode of regulation, but rather are regulated similarly in both sexes, with gene expression downstream of one isoform resulting in more potent activation or repression, as previously described in our studies of adult head tissues  <cit> . interestingly, yp-like regulation was observed for only seven genes in our pupal dataset: the genes with male-biased expression cg <dig> and cg <dig> and the genes with female-biased expression abdominal-a , lpr <dig>  cg <dig>  cg <dig>  and cg <dig>  it is possible that the yp-like mode of regulation may be the more common method of regulation for a particular class of genes  or might be revealed to be the primary mode of dsx regulation when higher resolution analyses are performed.

abda, which appears to be activated downstream of dsxf in females and repressed downstream of dsxm in males, is a well-characterized homeotic selector gene that was shown to be important for specifying segment identity  <cit> . in the time course analyses above, abda was found to have female biased expression at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hour apf, with the highest expression difference between the sexes at  <dig> and  <dig> hour apf. previous research examining 40– <dig> hour apf, suggested that abd-a and dsx, along with abdominal-b, act to regulate the expression level of a downstream target, bric-a-brac, and lead to differential abdominal pigmentation between males and females  <cit> . in that study it was shown that abda transcript levels in the abdominal epidermis do not vary between dsx null animals and wild type animals, thus suggesting that abda is not regulated by dsx in this tissue. the dsx-dependent differential expression of abda that we observed could be due to expression in other tissues, since here whole pupae were analyzed. indeed, abda has been shown to be expressed and functional in several distinct tissues and cell types, including abdominal neuroblasts and the female genital disc  <cit> .

the proposed modes of regulation were validated by additional microarray experiments in which the male and female isoforms of dsx were over-expressed . of the  <dig> genes in the dsx-regulated set for which dsx modes of regulation was examined,  <dig> did not show significant differential expression in the experiments when we either over-expressed dsxf in females or dsxm in males. of the remaining  <dig> genes,  <dig> were male-biased; these genes showed decreased expression when dsx was over-expressed, either in one or both of the dsx isoform over-expression experiments. similarly, of the remaining  <dig> female biased genes,  <dig> showed increased expression levels when dsx was over-expressed, either in one or both of the dsx isoform over-expression experiments. only two genes with female-biased expression  showed decreased expression levels when dsxf was over expressed in females compared to control females, opposite of the predicted effect from our model.

CONCLUSIONS
here, an analysis of gene expression profiles underlying the developmental transitions that occur during metamorphosis in both wild type and germline-deficient males and females is presented. many genes were identified that are expressed in somatic tissues of both males and females at five discrete times during development, with far fewer showing sex-differential expression in somatic tissues. the observation that about half of the genes identified with somatic, sex-differential expression show this pattern of expression at only one or two of the stages examined suggests that expression at these stages mediates distinct developmental events. further molecular-genetic analyses of genes identified here will provide insight into their functional roles during development and how tissues that display little sexual dimorphism at the start of metamorphosis undergo patterning and morphogenesis to result in highly dimorphic adult structures. the analyses also identified genes expressed in either the male or female germline during pupal stages that were not previously shown to have germline-dependent expression or were not thought to be expressed as early as the pupal stages  <cit> .

differences in somatic, sex-differential expression were examined more extensively at the  <dig> hour apf stage. at this stage, the set of genes with somatic, female-biased transcript levels was overrepresented with genes located on the x chromosome. this could be a consequence of the increased amount of time, during the life history of drosophila, that the x chromosome spends in females, resulting in a selection for genes that function in female somatic tissues on this chromosome; this idea that was previously suggested to explain the relative depletion of genes on the x chromosome that have male-biased expression  <cit> .

transcriptional differences between the sexes occurring downstream of tra and dsx, two sex determination hierarchy regulatory genes, were also examined at the  <dig> hour apf stage. the genes regulated as a consequence of tra and dsx that show high expression differences are overrepresented with those that encode proteins that function in epithelial morphogenesis, imaginal disc morphogenesis or cuticle formation. this set also includes the well-studied homeotic gene abda. further analyses of these genes will provide insight into how sex-specific developmental programs are integrated with other developmental programs. the observation that abda is regulated as a consequence of dsx, suggests that during pupal stages, dsx might direct aspects of cell-fate identity, rather than acting in a parallel pathway to overlay sex-specific regulation information onto cells that are directed to their cell-fate identities in a non-sex-specific manner. identifying the tissues that give rise to abda sex-differential transcript abundances and determining how dsx regulates these differences are important future studies. the identification of genes regulated downstream of tra and dsx provides some of the first, large-scale, molecular insights into how the sex hierarchy instructs the changes that culminate in the production of sexually dimorphic adult male and females.

the data presented here broadens the idea that the yp-like mode of dsx-regulated gene expression – in which dsxm and dsxf regulate a given gene with one acting as an inducer in one sex and the other acting as a repressor in the other sex – might be the case for a small set of genes  <cit> . in this study and our previous genomic studies  <cit> , very few genes were identified that display that pattern. our results extend the idea that many genes with sex-differential expression are either activated or repressed as a consequence of dsxm and dsxf activity in both sexes, but that the extent of activation or repression is sex-specific  <cit> . therefore, for many genes, the consequence of dsx activity does not switch a gene on or off, but dials expression to high or low levels, resulting in sex-differential expression and ultimately sex-specific development.

this mode of gene regulation makes the most sense in cases where there are homologous structures in both males and females that undergo sex-specific modifications, like the sex-comb bristles on the foreleg in males or sex-specific differences in abdominal pigmentation, where similar sets of genes might be active in males and females, but to different extents. a similar idea was first suggested to explain foreleg bristle phenotypes in animals in which dsx was ectopically produced  <cit> . this mode of dsx gene regulation is more difficult to reconcile for cases where males and females have very different structures derived from different embryonic primordia, such as the genital disc primordia that give rise to the male and female internal and external genitalia. however, even in these tissues, similar batteries of genes might be used during metamorphosis to drive morphogenesis, but might have sex-specific spatial patterns, resulting in different transcript levels, consistent with what has been previously shown , and consistent with our observations. it should be noted that higher resolution analyses of sex-differential gene expression for a given gene will likely reveal that the modes of dsx-regulated gene expression are much more complicated than can be predicted from whole animal microarray expression studies. analyses of the spatial gene expression patterns and molecular and functional studies on the genes identified here are an important next step in understanding how dsx-regulated gene expression directs sex-specific development.

