BACKGROUND
single nucleotide polymorphisms  are most common type of dna sequence variation identified in individual genomes and are used as markers to identify disease-associated genes. previous studies showed that chromatin structure affects snp distribution  <cit> . nucleosome, a structure of 146-bp dna double helix wrapped on surface of a histone core, is the basic repeat unit of chromatin. generally, nucleosomes are depleted near transcription start sites  and are phased as a nucleosome arrays downstream of tsss  <cit> . higasa et al. revealed a periodicity of  <dig> nucleotides of snp density around tsss in cpg islands-associated genomic region; the periodical patterns suggested the location of nucleosomes that are phased at tsss  <cit> . in japanese killifish, it was found that point mutations occur approximately at nucleosomes and that insertions and deletions longer than 1 bp are present in nucleosome-depleted regions   <cit> . this was confirmed in the human genome in our laboratory  <cit> . further analysis in human cells showed that, although snps are enriched in the core region of bulk nucleosomes, they are not enriched in nucleosomes containing the h2a.z variant or histone h <dig> tri-methylated at lysine  <dig>   <cit> .

providing a polymorphism arises as a result of a mutation  <cit> , a snp results from a single base mutation that substitutes one nucleotide for another. cpg dinucleotides mutate at a high rate of c- > t because cytosine is vulnerable to deamination  <cit> . chen et al suggested that nucleosomal dna undergoes fewer c- > t mutations because of suppressed cytosine hydrolytic deamination relative to nucleosome-depleted dna  <cit> . selection appears to be acting on particular base substitutions to maintain optimum gc compositions in nucleosome and linker regions  <cit> . non-cpg mutation rates are lowest in the open chromatin regions of the genome  <cit> .

despite the advancement in this field, the following open questions remain. first, the literature suggested that most snps sites are enriched at nucleosomal dna; we asked if this enrichment is genomic locus specific, and if snps are associated with specific hms. second, what is the difference between risk-associated snps and neutral snps in terms of histones modifications, nucleosome occupancy and gc-content? third, snps are the results of ancient mutations. does newly occurring mutation associate with a snp?

in this work, we investigated the distributions of nucleosomes, histone modification, dna methylation and gc-content around human snps sites and revealed that coding-snps are enriched at nucleosomes, whereas intron-snps are mostly in nucleosome-depleted regions. dna methylation and repressed hms marked around the coding-snps. the base-transversion allele frequency was significantly lower in coding-synonymous snps than in risk snps. in cancer genomics, somatic mutation frequency was significantly higher at the - <dig> and + <dig> positions relative to snp sites. our results show some detailed characteristics of snps from an epigenetics perspective.

RESULTS
nucleosome occupancy is distinct at snps sites in different genomic loci
the literature suggested that snps are enriched at bulk nucleosomes, but are depleted at h2a.z-containing nucleosomes or nucleosomes with h3k4me <dig>  <cit> . here, we showed that the nucleosome organization is genomic locus-specific around snps sites. according to the annotation of dbsnp build  <dig> from the ucsc genome browser, human snps are classified into nine types . we calculated the nucleosome occupancy profiles for the nine types of snps in cd4+ t cells, lymphoblastoid cells  and in vitro. the distribution of snps shows a periodic pattern near tsss . although the nucleosome occupancy profile peaks at overall snps , it differentially positions at the nine types of snp sites. snps in coding regions  are consistently enriched in nucleosomal dna in three states of cells . contrastingly, intron snps were mostly in ndrs, regardless of the state of the cells . the snps in 3′-untranslated regions  were also in ndrs. most snps in the 5′ and 3′ regions of genes are actually in intergenic regions, they are also enriched at ndrs. the snps in 5′-untranslated regions  are nucleosome-occupied in cd4+ t cells and in vitro, but are nucleosome-depleted in the lymphoblastoid cells. in order to confirm that the patterns of nucleosome occupancy are not due to random factor, we randomly selected genomic sites in exon, intron, utr <dig>  utr <dig> and 5′ and 3′ of genes, and calculated profiles of nucleosomes around the random sites. result indicated that the profiles do not exhibit obvious patterns , suggesting the patterns of nucleosome occupancy shown in figure  <dig> are significant.

taken together, the results indicated that nucleosome organization is distinct between coding-snps and noncoding snps.

it was observed that the patterns of nucleosome occupancy were almost consistent between in vivo  and in vitro  conditions, suggesting that the dna sequence has a role in patterns of snps relative to nucleosomes. in addition, the peak of nucleosome occupancy at coding snps is wider in vitro than in vivo , probably suggesting a fuzzy nucleosome in vitro.

we then compared nucleosome occupancy for risk snps and neutral snps . in both cd4+ t cells and lymphoblastoid cells, risk snps are enriched at nucleosomes . in fact, risk snps contain only a small faction of coding-snps  . thus, according to the results shown in figure 1a-c, risk snps should be mainly in ndrs; however, they are at nucleosome, indicating a specific feature.

repressive hms are enriched at coding-synonymous snps sites and depleted at intron-snp sites
we calculated the profiles of the hms around snps sites in cd4+ t cells and lymphoblastoid cells. profiles of hms around 5′-untranslated snps  sites are typically consistent with the distributions of hms at promoters and gene bodies   <cit> . the literature suggested that activation modifications, including acetylations of histones and h3k4me <dig>  cover at the promoter and the 5′ end of genes, and repressive modifications  are lacking in these regions  <cit> . in our results, around utr5-snps, most acetylations are enriched and the repressive methylations are depleted . around utr <dig> snps, most of hms is depleted .

importantly, we observed an enrichment of repressed hms near coding-synonymous snps  and a depletion of hms near intron snps . considering the results in figure 1a, this suggested that those nucleosomes around coding-synonymous snps sites are marked with repressive hms. by contrast, intron-snps lack hms because they are located in ndrs . some types of hms are conserved between cd4+ t cell and lymphoblastoid cell , such as h3k79me <dig> for utr <dig> snps, h3k79me <dig> for coding-synonymous snps, h3k36me <dig> for intron snps. however, some of them vary greatly, such as h3k27me <dig> for coding-synonymous snps .

the difference in hms between coding-synonymous and intron snps can be attributed to specific distribution of hms among genome. generally, nucleosome occupancy is higher in exons than in introns  <cit> . due to this, as expected, hms will be more enrichment in exons than in introns. thus, we observed the hms around snps show a more enrichment in coding regions than in introns.

risk non-coding snps are enriched at nucleosomes with histone modifications
in figure  <dig>  we observed coding-snps are enriched at nucleosomes and intron-snps are depleted at nucleosomes. interestingly, although risk snps contain only a small faction  of coding-snps, nucleosome occupancy is high around the risk snps. to this end, we then tested the nucleosome occupancy and hms for risk coding-snps and risk non-coding snps, respectively. results suggested that both coding and non-coding risk snps are enriched at nucleosomes in cd4+ t cells , although nucleosome occupancy around the risk snps sites is less than that around neutral snps sites. profiles of hms around risk coding-snps sites are similar to those around coding-synonymous snps  sites . that is, around the type of snps sites, acetylated modifications are depleted and repressed hms are enriched. importantly, we found that around the risk non-coding snps, both repressed and transcription-activated hms are enriched , suggesting a distinct characteristic. also, histone acetyltransferases   and histone deacetylase  are enriched around risk snps and depleted around neutral snps .

we tested whether hms can discriminate the risk snps and neutral snps. we identified those hms that are different between the two types of snps  and constructed linear classifiers . the classifier with four types of hms achieves an auc of  <dig>  in the roc curve , suggesting that hms discriminately mark the genomic loci around the risk and the neutral snps.

gc content and dna methylation level are low near risk snp sites
snps result from a single base mutation  <cit> . cpg dinucleotides show a high rate of c- > t mutations  <cit> , and non-cpg mutation rates are lowest in open chromatin  <cit> . snps are tightly correlated with both base substitution and gc-content.here, we firstly plotted average nucleosome occupancy against gc-content around snps sites . nucleosome occupancy near snps sites is highest when gc-content is near 54%. with an increase or a decrease of gc-contents, nucleosome occupancy decreases around snps.

we then investigated the allele frequency for snps. as expected, the frequency of base transitions  is three-fold higher than that of base transversions  in snps . interestingly, the base-transversion frequency of neutral snps is significantly lower than that of risk snps  .

the gc-content profile is significantly higher around neutral snps sites than that around risk snps sites ) . in fact, gc-content profile goes uniformity around risk snps sites, but it greatly increases near neutral snps sites . the gc-content profiles around the nine types of snps indicated that coding snps are associated with a higher gc-content than non-coding snps . moreover, dna methylation level is also much higher near neutral snps sites than that near risk snps sites . around the risk coding snps, both gc content and dna methylation show a higher level than those around the risk non-coding snps , but the differences are not significant ). we also found the nucleosomes are positioned at base-transition risk snps, but are depleted at base-transversion risk snps .

new mutations occur frequently at - <dig> and + <dig> base position around snps sites
considering the close relationship between snps and mutations, we asked if new somatic mutations are associated with snps. using a dataset of somatic mutation sites from malignant melanoma  <cit> , we calculated the snp frequency of a 10-kbp region around the somatic mutation sites. the results showed that snp frequency distribution is stable distal the mutation sites . however, at the - <dig> and + <dig> position relative to the mutation sites, the snp frequency is significantly  higher ) . this suggests that new mutations tend to occur at the - <dig> and + <dig> position proximal to snps sites . moreover, the snp frequency is 2-fold lower at the mutation sites  . this indicates that a new mutation occurs at a snp site with a lower probability; i.e. mutation of a snp occurs at a low frequency.

discussion
snp distribution shows an imprint of nucleosome positions in genomes  <cit> . snp is caused by a single base mutation and cpg dinucleotides is highly correlated with mutation  <cit> . in this work, we investigated the chromatin organization around snps and analyzed the association between snp allele frequency, mutation and gc-content using genome-wide dataset of nucleosomes and hms in the human genome.

firstly, we revealed that the nucleosome organization is genomic locus-specific around snps. whether a snp occurs at a nucleosome is determined by the genomic locus where it is in. we revealed that coding snps are located at nucleosomes, which is consistent with previous studies  <cit> . however, intron snps occur in nucleosome depleted regions . this represents new knowledge concerning nucleosomes and snps. the specific selection of snp for nucleosomes is probably due to consequence of interplay between nucleosomes and dna sequence variation in evolution, particularly in introns  <cit> . moreover, the characteristics are conserved in cd4+ t cells, lymphoblastoid cells and in vitro , indicating a certain stability of the epigenetic state around snps and also a tight association between genetic variation and chromatin structure in evolution.

tolstorukov et al. suggested that snps are depleted at h3k4me3- or h2a.z-containing nucleosomes  <cit> . we found that coding snps are enriched at nucleosomes and are associated both repressive hms and dna methylation in cd4+ t cell . given the stability of the epigenetic state across cell types and snp arises from a mutation, our results suggested heritable mutations tend to occur at heterochromatin.

secondly, risk non-coding snps are enriched at the nucleosomes with hms. risk coding snps show similar features to coding-synonymous snps. they are enriched at nucleosomes marked with both repressed hms and high dna methylation . this suggests that the “risk” of such type of snps is due to their capacity of changing the type of amino acid in expression. however, risk non-coding snps show a specific feature. they are at nucleosomes and are associated with high a level of hms, a low dna methylation and an enrichment of both acetyltransferases and deacetylase .

taken together, the specific chromatin structure suggested that risk non-coding snps occur probably in functional dna regions. in transcription and dna duplication, those functional regions will be bound by transcription factor  and other proteins. this type of snps will alter interaction between dna and proteins, thus leads to a deleterious consequence  <cit> . gaffney et al indicated that snps could affect the positioning of nucleosome arrays by changing tf binding affinity in humans  <cit> .thirdly, we suggested that new mutations occur at a snp sites with a low probability. however, they tend to occur at the - <dig> and + <dig> position relative to snp sites . the association between snps and new mutations is interesting, and provides a clue to identify mutations in cancer cells.

regardless of some new findings, we should address two limitations in the study. one is about the data of mutation sites. the data of mutation sites is from human cancer cell  <cit> . due to genetic instability and specific cell state, both mutation rate and mutation mechanism are probably distinct between cancer cells and normal cells. thus, the finding regarding the distribution of snp and mutation sites is only confined in the cancer cells. the other is about the choosing for neutral snps. we selected coding-synonymous snps as neutral snps. in recent literature  <cit> , it was suggested that although coding-synonymous variation don not alter the sequence of the encoded protein, they can alter exonic splicing motifs and affect mrna splicing in oncogenes in cancer cells. thus, our definition for neutral snp has a flaw.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we investigated the association between snps and chromatin organization. the results indicated chromatin structure is distinct between coding snps and non-coding snps. coding snps are enriched at nucleosomes, and are seemingly marked with repressive histone modifications. non-coding snps are mainly at nucleosome-depleted regions with less histone modifications. risk snps also occur in nucleosome and are associated with low levels of dna methylation and specific histone modifications. also, new mutations tend to occur at the - <dig> and + <dig> base position relative to snp sites. regardless of limitations in data selection, our analysis sheds light on the interplay between genetic variation and chromatin state.

