BACKGROUND
genome-wide association  studies have identified genetic loci associated with complex diseases and other aspects of human physiology  <cit> . all replicable associations identified to date have been discovered using gwa analysis techniques that analyze one genetic marker at a time  <cit> . while successful, it is well appreciated that single-marker analysis strategies may not be the most powerful approaches for gwa analysis  <cit> . multiple locus inference is an alternative to single-marker gwa analysis that can have greater power to identify weaker associations, which can arise due to small allelic effects, low minor allele frequencies , and weak correlations with genotyped markers  <cit> . by correctly accounting for the effects of multiple loci, such approaches can reduce the estimate of the error variance, which in turn increases the power to detect weaker associations for a fixed sample size. since loci with weaker associations may contribute to a portion of the so-called 'missing' or 'dark' heritability  <cit> , multiple locus analyses have the potential to provide a more complete picture of heritable variation.

methods for multiple locus gwa analysis must address a number of problems, including 'over-fitting' where too many associations are included in the genetic model, as well as difficulties associated with model inference when the number of genetic markers is far larger than the sample size  <cit> . two general approaches have been suggested to address these challenges: hierarchical models and partitioning/classification. hierarchical modeling approaches  <cit>  employ an underlying regression framework to model multiple marker-phenotype associations and use the hierarchical model structure to implement penalized likelihood  <cit> , shrinkage estimation  <cit> , or related approaches to control over-fitting. these methods have appealing statistical properties for gwa analysis when both the sample size and the number of true associations expected are far less than the number of markers analyzed, which is generally considered a reasonable assumption in gwa studies  <cit> . alternatively, partitioning methods do not  assume a specific form of the marker-phenotype relationships but rather assume that markers fall into non-overlapping classes, which specify phenotype association or no phenotype association  <cit> . control of model over-fitting in high dimensional gwa marker space can then be achieved by appropriate priors on marker representation in these classes  <cit> .

despite the appealing theoretical properties of multiple locus methods that make use of hierarchical models or partitioning, these methods have not seen wide acceptance for gwa analysis. there are at least two reasons for this. first, an ideal multiple locus analysis involves simultaneous assessment of all markers in a study and, given the scale of typical gwa experiments, most techniques are not computationally practical options  <cit> . second, there are concerns about the accuracy and performance of multiple locus gwa analysis. this is largely an empirical question that needs to be addressed with simulations and analysis of real data.

here we introduce the algorithm v-bay, a ariational method for esian hierarchical regression, that can address some of the computational limitations shared by many multiple locus methods  <cit> . the variational bayes algorithm of v-bay is part of a broad class of approximate inference methods, which have been successfully applied to develop scalable algorithms for complex statistical problems, in the fields of machine learning and computational statistics  <cit> . the specific type of variational method implemented in v-bay is a mean-field approximation, where a high dimensional joint distribution of many variables  is approximated by a product of many lower dimensional distributions  <cit> . this method is extremely versatile and can be easily extended to a range of models proposed for multiple locus analysis  <cit> .

the specific model implemented in v-bay is a hierarchical linear model, which includes marker class partitioning control of model over-fitting. this is particularly well suited for maintaining a low false-positive rate when identifying weaker associations  <cit> . v-bay implements a simultaneous analysis of all markers in a gwa study and, since the computational time complexity per iteration of v-bay is linear with respect to sample size and marker number, the algorithm has fast convergence. for example, simultaneous analysis of a million markers, genotyped in more than a thousand individuals, can be completed using a standard desktop  in a matter of hours.

we take advantage of the computational speed of v-bay to perform a simulation study of performance, for gwa data ranging from a hundred thousand to more than a million markers. in the results we focus on the simulation results for single population simulations, but we also implement a version of the algorithm to accommodate known population structure and missing genotype data. we demonstrate that in practice, v-bay consistently and reliably identifies both strong marker associations, as well as those too weak to be identified by single-marker analysis. we also demonstrate that v-bay can outperform a recently proposed multiple locus methods that uses the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator  penalty  <cit> , a theoretically well founded and widely accepted method for high dimensional model selection. v-bay therefore provides a powerful complement to single-marker analysis for discovering weaker associations that may be responsible for a portion of missing heritability.

RESULTS
the v-bay algorithm
the v-bay algorithm consists of two components: a hierarchical regression model with marker class partitioning and a variational algorithm for approximate bayesian inference. the underlying hierarchical model of v-bay is a bayesian mixture prior regression  <cit>  that has been previously applied to association and mapping problems  <cit> . the regression portion of this hierarchical model is a standard regression used to model genetic marker-phenotype associations, and allows for natural incorporation of population structure and other covariates. the model partitioning incorporates global features of genetic marker associations, which are assumed to be distributed among positive, negative, and zero effect classes. the zero effect class is used to provide a parametric representation of the assumption that most markers in gwa studies will not be linked to causative alleles and therefore do not have true associations with phenotype  <cit> .

approximate bayesian inference with v-bay is accomplished by an algorithm adapted from variational bayes methods  <cit> . as with other variational bayes methods, the goal of v-bay is to approximate the joint posterior density of the hierarchical regression model with a factorized form and then to minimize the kullback-liebler  divergence between the factorized form and the full posterior distribution  <cit> . this is accomplished by taking the expectation of the log joint posterior density, with respect to each parameter's density from the factorized form, and iterating until convergence  <cit> . the overall performance of v-bay will depend on how well the factorized form approximates an informative mode of the posterior distribution of the hierarchical model. we have chosen a factorization with respect to each regression and hierarchical parameter, which appears to perform extremely well for identifying weak associations when analyzing simulated gwa data that include large numbers of genetic markers.

computational speed
the computational efficiency of v-bay derives from two properties: it is a deterministic algorithm and the objective function has a factorized form. since v-bay is deterministic it does not need the long runs of markov chains required by exact bayesian mcmc algorithms  <cit> . for gwa analysis, these latter stochastic algorithms can be very slow to converge, particularly when marker numbers are large and when there are complex marker correlations produced by linkage disequilibrium  <cit> . the factorized form of v-bay means that the minimization is performed with respect to each parameter independently, where each iterative update satisfies consistency conditions for maximizing the lower bound, given the state of the other parameters. unlike univariate update algorithms, which may not necessarily have efficient updates with respect to the likelihood gradient function  <cit> , the consistency conditions produced by the factorized form ensure that the univariate updates produce a computationally efficient approach to a kl-divergence minimum.

more precisely, v-bay has linear time complexity scaling with respect to both marker number and sample size per iteration . v-bay therefore has better computational scaling properties than most currently proposed multiple locus algorithms for full likelihood or exact mcmc bayesian analysis, when simultaneously considering all markers in a gwa study  <cit> . while the total time to convergence will depend on the true underlying genetic model, total computational times appear to be very tractable. as an example, using a dual-quad core xeon  <dig>  ghz, with  <dig> gb of memory, v-bay converges in less than four hours for data sets in the range of  <dig> million markers, for a sample size of  <dig>  and has average convergence around ten hours for sample sizes of  <dig> 

significance thresholds
we assessed significance of marker associations using -log <dig> p-vbay, the negative log posterior probability of a marker being in either the positive or negative effect class. this is a natural statistic for deciding significance, since p-vbay is the  probability that the marker has an association with the phenotype. while different significance thresholds based on -log <dig> p-vbay can be assigned to control false positive rate, as illustrated in figure  <dig>  the distribution of this statistic has an appealing property. the statistic has a value of zero for most of the true hits and there is a large gap  between significant markers and those with less significant scores. this is true even when the individual heritabilities of the true hits are low. this property of v-bay is remarkably robust. a gwa practitioner using v-bay can therefore easily identify a significant association  in practice when applying a conservative significance threshold.

performance of v-bay compared to single-marker analysis
we empirically analyzed v-bay performance on  <dig> simulated gwa data sets. marker numbers for these data were one-hundred thousand, six-hundred thousand, or one million markers and were simulated using the approximate coalescent simulator macs  <cit> . we simulated a continuous phenotype with normally distributed error under the conditions listed in table  <dig>  where each gwa data set analyzed was produced by choosing a combination of these conditions. for these simulated data sets, we analyzed the performance of v-bay compared to a single-marker analysis that was implemented by applying a linear regression model individually to each marker.

as illustrated in table  <dig>  v-bay can perform better than single-marker analysis given a sufficient sample size or a sufficient number of loci with high individual heritabilities. both the number of true associations identified and the amount of heritable variation explained can be greater when employing highly conservative false positive tolerances. for example, when using a false positive rate approaching a bonferroni correction, v-bay can on average double the number of associations found by single-marker analysis and can explain 20% more of the variance in phenotype under the most favorable conditions simulated. the reason for this increase in performance is that v-bay has greater power to detect weaker  associations by accounting for the effects of multiple loci.

phenotypes were simulated with a fixed total heritability of  <dig> . the false positive rate was controlled to be < 10- <dig> for both the v-bay analysis and the single-marker analysis. 

aaverage, maximum, and minimum individual heritabilities of the individual loci.

bthe smallest individual heritability identified among the true positives.

cthe average total heritability accounted for by the true positives identified.

whether small associations are identified by v-bay depends on the interplay between the sample size of the gwa study and the percentage of variation explained by the individual marker associations. for example, figure 2a and 2b present the receiver operator characteristic  curves comparing the performance of v-bay and single-marker analyses for  <dig> replicate simulations, with  <dig> or  <dig> loci affecting a phenotype, total heritability of  <dig> , and sample sizes of  <dig> or  <dig>  respectively . with a sample size of  <dig> , v-bay outperforms single-marker analysis for the  <dig> loci simulations, and is about the same for the  <dig> loci simulations. the reason for the relative decrease in performance of v-bay in this latter case is the average individual heritability associated with each associated marker is lower. most of the true associations are therefore too small to detect even when controlling for the largest effects with a multiple locus method like v-bay . with a larger sample size however, v-bay is able to detect a much larger proportion of the weaker associations in the case of  <dig> contributing loci . also, since there are more loci to detect with  <dig> loci, v-bay has far better performance than single-marker analysis overall at a highly conservative false positive rate . further simulations indicated that even for a uniform distribution of individual heritabilities , v-bay performs better for similar sample sizes and individual heritabilities. for example, for  <dig> loci with a sample size of  <dig>  and false-discovery rate of  <dig> % the average power of v-bay was 93%. this is greater than the corresponding power of 72% for single-marker analysis with the same false-discovery rate. in general, regardless of sample size, if there are enough loci with associations that are not too weak, then v-bay outperforms single-marker analysis.

v-bay performance is a direct function of the individual heritabilities, and not the total heritability of the phenotype. the individual heritability is defined by both the minor allele frequency and the effect size . therefore loci with large effects may still have low individual heritabilities if the minor allele frequencies of the true loci are low . for example, for our simulations where the total heritability was controlled to be  <dig> , and the individual heritabilities were shifted to be smaller overall, v-bay performance was far closer to single-marker analysis. when we increased the individual heritabilities associated with associations in these simulations, while holding the total heritability at  <dig> , v-bay can outperform single-marker analysis. for all simulations, when an individual heritability falls below a certain threshold, neither approach could detect the association. there exists a limit to how weak an association can be and still be detected by v-bay, given the sample size of the gwa study. even in the worst case scenarios simulated, with many loci with small individual heritabilities and a small sample size, the performance of v-bay was not significantly different from single-marker analysis across simulations. this result suggests that even if the number of loci were increased , the performance of v-bay would at worst be the same as single-marker analysis.

the inset in figure  <dig> illustrates another appealing property of v-bay. in contrast to a single-marker analysis, where each marker in a linkage disequilibrium block containing a true association will have an inflated -log <dig> p-value, v-bay identifies only a single marker as significant, which is in high linkage disequilibrium with the true association. we found in our single population simulations that, while the specific marker assigned depends on the update order of the algorithm, the correlation between the marker and the causative allele averages r <dig> =  <dig> , with 28% of hits on markers in perfect linkage disequilibrium, and 52% of markers with r <dig> ≥  <dig> . v-bay can therefore provide high mapping resolution within a linkage disequilibrium block.

comparison to the lasso
the v-bay algorithm was compared to the lasso, one of the only other currently proposed multiple locus methods that make use of a hierarchical regression model and have similar scaling properties to v-bay  <cit> . for comparison to v-bay, we use a form that implements a lasso type penalty  <cit> , based on the algorithm presented in wu et al.  <cit> , modified to allow continuous phenotypes.

phenotypes were simulated with a fixed total heritability of  <dig> . the false discovery rate was controlled to 5% for all three analyses.

genome-wide association analysis of hapmap gene expression
to investigate the empirical properties of v-bay, we performed a gwa analysis on gene expression levels measured in eternal lymphoblastoid cell lines, generated from the  <dig> unrelated individuals of phase ii of the international hapmap project  <cit> . individuals in this sample were genotyped for upwards of  <dig>  million snps and were derived from four populations: caucasian with european origin , chinese from beijing , unrelated japanese from tokyo , and yoruba individuals from ibadan, nigeria   <cit> . in the original gwa analysis of these data, stranger et al. used a single-marker testing approach, considering each population independently, and limiting the analysis to snps in the cis-regions of each gene to control the level of multiple test correction  <cit> .

using a version of v-bay that accounts for population structure and missing genotype data, we analyzed the pooled data from these populations. we did not limit the analysis to cis-regions, although we did limit our analyses to snps with maf > . <dig>  leaving  <dig>  million markers genome-wide. to minimize computational cost, we also limited our analysis to the  <dig> expression probes stranger et al. found to have the most significant associations, and an additional  <dig> probes with the largest residual variance, after correcting for population structure. for comparison, we also applied a single-marker analysis to these pooled data, for the  <dig> expression probes, incorporating a covariate to account for population structure.

on average, v-bay was able to complete the gwa of each of these expression phenotypes in  <dig>  hours using a dual-quad core xeon  <dig>  ghz . in 90% of cases, where our single-marker analysis reproduced the most significant cis-associations reported by stranger et al., v-bay also identified the association. in addition, a total of  <dig> out of the  <dig> previously reported cis-associations  <cit>  were identified with v-bay . a typical result from these analyses is presented in figure  <dig>  these manhattan plots are for the hla-drb <dig> expression probe, which was not reported by stranger et al. as having a strong cis-association. for this probe, v-bay, the lasso, and our multiple population single-marker analysis indicated a strong cis-association. since this association was also found with single-marker analysis, identification was not due to v-bay but to the analysis of the pooled data from different populations . still, the increased sensitivity of v-bay was suggested in this case by trans-associations identified by individual runs of v-bay, which were not identified by the single-marker analysis or the lasso. however, we imposed the restrictive criteria that an association identified by v-bay would only be considered significant if it was robust to missing data resampling and marker reordering runs. using this conservative strategy, none of the putative trans-associations were robust enough to report. with an increased sample size, we believe that these trans-associations could be confidently assigned as true hits.

CONCLUSIONS
v-bay addresses computational efficiency and performance concerns associated with many multiple locus gwa algorithms. while v-bay currently utilizes a hierarchical partitioning model, the same approach could be used to implement scalable algorithms for a wide range of models. for example, different shrinkage or penalization models such as the lasso  <cit> , ridge regression  <cit> , or a normal exponential gamma distribution penalty  <cit>  are easily implemented by removing the partitioning and substituting the appropriate prior distribution. further, the variational bayes method used for computation does not require specific closed form integrals arising from hyperparameter distributions, which characterize many of the proposed algorithms for full penalized-likelihood or bayesian gwa analysis  <cit> . there is therefore the potential for developing an entire class of scalable multiple locus algorithms for gwa analysis that could be tuned for different genetic and experimental conditions within the v-bay framework.

