BACKGROUND
to catalyze progress in understanding the molecular basis of drug response and its variability in humans, pharmacogenomics researchers need to establish connections between genes, gene polymorphisms, drugs, and diseases. however, pharmacogenomics is a dynamic field with a growing literature, and this wealth of published information can be difficult to track because it is published in many discipline-specific journals. to address this difficulty, researchers sometimes perform multiple searches repetitively – differing only in their syntax but not semantics – to find facts that match certain patterns. for example, a query template may be "{gene} verb {drug}", where the {gene} and {drug} are a specific gene and drug of interest to the researcher, and the verb phrase is one of the following three: 'binds', 'interacts with', or 'associates with'. these searches are very similar, and yet must be performed separately to extract all articles that contain each of the particular triplets, as there is no existing method to search using a category that includes the three verb phrases. text mining approaches may be useful in addressing this problem, because computational techniques can automatically scan, retrieve and summarize the literature and store it in a computable format. search techniques such as pubmed and google are keyword-based, and do not contain semantic information about desired relationships in text. natural language processing has been applied to pharmacogenomics in the past  <cit> , but there is an opportunity now to use it for extracting the connections between the entities of interest in pharmacogenomics. template-based semantic search can allow these connections to be automatically extracted, building on the commonalities in the sentence structure. the templates must be tailored to the specific field of research, in order to incorporate the terms and categories of interest to the researcher.

separate from the technical issues of information extraction is the choice of text corpus. a major limitation of many search methods is that only literature abstracts are indexed. however, the full text of the articles may offer improved performance.

some systems can support semantic concept-based search or relationship extraction, including relemed  <cit> , ihop  <cit> , ingenuity pathways  <cit> , genies  <cit> , cbioc  <cit> , and geneways  <cit> , but these systems do not generally provide search within full text and visual mark-up of the search results within the local context.

the textpresso search engine is a template-based text search engine developed for model organism databases  <cit> . textpresso uses an expert-built ontology that contains categories of phrases and words of biological interest. database curators and users specify particular types of objects and relationships of interest, and the system finds articles that match these. textpresso is based on a large set of regular expressions written to find templated relationships in text. it indexes the full text of articles that are provided as pdf files. constraints can be added to queries – for example, specifying that two entities appear in the same sentence in the article. highlighted search results allow the searcher to efficiently skim search results.

we hypothesized that with minor modifications textpresso would be useful for the task of identifying and extracting pharmacogenomic relationships. in particular, we wanted to extend textpresso to be useful for pharmacogenomics literature focusing on drugs, human genes, their variants, and the associated molecular and cellular phenotypes. articles processed by our modified textpresso  are selected to be relevant to pharmacogenomics based on previously reported tools  <cit> . table  <dig> shows examples of categories and terms identified by pharmspresso. we evaluated our extension by comparing the ability of pharmspresso to extract information about genes, drugs and polymorphisms from  <dig> articles, to the performance of  <dig> human gold standard evaluators reading the same literature.

examples of textpresso biological entities and relationships, along with additions for pharmspresso . the ontology includes  <dig> categories of two types:  biological entities and  relationships between entities. category names and examples of these categories are shown. * marks categories imported from gene ontology .

RESULTS
pharmspresso overview
* includes names, symbols, aliases

** includes redundancies in mesh thesaurus

we used the mesh thesaurus disease terms, including many synonyms and phrase permutations that create redundancy in disease matches. however, these are required to capture the different ways in which they appear in natural language.

pharmspresso can extract facts relevant to a specific gene
pharmspresso can extract categorical facts and relationships between categories of biological entities
in other queries, particular relationships of interest can be specified in addition to keywords. for example, a user may require a relationship synonymous with "association" or "effect" to be found within a sentence. in particular, patterns such as "{drug} {association} {gene}" can be found by querying for sentences containing these three categories. specific instantiations of {gene}, such as 'cyp2c19', can be sought by querying for the keyword 'cyp2c19' with the categories {drug} and {association}. for example, the article by ha-duong et al. titled 'ticlopidine as a selective mechanism-based inhibitor of human cytochrome p <dig> 2c19', includes the following sentence retrieved by pharmspresso: "spectral interaction studies demonstrate that ticlopidine readily binds to the protein active site of cyp2c19"  <cit> .

pharmspresso finds information not present in abstracts alone
evaluation of pharmspresso system
we performed an evaluation of the system by comparing the information extraction by pharmspresso to a gold standard of manual curation . the  <dig> articles used in our evaluation contain  <dig> gene mentions; pharmspresso finds  <dig> %  of these. the gold standard contains  <dig> polymorphism mentions; pharmspresso finds  <dig> % . when compared to the non-table gold standard , pharmspresso performance rises to  <dig> % , as there are  <dig> mentions that appear in tables embedded in the article as images. the gold standard contains  <dig> drug mentions; pharmspresso finds  <dig> % . if we query {gene} and {drug} together, pharmspresso finds  <dig> % of these associations. table  <dig> contains a summary of these results.

summary of pharmspresso performance in evaluation. the rows report percent of gene, gene-variant , and drug mentions found by the gold standard, recovered by pharmspresso.

discussion
pharmspresso's main strengths are its ability to process full text articles and index their contents based on an ontology of key concepts, on a corpus of literature relevant to the field of pharmacogenomics. it provides a search engine for finding entities and semantic relationships between them of pharmacogenomic importance. pharmspresso identifies relationships because it has a model of the words used to associate different concepts. its display allows users quickly to browse through search results.

because pharmspresso uses regular expressions that may be imprecise, it can retrieve false positive search results. for example, in one article  the ligand 'e1s' is tagged as a polymorphism, similar in pattern to e216s which indicates a substitution at position  <dig> from glutamic acid to serine. fortunately, the highlighted search results are easy to peruse, and irrelevant hits can quickly be discarded by users. the parsing of author names in the reference section of an article also leads to false positive gene polymorphisms, and the bibliographies should probably be removed from the corpus.

some instances are missed by regular expressions that are too precise. for example, the gene name oct- <dig> appears in the literature, whereas our lexicon contains the more standard notation oct <dig> for this gene. pharmspresso misses oct- <dig> as a gene. careful refinement of gene name templates could improve performance.

the creators of the textpresso ontology often included the category name as a term in the category, such as the term 'cell' in the category 'cell or cell group'. this practice was useful to us, in particular with the inclusion of the word 'gene' in the {gene} category. pharmspresso can thus highlight gene mentions, even if the gene itself does not appear in our lexicon; we can identify genes because the word 'gene' is highlighted. for example, in the sentence from pmid 12123487: 'the individual response to gemfibrozil could be partly explained by polymorphisms in genes coding for apolipoproteinb  and apoa1ciii', the drug gemfibrozil is reported to be in a relationship with the genes 'apolipoproteinb' and 'apoa1ciii', which do not appear in the pharmspresso drug lexicon. however, because the word 'genes' does appear in the lexicon, this text snippet is highlighted, with the word 'genes' highlighted, and thus allows the researcher to examine the article in which the sentence appears. this also allows us to refine our gene lexicon to include the two genes mentioned. similarly, if we expand the polymorphism category to identify the words 'polymorphism', 'variant', and 'allele', performance is likely to improve.

our focus on the identification of polymorphism mentions in the literature, was in identifying those variants that can be mapped to specific locations in the genome. thus, pharmspresso does not recognize gene variant names that follow the "star notation"  as a polymorphism, as they do not give any explicit genomic location information. however, pharmspresso can easily be engineered to identify these variants, perhaps using a new category in the ontology. for example, in the  <dig> articles reviewed by the evaluators, there were  <dig> mentions of variants that follow the star notation. pharmspresso uses a relatively simple algorithm for finding polymorphisms. others have reported more complex methods – sometimes more domain-specific and usually more computationally expensive for finding gene and variant mentions  <cit> . these may be incorporated in future versions of our system.

in our evaluation of polymorphism and gene detection, one of the  <dig> articles contained a large table with all the mentions of polymorphisms. however, as this table was an image embedded in the article, the conversion from pdf to text did not capture this information. this is a limitation of the system. for the purposes of this analysis, that article was removed and the analysis of polymorphism mentions included only  <dig> articles. we find that the most important polymorphisms are often also mentioned in the text of the article itself, and thus are not missed by pharmspresso.

we note that there were some bona fide polymorphisms in the literature that the annotators missed – these would have raised performance in identification of polymorphism mentions.

pharmspresso identifies  <dig> % of drug mentions when querying for the {drug} category, as opposed to only  <dig> % if querying for {gene} and {drug} categories together. often, the gene is described in once sentence, and the drug in the following sentence. thus the strict limit of one sentence only might best be relaxed to allow  <dig> or more sentences. pharmspresso does not currently have a mechanism to rank the most likely or most frequently mentioned associations. such a ranking could assist users in deciding which associations are the most reliable.

a bottleneck in the process of the pharmspresso pipeline is the gathering of the full-text articles. it can be tedious to download pdfs from journals that publish work on pharmacogenomics. we anticipate that the improved availability of full text may permit partnerships with publishers to streamline the pipeline. another limitation of the system is that pharmspresso only works on a pre-defined corpus of relevant articles, and not on all existing literature. in the future, pharmspresso will include a larger corpus, and abstracts will be used when the full text is not available. additionally, the results of the information extraction will be downloadable in tabular format, useful for building interaction networks.

the pharmspresso package is available to the public at .

CONCLUSIONS
pharmspresso is a resource that extracts information from full text articles by identifying key pharmacogenomic concepts and the relationships between them. it marks up a corpus of literature based on an ontology of concepts, among which are the classes genes, gene variants, drugs, and polymorphisms. subsequently, it displays the sentence-level results to the user as visually enhanced text, highlighting the relevant extracted concepts within their local context. pharmspresso is easily extendible to other disciplines. as the increasing amount of published literature makes it very difficult for humans to manage the knowledge in a scientific field, automated tools are needed to organize the information and effectively understand unstructured text. we are working on making pharmspresso a robust system that will automatically retrieve relevant literature, mark it up using our ontology, extract the facts of interest, and use them to populate a database of interactions. in addition to serving as a resource for human users, the knowledge collected by pharmspresso may also be amenable to automated data mining and relationship-discovery methods.

