BACKGROUND
genetic variations cause many phenotypic differences in the organism development and physiology, and contribute to individual disease susceptibility and drug response as well. the most widespread genetic variations are snps  that are frequently used in case-control studies to identify possible associations between genotypes and complex diseases  <cit> .

at the present time, more than  <dig> million human snps are listed in the public databases, and this number is growing steadily. the amount of snps needed to obtain reliable results in association studies depends on linkage disequilibrium among them  <cit>  and on their organization in haplotypes  <cit> . the ongoing identification of tagging-snps and haplotype blocks by the international hapmap project  <cit>  will make it possible to use smaller numbers of snps to capture all the genetic variation in a given chromosomal region  <cit> . currently, however, many snps are needed to achieve this goal with statistically significant results. since the dna samples to test must also be numerous, it is essential to carry out such investigations in a high-throughput way.

in the last few years great efforts have been made in developing high-throughput methodologies for snp genotyping in order to attain high sensitivity, low error rates and affordable costs  <cit> . among these methods, several of the most effective relay on the use of microarrays  <cit> . genotypes are assessed by comparing to each other the signal intensities  <cit>  of hybridized allele-specific probes, which may be labelled either by sbe   <cit> , or by selective ligation   <cit> , or by allele-specific primer extension on microarray  <cit> . the fluorescent labelling of the polymorphic alleles may be carried out by: 1) conjugating each of the four bases to a different dye, with the mandatory use of a tetra-laser scanner for the acquisition of the microarray images  <cit> ; 2) employing only two dyes  <cit> , for example by hybridizing the labelled alleles two by two  onto distinct arrays  <cit>  and using a dual-laser scanner to acquire the slide images.

although powerful, the tetra-colour approach is very expensive, since four different fluorescent dyes are required and the tetra-laser scanner has very high acquisition and maintenance costs. on the contrary, the dual-colour approach is more easily affordable for all the microarray laboratories that already perform gene expression analysis, but it may present some drawbacks. since each array is used to test directly only two bases , the signal intensities on the p1-array must be compared to those on the p2-array in order to infer all the six possible bi-allelic genotypes. however, genotype assignments through the direct comparison between arrays p <dig> and p <dig> are not completely reliable. a number of systematic errors, introduced at several steps in the experimental protocol , may differently affect the signal intensities on the two arrays, thus making their comparison unsuccessful.

to improve the dual-colour microarray approach for snp genotyping, a normalization method, which produces coefficients able to make signal intensities from different arrays comparable, is needed. such a method must take into account both systematic and random errors in the experimental procedure. unfortunately, theoretical methods for an a priori normalization require a formal and quantitative description of each source of noise, which is not always feasible.

here we propose tamges  as an alternative normalization approach based on bilinear regression theory, which requires a further experimental contribution: in addition to the two p-arrays, an extra array identical to the others  is hybridized with the products of a third labelling reaction in which each dye is conjugated with two bases. the signal intensities recorded from the u-array can be used to extract the normalization coefficients crucial to make the data recorded from the two p-arrays directly and reliably comparable.

we also describe software modules which we developed for data processing and analysis obtained by applying the proposed experimental protocol.

RESULTS
experimental approach
the dna sequences containing the snp loci were amplified by multiplex pcr ; cyclic sbe reactions were carried out in the presence of fluorescently labelled ddntps by using primers with 3'- end complementary to the nucleotide exactly before the snp and with a tag sequence at their 5'- end . the sbe products were then hybridized onto the arrays to unique anti-tag probes complementary to the primer 5' tags. after slide image scanning, alleles and genotypes were assigned by software analysis.

two-array method
the simplest approach to execute snp genotyping by microarray with only two dyes is the performance of two sbe reactions , subsequently hybridized on distinct arrays  <cit> . we performed a p <dig> reaction with cy5-ddatp and cy3-ddgtp  for the direct investigation of a/g polymorphisms, and a p <dig> reaction with cy5-ddctp and cy3-ddutp  for the direct investigation of c/t polymorphisms. the evaluation of the a/c, a/t, g/c and g/t genotypes was achieved through the comparison of the signals corresponding to the same snp recorded from the two p-arrays.

the analysis of both p-arrays aimed at discriminating between true and false signals. for each spot, the background intensity values in the green  and red  channels and the distribution of green and red intensity values were extracted. it is generally accepted, in fact, that a signal may be identified as definitely true when its foreground value is several standard deviations above its background value. a direct consequence of this assumption is that signals in the range of the background value are classified as artefacts. it is not unlikely, however, to find a class of values statistically distant from the background, but showing values significantly lower when compared to top-score signals. as a consequence, the genotype assignment relative to ambiguous signals is a problem even on a single array. in the present case, another difficulty emerged, triggered by the need to compare the signals coming from two distinct arrays. within any array, systematic comparison errors can be easily introduced by experimental random drifts; drifts can be caused by different global performances of the sbe probes due to different labelling efficiency or hybridization rate to the target on the array, as well as by a better or worse yield of each fluorescent dye.

in spite of an accurate optimization of the experimental protocol, also through a careful selection of primers for the multiplex pcr and for the sbe reaction, some inconsistencies in the procedure still remained, thus making genotype assignments not always reliable.

"ambiguous signals", in fact, are very difficult to assign as true or false, since their relative error is maximum. as a consequence, instead of trying an a priori standardization of the data measured on the two p-arrays, which may prove to be unfeasible, we introduced a further data source, the u-array.

tamges 
we hybridized the union array  with the products of a sbe reaction performed using all the labelled bases employed for the two p-arrays . therefore, for the u-array, the green signal was not associated to a single base, but to a pair of bases, the green-labelled in the p1-array and the green-labelled in the p2-array. the same was true for the red signal.

the u-array provided us with a supplemental source of experimental data, which can be deconvolved by using a bilinear regression approach . the signals deriving from the u-array enabled us to obtain an exact estimation of the ratio between the arrays p <dig> and p <dig>  thus allowing for the direct comparison of their normalized signals and making the identification of a/t, a/c, g/c and g/t snps more efficient.

comparison between two-array method and tamges
in order to evaluate if tamges increases the quality of snp genotyping data obtained by dual-colour microarrays, we estimated the frequencies of genotyping errors derived from the direct comparison of the two p-arrays  or by using tamges. we first exploited the performances of tamges on a limited number of experimental data and then we expanded the number of samples by synthetic data.

results from experimental data
we compared the application of the two-array method and tamges by genotyping  <dig> snps  in  <dig> samples for a total of  <dig>  snps .

with the two-array method , the amount of missing data was very high: indeed, 54% of the signals came out as ambiguous . moreover, 5% of the signals were recognized as unspecific . thus, only 41% of the snps were assigned by this system. by analyzing the same  <dig> samples by tamges, in contrast, ambiguous signals were only 16%, while the amount of unspecific signals remained 5% , so that 79% of the examined snps were assigned. the concordance rate between the 41% and 79% of snps, called by the two methods respectively, was absolute in the 77% of the cases and partial  in the 20% of the cases. the totally discordant genotypes accounted for the 3% of the cases.

the signals that remained ambiguous after the application of tamges included both signals with foreground intensity values lower than the background intensity value and signals discarded in the data processing because the sum of their normalized intensities on the two p-arrays was not equal to their intensity on the u-array .

these results suggest that the application of tamges not only allows for the reduction of the uninterpretable signals, but also increases the confidence in the assigned genotypes. applying both the two- and the three-array methods, we noticed that the unspecific signals  were related to the same few snps, and always restricted to one channel, probably accounting for non-random phenomenon of cross-reaction to unspecific templates.

moreover, the normalization procedure takes into account systematic errors which can be generated by a time-delayed assay and is able to filter them. if any array  fails in producing analyzable signals, it can be recovered by simply hybridizing the sbe products on another slide, or by repeating only the failing sbe reaction.

results from synthetic data
to strengthen the results obtained with experimental data, we generated synthetic data by simulating a typical snp genotyping experiment according to the procedure applied to obtain real data.

we generated a total of  <dig>  random experiments, each one with  <dig> samples over a set of  <dig> snps. we set the frequency of both alleles of each snp equal to  <dig> , and we computed the frequency of errors only among the samples/snps with two signals. each simulated experiment exhibited some unique random  and some deterministic parameters. most of these parameters were generated by looking at our preliminary experimental data drawn from the two-array method, but we analyzed in detail the only two which we considered as potentially critical for the comparison: the global frequency of artefacts and the multiplicative variability between the two arrays. the  <dig>  experiments were subdivided into  <dig> levels of frequency  and  <dig> levels of variability . we performed  <dig> simulations for each experiment.

the results obtained on synthetic data are shown in figures  <dig> and 3; in both the figures, the  <dig> levels of artefact frequency were collapsed together, since no qualitative difference emerged from different levels. figure  <dig> shows the box-plots of the  <dig> data corresponding to the different levels of multiplicative variability. figure  <dig> shows the averages of the same data in a single plot. it is evident that if the variability between arrays is small, there is no need at all to normalize them through the third array: outliers in the right part of figure  <dig>  show that sometimes  the regression fails to determine the right coefficients and the frequency of error increases. on the other hand, if the variability is high , the two-array method becomes very faulty, while tamges reduces the frequency of errors by one order of magnitude .

evaluation and validation of tamges
to estimate the global efficiency of the proposed genotyping method, we assessed the amount of missing data by experimentally analyzing  <dig> additional samples. for all the  <dig> snps, ambiguous signals accounted for  <dig> % on average, ranging from  <dig> % to  <dig> % for different snps . among all the analyzable signals, we verified that non-assigned alleles were only  <dig> % on average, ranging from 0% to  <dig> % for different snps . non-assigned genotypes were  <dig> % on average, ranging from 0% to  <dig> % for different snps .

to estimate the reliability of our method, we sequenced four dna samples for each snp by an abi prism  <dig> genetic analyzer . we obtained concordant results with the exception of four snps for which one allele was missed in one sample. interestingly, our method allows for a clear discrimination between heterozygous deletion genotypes  from homozygous genotypes , whereas the sequencing gives the same pattern in both the cases.

all the analyzed snps were tested by hwsim.exe  <cit>  and resulted to be in hardy-weinberg equilibrium.

discussion
tamges genotypes all the possible snps by performing three sbe reactions  with different combinations of labelled ddntps, hybridized on three identical arrays. other dual-colour approaches request either a distinct array for each of the possible base changes or the use of one labelled allele-specific probe for each snp  <cit> .

most of the existing methods, based both on tetra- and dual-colour approaches, do not succeed in genotyping all the snps with equal efficiency; snps with a too high data loss are simply discarded from the analysis. if many snps are analysed, as in large scale studies or wide genome scans, such a loss of data does not usually compromise the overall informative power of the study. on the contrary, in the context of association studies of candidate genes and snps, retrieving maximum information is essential. our approach guarantees acquisition of reliable data also in those cases where snp genotyping proves to be difficult. indeed, with the three-array approach the overall amount of unsolvable signals was  <dig> %, thus significantly smaller as compared to 54% obtained by the previously employed two-array approach, and lower than the percentage of snps usually discarded by other methods  <cit> . in addition, tamges resulted more accurate in calling genotypes than the two-array method. the concordance rate between the two approaches, in fact, was not absolute , while the concordance rate between tamges and the sequencing method was almost absolute. thus, the increased cost due to the use of the third array is well balanced by this strong enhancement in data quality.

spots on distinct arrays may show very different signal intensities because each array may be considered as a microenvironment separate from the others. we observed that slide printing quality, for example, may determine as much as 20% variability in signal intensities between twin spots and as much as 30% variability between the same spots in replicated samples. solving the variability between the arrays p <dig> and p <dig> might account for the observed decrease of unsolvable signals. the introduction of the u-array and the application of a bilinear weighted-least-square regression model  allow for the calculation of normalization factors for the arrays p <dig> and p <dig> and, consequently, for their direct and unambiguous comparison.

the percentage of residual unsolvable data resulted to be different for each snp, ranging from about 5% to 30%. missing data proved to be mostly dependent on the unequal efficiency of the sbe primers, either in the sbe reaction or during the hybridization, which produced signals below the detection threshold. in the sbe reaction, the efficiency in the incorporation of labelled ddntps might be affected by secondary structures in the template, as we verified for several snps by mfold  <dig>  software  <cit> . as far as the hybridization is concerned, too low signals might depend on the investigating anti-tags; anti-tags can be poorly spotted or too close to the hybridization positive control, which usually has a strong signal spreading in the surrounding background. a more careful selection of efficient primers and utilisation of only good quality slides would likely decrease further the amount of missing data. we got an overall allelic and genotypic call rate respectively of  <dig> % and  <dig> % on average.

we adopted a multiple statistical approach  for analyzing data as in a case-control association study . this approach conferred consistency to genotyping and association data since the three distinct p-values deriving from each approach were concordant. moreover, the new and average analyses, taking into account the probability with which genotypes and alleles are assigned, weighted the confidence of the data.

it is noteworthy that all the obtained genotyping data were certain, as established by sequencing validation. moreover, the fact that all the snps were in hardy-weinberg equilibrium confirmed the coherence of the proposed system  <cit> .

the application of tamges confers an important experimental advantage: the ruling-out of the necessity to perform all the steps of the protocol, from the dna target amplification to the hybridization on microarray, at the same time for both the p-arrays. for a given sample, indeed, tamges is cost-effective in reclaiming partial data due, for example, to the failure of at least one out of the three arrays: relying on the normalization peculiarities of the u-array, only the failed array is recovered as long as the sbe reaction is performed on the same pcr product. with the two-array approach, if only one array fails, it is necessary to re-hybridize both, since the variability would be too high to be neglected. this means that tamges makes the two-colour microarray protocol for snp genotyping not only more reliable, but also more flexible.

CONCLUSIONS
tamges represents a useful, flexible and high-throughput tool for snp genotyping by dual-colour microarrays, which enables laboratories equipped with dual-laser scanners, usually employed for gene expression studies on microarray, to perform also snp genotyping without any additional requirement or costs.

the main advantages of tamges, compared to other existing dual-colour approaches, are:

1) cost-effectiveness due to:

a. the utilization of non labelled allele-specific primers and probes,

b. the use of a reduced numbers of arrays ,

c. the possibility of repeating just one array, instead of all those relative to a sample, in the event that a single array has failed;

2) higher specificity due to the multiple statistical approach employed for the correlation analysis, which allows for the estimation of the confidence of the obtained data.

this is the reason why tamges is especially suited for association studies based on candidate genes and snps, where the number of snps to be genotyped is limited and achieving the highest possible knowledge from all the selected snps is an essential goal.

