BACKGROUND
within many developmental contexts, cells assemble into epithelial sheets and coordinately differentiate to form organs and tissues. this differentiation process often involves changes in cell shape, cell-cycle arrest, and the emergence of cell-type-specific features. whereas many factors  have been identified that control individual aspects of this differentiative process, it is less clear how these divergent changes in epithelial and cell biology are temporally coordinated to generate the adult structure.

drosophila wing tissue is uniquely amenable to studies that concern epithelial differentiation. during larval stages of development, presumptive wing cells proliferate within a relatively uniform, mono-layered epithelium. when the animal pupariates and metamorphosis is initiated, however, this simple epithelium rapidly transforms into a complex wing structure. the most dramatic changes associated with wing differentiation involve cell shape, as evagination and elongation of the wing pouch gives rise to the much larger wing blade. this process requires wing-cell flattening, creation of a bi-layered epithelium, and the formation of tubes 
 <cit> . coincident with this epithelial morphogenesis, each cell executes its final cell cycle
 <cit> , adopts a cell-type-specific shape
 <cit> , and forms a polarized actin-rich wing hair
 <cit> , among other things. to identify regulatory mechanisms that initiate and coordinate the terminal differentiation of an epithelium, therefore, we have characterized the changes in gene expression that occur during a time course of drosophila wing metamorphosis.

our time-course study in the wing reveals a surprisingly complex pattern of gene regulation during metamorphosis, affecting nearly half of the genes in the drosophila genome at one or more time points. we suggest that this complex regulatory pattern results from the combined influence of sequence-specific binding complexes within genetic enhancers, and temporal changes in core-promoter preference. as such, our focused analysis of a single epithelial tissue as it undergoes a dynamic developmental transition, suggests an important role for core-promoter sequences  in coordinating epithelial differentiation.

RESULTS
within a very short period of time  the wing imaginal disc is transformed from a relatively simple epithelial sheet into a complex structure that resembles the adult wing . to illustrate this fact, and to confirm the developmental timing of our genotype under study , wing tissue was dissected at several developmental time points between the late third larval instar  and 36 h after puparium formation . we found that wing pouch evagination began at pupariation and was clearly evident by 2 h apf . by 6 h apf, wing elongation and hinge region constriction were occurring , as described previously
 <cit> . in addition to gross morphological changes such as these, dramatic changes in shape were also observed at the cellular level. developing wing tissue was stained for de-cadherin to reveal the apical shape of each cell
 <cit> . between  <dig> and 36 h apf, wing cells adopted a hexagonal shape 
 <cit> , and vein/intervein shape differences emerged
 <cit>  . each wing cell also formed a wing hair during early pupal stages
 <cit> , as revealed by f-actin localization .

between late l <dig> and 36 h apf, presumptive wing cells also exit the cell cycle. to precisely determine the timing of this event, we used fluorescence-activated cell sorting  analysis to characterize the temporal changes in dna content of wing cells . the wing epithelium remained proliferative through 2 h apf , but by 6 h apf many cells had temporarily arrested cycling with a g <dig> dna content. this results in an in vivo semi-synchrony of the final cell cycle. by 18 h apf, most cells in the wing had re-entered the cell cycle and completed their final round of division 
 <cit> . by 24 h apf, over 95% of the wing was arrested in g <dig>  and only very rare s- or m-phases were observed in the wing blade . no further cell cycling was observed in the wing blade between  <dig> and 36 h apf.

to capture the gene expression dynamics that drive these developmental changes, we performed a microarray analysis. rna was isolated from late l <dig> wing discs , and from wings at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 36 h apf. for technical reasons concerning the dissection, samples from the earliest time points  contained presumptive notum tissue, whereas the later samples  did not. this array analysis revealed a striking number of transcripts whose level of expression significantly changed during this developmental time course . for example, comparison between l <dig> and 36 h apf yielded  <dig> genes that were differentially expressed. in total,  <dig> genes were differentially expressed at one or more time points.

gene expression dynamics during differentiation of the wing
with such a large number of differentially expressed genes, we explored computational methods of categorizing and grouping genes to identify patterns within the data. we first used self-organized mapping of genes  to intuitively display global gene-expression dynamics. this provided a clear view of general changes in gene expression over time, but masked many discrete temporal patterns by grouping them in with the most common trends .

we next used hierarchical clustering to organize all  <dig> differentially expressed genes. from this analysis, we estimated that the dataset contained between  <dig> and  <dig> distinct temporal patterns of gene expression. based on this information, we used the genesis program to perform k-means clustering, imposing values of k that ranged from 26– <dig>  we empirically determined that  <dig> clusters represented the optimal number of temporal expression patterns, without generating too many similar or overlapping clusters. additional file
 <dig> shows the pattern of expression for each k-means cluster and supplemental text files 1– <dig> contain the transcript list and complete data for each cluster. we next hierarchically organized the genes within each k-means cluster, and ordered the clusters to generate a heat map, which represents the global changes in gene expression that occur during metamorphosis of the wing .
 <dig>  for each cluster, the normalized log <dig> expression level of each gene  is plotted as a function of time . the magenta line represents the average expression of all genes within a cluster. examples of genes and enriched gene ontology terms for the selected clusters are listed at right.

enhancer motifs are enriched in co-regulated clusters
we first examined gene ontology  enrichment within the 30 k-means clusters to see if clusters with similar temporal patterns of expression contained functionally related genes. for this analysis  <dig> go terms were used. sorting clusters based on go enrichment, however, did not group clusters with similar patterns of expression . during differentiation of the wing, therefore, go terms do not accurately predict the temporal pattern of expression for a given gene.

we next asked whether similarly regulated clusters of genes share known regulatory motifs  within upstream enhancer regions. a database of  <dig> known drosophila transcription factor-binding motifs  was used for this analysis
 <cit> . we also added several motifs to this dataset, including the mammalian e2f motif from transfac, and custom motifs for drosophila myc, ecdysone receptor/ultraspiracle complex , trithorax-like , medea , and drosophila e2f. these custom motifs were obtained by performing meme analysis on previously described target genes
 <cit> , and by deriving a consensus from two drosophila e2f binding sites identified by yamaguchi and colleagues
 <cit> . the med motif was obtained by meme analysis of confirmed direct decapentaplegic  signaling target genes in the wing . finally, a starvation responsive e-box motif
 <cit>  was also included. see additional file
 <dig> for details concerning these custom motifs. additional file
 <dig> provides the position-specific scoring matrices  for all motifs used for this analysis.

for each gene, 1 kb of sequence immediately upstream of the transcriptional start site  was defined as the dna-search space. this amount of sequence provided a good compromise between capturing important regulatory elements and minimizing sequence search space, which can decrease enrichment. we empirically tested search spaces of  <dig>   <dig>  and 3 kb upstream of each tss, and found the greatest amount of motif enrichment and/or depletion when 1 kb of sequence was analyzed. this finding is consistent with published data concerning drosophila regulatory elements
 <cit> , but certainly does not identify all binding sites within target-gene enhancers and will omit binding sites outside of the 1-kb window and in introns.

in figure 
 <dig>  the average change in gene expression for each cluster is represented by the heat map at the top, and the most significantly enriched go term for each cluster is listed . clusters were ordered based on similarities between the temporal patterns of gene expression. we found that a number of motifs known to regulate cell growth, protein synthesis, and the cell cycle , mothers against dpp , med, and brinker binding motifs
 <cit> ) were frequently enriched in the upstream sequences of the same clusters. in addition, expression of these clusters generally declined during pupal stages of development and upon cell-cycle exit . an interesting exception to this rule was cluster  <dig>  which contains many of these same binding sites, but is characterized by increased levels of expression during pupal stages . we also found that motifs associated with tissue differentiation  were significantly depleted in clusters with declining levels of expression . instead, these differentiation-associated motifs were enriched in clusters that increased expression during pupal time points. finally, clusters that exhibited a strong peak of gene expression  at 6 h apf  were typically associated with broad binding-site enrichment. this suggests that broad mediates a transcriptional response to ecdysone signaling at 6 h apf in the wing . this likely mediates the g <dig> arrest that characterizes the 6 h apf wing, as two high-scoring potential broad binding sites are found upstream of the gene string, whose downregulation mediates the temporary g <dig> arrest. our data suggests that in the differentiating wing enhancer motifs are generally enriched in clusters of genes with similar temporal patterns of expression.

core-promoter types strongly correlate with co-regulated clusters of genes
a previous study used cell sorting coupled with serial analysis of gene expression  to reveal a role for dref in controlling gene-expression changes during differentiation of the drosophila eye
 <cit> . dref is a transcription factor that acts as a component of a transcription-initiation complex containing tbp-related factor <dig> 
 <cit> . the dref regulatory element  is found in upstream regulatory regions of many cell-cycle genes , but is also one of the most common core-promoter motifs identified in drosophila <cit> . we found dre enrichment in clusters of genes with declining levels of expression during terminal differentiation, which generally contained genes involved in the cell cycle and ribosomal biogenesis. this finding, combined with recent work demonstrating a role for core-promoter components in regulating gene transcription during development
 <cit> , prompted us to examine whether core-promoter types are associated with specific temporal patterns of gene expression in the differentiating wing. for each of the 30 k-means clusters, therefore, we asked whether ten core drosophila promoter motifs  were either enriched or depleted. the 100 bp spanning the tss  was defined as the dna-search space for this analysis. certain core-promoter  motifs  were frequently found together in clusters of genes with declining levels of expression during wing differentiation. in contrast, initiator , downstream promoter element , and motif-ten element  motifs were often found together in clusters that increased expression over time. tata motifs were rarely enriched or depleted in these k-means clusters . in the developing wing, therefore, core-promoter type strongly correlates with the temporal patterns of gene expression, suggesting a change in core promoter usage upon terminal differentiation.

clusters enriched for certain motifs contain verified target genes
to ask whether motif enrichment within a cluster indicates that these genes are regulated by a common factor , we compared selected clusters to published datasets of verified target genes. for example, cluster  <dig> is enriched in ecr/usp motifs. to validate that this cluster represents a true ecr/usp regulon, we compared genes within this cluster to previously identified ecr/usp targets
 <cit>  . similarly, clusters  <dig> and  <dig> are enriched in the starvation-associated e-box motif, the myc motif, and the drosophila e2f motif. genes from these two clusters were therefore compared to starvation-response genes
 <cit> , myc target genes
 <cit> , and e2f target genes
 <cit>  . in every case except one, significant enrichment for the independently validated target genes was observed . observed enrichment was most significant when similar tissues and developmental stages were compared. this likely reflects tissue- and temporal-specific target-gene expression, as expected. strikingly, genes within clusters  <dig> and  <dig> are enriched for both myc and e2f motifs, yet they are characterized by different core promoter motifs, and are regulated in an opposite fashion . nonetheless, the majority of genes in cluster  <dig> and  <dig> were independently validated as legitimate myc and e2f target genes. however, nearly all cluster  <dig> myc/e2f targets increase in response to myc or e2f overexpression , whereas nearly all cluster  <dig> genes decrease in response to myc or e2f overexpression . our data suggest that this dramatic switch in gene-expression behavior may depend upon the type of core promoter, although we cannot exclude the contribution of other enhancer motifs to gene expression in these clusters.

core-promoter type may influence gene-expression behavior
in our analysis, each transcript has a unique identifier, providing the transcription start location  for each isoform. thus, all transcripts were treated as separate entities, allowing us to include alternate tsss in our analysis. this raised the interesting question of whether genes with multiple tsss that contain different core promoter types, switch core-promoter usage during differentiation.

in the drosophila genome, 14% of genes are predicted to utilize multiple tsss. based on our analysis, a small number,  <dig> % of these have identifiable dpe or dre core promoter motifs. of this small number of genes, there are  <dig> genes within the drosophila genome that have a dre at one promoter and a dpe  at an alternative tss. in our wing dataset, nine of these genes had at least two temporally regulated transcripts that use fundamentally different core promoters. in all nine cases, the complement of promoter motifs predicted the transcript’s overall expression behavior and cluster assignment . transcripts from the same gene that utilized different core-promoter types did not cluster together, whereas transcripts from different genes with similar promoters frequently clustered together . these nine genes represent  <dig> transcripts. for  <dig> of the  <dig> alternate tss transcripts, the predicted core promoter enrichment for the assigned cluster also correctly predicted the transcript expression pattern. for these genes, core-promoter sequences could exert a greater influence on temporal patterns of expression than more distal regulatory sequences.

a small number of genes in our data set employ multiple tsss that are associated with different types of core promoters. transcripts associated with these genes often exhibited different temporal patterns of expression , which was predicted by the type of promoter, in all except for two transcripts .

changes in expression of core promoter-associated factors upon terminal differentiation
we next examined the patterns of expression for genes that encode core promoter-binding proteins, general transcription components, and tbp-associated factors . expression data from the wing developmental time course was extracted for these genes, and hierarchical clustering was used to group them according to their temporal pattern of gene expression . significant changes in expression were observed for core promoter element binding proteins ), and tfiid components ). expression levels of dref, several tafs , and an isoform of beaf  that binds the dre
 <cit>  all declined during terminal differentiation of the wing. in contrast, expression of trf <dig> , an isoform of beaf , several tafs , and select testes-specific tafs , cannonball , andnohitter ) increased during the developmental time course. these observations support the hypothesis that a change in core promoter usage may be associated with terminal differentiation in the wing.
 <dig>   rt-pcr and western blot analyses were used to examine rna or protein levels for selected factors in pupal wing tissue. by microarray analysis sa, which is a ttaf, did not increase expression at the time points shown. this was verified by western blot. levels of the ttaf mia increased in the wing, both by rt-pcr  and western blot . mia-specific bands at  <dig> and  <dig> kd  are observed with anti-mia antibody in select tissues . beaf decreased in the wing over time. acetylated histone h <dig> served as a loading control.  using uas-rnai lines, engrailed-gal <dig> was used to inhibit either white , or nht in the posterior wing. tubulin-gal80ts was used to limit rnai expression from the second larval instar until eclosion. compared to controls , nht reduction affected posterior wing growth and cuticle integrity . staining for f-actin reveals developing wing hairs at 34 h apf . compared to the anterior control, expression of nht rnai led to delay in wing hair formation in the posterior . nhtz <dig> hemizygotes, exhibit ectopic vein and multiple wing hair phenotypes . two nht alleles in trans  at 25°c exhibit ectopic vein . approximately 10% of nhtz5347/nhtz <dig> females exhibit patches of thin, small wing hairs .

to verify the expression-array data, western-blot analysis was used to examine protein levels for selected factors in pupal-wing tissue . by microarray analysis, the ttaf spermatocyte arrest  did not increase expression at the time points shown. this was verified by western blot, and demonstrates selectivity in ttaf regulation within the differentiating wing . levels of the ttaf mia increased in the wing at later stages of development , whereas total levels of beaf decreased in the wing over time.

using inducible rnai transgenes, we then reduced levels of several tafs and testes-specific tafs  and examined the effect on differentiation of the wing. because many of these genes can affect general transcription, we used the temperature-sensitive gal <dig> system, in combination with wing gal <dig> drivers, to express rnai constructs from the mid-larval stage of development  until eclosion . rnais to specific tafs and core promoter-associated genes resulted in disrupted wing phenotypes when expressed via apterous-gal <dig>  these included bip <dig>  and tfiias- <dig> . employing the same experimental protocol for the ttaf can resulted in lethality. when the ttaf nht was inhibited in the posterior wing using engrailed-gal <dig> , defects in posterior wing growth and cuticle integrity were observed . terminal differentiation in nht rnai-expressing wings was assessed at the cellular level by staining these wings for f-actin at 34 h apf. beginning at this stage of development, every cell in the wing blade forms an actin-rich wing hair, which is an early differentiation event. expression of nht rnai in the posterior wing led to a cell-autonomous delay in wing-hair formation and terminal differentiation , revealing an unexpected potential somatic role for nht.

in further support of a function for nht in the wing, we noted that flies hemizygous for the ems loss of function alleles nhtz <dig> or nhtz <dig> <cit>  were sub-viable and 50% of escapers were developmentally delayed by 24 hours during the pupal stage. nearly all nhtz <dig> hemizygous adults exhibited ectopic wing vein phenotypes  and 10% exhibited multiple wing hair phenotypes . fifty percent of nhtz5347/nhtz <dig> transheterozygous males exhibited a mild ectopic vein phenotype in the anterior wing and 10% of females raised at 25°c exhibited ectopic vein  and occasional patches of small, thin wing-hairs .

vein refinement involves the coordinated action of multiple signaling pathways and a developmental delay can affect the vein the refinement and limitation process. other genotypes exhibiting wing hair developmental delay also exhibit multiple wing hairs or thin wing hair phenotypes
 <cit> , further suggesting a developmental delay in the wing occurs due to loss of nht. this result, combined with the promoter/motif analysis, suggests that a change in tafs and core-promoter type preference may play an important role in regulating gene expression during differentiation of the wing. in total, our results indicate that the combinatorial influence of enhancer occupancy and core-promoter usage shapes the spatial and temporal patterns of gene expression that drive epithelial differentiation.

discussion
dramatic gene-expression changes during metamorphosis of the wing
previous studies with whole animals estimated that 10% of the genome is differentially regulated during metamorphosis
 <cit> . many tissue-specific changes in gene expression are likely obscured by using whole animals however, as li and white found that expression levels for 17% of the genes in the genome are significantly affected in at least one of five tissues during the developmental transition into metamorphosis
 <cit> . strikingly, our analysis of wing tissue during metamorphosis revealed significant changes in expression for ~50% of the genome . this likely reflects the wide range of developmental and cellular processes that are involved in differentiation of the wing . changes to the cell cycle are particularly dynamic during this developmental time period , as initially proliferative cells temporary arrest in g <dig>  synchronously execute a final cell cycle, and permanently exit the cell cycle in g <dig> . our results indicate that such a breadth of developmental changes ultimately depends upon the modulation of several thousand genes. our data suggests that this dynamic program of gene-expression regulation involves combined inputs from both enhancer sequences and the type of core promoter. furthermore, this suggests that only a small proportion of genes will truly fit the definition of “constitutive” or “housekeeping” when examining dynamic developmental processes across multiple tissues.

temporal gene-expression patterns correlate most strongly with core-promoter types
in the differentiating wing, gene expression patterns were not highly correlated with go term enrichment, i.e., functionally related genes were not co-regulated. instead, shared upstream-regulatory motifs and the type of core promoter were more accurate predictors of a gene’s temporal pattern of expression. these findings are in contrast to a recent analysis, which suggests that co-regulated genes in drosophila are more likely to share go terms than transcription factor binding sites
 <cit> . these authors based their conclusions on gene-expression data from whole organisms, an approach that may have masked tissue-specific patterns that are necessary to find shared transcription factor binding sites. instead our analysis is consistent with the findings of fitzgerald et al.,
 <cit>  which found core promoter type strongly correlated with gene expression in embryos vs. adults. we also found that enrichment for a particular type of core promoter more accurately predicted a gene’s temporal pattern of expression than enrichment for any particular enhancer motif within  <dig> kb of the tss. comparing the same tissue at multiple developmental time points, therefore, has revealed an unappreciated level of transcriptional regulation that depends upon the core-promoter type. as the wing differentiates, we found a shift in expression away from genes with dre, and certain core promoter types , toward genes that use inr, dpe, and mte promoter elements. this trend even held true for genes with multiple tsss containing different core promoters, where in nearly every case we observed a shift in tss usage during differentiation . this shift may reflect changes in taf and core promoter associated factors during terminal differentiation, and is consistent with studies that have found wing differentiation functions for additional components of the basal transcription machinery 
 <cit> .

the type of core promoter may dictate target-gene induction or repression in response to myc and e2f
for general enhancer analysis, promoters such as the heat-shock protein   <dig> tata promoter are thought to be sufficient. validation of the reporter-gene expression pattern is typically performed at a limited number of pre-selected time points, and reporters that recapitulate the expected pattern are chosen. our data suggest however, that such constructs may miss important aspects of temporal regulation that are not captured by an arbitrary choice of core promoter.

two gene clusters in our dataset  were enriched for both e2f and myc binding sites, and regulated known e2f and/or myc target genes
 <cit> . however, most genes within cluster  <dig> were induced by dmyc/de2f <dig>  whereas most genes within cluster  <dig> genes were repressed by dmyc/de2f <dig> activity . the latter represents a non-canonical response, as these factors primarily activate transcription when overexpressed. we identified a difference in core-promoter sequences between these two clusters, as cluster- <dig> genes were enriched for dre, cp- <dig>  - <dig>  and − <dig> sequences, whereas cluster- <dig> genes were enriched for dpe, mte, and inr sequences. this finding, together with our observation that the expression of genes encoding for core promoter-associated proteins were temporally regulated in the differentiating wing, suggests that differences in core-promoter type may underlie the non-canonical behavior of these e2f and myc target genes. most studies concerning e2f regulation use either well-characterized endogenous dre-containing promoters
 <cit> , cell-cycle gene promoters that contain dres
 <cit> , or engineered constructs with an hsp <dig> tata-type promoter
 <cit> . our data suggest that there may be another level of e2f  transcriptional regulation that is missed by using reporters such as these. this idea is supported by findings that an enhancer can be functionally linked to a specific core promoter in drosophila <cit> , and that certain factors can stimulate dpe-dependent transcription and inhibit tata-dependent transcription
 <cit> . future studies that involve reporter constructs with different types of core promoters  will be necessary to verify and characterize this new level of regulation.

a requirement for a ttaf in wing terminal differentiation
a previous report indicated that expression of nht  is restricted to the male germline
 <cit> . it was surprising to find therefore, that nht may play a role in the proper timing of terminal differentiation in the pupal wing. however, nht expression had only been examined in embryos ) and adults
 <cit> . newer modencode transcriptome data found that nht transcription is undetectable until pupal stages of development
 <cit> , whereas the adult wing contains very few viable cells, due to developmentally regulated apoptosis that occurs immediately after eclosion
 <cit> . we found that nht, as well as several other ttafs including mia and sa, are expressed in the pupal wing. these results are based on microarray, rt-pcr and western blotting analyses, where possible . our ttaf expression data do not contradict previous findings, therefore, but instead reveal somatic expression at a different stage of development.

nht mutants are viable but male sterile, consistent with their well-defined role in terminal differentiation of spermatocytes
 <cit> . although wing phenotypes associated with nht loss-of-function have not been reported, we used an inducible rnai construct to inhibit nht function in the pupal wing. this acute knockdown approach revealed a dramatic wing hair differentiation phenotype that may be partially masked in nht mutants by compensatory changes in other tafs. we also observed wing vein and abnormal wing-hair phenotypes in nht mutants . this genetic data demonstrates an unexpected role for nht in wing development. our results suggest that non-canonical tafs may play an important role in terminal differentiation of somatic tissues as well
 <cit> , including tafs that were previously thought to be germline specific.

CONCLUSIONS
the dynamic changes in gene expression during drosophila wing terminal differentiation encompass approximately 50% of the protein coding genes in the genome, and are directed by combinatorial inputs from both enhancer sequences and the core-promoter type at individual genes. our results suggest that a change in core promoter preference, likely mediated by a shift in expression of core promoter binding proteins, plays a much more significant role in modulating gene expression during metamorphosis than previously recognized.

