BACKGROUND
t. brucei sspp are single celled, flagellated protozoan parasites that cause human african sleeping sickness and nagana in cattle. the organisms follow a complex life cycle alternating between the mammalian and insect hosts. t. brucei sspp replicate by binary fission and, in the infected mammals, long-slender bloodstream forms use antigenic variation of their surface protein coat to effectively evade elimination of the population by the host immune system. in order to efficiently infect the insect vector  the ls cells  transform into quiescent “short stumpy”  cells that are pre-adapted to the life in the midgut of the tsetse. this transition occurs in response to a parasite derived unidentified “stumpy inducing factor”  in a cell density dependent manner
 <cit> . the further transition from the quiescent ss stage to the procyclic  insect stage occurs in the tsetse midgut. in vitro this situation can be mimicked through a temperature drop  and citrate or cis-aconitate addition to the medium. the mechanism of the in vitro differentiation involves the stage-specific expression of carboxylate transport proteins
 <cit>  and a phosphatase cascade that eventually relays the differentiation signal to the glycosomes
 <cit> . glycosomes are peroxisome-derived trypanosome-specific organelles harbouring more than  <dig> proteins involved in a number of different pathways including glycolysis and the beta-oxidation of fatty acids
 <cit> . how the glycosomes further promote differentiation remains elusive.

during the life cycle t. brucei undergoes dramatic changes including the surface proteome, changes in overall size, shape and motility as well as intracellular changes most prominently seen in the mitochondrion. the organelle transforms from an acristate tubular structure devoid of cytochromes, oxidative phosphorylation and tricarboylic acid “cycle”  activity to a compartment capable of the bona fide mitochondrial activities
 <cit> . the morphological and metabolic changes occurring during the life cycle are accompanied by major changes in gene expression at the mrna level
 <cit> . trypanosomes regulate steady state mrna abundance mainly at the posttranscriptional level likely through differential stability of the mrna molecules as has been shown for a number of transcripts
 <cit>  <cit> . additionally, a number of individual studies including work on the procyclic surface proteins
 <cit> , the glycosomal aconitase
 <cit> , the mitochondrial cytochrome c reductase
 <cit>  and several cytochrome oxidase subunits
 <cit> , have demonstrated that trypanosomes use translational and posttranslational mechanisms to regulate gene expression, however the genome-wide scale of these mechanisms remains unknown. the majority of proteomic studies in t. brucei have focused on individual parts/compartments of the cell including the mitochondrion
 <cit> , the plasma membrane
 <cit> , the flagellum
 <cit>  or applied semi-quantitative strategies in two life stages . no comprehensive proteomics study of the three life cycle stages have been done and/or compared with the corresponding transcriptome. thus the importance and scale of translational regulation and protein stability as means of gene expression regulation in t. brucei remain elusive.

in recent years silac approaches have become the method of choice for the quantitation of proteomes in numerous organisms ranging from yeast to plants and humans
 <cit> . here we present the first quantitative proteomics study of three life stages of t. brucei using silac and compare it with recently published transcriptome data and proteome data.

RESULTS
insect-form t. brucei cells grew at very similar rates irrespective of the medium , dialyzed/regular fetal bovine serum  and labeled or unlabeled amino acids . we could show that after  <dig> cell division cycles in medium containing heavy isotope labeled arg/lys the mean ratio of heavy over light isotopes in the detected peptides changed more than  <dig> fold from  <dig>  to  <dig>  indicating that the majority of proteins had incorporated the heavy isotope amino acids . this is also supported by the inspection of individual peptides, where the incorporation of heavy isotopes can be followed from  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> cell cycle divisions . for the comparison of relative protein abundance we used in vitro grown pc  and the mammalian ls or ss parasites  from infected animals . ls parasites were harvested from an early day three infection at a density of 5 ×  <dig> cells/ml, while the ss cells were harvested at a density of 3-5 × 108/ml on day six from immunosuppressed animals. parasites grew at similar rates in immunosuppressed and untreated animals . we purified the bloodstream form trypanosomes using anion exchange chromatography as described previously
 <cit> . 5 ×  <dig> insect-form and bloodstream form cells  were lysed using sds page buffer and subsequently mixed. the total cell extracts were separated on sds page in triplicate. each lane was cut into  <dig> slices, trypsinized and the resulting peptides analyzed by lc mass spectrometry.

overall proteome
to test how well the gel-base mass spectrometry approach covered the potential t. brucei proteome we compared the distribution of protein size, number of transmembrane domains and pi between the predicted and the detected proteome from two technical replicates . we identified annotated proteins ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> amino acids , however, a bias against the detection of very small proteins  and proteins with more than one trans-membrane domain were observed . also very basic proteins rich in arg and lys residues were detected less often than predicted from the genome encoded proteome. in general we achieved very good coverage of the overall proteome, which can also be seen in the genome-wide plot of protein abundance-changes during the development . the peptide information is summarized in the additional file
2: table s <dig>  we detected uniform coverage along the  <dig> mega-chromosomes and the majority of transcription units, with the exception of the subtelomeric regions in most chromosomes.

in order to validate the mass spectrometry data and evaluate the whole-cell protein samples for integrity we compared the abundance of the proteins in mass spectrometry with the abundance in western blotting using a selected number of antibodies and found good correlation between the fold-change measured by the two techniques .

from the > <dig> proteins detected  we reliably measured the abundance of  <dig> in all three life stages . from these about  <dig>  proteins were changed in expression level  in each of the comparisons, while about  <dig>  proteins remained unchanged in abundance . among the unchanged protein groups we detected  <dig> ribosomal proteins with mean and median fold-change of close to one in each of the life-stage comparisons . analysis of the three life cycle stages showed a major change in protein composition during the transition from the proliferative ls to the ss cells . more than  <dig> proteins were increased in abundance in the ss when compared to the ls, while only  <dig> were less abundant. the bias towards an increase in protein abundance was subsequently reversed during the transition from the quiescent ss to the insect-form . a set of  <dig> proteins was detected only between ls and pc  and further  <dig> genes were detected only between ss and pc . the changes of protein abundance can also be grouped into the different cellular functions/compartments . over 40% of the proteins in seven cellular component go terms: plasma membrane, peroxisome, nucleus, mitochondrion, microtubule, lysosome and glycosome, are ≥ 2x increased in abundance during the differentiation to the short stumpy cells.

 <dig> calculated from ls/pc and ss/pc.
 <dig>   go term enrichment. green indicates fraction of proteins ≥ 2x upregulated, red  and orange .

we also compared our results to a recently published study by urbaniak and co-workers
 <cit> , who applied a similar mass spectrometry approach to two life stages . different from our study urbaniak used in vitro grown monomorphic mitat <dig>  t. brucei cells that are not able to differentiate and complete the life cycle. out of  <dig> proteins that we detected in ls/pc  <dig> could also be found in the study of urbaniak and co-workers, while  <dig> and  <dig> proteins were only detected in the urbaniak and our study, respectively . we compared abundance-changes of  <dig> proteins and could show strong positive correlation for the vast majority of proteins between the two studies, excluding  <dig> proteins  that displayed opposing directions of expression change . both studies show an increase of mitochondrial protein abundance in the insect-form cells, however the increase is substantially larger for the study presented here  when compared to the study of the monomorphic cells . this can also be seen in figure
4b) where  <dig> of  <dig> mitochondrial proteins detected  are above the diagonal that marks equal fold-change.  <dig> of  <dig> proteins significantly differ in abundance between ls and pc in the two studies .  <dig> and  <dig> of these proteins show larger fold-changes during the differentiation in the gunasekera and urbaniak study, respectively.  <dig> of these proteins  are predicted to be mitochondrial. additionally we compared relative abundance-changes during the transition from ls to pc from our study to the corresponding lifestages in trypanosoma congolense from a recently published study
 <cit>  . for  <dig> proteins the relative abundance-changes between ls and pc in the two parasite species correlated with a spearman’s rank correlation of rho= <dig>  , including  <dig>  proteins that showed opposing patterns of expression in the two studies . when we excluded those  <dig> proteins from the analysis the spearman’s rank correlation increased to rho=  <dig>  .

n-terminal extensions and alternative splicing to diversify protein production
previously, others and we predicted several hundred proteins in the t. brucei proteome to have potential n-terminal extensions to the currently annotated start codon
 <cit> . for  <dig> of these proteins we have detected n-terminal peptides covering the predicted extensions . nineteen of the corresponding transcripts, including six mitocarta transcripts contain alternative trans-splice sites downstream of the 5’ most  atg . in the four representative examples alternative trans-splicing at the downstream positions would not permit translation of the n-terminal extension however, translation could initiate at one of the in-frame atg codons downstream of the alternative splice site . one of the consequences of the change in the n-terminal peptide is exemplified with the gene tb <dig> . <dig> that harbours a mitochondrial targeting signal in the n-terminal  <dig> amino acids. translation from the alternatively trans-spliced transcript would not contain this targeting signal and thus the corresponding protein would probably not localize to the mitochondrion. this is similar to the situation of the previously described isoleucyl trna synthetase  gene where alternative trans-splicing leads to two different size transcripts that are translated into proteins with a longer and shorter n-terminus localized to the mitochondrion and the cytosol, respectively
 <cit> .

although we have no additional experimental verification the mass spectrometry data together with the alternative splicing profile and our previous results for the trna synthetase suggest that from the transcripts described above two or more proteins differing in the n-terminus are potentially translated. these findings support the hypothesis that alternative trans-splicing is a significant mechanism for the diversification of the information encoded in the t. brucei genome.

mitocarta
corresponding to the overall coverage we detected  <dig> proteins predicted to be part of the mitochondrial organelle that is estimated to harbour about  <dig> proteins
 <cit> . for  <dig> of these proteins the abundance-changes between ls/ss/pc forms of the parasite were quantified . the major trend was an increase in mitochondrial protein abundance in the ss and pc cells, relative to the ls bloodstream form. the majority of changes occurred during the transition from the proliferative ls to the quiescent ss stage of the parasite, with little increase upon transition to the insect-form . a more detailed analysis of the respiratory chain confirmed this trend with the exception of the proteins from complex iii and iv, which showed the main increase during the transition to the pc form  while one of the well studied bloodstream-specific proteins in the mitochondrion, the terminal alternative oxidase , decreased in abundance only after the transition to the insect-form of the parasite . additionally many enzymes of the procyclic-specific metabolism like the enzymes of the tca “cycle” and the pathway converting pyruvate via acetyl-coa to acetate are present in the ss cells at levels comparable to the insect-form. the latter pathway includes the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex subunits , the acetate:succinate coa transferase  and the succinyl coa synthase . in summary, we find a majority of the mitochondrial proteins detected in this study to be increased in abundance in the quiescent ss form when compared to the proliferative ls.

novel transcripts expressed
kolev and co-workers recently showed the expression of  <dig> previously not annotated genes in the t. brucei genome at the rna level
 <cit> . we detected peptides for  <dig> or 3% of these  <dig> genes , while we could show the expression of about 30% of the remaining genes in the t. brucei genome. four of the  <dig> detected proteins encoded by novel transcripts belong to the retrotransposon hot spot protein family, while the remaining, including a  <dig> amino acid peptide, are proteins of unknown function with no significant similarities to other proteins outside the group of trypanosomes.

comparison rna/protein
using previously published rna expression profiling data from the same cell line  and life stages we compared the relative changes of rna and protein during the life cycle
 <cit> . for ~40% of the genes analyzed  rna and protein abundance-changes in pc/ls differed less than two fold with a spearman’s rank correlation coefficient of rho= <dig> , . the number of genes correlating at the level of rna and protein increased to 67% when the difference was allowed to be up to four fold . conversely this implied that depending on parameters and developmental stage 30% of the genes showed little to no correlation between rna and protein abundance-changes. however, using a principle component analysis  that allows us to reduce the dimensionality/complexity of the datasets and extract common features, we could show that rna and protein data from the individual life stages clearly cluster together .

discussion
this is the first study demonstrating the usefulness of the silac approach in the comparison of the total proteome of three t. brucei life cycle stages. we could show that fly transmissable insect-form t. brucei  grows well in silac heavy isotope-adapted sdm <dig> medium in vitro with little to no arg-13c <dig> to pro-13c <dig> conversion detectable. this is in good agreement with the lack of the ornithine aminotransferase in the t.brucei genome, an enzyme essential for the conversion arg to pro in other systems . interestingly the closely related parasite leishmania contains all enzymes necessary for the arg to pro conversion and thus might be less suited for a silac approach with labelled arg. as expected for a gel-based approach detection was slightly biased against very small proteins, proteins with > <dig> trans-membrane domain and very basic proteins, the latter possibly due to trypsin based cleavage of these proteins in very small peptides that are subsequently missed in the lc mass spectrometry. however, with more than  <dig> different proteins detected we achieved very good coverage of the t. brucei proteome . the comparison with a recently published study by urbaniak and coworkers showed overall excellent correlation of protein abundance-changes between blood  and insect  form cells  despite the fact that the growth conditions  and the cell lines  were quite different. interestingly, many mitochondrial proteins showed a decrease in fold-change between the blood and insect-form in the monomorphic when compared to the pleomorphic cell line. at this point we cannot distinguish if this is due to an increase of mitochondrial proteins in the bloodstream form, a decrease in the insect-form or a combination of both. however, it is well established that in vitro grown monomorphic bloodstream form cells differ in shape and motility from their in vivo grown pleomorphic counterparts . furthermore it has been speculated that the monomorphic cells are more similar to the intermediate forms of the pleomorphic cells, a differentiation step in between the ls and ss forms. when we compared our results to a recent study of the related parasite t. congolense we also detected strong positive correlation of protein changes during development , however less strong than when compared to the monomorphic t. brucei strain <cit> . similar to t. brucei, the t. congolense parasite is transmitted by the tsetse and infects a variety of mammalian hosts. however, there are a number of differences in the mammalian host pathogenesis between the two parasites including the localization in the host
 <cit> , suggesting that there are likely differences in the underlying protein expression in the mammalian blood stage. these differences in biology could explain the discrepancies we find between the two studies, especially the significant number of proteins that are regulated in opposing directions. additionally, the differences in the expression profiles could also be a result of the techniques applied in the two studies. isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation , which was used by eyford and co-workers requires that the samples are individually processed, protease treated and labelled with the isobaric tags, while silac allowes the combined processing of the samples after growth in the heavy and light isotope media. we feel that the combined processing is an advantage of silac over itraq since no variability in processing is introduced between two samples. itraq on the other hand offers the advantage to measure up to eight samples together and thus save mass spectrometry resources and costs .

analyzing the changes during development we could show that about 45% of the proteins change in abundance in each of the comparisons, while more than 50% remained unchanged . among the unchanged protein groups we detected  <dig> ribosomal proteins with mean and median fold-change of close to one in each of the life-stage comparisons . this is not unexpected since ribosomal proteins are part of the cell’s core machinery and as such unlikely to undergo large changes in abundance. among the proteins that change abundance during differentiation we found very good correlation to previously published data of a number of proteins including the alternative terminal oxidase  a glycosomally targeted phosphatase  and the surface transporter family proteins associated with differentiation . the overall increase in protein abundance during the transition from the ls to the ss cells is explained by the specific requirements for this intermediate life cycle stage. the ss cell is adapted to the nutrients, ph and temperature of the mammalian host, while at the same time it is pre-adapted to the conditions in the tsetse midgut as particularly through the increase in abundance of mitochondrial proteins
 <cit> . it is well established that the bloodstream form trypanosomes are devoid of cytochromes and consequently lack oxidative phosphorylation activity
 <cit> . the data presented here now suggests that one of the final activation steps of energy production in the mitochondrion rests in the production and assembly of complexes iii and iv of the oxidative phosphorylation chain, while complexes i, ii and v are already present in the quiescent ss cells. this is in good agreement with the abundance of the trypanosome alternative oxidase  in the bloodstream form parasites. tao is the terminal electron acceptor in the bloodstream cells necessary to re-oxidize the reduction equivalents produced during glycolysis, essentially substituting complex iv. only after the transition to the procyclic form and the activation of the regular oxidative phosphorylation chain including complex iii and iv the abundance of the tao protein decreased. at first glance the presence of many of the procyclic-specific enzymes in the ss stage is seemingly at odds with some of the metabolome data. the major end product of glucose metabolism in the ss cells, for example, has been shown to be pyruvate and not acetate as it is found in the pc cells
 <cit> . this poses the question as to why the excess pyruvate is not converted to acetate if the enzymes of the corresponding pathway  are present. we identified a potential pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase , a homolog of the pdh activating enzyme in other systems, which is upregulated at the protein level only upon transition to the insect-form. the developmental regulation of the phosphatase thus would explain the lack of asct activity due to a lack of acetyl coa substrate . clearly this is only a hypothesis and requires experimental verification, but it demonstrates the power of the silac comparative approach to study the specific biology of trypanosomes. furthermore we would like to remind the reader that the in vitro grown insect-form cells, although fly transmissible, are possibly different from the trypanosomes in the in vivo situation in the tsetse.

the recent discovery of a large number of novel transcripts prompted us to specifically search for corresponding protein products, however we only detected peptides for 3% of these transcripts. many of the novel transcripts contain very small open reading frames  and thus there is the possibility that these small proteins were missed on sds page, although we detected peptides belonging to a very small protein  encoded by a novel transcript. overall we think that a majority of the novel transcripts, although poly adenylated and capped are likely non-coding and thus present a large repertoire of potentially regulatory rna species in the t. brucei genome as has recently been demonstrated for two of the novel transcripts by michaeli and co-workers
 <cit> .

one of the enigmas of gene expression regulation is the apparent lack of correlation between the changes at the mrna level and the protein level in some systems. a recent study, for example, described the concordance of mouse proteome and transcriptome from different mouse strains to be at a modest level  with about 40% of the detected proteins not correlating to the changes in mrna level
 <cit> . on the other hand, a study in yeast showed that correlation of protein and mrna levels following a perturbation in osmolarity was strong for the genes up-regulated at the mrna level, however there was no correlation for mrnas down-regulated during this process. the authors propose a model in which decrease in mrna abundance serves purposes different from the down regulation of protein abundance during osmolarity stress
 <cit> . in our study the comparison of ls/pc showed a similar behaviour. rna/protein abundance-changes correlated much better when rna was increased at least two fold  than if rna was decreased at least two fold , however this phenomenon was reversed when pc was compared to the ss form . in order to test if the lack of correlation between rna and protein is due to biological variability at the rna level we restricted the set to transcripts with good correlation between a previous microarray study of bloodstream and procyclic t. brucei and our slt data and compared it to the protein data . of the  <dig> genes with a robust regulation pattern at the rna level  <dig> were represented in our mass spectrometry data. the correlation coefficient of the restricted dataset  was only marginally higher than the entire dataset  thus even for transcripts with a robust expression pattern, protein abundance-changes do not correlate very well. although we cannot entirely exclude that the difference in regulation at the rna and protein level is due to the variability in biological replicates it seems likely that a significant portion of the protein abundance-changes are due to regulation of translation or protein stability and thus are not reflected at the rna level.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary we show  the effective use of silac for the analysis of whole proteome changes during the life cycle in t. brucei, especially also to uncover potential regulatory proteins that control the differentiation  the likely n-termini of  <dig> proteins and that number of them possibly produce several n-terminal isoforms;  a surprising difference between the protein and rna changes during the life cycle, that are possibly explained by a significant level of translational/posttranslational regulation that has yet to be explored,  that the massive changes, especially in the mitochondrial proteome of the quiescent ss form support its status as a distinctly differentiated subpopulation of cells committed to life in the fly.

