BACKGROUND
the concept of dpp as morphogen in early wing development owes much to the observation of nested target gene expression domains, initially described for spalt  and omb  <cit>  and subsequently for vestigial  and the vg quadrant enhancer  <cit> . dpp spreads from its expression domain along the a/p compartment boundary to receiving cells forming a gradient which directs patterning and growth of the wing pouch  <cit> . dpp signaling represses the transcriptional repressor gene brinker , which is thereby expressed in a gradient inverse to the dpp signaling activity  <cit> . the relationship between target gene expression and brk level is not simply reciprocal. for instance, high level sal expression in the central wing pouch requires direct dpp signaling in addition to repression of brk, i. e. the sal expression domain is specified by opposing gradients  <cit> . moreover, different target genes appear to be repressed by brk through different mechanisms  <cit> . irrespective of the mechanistic details, the nested expression pattern of sal and omb forms the basis of the threshold model of dpp  target gene regulation  <cit> .

apart from setting up gene expression patterns, the dpp gradient appears to fulfil additional roles. dpp is required for establishing a density gradient of the apical microtubule web , a specialization of the columnar wing pouch epithelium  <cit> . clonal reduction of dpp signaling in the disc main epithelium leads to wing size reduction and jnk-dependent cell death  <cit> . mutant cells cluster into cysts in which apical and baso-lateral contacts to neighbouring wild type cells are disrupted  <cit> . these changes are not secondary to the activation of the jnk-pathway and apoptosis  because they occur when these processes are inhibited. the mutant cysts can survive to the adult stage and differentiate. one recognized feature of cytoskeletal reorganization in tkv clones is the loss of the amw. taken together, these findings led to the hypothesis that the dpp gradient ensures correct cell morphogenesis which is necessary for epithelial integrity  <cit> . clones mutant for the dpp signal transducer mothers against dpp  lose the amw and are extruded from the epithelium. clone extrusion is suppressed in mad brk double mutant clones, suggesting that this function of dpp is mediated by brk-mediated dpp target genes  <cit> . as the dpp target gene omb is required to maintain normal epithelial structure at the a/p boundary  <cit> , omb might be, and here is demonstrated to be, one of the mediators downstream of dpp signaling in the establishment of epithelial architecture also elsewhere in the wing disc.

the drosophila wing imaginal disc is subdivided into an anterior and a posterior compartment. in analogy to other systems, the segregation of cells at the a/p boundary is thought to be due to compartmental differences in cell-cell affinity , although recent analysis indicates an important role for increased mechanical tension for the maintenance of the a/p boundary  <cit> . omb cooperates with hh signaling to promote cell segregation at the a/p boundary, presumably by regulating the expression of cell affinity molecules  <cit> .

omb is essential for wing development and is sufficient to initiate secondary wing morphogenesis when ectopically expressed in the notum anlage of the wing disc  <cit> . the homologous vertebrate tbx <dig> subfamily genes  are also involved in limb development and cause inherited haploinsufficiency syndromes associated with limb defects when mutated in humans   <cit> . tbx <dig> and tbx <dig> are amplified or overexpressed in a wide range of neoplasms. increased levels of tbx2/ <dig> contribute to cancer progression by suppressing cellular senescence and by promoting invasiveness . the latter phenomenon may be related to the morphogenetic role of omb which we describe here.

the nested expression patterns of sal and omb are generally taken to support a threshold model of dpp  target gene regulation, e.g.  <cit> . we show that, contrary to prior interpretations of omb enhancer trap patterns, the spatial distribution of omb is not described by a step function but rather decays smoothly toward the periphery of the wing pouch. the graded omb distribution precludes the occurrence of spatial omb concentration discontinuities which cause abnormal cell shape and cell extrusion in the wing disc epithelium. moreover, the omb gradient appears to be required to specify a gradient of cell affinity along the a/p axis.

RESULTS
omb is expressed in a gradient
omb expression in the wing imaginal disc is frequently visualized indirectly by monitoring the activity of enhancer trap insertions in the omb locus. as will be discussed below, the spatial patterns of such indirect read-outs are likely to differ in detail from that of endogenous omb. we, therefore, analyzed the omb distribution directly by immunofluorescence using an antibody specific to omb . in the wing disc pouch of late-third instar larvae, omb was high in the center and declined smoothly toward the lateral  margins of the pouch . this lateral decline was also conspicuous in x-z confocal sections parallel to the a/p axis . along the orthogonal proximo-distal  axis, the omb distribution was not noticeably graded . omb distribution was also graded along the a/p axis in the wing disc pouch of early-third instar and mid-third instar larvae , suggesting that the distribution of omb is graded along this axis throughout the third instar larval stage. in the commonly used omb-lacz enhancer trap line ombp <dig>  <cit> , β-galactosidase, as visualized by immunofluorescence, was also expressed in a gradient, indicating that the omb gradient does not arise by post-transcriptional regulation . to rule out that unspecific binding of the polyclonal anti-omb antiserum contributed to the graded appearance of the omb expression profile, we expressed omb-rnai in the en-gal <dig> domain of the wing disc . such discs showed very low staining in the posterior compartment indicating high specificity of the antiserum used. since rnai does not completely eliminate omb expression the actual specificity will be even higher, as indicated by the lack of staining in parts of the notum region .

in order to determine whether the graded distribution of omb is required for the correct architecture of the wing disc epithelium, three types of mosaic clones were generated, all causing disruptions of the smooth omb concentration profile. in the first, omb was induced laterally to a level comparable to the endogenous peak concentration. in the second, omb was reduced, and in the third, omb was overexpressed beyond the maximum endogenous level. in mosaic discs, cytoskeleton and apico-basal organization were visualized by phalloidin staining , anti-α-tubulin staining , and anti-de-cadherin immunofluorescence .

expression of constitutively active tkv causes cell retraction in the lateral wing disc
expression of a constitutively active form of the type i dpp receptor thickveins  in act5c>tkvqd clones increased omb to a level comparable to its peak endogenous level . in the lateral region, clones rounded up and accumulated f-actin either at the clonal border  or within the clone . this behaviour was not observed in control clones . when inspected in the x-z plane, cells in the clone were either shortened at the clonal border  or in the center of the clone . we use the term retraction to describe this shortening which leads to an apical indentation while basally the arrangement of clonal cells appears not to differ from the surrounding cells. the position of the apico-basal retraction appeared to be governed by clone size. large lateral clones rounded up and exhibited retracting cells at the clonal border, thereby becoming surrounded by a circular fold . small lateral clones rounded up and retracted toward the basal membrane in the clonal center . unlike extruding tkv mutant clones  <cit> , act5c>tkvqd clones maintained apical contact to neighbouring cells. these results suggest that up-regulated dpp signaling in the lateral region of the wing pouch is sufficient to change the shape of epithelial cells if these are in contact with cells experiencing less dpp signaling activity.

the wing pouch amw depends on dpp signaling. amw density is graded along the a/p axis with a broad maximum in the center of the pouch and attenuation laterally  <cit>  . in clones lacking tkv activity, the amw is strongly reduced  <cit> . however, the amw was also lost in retracted cells both inside and outside of uas-tkvqd clones , suggesting that its presence depends on the spatial continuity of dpp signaling. to test whether it is the up-regulated omb level, elicited by increased dpp signaling , which causes the retraction of cells in the lateral wing pouch, uas-ombrnai was co-expressed with uas-tkvqd. ombrnai essentially eliminated omb under these conditions. furthermore, the retraction of lateral cells was prevented by this regime . thus, the up-regulation of omb is required to mediate the re-organization of the epithelial architecture in lateral act5c>tkvqd clones.

lack or strong reduction of omb causes retraction of cells in the wing pouch
as a second test for determining the role of omb in the maintenance of epithelial architecture, omb loss-of-function clones were generated. in the wing pouch, small omb mutant clones rounded up and accumulated f-actin in the clonal center . . when visualized in the x-z plane, the apico-basal retraction of mutant cells was apparent in the center of the clone . no retraction was seen in clones of the lateral periphery . in the retracted clonal cells, the amw was strongly reduced . staining against de-cadherin showed that retracting cells retained apical contact among themselves and to the surrounding phenotypically wild type cells . the close proximity of e-cadherin-labelled adherens junctions of neighboring cells, as seen in x-z sections, indicates that retracting cells were apically constricted. distinct apicolateral junctions were more easily discernable in shallow retractions . to confirm the observations obtained with omb mutant clones, act5c>ombrnai clones were generated. in these, omb was strongly reduced . act5c>ombrnai clones showed the same phenotype as omb null mutant clones . these results indicate that omb is required to maintain the correct shape of epithelial cells in the larval wing pouch.

jnk-dependent cell death has been observed previously on either side of the border of clones disrupting the normal dpp signaling gradient  <cit> . cellular retraction in omb clones appeared independent of cell death. although caspase- <dig> positive cells were occasionally observed at the border of clones , many retracting clones showed no evidence of cell death  and still proliferated . the relationship between cellular retraction and jnk-dependent cell death was analyzed in more detail for omb-overexpressing clones . in the adult wing, the majority of omb clones manifested as clustered microchaetae restricted to either the dorsal or ventral leaflet, similar to the predominant phenotype of uas-tkvqd clones. occasionally, omb clones survived to adulthood as cyst-like structures located between the dorsal and ventral wing surfaces indicating complete retraction of mutant cells during the pupal stage. in both cases, retracting cells survived up to the stage of cuticle deposition .

overexpression of omb causes cellular retraction in both autonomous and non-autonomous ways
in the third strategy, direct omb over-expression in tubα1>omb clones led to local omb accumulations that strongly exceeded the peak level of the endogenous protein. mutant clones showed cellular retraction in the center of the clone . when clone frequency was enhanced by increasing the heat-shock temperature, wild type cells were clustered into groups with smooth outlines surrounded by omb-overexpressing cells. in these non-clonal wild type cell groups, cellular retraction occurred either in the periphery  or in the center . judged by the continuity of apical phalloidin staining, these retracting wild type cells maintained apical contact with neighboring cells overexpressing omb. this situation corresponds morphologically to omb loss-of-function clones surrounded by wild type cells, where cells with reduced omb undergo apico-basal contraction. the data show that overexpression of omb can cause cellular retraction both autonomously and non-autonomously. omb overexpression is known to induce jnk-dependent apoptosis  <cit>  . if apico-basal retraction were a consequence of the initiation of apoptosis, then blocking jnk pathway activation and apoptosis should block cellular retraction. repression of cell death by a dominant negative form of jnk  or by co-overexpression of p <dig>  <cit>  did not rescue the cellular retraction phenotype  suggesting that cellular retraction is not coupled to execution of the apoptosis pathway.

omb affects cell affinity in a concentration-dependent manner
we noticed that central omb mutant clones in which apico-basal retraction could be observed were of roundish shape  whereas non-retracting clones in the lateral periphery had wiggly contours. in the framework of the cell affinity hypothesis  <cit> , differences in cell affinity are expected to influence the shape of a clone. clones with irregular outlines are thought to have surface properties similar to their neighboring cells. the round shape and smooth border of clones on the other hand is considered to reflect differences in the affinity of cells in and outside of the clone. omb mutant clones located in the central region had a rounder shape and smoother borders compared to clones located in the periphery . for quantification, we calculated the shape factor  of omb mutant clones using the formula 4Πa/l <dig>  as a function of their distance to the a/p boundary  <cit> . a circular clone will have a sf value of  <dig> whereas wiggly clones will have values smaller than  <dig>  control clones had irregular shapes  regardless of their position in the wing imaginal disc . in contrast, omb mutant clones in the periphery were irregular in shape  whereas they had a rounder shape when located in the vicinity of the a/p boundary  . clones at intermediate positions had intermediate values, indicating that the shape of omb mutant clones is graded along the a/p axis. omb mutant clones in the a and p compartments had similar shape factors when located at similar distance from the a/p boundary. as shown above, the expression of omb is graded along the a/p axis of the wing pouch. the difference in omb levels between omb null clones and wild type surrounding cells will be highest in the vicinity of the a/p boundary and lowest at the periphery of the wing pouch. thus, the sf value of omb mutant clones correlates with the difference in omb protein concentration between clone and the neighboring wild type cells. this suggests that the affinities of cells in peripheral and central regions of the wing imaginal disc are different and that omb activity contributes to this difference in a concentration-dependent manner.

in a reverse approach, we expressed omb to different levels in the notum region of the wing disc which contains little endogenous omb  <cit> . flip-out clones were generated in which omb was expressed under the control of tubα1>gal <dig> or act5c>gal <dig> . while control clones had irregular outlines , clones expressing omb were rounder, with a sf value that increased with omb level .

both experiments indicate that the level of omb controls cell affinity and that omb can exert this control both in its endogenous domain  as well as in an ectopic setting .

discussion
dpp gradient interpretation in the larval wing pouch
thresholds, in a strict sense, should lead to a sharp transition in gene expression from one cell to the next  <cit> . this is, in fact, not observed for any of the early wing pouch targets . similarly, in the well studied xenopus embryo model, activin forms a gradient that initially leads to a graded distribution of the target protein xbra which is refined to form sharp boundaries under the involvement of secondary factors  <cit> . dpp, via sal and omb, specifies the highly stereotypic positions of wing veins l <dig> and l <dig> but also in this case additional genes are involved  <cit> . recent work on gradient interpretation supports the notion that smooth gradients of a single morphogen may not suffice to specify sharp transitions in nuclear or cell specification, e. g.  <cit> . these findings suggest that the concept of positional information  <cit>  may not be valid in its simplest form  <cit> .

most studies on omb as a dpp target gene in wing develoment were performed with omb-lacz or omb-gal <dig> enhancer trap lines  <cit> . these lines quite faithfully render the overall omb expression pattern but differ from endogenous omb in detail . differences in the steepness of graded gene expression patterns between direct  and indirect measurements  have been noted before . a systematic deviation will occur when β-galactosidase is monitored by histochemical staining . β-galactosidase is a homotetrameric protein that is only active in its oligomeric form  <cit> . this will cause a sigmoid dependence of activity on protein concentration. similarly, when gal <dig> expression is monitored by uas-reporter activity, synergistic binding of dimeric gal <dig> to the uas pentamer of standard puast derivatives  <cit>  can cause a non-linear response  <cit> .

presence of a gradient of cell affinity
transplantation experiments in developing insect wings suggest that cells within a compartment differ in cell-cell affinity. cells at the same proximo-distal position have a similar p/d affinity value and intermingle to form a wiggly interface. in contrast, groups of cells transplanted to different proximo-distal positions will rearrange contacts and form a roundish patch thereby minimizing contact with the surrounding tissue  <cit> .

we tested whether a gradient of cell affinity is present along the a/p axis in the drosophila wing disc by analyzing the shape of omb mutant clones . we found that omb mutant clones close to the a/p boundary had smooth borders, indicating that omb mutant cells sort out from neighboring wild type cells. with increasing distance from the a/p boundary, clone shape became progressively irregular. this, in the framework of the cell affinity model, suggests the existence of a gradient of cell affinity which is disrupted by omb clones. the gradient of cell affinity correlates with the level of omb expression, indicating that omb, at least in part, shapes this gradient. this was confirmed by expressing omb to different levels in a tissue with little endogenous omb.

omb may not be the only transcription factor controlling an affinity gradient in the wing pouch. clones mutant for sal have round borders in the central part of the disc and are wiggly in distal parts, suggesting that sal, which is downstream of omb in the wing pouch  <cit> , also affects cellular affinity  <cit> . given the predominantly apical defects seen in clones that differ in omb level from the surrounding tissue, it is plausible that omb controls the expression of apically located cell adhesion molecules. in the simplest case, the omb-controlled affinity gradient will be similarly shaped as the omb gradient but an inverse gradient cannot be ruled out. in both cases, local disruption in the omb level would lead to changes in the spatial distribution of affinity molecules causing clones to round up and, in the extreme case, to sort out of the epithelium . graded expression of omb may play a related role in setting planar polarity values in the development of the adult abdominal segments  <cit> .

the importance of being graded
in addition to dpp itself, several gene products directly or indirectly downstream of dpp are expressed in a graded manner  and tartan ). some of these are part of the dpp signaling cascade , sal and omb are nuclear effectors, caps and trn cell surface proteins. furthermore, the density of the amw is graded along the a/p axis. in tkv clones, the amw is lost  <cit> . we show here, that in and around large uas-tkvqd clones, in which the dpp pathway is constitutively active, the amw is also strongly reduced in retracting cells but not in central non-retracting cells , indicating that the reduction in amw density is elicited by the apposition of cells strongly differing in dpp signaling acitvity. amw reduction in tkvqd clones indicates that amw density is not only controlled by the dpp level but is also subject to control which is levied by dpp signaling discontinuities.

dpp is required for wing disc growth and proliferation  <cit> . the uniform proliferation across the wing disc has been difficult to reconcile with the exponential shape of the dpp gradient and with the finding that ubiquitous expression of dpp or of dpp pathway components can promote overgrowth . according to a model proposed by rogulja and irvine, two dpp-dependent growth promoting systems coexist in the wing imaginal disc, only one of which is responsive to the gradient of dpp signaling  <cit> . more recently, basler and colleagues argued, that a gradient of dpp signaling is not required for wing growth  <cit> . in the latter model, dpp requirement differs qualitatively for growth and patterning.

to what extent are genes known to be regulated by dpp involved in apico-basal retraction? we show that spatial discontinuity in omb level is necessary for this phenotype. central loss-of-function clones of sal, which is expressed in a gradient with a shorter a-p width than omb  <cit> , were reported to sort out of the surrounding epithelium indicating that sal, too, is required to maintain epithelial integrity  <cit> . omb is known to be required for sal expression  <cit> , . this raises the question of whether omb acts via sal. we do not think that the effect of omb l-o-f needs to be mediated by sal. first, ombrnai is sufficient to elicit cellular retraction  but does not cause loss of sal expression . second, retraction caused by omb g-o-f is not mediated by sal because its expression is not induced by ectopic omb . third, in the adult wing, we observed the cuticular manifestations of retraction and extrusion events also anterior to longitudinal vein l <dig> and posterior to l <dig> , indicating that these retractions did not arise as a consequence of secondary local sal reduction ). clones lacking dpp signaling are extruded from the wing disc epithelium  <cit> . this does not occur with sal  <cit>  or omb mutant clones during larval development, and only  during pupal development. with regard to extrusion from the larval wing imaginal disc there is, thus, a qualitative difference between tkv and omb/sal clones. we surmise that dpp target genes other than omb and sal are involved in generating the tkv mutant extrusion phenotype.

graded gene expression appears required also along the orthogonal dorso-ventral  axis. vestigial is expressed in a symmetrical gradient that decays away from the d/v boundary  <cit>  and is required for patterning and growth control along the d/v axis. vg gain-of-function clones induce jnk at the clone border which is more remote from the d/v boundary, indicating that jnk is activated by spatial discrepancy in vg levels  <cit> . such clones  become larger with increasing distance from the d/v boundary and retract from the apical epithelial surface  <cit> . apparently, the creation of local discontinuities in vg level leads to increased proliferation on both sides of the clonal border. the importance of a graded vg distribution is underlined by the reduced size of both vg mutant and vg overexpressing wings  <cit> . a similar requirement for graded gene expression to ensure normal wing disc proliferation was shown for dachsous and four-jointed  <cit> . like clones mutant for factors downstream of dpp, which disrupt a/p-boundary-centered gradients, vg mutant clones, in which jnk-mediated apoptosis is suppressed, are extruded from the wing disc  <cit> . retraction and extrusion, like morphogenetic apoptosis  <cit>  may be universal mechanisms for correcting disturbances in the graded expression of factors required for patterning and growth of the wing disc epithelium. the gradient of cell affinity may serve to stabilize patterns of positional information against fluctuations of the respective morphogen activity gradients.

CONCLUSIONS
in the field of developmental biology, positional information and morphogens are important concepts to understand how cellular fields can be patterned. the drosophila wing imaginal disc is a well studied system in which the diffusible protein decapentaplegic, expressed in a stripe along the anterior-posterior compartment boundary, leads to the nested expression of target genes . the nested expression patterns are thought to arise from different thresholds of gene activation. we show by quantitative analysis that omb expression is graded along the anterior-posterior axis. manipulations that introduce spatial discontinuity in the omb level cause disruptions of epithelial morphology, indicating that the normal graded distribution of omb is important for proper wing development. we furthermore provide evidence that the omb gradient instructs the formation of a gradient of cell affinity which may reduce cell mixing in the compartment.

