BACKGROUND
importance of krill
the pelagic crustacean order euphausiacea has a worldwide distribution, consisting of  <dig> species that range from a few millimetres to  <dig> cm in body length. antarctic krill  is one of the largest euphausiid species  and is found exclusively in the southern ocean. krill are the most prominent euphausiid species in terms of biomass, with estimates in the range of  <dig> to  <dig> million tonnes   <cit> . they are an important resource for large numbers of higher predators as well as for commercial fishing. there is presently much interest in obtaining a greater understanding of their physiology and life-cycle to assist with their effective management as a resource  <cit> .

crustacean moulting
moulting is an important and on-going process of physiological change in the life-history of all crustaceans. to moult, individuals must loosen the connectives between their living tissues and the extracellular cuticle, escape from the confines of this cuticle relatively rapidly, take up water, expand the new flexible exoskeleton and then quickly harden it for defence and locomotion. the act of ecdysis itself may only take a few moments  but the processes building up to that point take much longer, with dramatic changes in physiology and biochemistry taking place over the course of the moult cycle. in particular, meticulous control of regulatory proteins and genes is required to form and harden a new exoskeleton as well as to dissolve, reabsorb and shed the old one  <cit> 

krill moulting
the process of moulting is particularly prominent in euphausiids since it continues throughout adult life at a relatively high frequency  <cit> . krill have the capacity to shrink or grow at each moult  <cit>  and frequent moulting could allow individuals to adjust body size according to prevailing conditions  <cit> . regular renewal may also decrease the period over which external parasites can settle and penetrate the relatively thin cuticle  <cit> . the high frequency and cost, in terms of energy and vulnerability, of moulting in euphausiids, implies that this process is under strong selective pressure.

krill cuticle and moult cycle
the organic matrix of the crustacean cuticle is a complex structure composed mainly of α-chitin microfibrils embedded in a protein matrix. these are mainly stacked in chitin/protein lamellae, called laminae. morphologically, there are three different layers in the cuticle of krill: an outermost epicuticle followed by an exocuticle and an endocuticle  <cit> . the epicuticle is the only layer to contain glycoproteins in addition to the chitin/protein matrix but makes up only  <dig> % of total cuticular thickness. the exocuticle makes up 20% of the cuticle. both the epi- and exocuticle are deposited before the krill sheds its old shell in the moult. the remainder of the cuticle is endocuticle, which is quickly built up in the postmoult period. the epidermis lies beneath these layers and is responsible for forming the new cuticle and secreting enzymes that digest the old one. cell processes of the epidermis travel through pore canals in the new cuticle to reabsorb digested old cuticle components  <cit> .

drach  <cit>  described distinct morphological stages within the crustacean moult-cycle. this staging system was adapted by buchholz  <cit>  for euphausiids and is summarised below:

• postmoult  - a soft cuticle

• intermoult  - a consolidated and hardened cuticle

• early premoult  - exuvial cleft between the old cuticle and the epidermis, followed by the progressive development of an underlying new cuticle

• late premoult  - old cuticle is soft

• ecdysis - the old cuticle detaches from the body

buchholz and buchholz  <cit>  carried out an ultrastructural examination of the moult-cycle stages of krill and revealed processes that underlie these morphologically distinct stages. for instance, the number of laminae was found to vary considerably over the moult cycle, with the maximal thickness of the endocuticle occurring during the intermoult phases, where maximal consolidation and hardness of the cuticle is observed. laminae in the old cuticle were found to reduce dramatically only in late premoult, when the krill cuticle becomes soft. tonofibrillae  remain connected to the old cuticle until late premoult, allowing individuals to remain active throughout preparations for moult. epidermal cells were largest around the time of moult, reflecting an uptake of water to increase body size before the hardening of the new cuticle.

distinct moult-related phases have also been recognised at the biochemical level  <cit> . enzymes that digest the old cuticle such as β-n-acetylglucosaminidase  and chitinase reach peak expression in premoult  <cit> . it is believed that such enzymes are under the control of ecdysteroids, which also show peaks in activity during the premoult phase. this activity is accompanied by an increase in the haemolymph of glucosamine, a break-down product of chitin. such products are likely to be channelled into the metabolic pool and be reutilised in the reconstruction of the new cuticle. such resorption and reutilisation of cuticular components is a key process in euphausiids not common to many other crustaceans.

conflict between cuticle formation and resorption
when the epidermis is secreting new cuticle, crustaceans must also digest and reabsorb the inner layers of the old cuticle without the new cuticle being digested  <cit> . this demands a tightly controlled sequence of events with adequate separation of counteracting enzymes. a number of mechanisms may facilitate this complex procedure. for instance, digestive enzymes may be secreted in inactive forms with exposure to accompanying activator molecules only occurring at precise times and locations. another mechanism is to enclose enzymes within coated vesicles that only release their contents within appropriate environments. physical separation of enzymes through cuticular barriers may also take place when inner and outer cuticles are present. the extent to which krill use these mechanisms in coordinating their moult cycle requires further investigation.

aims of the study
the molecular events associated with cuticle formation remain poorly understood in crustaceans  <cit> . our aim was to identify genes involved or associated with the formation and recycling of cuticle in krill and study their expression patterns throughout the moult cycle. we used cdna microarray technology to achieve this aim, representing the first time such an approach has been applied to any euphausiid species. combining this with detailed moult staging allows us to obtain one of the most highly resolved molecular insights into moult-cycle processes yet achieved in any crustacean species.

RESULTS
experimental design
in our experiment, biological replicates from each of the moult stages, a/b, c, c late, d <dig>  d <dig>  d <dig>  and d <dig> were competitively hybridised against a control group consisting of a pool of c early krill. c early was considered the most suitable control since it is one of the easiest stages to categorise  and also it is the stage where comparatively few processes related to the krill moult cycle appear to be underway  <cit> . there is no 'rest' stage in the krill moult cycle  <cit>  and c early is when the last laminar layers are added to achieve full consolidation and hardening of the fresh cuticle. therefore, it must be taken into account that certain processes related to cuticle synthesis are within the control gene expression pool such that stages where there is no cuticle synthesis will appear as being down regulated.

our design compared all other moult stages with a single reference time-point . this particular design has the advantage of being able the best to assess the relative changes in gene expression between the different moult stages and c early  <cit> . however, it does also mean that the gene expression features unique to this control stage are unresolved. there are other potential ways in which experiments of this sort can be designed. kuballa et al  <cit>  and kuballa and elizur  <cit>  designed a microarray experiment in which gene expression in consecutive moult stages were compared. this has the advantage of resolving subtle variations in gene expression from one moult stage to another  <cit> . however, an assessment of gene expression level over the entire moult cycle is difficult since there is no single reference point. it also relies on none of the moult stages being misidentified, which can be an issue in smaller crustacean species such as krill, where moult stage phenotypic differences may be subtle. another approach is to generate a reference that is a combination of all moult stages. this also allows each moult stage to be resolved. however, it does bias the results towards those genes where there are many fold differences in expression over the moult cycle in order to be distinguishable above the expression levels already in the control. genes where expression is temporally limited and/or small in amplitude have a higher chance of being unresolved through this approach. we therefore considered the single time-point reference approach most appropriate for the purposes of our study aims.

microarray analysis
the one-way anova identified  <dig>  transcripts that showed significant differential expression between moult stages , although this does not include c early because of its use as a control. of these,  <dig> were differentially expressed more than twofold relative to the c early control. a condition tree of these differentially expressed transcripts  shows eight cluster groups that were each dominated by a particular moult stage. the respective dominant moult stages were reflected in the designated names of these eight groups, which, in order of the moult-cycle sequence, were: inter <dig>  inter <dig>  inter <dig>  inter <dig>  d0a, d0b, d1- <dig>  d3/a. it is to be noted that inter <dig> to  <dig> represent different phases of expression during the intermoult period but their sequential order is uncertain. for each cluster group, transcripts that were differentially expressed more than twofold relative to c early are listed with fold changes, top blastx and tblastx hits , gene ontology identifiers and significant  pfam protein domain matches in additional file  <dig>  expression profiles of selected transcripts relative to the cluster-groups, ordered according to the moult-cycle sequence, are shown in graphical format in figure  <dig>  the expression profiles of five of these transcripts were validated by qpcr . from this type of analysis, sequence matching to ncbi databases using blastx and tblastx, different classes of transcripts were identified with potentially different functions. the sequence of up regulation of these genes relative to the moult cycle is illustrated in figure  <dig> 

cuticle genes
many transcripts that were differentially expressed more than twofold relative to the c early control had significant sequence homology to arthropod cuticle genes. a number of these transcripts showed large changes in expression over the moult cycle. for instance, one transcript , a homologue of the calcified cuticle protein cp <dig>  , was down-regulated  <dig> fold during the intermoult stage inter <dig> and up regulated by the same fold change in stage d1- <dig>  a total of  <dig> different cuticle genes were revealed , with each corresponding protein containing one of three different domain types: cuticle_ <dig>  chitin_bind_ <dig> and cbm_ <dig> - also known as the peritrophin-a domain , as identified through ncbi and pfam database searches. table  <dig> illustrates that, during intermoult, almost all of the cuticle genes were down regulated, while in early premoult , the reverse occurred. during d3/a, the number of cuticle genes up regulated compared to d1- <dig> was lower, with approximately half of the differentially expressed genes in this moult stage down regulated. this can be seen in graphical format in figure  <dig> where transcripts homologous to the cuticle genes, calcification-associated peptide  <dig> and cuticle cb <dig> were down regulated in d3/a while the cut- <dig> cuticle transcript was up regulated during this moult stage. all the down regulated genes in d3/a were of the chitin_bind_ <dig> type.

krill are almost unique among crustaceans in that they do not have a calcified exoskeleton  <cit>  and this is supported by the types of cuticle genes found differentially expressed in this study. the proteins of most of the differentially expressed cuticle genes have either been isolated from uncalcified, arthrodial membranes of calcifying crustaceans, such as amp <dig> , amp <dig>  and amp <dig>  from callinectes sapidus  <cit> , or found to have an inhibitory role in calcification, for example the calcification associated peptides  <dig> and  <dig>  isolated from the crayfish procambarus clarkii  <cit> . there were only four cuticle proteins that contained the cuticle_ <dig> domain, and although proteins with this domain have been isolated from the calcified cuticle of the crab, cancer pagurus  <cit>  and lobster, homarus americanus  <cit> , they did not include these four. the remaining cuticle genes have either yet to be fully annotated, such as cuticle protein cb <dig> from portunus pelagicus  <cit>  or have been described from non-calcifying crustaceans, such as lepeophtheirus salmonis or insects such as tribolium castaneum.

sequence of expression of the cuticle genes and chitin synthesis
the first visible sign that an individual krill is about to undertake the process of moulting is apolysis , the point at which an exuvial cleft opens between the old cuticle and the epidermis. at the level of gene expression, we found a number of genes involved with cuticle synthesis that were up regulated at this stage. for instance, there was a threefold up regulation of glutamine synthetase, which encodes for an enzyme involved in the synthesis of glutamine from glutamate and ammonia  <cit> . glutamine, along with fructose 6-phosphate, is used in the synthesis of glucosamine  <cit> , an amino sugar that forms long chain n-acetylglucosamine polymers that make up chitin. a transcript with significant sequence homology to mannosyltransferase  <dig> , encoding for an enzyme  belonging to the glycosyltransferase  family of enzymes  <cit> , was also up regulated at this point in the moult cycle. the glycosyltransferases include chitin synthase , an enzyme that synthesises chitin polymers through catalysing glycosidic bonds between monosaccharides  <cit> . furthermore, we observed a simultaneous up regulation in c-type lectin, which may be involved in the production of cuticular glycoproteins  <cit> .

the period between early and late premoult is when the epi- and exocuticle layers are laid down. the epicuticle layer only makes up  <dig> % of the thickness of the completed cuticle, but it plays a significant role since it is the only layer to contain glycoproteins. amongst a range of functions, glycoproteins are known to decrease water friction  <cit>  so they may be vital in optimising swimming efficiency in these highly motile organisms. the formation of epi- and exocuticle layers already creates a barrier between the old cuticle and the rest of the organism long before the point of ecdysis.

we also observed up regulation of two transcripts homologous to beta-ii tubulin  during early premoult. these genes encode for a globular protein involved in the formation of microtubules, which are involved in mitosis. early premoult is when cell division occurs in the epidermis. the epidermal layer may appear folded within the confines of the cuticle during premoult, in readiness for expansion once the old cuticle is shed  <cit> .

blast analysis identified a transcript up regulated during premoult with homology to collagen alpha  <dig>  , a protein that controls the formation and organisation of collagen fibrils  <cit> . bundles of collagen fibrils form insoluble fibres with high tensile strength that, amongst many other functions, are prominent in extracellular matrices. these matrices assist in growth and development through providing a framework on which to organise complex structures. exoskeletal setae that are found on the numerous appendages of krill to facilitate swimming and the capture and processing of food, are notably complex in their diversity and structure. early stages in the development of these setae are observable during the premoult stage and even serve as a diagnostic feature of this moult stage. interestingly collagen alpha  <dig>  may also have a role in binding chitin structures since pfam analysis of this transcript identified a cbm_ <dig> domain found in chitin binding proteins  <cit> .

resolving the conflict between cuticle formation and resorption
the fact that a barrier between the old cuticle and the rest of the organism is in place by mid-premoult places some restrictions on the krill in terms of recycling components from the old cuticle. firstly, this barrier prevents digestive enzymes with large molecular weights from being secreted into the exuvial cleft. secondly, breakdown products cannot be freely transferred into the metabolic pool within the haemolymph. we found a number of features in the sequence of gene expression which demonstrate how krill overcome this potential conflict.

in terms of digestive enzymes, we observed that the highest expression levels of various β-nagases and chitinase  <dig> occurred during intermoult. this is in advance of apolysis and the opening of the exuvial cleft. these enzymes must therefore be secreted into the cleft before the epicuticle barrier starts to form. this agrees with buchholz and buchholz  <cit>  who considered that discharge of digestive enzymes into the exuvial cleft must commence prior to stage d <dig> .

nevertheless, peak activity in these digestive enzymes does not occur until mid to late premoult  <cit>  meaning that there must be a lag in their activity. we found evidence of two means by which krill may engineer such a lag at the gene expression level. firstly, during the time that digestive enzyme genes were expressed, there was a simultaneous up regulation of a gene  encoding for a protein required for budding of vesicles from golgi membranes. packaging the digestive enzymes within vesicles prevents them coming into contact and digesting cuticle until the vesicles have broken down. compere et al  <cit>  found that exolysosomes first appeared in decapods during apolysis  and did not appear to lose their contents into the exuvial space until late premoult .

we also observed that most of the β-nagase related gene transcripts had significant sequence homology  to a β-nagase precursor  . this requires limited proteolysis by trypsin in order to become activated  <cit> . the activation may be triggered by a transcript  with significant sequence homology to trypsin, which is up regulated by  <dig>  fold in d1- <dig> and  <dig>  fold in d3/a . therefore, the enzymes can be transported to sites of activity without harming any other structures, including any newly synthesised cuticle. the major peak of cuticle digestion occurs over a relatively short time window, in late premoult  when the number of laminae in the old cuticle decrease rapidly and the krill becomes soft  <cit> . this mechanism of producing precursor enzymes allows stocks to be accumulated with only rapid proteolysis required to facilitate a relatively instantaneous increase in cuticle digestion activity.

also during premoult , we found that a transcript homologous to a predicted oligopeptide transporter  was up regulated more than two fold. although the newly formed epi- and exocuticle layers form a barrier between the old cuticle and the rest of the organism, it is essential that there is exchange of some components if any recycling of the old cuticle is to occur. the transporter is likely to be part of an intercellular transport mechanism in which low molecular weight products are passed into and out of the exuvial space. the increasing β-nagase activity, in concert with other enzymes such as endochitinases and proteinases, accelerates the decomposition of the old cuticle during the last stages of the moult cycle  <cit> . the liberated chitin oligomers and, in particular, the amino sugars are resorbed via the epidermis  <cit> . fine extensions of the epidermal cells extend transversely through the new cuticle via pore canals, coming into contact with the exuvial space  <cit> . these pores are small enough to allow small molecules of digested cuticle  to enter and be reabsorbed, but do not permit entry of large enzyme molecules such as the β-nagases  <cit> . the same pores may also allow the passage of activator molecules such as trypsin to flow outwards into the exuvial space. these pores eventually become cut off when the new cuticle is finally complete during intermoult  <cit> .

hormonal control of digestive enzymes
as mentioned earlier, we found that many of the β-nagase-like transcripts encoded for precursors that required proteolysis by enzymes such as trypsin in order to become active and that we also found a transcript homologous to trypsin up regulated during premoult. shechter et al  <cit>  found that trypsin was amongst several enzymes that were differentially expressed over the moult cycle of red claw crayfish and that expression levels were responsive to levels of ecdysteroid. ecdysteroids are known to play a coordinating role in the moult cycle of many arthropods  <cit>  through acting on ecdysteroid responsive genes. in krill, buchholz  <cit>  reports that there are several peaks in ecdysteroid activity during the premoult phases, coinciding with peaks in chitinase and β-nagase activity. our results suggest that the actual mechanism of control may act through the response of trypsin to the titre of ecdysteroid, which then regulates the level of digestive enzyme activation.

ecdysis
we found transcripts with significant sequence homology to genes encoding proteases such as trypsin and masquerade-like protein  were up regulated during late premoult . although we have already discussed the role of these enzymes as activators, they may also function in breaking down protein directly. during the  <dig> days between apolysis and ecdysis in krill, tonofibrillae  remain connected to the old cuticle until just before the point of ecdysis . this is also observed in insects  <cit>  and in other crustaceans  <cit> . the up regulation of the proteases may be part of the mechanism that acts to break down tonofibrillae and so release the old cuticle.

protective measures
during early postmoult the krill still have a soft cuticle and so may be more vulnerable to pathogenic attack. it is interesting then, that transcripts homologous to a number of immune-related genes were up regulated during d1- <dig>  as with all crustaceans, krill do not have an adaptive immune system and instead rely upon an innate immune system composed of cellular and humoral immune responses for protection against pathogens.

part of the humoral response involves the production of antimicrobial peptides, small cationic molecules that in shrimps consist of three main families: penaeidins, antilipopolysaccharide factors and crustins. two transcripts homologous to the gene encoding for crustin  <dig> from panulirus japonicus  were up regulated more than threefold during d1- <dig>  activation of antimicrobial peptide genes occurs through the toll and imd  signalling pathways in drosophila  <cit> , and so it is revealing that a transcript homologous to a gene encoding for spätzle 2-like protein  was up regulated more than sixfold during d1- <dig>  as spätzle is a known activator of the toll signalling pathway  <cit> . indeed, shi et al  <cit>  demonstrated up regulation of crustin gene expression in the chinese shrimp, fenneripenaeus chinensis following injection of recombinant spätzle protein. spätzle itself is synthesised as an inactive proprotein and is activated by cleavage with serine proteases  <cit>  including trypsin  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the objective of the present study was to use a cdna microarray that we developed for krill to document the sequence of expression of genes over the moult cycle. we found that many of the genes identified as being differentially expressed over the moult cycle have already been described in other studies, particularly those focussed on arthropod cuticle synthesis. we also found genes relating to many other physiological processes were differentially expressed according to moult cycle stage, such as protein processing and synthesis, mitosis, extracellular-matrix construction, proteolytic activation and immunity. our study showed that gene expression related to recognisable morphological changes occurring in premoult, postmoult and intermoult takes place in advance of those stages. with such a high frequency of ecdysis, the moult cycle has a dominant influence on the behavioural and physiological ecology of krill  <cit> . this study makes significant progress in our understanding of how this cycle operates at the gene-expression level, particularly in terms of explaining how the structural steps undertaken at each moult stage are implemented and how they might be controlled. when combined with the use of fresh material from a wide geographic area and the accurate assessment of morphological state, analysis with a cdna microarray constitutes a powerful means for future investigations of genes and physiological processes important to the ecology of krill.

