BACKGROUND
despite the identification of single-gene mutations that can retard ageing in laboratory species  <cit>  little is known about genetic mechanisms controlling evolution of longevity and senescence under natural conditions, particularly in vertebrates  <cit> . the influence of extrinsic mortality on evolution of aging is a subject of great theoretical interest, but has received limited experimental tests in vertebrates  <cit> . evolutionary theories of aging  <cit>  indicate that senescence is a result of age-dependent decrease in the force of selection and predict that populations experiencing lower mortality due to external causes evolve slower senescence. studies of experimental evolution in drosophila have confirmed that experimental modulation of extrinsic mortality can lead to retarded senescence  <cit> .

despite enormous effort to study senescence in wild populations  our knowledge about evolution of longevity and senescence under natural conditions in vertebrates is very limited  <cit> . this is mainly because only few studies were able to employ replicated populations . beside difficulties to obtain data on replicated populations, there are several other reasons for the lack of a better understanding of senescence in the wild. there is a need for resighting or recapture of the same individuals, the long lifespan of most vertebrates, the recent elucidation of more complicated predictions regarding evolution of aging, the difficulty in quantifying extrinsic mortality and several possibilities how exactly to measure senescence rate.

the relationship between extrinsic mortality and senescence may be more complex than suggested by early theory  <cit> . for example, age classes may vary in their susceptibility to extrinsic mortality  <cit>  or increases in extrinsic mortality rate may be accompanied by decreases in population density and increases in resource availability to survivors  <cit> . when these additional variables are included, model predictions are affected and increased extrinsic mortality may result in either accelerated senescence, retarded senescence, or no overall change in patterns of senescence. further, another important issue is how mortality risk is realized. for example, if survival in the wild is condition-dependent  <cit> , higher extrinsic mortality rate can lead to slower rather than more rapid senescence, despite the fact that the same genotypes evolve according to classical predictions when mortality is applied randomly  <cit> . it corroborates earlier evidence that it is important to consider how mortality is applied in the selection experiments on drosophila <cit> .

in our study system, different populations of annual fish do not experience different strengths of extrinsic mortality throughout their life span , but are subject to differential timing  of a sudden habitat cessation. in this respect, our study allows to test how aging evolves in natural environments when condition dependent survival has a limited effect.

up to date, the only study of evolution of senescence in replicated natural populations of vertebrates provided outcomes challenging several points of evolutionary theory of ageing. in that study a small tropical fish, guppy  was used with populations experiencing high- and low-predation conditions and found, contrary to expectation, that populations from high-predation environments had slower senescence than low-predation populations  <cit> , possibly because predation-dependent mortality was condition-dependent.

annual fish of the genus nothobranchius offer a remarkable system to study the effects of extrinsic mortality on evolution of aging due to their naturally short lifespan and strictly nonoverlapping generations  <cit> . nothobranchius fish inhabit temporary pools in eastern africa that are flooded during intense monsoonal precipitation, leading to synchronous hatching of eggs  <cit> . this ensures that all fish in a given pool are of the same age and that the upper limit of longevity is set by the desiccation of the pool. in this respect, different populations of annual fish do not experience different strengths of extrinsic mortality throughout their life span. the age-mortality relationship is almost rectangular and extrinsic mortality abruptly reaches 100% in all populations, but the timing of this increase differs. therefore, these taxa allow to test how aging evolves when the survival abruptly drops to zero after different periods of time. importantly, these fish retain their short lifespan when reared in captivity and express typical vertebrate aging markers  <cit> . a substantial heterogeneity in the precipitation pattern and hence the time window for the completion of the life cycle is observed across the distribution range of the genus nothobranchius <cit> . therefore, fish from more arid habitats are predicted to experience a shorter maximum lifespan.

here, we test whether differences in habitat duration led to the evolution of a different rate of senescence in this clade of annual fish. we studied nothobranchius populations from southern and central mozambique because a striking aridity cline is present in this region. the inland region in southern mozambique receives total annual precipitation as low as 400 mm/year, in contrast to coastal areas near the city of beira where total annual precipitation is about 1200 mm/year . two independent evolutionary lineages of nothobranchius are found in this area: n. furzeri and n. kuhntae belong to one lineage while n. rachovii and n. pienaari belong to another lineage  <cit> . for each of these two evolutionary lineages, one species originates from the semi-arid inland habitat  and the other species from the humid coastal area . this enables us to investigate whether there is parallel evolution of senescence in two independent evolutionary lineages . as hatching is synchronized across dry and humid regions due to periods of intensive cyclone-based precipitation over large areas, fish across our study area are of the same age  <cit> . therefore, the critical factor in determining the maximum window of survival in the wild is the calendar date of habitat desiccation.

importantly, fish of the genus nothobranchius are emerging as model laboratory species for genetic studies of ageing. there is a growing number of genetic/genomic resources available  <cit>  and quantitative trait loci controlling longevity were detected in crosses of laboratory populations  <cit> .

RESULTS
habitat desiccation
we used two complementary approaches to directly confirm that pools in more humid regions hold water for longer periods of time than pools in more arid regions – direct observation and the use of dataloggers.

at the beginning of the dry season in  <dig> and  <dig>  we visited sites where presence of nothobranchius fish was detected in previous years  and recorded whether particular habitats had desiccated or not. there was a clear difference between regions; in ‘semi-arid’ regions most sites were dry, whereas in ‘humid’ regions most were filled .

the time of the pool desiccation was estimated using waterproof dataloggers that were left in habitats during previous visits . filling and desiccation of the pool was indicated by abrupt decrease and increase of amplitude of daily temperature fluctuation . in  <dig>  dataloggers were placed after the start of the rain season  and recovered at a later timepoint,  <dig> out of  <dig> loggers and  <dig> out of  <dig> loggers that had been recovered between  <dig> and  <dig> july were dry in semi-arid region and humid region, respectively. in  <dig>  dataloggers placed in  <dig> were recovered and therefore detected also the filling of the ponds. ten out of  <dig> loggers and  <dig> out of  <dig> loggers that had been recovered  were already dry in semi-arid region and humid region, respectively.

in  <dig>  the mean date of pool desiccation estimated from the logged temperature fluctuations in semi-arid region was  <dig> april . in  <dig>  the mean date of pool desiccation in semi-arid region was  <dig> march . for  <dig>  loggers clearly demonstrated synchronous flooding of all sites, with flooding on  <dig> january  <dig> apparent at all sites except for one site in semi-arid region which was not flooded and remained dry throughout the wet season  <dig> . this shows that, during this season, habitats in semi-arid region were flooded for a mean of 73 days , while habitats in humid region were flooded for at least 142 days , but likely longer .

captive longevity of nothobranchius populations
in total, we recorded captive lifespan of  <dig> different populations from four different nothobranchius species belonging to two evolutionary lineages  and two habitat types  . we analyzed the lifespan of three independent captive populations of n. furzeri  for which the collection point is known. these populations span the entire distribution range of the species. for comparisons, we measured lifespan of three independent captive populations of the closely related species n. kuhntae  for which the collection point is known . one of the n. kuhntae populations could be followed only until age 33 weeks due to disease outbreak in their tank, but was included in the analysis as censored at age > 33 weeks. the longevity of each of the three n. furzeri populations  was shorter than any of the three n. kuhntae populations . it should be remarked, that none of these wild-derived n. furzeri populations replicated the extremely short lifespan  observed in the laboratory strain grz  <cit> . median survival of the pooled n. kuhntae population  was almost doubled with respect to the pooled n. furzeri populations   and 10% survivorship was larger by 38% . out of nine pairwise comparisons between n. furzeri and n. kuhntae ,  <dig> were significant . only the two comparisons involving the censored n. kuhntae population were not significant . further, the shape of the curves is apparently different in n. furzeri and n. kunthae. analysis of age-specific mortality suggests that when mortality is fitted by the gompertz function aebt, differences in longevity are rather accounted for by large differences in initial mortality a than in the rate of aging b . this datum should be taken with caution, however, due to a small sample size in n. kuhntae.

*censored at age 33 weeks when survival was 74%.

** not collected by the authors, but commercially available.

*** syntopic species in beira.

in the n. rachovii clade, longevity was measured in two independent populations of n. rachovii  and populations of n. pienaari. one n. pienaari population came from semi-arid habitat . the second n. pienaari population originated from an intermediate coastal habitat . the longevity of the semi-arid n. pienaari population was shorter than that of each of the two n. rachovii populations. median survival of the pooled n. rachovii populations was 54% larger than the semi-arid n. pienaari population  and the 10% survivorship was 66% larger . the longevity of the n. pienaari population from intermediate habitat was longer than n. pienaari from semi-arid habitat  and shorter than that of the two n. rachovii populations pooled .

accumulation of lipofuscin in captive and wild nothobranchius populations
to corroborate that a shorter lifespan in populations from semi-arid region was the result of a faster rate of physiological deterioration, we analyzed a well-accepted age marker, lipofuscin, an auto-fluorescent pigment that accumulates over time in a large variety of organisms  <cit> . in invertebrates, association between neurolipofuscin deposition and natural mortality is a phylogenetically and environmentally widespread phenomenon, making it a unique integrative marker of aging  <cit>  and lipofuscin is a predictor of individual longevity in c. elegans <cit> . the association between lipofuscin and rate of ageing is less established in vertebrates, but it still represents the best age marker available, and should provide a consistent estimate for a taxonomically constrained analysis like ours.

lipofuscin accumulation was analyzed at age 21 weeks in the liver and brain of two populations from each habitat within each clade. for n. furzeri and n. kuhntae, we analyzed populations for which lifespan data are available  . for n. rachovii also, we analyzed populations for which lifespan data are available . for n. pienaari, we analyzed the populations moz 99/ <dig>  for which lifespan data are available , and the population moz 99/ <dig>  that we obtained in too small numbers and therefore was used for histological analysis only.

in both clades, the populations from the semi-arid habitat had higher lipofuscin loads than the populations from the humid habitat of the same chronological age .

to confirm that data on captive populations reflects natural processes, we collected wild individuals of n. furzeri and n. kuhntae in mid-april  <dig>  since fish hatch synchronously around january  all fish had an estimated age of 15 weeks. we found a robust difference in lipofuscin load in liver between the populations . we additionally analyzed n. kuhntae collected in july  <dig>  and found more and much larger lipofuscin deposits in their liver than the april  <dig> sample . that age cohort of n. furzeri was already not present in the semi-arid region due to habitat desiccation.

genetic differentiation of nothobranchius populations
the existence of parallel evolution of senescence in nothobranchius may represent a paradigm for identification of loci under differential selection in short- and longer-lived species. this can be obtained by interspecific crosses and mapping of quantitative trait loci  or analysis of sequence variation. we therefore set to provide proof-of-principle for these two approaches.

a microsatellite-based linkage map was developed for n. furzeri in order to map loci controlling sex determination and color morphs in this species  <cit> . species within n. furzeri and n. kuhntae lineage , can be crossed in the laboratory and give rise to viable offspring . to test whether genetic markers generated for n. furzeri can be used in the other nothobranchius species from southern mozambique, we typed randomly-selected microsatellites in one individual each of n. furzeri, n. kuhntae, n. rachovii and n. pienaari.

out of  <dig> markers,  <dig>  and  <dig>  provided amplification in n. kuhntae and n. rachovii /n. pienaari respectively. out of  <dig> markers,  <dig>  and  <dig> , were polymorphic among the typed individuals and would have been informative in a prospective interspecific cross . therefore, genetic markers which are currently being generated in n. furzeri <cit>  can be used for genetic studies in the other nothobranchius species. to test for genome-wide nucleotide divergence between n. furzeri and n. kuhntae, we employed a genomic sequence sample of  <dig>  n. kuhntae sequences  generated previously  <cit> . these sequences were compared with a recently developed transcript catalogue of n. furzeri  to identify protein-coding exons. there were 115 n. kuhntae genomic sequences  which corresponded at least two exons  in n. furzeri transcripts and could be aligned in the two species . in these, we measured a mean nucleotide identity of 99%. the median frequency of estimated non-synonymous substitution per non-synonymous site  was  <dig>  and the median frequency of estimated synonymous substitution per synonymous site  was  <dig>  with ω =  <dig>   indicating on average strong purifying selection.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we present evidence of parallel evolution of life span and senescence in annual nothobranchius fishes. this evidence is based on interspecific comparison between closely related species inhabiting contrasting habitats, using two evolutionary lineages and replication of populations for each study species. in both lineages, the species from semi-arid habitat showed accelerated senescence compared to the species from a humid habitat. these data suggest that constraints to the maximum natural lifespan modulate the evolution of aging in these annual fish.

none of the wild-derived n. furzeri populations replicated the extremely short lifespan  observed in the laboratory strain grz  <cit>  despite the fact that one population in our study  originates from just 30 km from the original sampling site of grz. the most straightforward explanation for these data is that the grz strain is highly inbred, probably due to the long captive history . indeed, the grz strain is nearly completely homozygous  <cit> . however, we cannot exclude that a rare combination of natural alleles has been fixed in the grz strain that is known to have undergone at least one bottleneck where the entire captive population was constituted by a single breeding pair  <cit> .

ageing evolves as a trade-off in response to patterns of extrinsic mortality. higher extrinsic mortality means that fewer individuals survive to reproduce at later ages, leading to erosion in selection to promote longevity and limit ageing effects. prevailing theories  <cit>  postulate that populations experiencing high extrinsic mortality evolve rapid ageing. rapid ageing manifests itself by higher intrinsic mortality and more rapid deterioration of vital functions. our data provide a strong quantitative example of modulation of aging by extrinsic mortality in vertebrates at an interspecific level. at intraspecific level, garter snake  populations from low- and high- extrinsic mortality environments were found to evolve long and short lifespans  <cit> , while guppy populations from low- and high- extrinsic mortality environments provided ambiguous results  <cit> . the difference between the studies appears to be connected to the source of mortality. while the guppy survival may be strongly condition-dependent , a source of the garter snake mortality likely stems from environmental conditions  and may be less prone to condition-dependence. this is also the case in our study system where the highest risk of mortality comes from habitat desiccation, impacting all individuals equally. considering the source of mortality rather than only its strength appears to be crucial to understand the evolution of ageing at intra- and inter-specific levels  <cit> .

lipofuscin is known as the age pigment because it accumulates with age in many organisms from c. elegans to humans. lipofuscin accumulation as a function of age is well studied in aquatic organisms  <cit>  and n. furzeri is characterized by a rapid and massive accumulation of lipofuscin as a function of age  <cit> . we have demonstrated that lipofuscin accumulation in liver and brain is positively associated with mortality rates of our study populations. we further demonstrated that lipofuscin also accumulates in fish collected in the wild and is therefore a naturally occurring phenomenon rather than a consequence of particular diet in captivity. this makes the use of lipofuscin accumulation a suitable proxy of age-dependent deterioration not only in animals in captivity, but also in the wild.

our inferences are based on a contrast in habitat duration between two regions. our study design was initially based on indirect estimates of habitat duration between the two regions, such as annual rainfall totals , seasonal distribution of rainfall , evapotranspiration rates  and vegetation   <cit> . however, such data are not conclusive and other factors, such as local soil conditions or morphology of the pools , may override those climatic factors. here, we present data that confirmed strong differences in habitat duration between the two regions. large dataset from field sites visits, collected over two years, clearly demonstrated that most nothobranchius pools  were dry in the semi-arid region in june or july, while only 25% of pools were dry in humid region. an additional relevant point is the synchronous hatch of nothobranchius across the study region. data on age of nothobranchius fishes estimated from otoliths  provided strong indication of synchronous hatching in the years  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . here, we use datalogger records to document a synchronous start of the aquatic phase in both habitats, associated with enormous, cyclone-associated precipitation in  <dig>  a combination of these data demonstrated much shorter duration of pools  in the semi-arid region.

nothobranchius are laboratory species and could be used to unravel the genetic architecture of these lifespan differences using two different approaches, for which we provide proof of principle. the first strategy is the use of intra- and inter-specific crossing between population/species with divergent phenotypes and subsequent analysis of quantitative trait loci . this approach has led to characterization of the genetic architecture controlling natural phenotypic variation in several fish species  <cit> . some qtls controlling longevity were recently identified using a crossing panel of n. furzeri laboratory strains  <cit> , but these crosses involved the grz strain and may not be representative of natural variations. the existence of a phenomenon of parallel evolution of senescence in nothobranchius from mozambique offers a powerful paradigm to identify conserved qtls controlling longevity which may eventually lead to the identification of genes controlling natural variation in lifespan in vertebrates. the second approach is the use of genome-wide sequence comparisons of coding exons. if a specific gene in two lineages experiences a difference in selection pressure  a signature could be detected in the sequence, for example in the ratio of synonymous to non-synonymous substitutions . this method has already allowed the identification of gene under differential selection in long-living mammals  <cit> . a transcript catalogue of n. furzeri is now available  and we measured here 99% sequence identity in the coding regions between n. furzeri and n. kuhntae. it will be straight-forward to use next generation sequencing techniques to identify transcripts with high ka/ks ratio and use them in subsequent analyses.

