BACKGROUND
with the increasing availability of published microarray data sets, there is a tremendous need for developing approaches to validate and integrate results across multiple studies. one major issue to deal with in the meta-analysis of dna microarrays is the lack of a single standard experimental platform for data generation. the dominant technologies so far have been two-color microarrays and oligonucleotide  arrays. because these technologies measure fundamentally differing genetic materials designed to represent identical targets, many properties of expression measurements may vary across platforms including scale of measurements, sensitivity in detecting fold changes, control of cross-hybridization, and so forth. the heterogeneity in array design poses a great challenge for cross-platform comparisons and integration of results across independent microarray studies. the general area of combining data across multiple studies is referred to as meta-analysis  <cit> .

many approaches have been proposed for meta-analysis of microarray data. rhodes et al.  <cit>  combined evidence of differential expression using a summary statistic involving the p-values from comparing cancer versus normal samples across multiple gene profiling studies and adjusted for multiple testing using q-values  <cit> . choi et al.  <cit>  proposed a bayesian model for the effect size for genes from multiple microarray experiments. in a more recent study  <cit> , data from one study were used to generate a prior distribution of the differences in logarithm of gene expression between diseased and normal groups, whose distribution was then updated using other microarray studies. these methods all model the effect size  <cit> , or a transformation thereof, across multiple studies.

recently, we proposed a bayesian mixture model-based transformation of dna microarray data based on a proposal of parmigiani et al.  <cit>  and applied it to develop a signature of breast cancer recurrence across multiple microarray experiments from different platforms  <cit> . the scale which was combined across studies is termed probability of expression . the focus of shen et al.  <cit>  was on the breast cancer application; here, we wish to examine the technical aspects of the modelling used there. based on the probabilistic model that underlies the poe methodology, one can exploit the notion of using latent variables for combining genomic data from multiple genomic studies. this is a very important idea that can have more general applications than that considered by parmigiani et al.  <cit> . in methods, we describe the data structure and define two general probabilistic models for quantities that are combinable across studies. the first is the model used in  <cit> ; we present it here for completeness. the second is a two-component mixture model that can be fit using an expectation-maximization algorithm. we also relate the latent variables to recent statistical methodologies for differential expression as well as false discovery rate  <cit> . we then illustrate the proposed methods with an application to a meta-analysis of data comparing metastatic to localized cancer across multiple microarray studies in the results section.

RESULTS
metastatic cancer study
we now discuss the application of the proposed methodology to a study looking at metastatic cancer. based on the availability of expression data for metastatic samples and clinical information regarding the distinction of primary and metastatic tumors, we selected three studies from publicly available data sources  <cit> . these three studies were selected based on two criteria: 1) both localized and metastatic samples are profiled, and 2) a reasonable number of common genes appear across datasets. it should be noted that generally only a small number of metastatic samples are profiled, which was the case in all three datasets. throughout the article, the terms primary and localized will be used interchangeably.

the goal of this meta-analysis is to identify the set of genes that best distinguishes metastatic tumors from primary tumors in human cancer tissue samples across distinct organ sites. the method mentioned in the previous section is applied to the three training sets to transform the data to poe using both the em and mcmc algorithms, and an optimal signature based on leave-one-out cross-validation logistic regression framework is obtained. the method will be compared to a few alternative meta-analytic approach  in terms of the selected gene signatures and the clustering of primary and metastatic tumors based on them. although the validation of methodology is challenging, we used our gene signature to predict metastasis-free survival time in the breast cancer study proposed by van't veer et al.  <cit>  as a possible validation. the hypothesis presumed here is that the profile for distinguishing metastatic from nonmetastatic tumors can be used to predict aggressive cancer prognosis.

data description
chen et al.  <cit>  mainly focus on characterizing the global gene expression patterns that distinguishes hepatocellular carcinoma  from non-hcc samples using cdna microarrays. our sample size numbers  are different from theirs because we have excluded non-tumor samples as well as repeat samples on the same patient. removing these samples leaves us with  <dig> unique primary tumors and  <dig> liver tumors which have metastasized.

garber et al.  <cit>  describe the diversity of gene expression patterns in squamous cell carcinomas , large cell lung carcinomas , small cell lung carcinomas , and adenocarcinoma  using cdna microarrays. these four subtypes of lung cancer are often detected in epithelial cells that line different sections of airways in the lung, and their treatment options differ by these types due to the pathological distinction among them. we first selected all  <dig> unique metastatic tumors and removed their paired samples profiled at primary stage. identifying and removing duplicate samples was performed the same way as for the chen et al. data. the subset of patients included in our meta-analysis were  <dig> primary adenocarcinoma samples and  <dig> samples with lymph node metastases.

finally, the latulippe et al.  <cit>  study identifies genes that differentiates primary and metastatic cancers in the prostate. using affymetrix oligonucleotide array u <dig> human gene arrays, they reported gene expression profiles of nearly  <dig>  genes/ests. all samples were included in our meta-analysis. the details for the three studies are summarized in table  <dig> 

an important aspect of this collection of data is that the organ sites are different. we are postulating a hypothesis that there is a common profile separating localized tumors from metastatic tumors across the three sites. similar evidence for this type of hypothesis has been suggested before  <cit> . the microarray platform differs by studies, so we mapped clone/probeset ids to unigene cluster ids  of its most recent build through source  <cit> . ugids are constantly updated. because our initial mapping was done in the year  <dig>  we translated these ugids to the june  <dig> build  in the ncbi database. the genes we report here and their annotation in the remainder of the paper is consistent with all annotations associated with the most up-to-date unigene clusters. when multiple clones are mapped to the same ugid, we averaged the expression over the clones within each sample. such a mapping produced  <dig> common ugids.

poe
before combining  <dig> samples from different sources into a single dataset, we transformed the raw data to poe from each study by normalizing the distribution of expression values in metastatic samples to that of localized samples. note that the localized or primary tumors represent the baseline group, since our goal is to select gene signature that distinguishes metastatic tumors from localized tumors, for which many conflicting hypotheses have been postulated. the output of poe from each study was then combined to form a single expression dataset with  <dig> genes and  <dig> samples.

in the following, the poe data transformations by the em and mcmc algorithms will be analyzed in parallel for the sake of comparison. all primary tumors are color-coded in red and metastatic tumors in green. in terms of computational speed, estimation of poe based on the em algorithm takes less than a minute for  <dig> genes per dataset, while that using mcmc takes about  <dig> minutes for  <dig> iterations and  <dig> periodic skips in the sampler. as the numbers of genes and samples grow, this difference will be substantial. for example, it usually takes  <dig> hours to fit poe for a dataset with  <dig>  genes using full bayesian modelling as opposed to  <dig> minutes for the maximum likelihood approach using the em algorithm. the reason for the computational difference is that the em algorithm is fit to one gene at a time, while the mcmc algorithm involves fitting to expression measurements for all genes simultaneously.

figures  <dig> and  <dig> show the poe transformation for two genes using both the em and mcmc algorithms. in both plots, the top panel shows the expression levels on the raw scale, followed by those on the poe scale from the em and mcmc algorithms, respectively. the gene in figure  <dig> is tgfb <dig> , which controls proliferation and differentiation in many cell types. the gene in figure  <dig> is f <dig> , coagulation factor ii, whose mutation leads to various forms of thrombosis and which is often expressed in liver tissues.

although both genes are in the signature obtained by our methods, they clearly represent different types of genes. based on figure  <dig>  f <dig> is under-expressed in the metastatic liver samples of chen et al., weakly under expressed in the lung samples of garber et al., and not differentially expressed in the latulippe et al. data. it was found significant only in the liver study among the three studies we considered here. on the other hand, tgfb <dig> is a gene whose expression is uniformly under expressed in metastatic samples across all three studies.

this observation on the two types of expression pattern on poe scale suggests that our signature will contain both types of genes. as will be shown later, a conventional meta-analytic approach that combines strength of differential expression across studies on the raw scale tends to select genes that behave similarly to tgfb <dig>  whereas our method picks up both types of genes. unless genes with expression patterns similar to f <dig> dominate the entire signature, the gene set from our method tends not to be influenced by a single study.

signature selection
as we proposed poe transformations using two different implementations, we will refer to the signatures from the data transformed by the em and mcmc algorithms as the poe em signature and the poe mcmc signature, respectively.

to obtain a gene signature that distinguishes metastatic samples from localized samples, we calculated risk indices for all samples. what we call a risk index is described in the methods section. a logistic regression is fitted for each gene with one sample held out at a time. the response variable is metastasis status . for all genes we iterated the same procedure holding each sample out while recording coefficients β and p-values. following the risk index approach for classification expalined in methods section, we calculated risk indices for all  <dig> subjects at various sizes of the gene signature. the optimal signature size p was then determined based on classification performance.

for classification purposes, we predicted the subjects with positive risk index to be metastatic and those with negative risk index to be localized cancer. using figure  <dig>  we took the optimal size to be  <dig> for the poe em signature as the error rates in metastatic and primary tumor samples collectively reach a minimum and do not decrease further as more genes are added beyond  <dig>  a similar criterion was applied to obtain a 70-gene poe mcmc signature. a plot of the risk indices and the optimal cutpoint is given in figure  <dig>  the poe em and poe mcmc signatures share  <dig> common ugids.

comparison and validation
we performed other analyses for the sake of comparison. first, we compared the classification performance of the signatures found using meta-analyses with that in which the classifiers were constructed on one dataset only and tested on the other two datasets. the performance is summarized in table  <dig>  while such individual study-specific signatures tended to perform well on the training dataset, their performance did not generalize well to other datasets. the consistently poor performance of all signatures on the garber dataset, including its own signature, suggests that this dataset might have poorer reliability than the others within the common subset of  <dig> genes used in this analysis.

table entries are misclassification error rates in percentage points using classifier from study on row to predict that listed in the column. number in parentheses in the signature column refers to number of genes at which classification accuracy was optimized. e3ect size refers to method of  <cit> .

we also compared our methods with two meta-analysis techniques developed in  <cit>  and  <cit> . the former performs bayesian inference on the classical hedges-olkin pooled effect sizes for each gene from multiple studies, and the latter uses bayesian hierarchical model to pool datasets across studies through group-specific mean and variance parameterization and selects gene signature based on their bayesian estimate of fdr.

first, since the method of  <cit>  pools the differential expression statistics from a collection of raw-scale data, there is no analogue of a risk index-based classification method available using their signatures. instead, we first obtained a signature of size  <dig> based on univariate gene selection. here the choice of size  <dig> in all signatures was chosen to provide a fair comparison of class prediction power with poe signatures. this corresponds to controlling the fdr at  <dig>  in the method by  <cit> . we call this the effect size  signature. we also fitted the hierarchical model from  <cit>  using winbugs software  <cit> . we used the prior specification reflecting vague prior information as in the original paper. the fitted model was obtained from a simulation of  <dig>  iterations with the initial  <dig>  iterations used for burn-in. the estimated probabilities of differential expression were surprisingly low, with the highest probability  <dig> . this implies that the  <dig> gene signature has fdr 99%. for the sake of comparison, we also took the  <dig> gene to assess its class prediction ability. we call this conlon signature. since both poe and the latter method report the probability of differential expression of individual genes, we examined the concordance between the two sets of probabilities. figure  <dig> shows the probability in conlon et al. plotted against that in poe em. the es signature shared  <dig> ugids in common with the poe em signature and  <dig> genes with the poe mcmc signature only, which suggests that the two signatures will have different characteristics.

meanwhile, the conlon signature had an overlap of two genes with the es signature and one gene with the poe em and mcmc signatures. the poor overlap of conlon signature with others is consistent with the high bayesian fdr estimated above.

to assess the classification performance, we performed hierarchical clustering of tissue samples from the individual studies using the es signature. figures  <dig> through  <dig> show the heatmaps of the es signature in individual studies with clustering tree. these were drawn separately because the raw scale data cannot be directly combined as in poe. figures  <dig>   <dig> are the heatmaps of the poe em and mcmc signatures. to highlight the sample labels in each plot, a yellow/blue color strip was added to the top of the dendrograms through figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  which should be viewed along with the breakdown of the clustering tree. for all plots, we used average linkage clustering with the distance metric defined using the euclidean metric. this was also done for the conlon signature . we found that the clustering performance of this signature was similar to that in the es signature as well, with most of the errors committed in garber lung study. the overall classification performance across all signatures is provided in table  <dig>  based on the classification table, we see that the proposed methods  greatly outperform the conlon signature, while they also are superior to the es method, although this difference is smaller.

we note that clustering with all signatures give fairly accurate results in all three studies. in the es signature, only a few metastatic samples are grouped together with two other primary tumors for the chen liver study . two metastatic samples are situated under the same node with primary tumors in garber lung study , finally, one primary and another three metastatic samples are in the opposite clusters in latulippe prostate study . overall, the clustering can differentiate metastatic tumors from primary tumors, although some metastatic tumors were grouped with primary tumors. the conlon signature had no classification error in latulippe prostate study, but essentially there was no tight clustering in garber lung study at all, although  <dig> out of  <dig> metastatic samples were clustered together in a local tree.

the poe em and mcmc signatures give comparably good clusterings of the two types of tumors across all studies. in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  all metastatic tumors except for two samples from the garber lung study are grouped together, and some primary tumors from the chen liver study are separated from other primary tumors. furthermore, the lengths of the edges to the leaf nodes in the dendrogram are shorter than that in the es signature, which suggests that the clustering of primary tumors is tighter than that using the es signature. this is a consequence of normalizing the expression level of metastatic tumors to the distribution of primary tumors by utilizing phenotypic information in the estimation of poe. the heatmaps visually demonstrate the difference between the es signatures and the poe signatures. we next used nih david  <cit>  to determine if there were functional groups enriched for in our gene expression signatures. in terms of gene annotation, the poe em and mcmc signatures share many common functional categories because they have many ugids in common such as response to stress, immune response, endopeptidase and enzyme inhibitor activity, cell organization and biogenesis, and regulation of cell cycle. the class of functions common to the poe and es signatures is cell cycle processes. go terms such as antigen processing, endogenous antigen via mhc class i, dna repair, many metabolism and transport activities appear in the es signatures only. also, a literature search has suggested the association of poe signature genes and their corresponding go terms with tumor invasion and metastasis in various cancer types. for example, aldh1a <dig>  and mapk <dig>  are targets of the hgf/met signaling pathway which has been associated with tumor metastasis and poor prognosis in human hepatocellular carcinomas  <cit> . in another example, overexpression of pfn <dig>  and ubs  has been associated with lymph node metastasis of gastric cancer  <cit>  and colon cancer  <cit>  respectively. these observations indicate that the poe signatures lead to relevant findings toward understanding the potential mechanism of differentiation of metastatic tumors from primary tumors.

finally, an additional validation of the method was attempted to see if the resulting gene expression signature can discriminate lethal from nonlethal cancers in an early detected population of cancers. note that the signature selection was primarily oriented toward the distinction of metastatic tumors from primary tumors. thus validation here is based on the conjecture that many metastatic tumors are highly likely to initiate lethal condition. we addressed this issue by using the data from the van't veer et al.  <cit>  study. their study profiled  <dig> primary breast cancer samples in hu25k inkjet arrays. among these patients,  <dig> patients developed distant metastases within  <dig> years,  <dig> patients continued to be disease-free after a period of at least  <dig> years. other  <dig> patients either had brca <dig> germline mutations or were brca <dig> carriers; we excluded these samples from the analysis.

the study was based on a large inkjet microarray profiling over  <dig>  probes. about two-thirds of  <dig> genes used in the three cancer studies appear in the van't veer et al. data. based on the classifier trained from the three cancer datasets described above, we mapped the genes from the signatures to those in the van't veer et al. data. we generated risk indices for subjects in van't veer et al. specifically, we first transformed the van't veer et al. data to the poe scale using both the em and mcmc algorithms without using the phenotypic information to prevent overfitting. note that we did not consider the effect size and conlon signatures here. then we calculate the log odds ratio for each patient using the coefficients trained from training data and the newly generated poe data. note that the estimated regression coefficients for the risk score came from the training set. as expected, the derived risk indices using the data from the em and mcmc algorithms are highly correlated .

a proportional hazards model  <cit>  relating metastasis-free survival to the risk index, adjusting for covariates, was fit to the data. tables  <dig> and  <dig> shows the results. in both analyses using data from the em and mcmc algorithms concur in that the derived risk indices are strong predictor of metastasis-free survival times. this association remains strong even after adjusting for estrogen receptor status and age. since we are interested in risk prediction, we calculated the c-index  <cit>  to see if the gene expression signature adds discriminatory information relative to estrogen status and age. for the model with just age and estrogen status, the c-index is  <dig> . for the em-based poe signature, the c-index with all three variables  is  <dig> . for the mcmc-based poe signature, the c-index with all three variables  is  <dig> .

cox proportional hazards model fitted to time to distant metastasis in lymph node from study by  <cit> . risk indices were derived based on poe data transformed by the em algorithm.

cox proportional hazards model fitted to time distant metastasis in lymph node from  <cit> . risk indices were derived based on the poe data transformed by the mcmc algorithm.

discussion
ideally, we wish to use all common genes from the available studies for meta-analysis. however, one issue that has been debated recently is that of reproducibility of genes across studies  <cit> . a technique that has proven to be useful as a filtering device to enhance comparability across arrays of different platforms is the integrative correlation coefficient or correlation of correlation coefficients  <cit> . the idea underlying this method is that while raw expression values vary from study to study, the intergene correlations do not vary as much. the intergene correlations are calculated across all samples; this yields a n × n matrix for each study. the row-wise averages are taken for each study and then calculated, and the correlations of these averages between these studies is then calculated. thus, one would consider combining genes that have similar intergene correlations across the studies. for normally distributed data, the sample correlation is independent of the sample mean. thus, genes selected based on an integrative correlation filter need not necessarily be highly expressed genes. we could perform this as a filtering step before applying the proposed meta-analysis methodologies; we did not do so here. the drawback to such a measure is that the filtering of genes might reduce the chance of finding subtypes in the datasets because the genes that define such subtypes may be excluded based on the integrative correlation coefficient.

one limitation of our methodology is that it is still subject to the usual meta-analysis assumption that the transformed expression measurements  are directly combinable across studies. if in fact we are trying to combine measurements for fundamental different quantities across multiple studies, then this in fact renders the meta-analysis invalid. however, for that situation most meta-analytical approaches are invalid, and one would need more sophisticated modelling assumptions.

a related issue to this is that of heterogeneity. the results of the analysis here should be interpreted with some caution in that we are comparing metastatic versus nonmetastatic tumors across a variety of tissue types. we made the assumption that the differences between the two types of tumors are the same across the three studies. if this is not true, then it might be quite possible that what we are detecting are in fact tissue-specific differences between metastatic and non-metastatic tissues. it is of interest to develop methods for assessing heterogeneity in meta-analyses of genomic data so that they may be applied before using the proposed methodology in the paper.

CONCLUSIONS
with the proliferation of genomic datasets from related studies by different scientific groups, an important method for increasing power will be to combine results across the different studies. in this article, we have proposed a model-based approach to doing this. being able to integrate and interpret multiple genomic datasets will be an important enterprise for data analysts working in bioinformatics to address in the future.

a question orthogonal to that looked at in this paper but of equal scientific importance is that of identifying genes whose expression is correlated across a subset of the samples. this is referred to as molecular subtype analysis and was in fact one motiviation of the poe algorithm proposed by parmigiani et al. . however, finding such gene signatures would require the use of completely different statistical methods than those proposed here and is beyond the scope of the current paper.

several important issues to consider when integrating microarray studies include use of different gene expression measurement scales, varying analytical power and reliability of the results for individual studies. to address these issues in a meta-analysis framework, we proposed a two-stage mixture modeling strategy. the goal of the mixture model-based transformation is to transform the preprocessed data to the probability scale, which are then integrated across datasets. in particular, the signed probability of differential expression pd is easily interpretable and is platform-independent. the normal-uniform mixture distribution under a bayesian hierarchical model setting has several desirable properties. we have also proposed an alternative model based on a two-component mixture and estimation using the em algorithm. we briefly compare the mcmc and em algorithms. the advantage of the former method is that it pools information across all genes, while the latger approach does not. however, the em algorithm is computationally much faster than the mcmc scheme. in our example, we find that there is substantial overlap between the two approaches for the metastasis data considered here. however, we also expect that for cancer studies, the em algorithm would fare better with larger phenotypic differences , while the mcmc approach would be of use when the phenotypic differences in samples are subtle .

combining samples on the probability scale mitigates the influence of potential artifacts from a single study. the effect is reflected on two counts. one, integrated sample cohorts improve the reliability of the findings by guarding against false positive results from a single study. two, it increases the statistical power to detect small consistent effects that can be otherwise masked by inadequacy of the sample size of an individual data set. by implementing this modeling approach, we were able to combine information from three microarray studies to build an inter-study validated signature for discriminating metastatic cancer from non-metastatic cancer.

the statistical methods described in the paper are available as an r package, metaarray, which is available through the bioconductor project at  <cit> .

