BACKGROUND
the majority of the dna in eukaryotic cells is packaged into nucleosomes. the nucleosome is composed of a histone octamer around which  <dig> dna base pairs are wrapped  <cit> . nucleosome positioning plays an essential role in diverse cellular processes by controlling accessibility of genomic dna to regulatory factors  <cit> . in general, there are three main ways in which cells regulate nucleosomal influences on these cellular processes: chromatin remodeling  <cit> , histone modification  <cit> , and incorporation of histone variants  <cit> . high-resolution nucleosome positions across genomes have been identified in yeast   <cit> . these valuable data make it possible to understand how nucleosome positions are exactly determined in vivo.

the coordination of nucleosome positions is a complex process involving combined interactions among multiple factors. experimental evidence indicates that certain dna sequences have strong ability to bend and twist  <cit> . consequently, dna sequences differ greatly in their ability to wrap around histones. the binding affinities can vary by several orders of magnitude  <cit> . recent studies have used dna sequence features to predict genome-wide nucleosome positions with modest success  <cit> , confirming that nucleosome positioning is partially encoded in the genomic dna sequence. yet it is less clear whether the underlying dna sequence plays a uniform role in nucleosome positioning throughout the genome. until recently, two studies have observed decay in contribution of the underlying dna sequence to nucleosome positioning along the coding region  <cit> . on the other hand, while recent results collectively suggest that factors besides dna sequence preferences also contribute to nucleosome positioning  <cit> , they leave open the question of whether different determinants of nucleosome positioning have distinct influences on nucleosome regulation.

in this study, we investigated into the relationship between the degree of dependence of nucleosome positioning on the underlying dna sequence and the mode of nucleosome modulation in yeast. we identified two typical promoter classes associated with high or low dependence of nucleosome positioning on the underlying dna sequence, respectively. the two classes are distinguished by multiple promoter features. strikingly, the two classes are associated with two distinct modes of nucleosome modulation. our results suggest that the two distinct modes of nucleosome modulation are linked with the intrinsic sequence preferences for nucleosomes.

RESULTS
two promoter classes with distinct determinants of nucleosome positioning
the regular spacing of certain dinucleotide sequences is known to facilitate the bending of dna around the nucleosome  <cit> . segal et al. have predicted genome-wide sequence preferences for nucleosomes in yeast based on dinucleotide probability distributions  <cit> . using these data, we calculated the ratio between sequence preferences of each experimentally determined nucleosome  <cit>  and mean preferences of linker dna surrounding it , as an estimate of the dependence of nucleosome positioning on the underlying dna sequence: high ratios indicate sequence-dependent nucleosome positioning, while low ratios could indicate nucleosome positioning less dependent on the intrinsic dna sequence . interestingly, the ratios of nucleosomes covering transcription start sites  and transcription termination sites  are both significantly higher than those of other nucleosomes . we focused on nucleosome positioning in the promoter region , and found that there were two subsets of promoters whose corresponding ratios are all greater or less than  <dig>  , respectively. this result indicates that nucleosome positioning at the two subsets of promoters is mainly or less dependent on the genomic sequence, respectively. we identified these two typical classes for subsequent analysis. promoters were grouped into sdn -enriched promoters or sdn-less promoters if their corresponding ratios were all greater or less than  <dig> , respectively . we validated these two typical classes in another dataset  <cit> : sdn-enriched and sdn-less promoters showed stronger and weaker positive correlation between sequence-directed nucleosome formation potential and experimentally measured nucleosome occupancy than the rest of the promoters, respectively .

we sought to understand why the underlying dna sequence contributes little to nucleosome positioning at sdn-less promoters. it has been reported that the well-positioned nucleosome, which is near tss, establishes a barrier that positions downstream nucleosomes along the coding region using the principles of statistical positioning, with little contribution from the intrinsic dna sequence  <cit> . we asked whether a similar strategy is employed by sdn-less promoters. however, well-positioned nucleosomes  <cit>  show no significant positional preference at sdn-less promoters . we next asked whether the less sequence-dependent nucleosome positioning at sdn-less promoters is due to the low intrinsic dna sequence preferences for nucleosomes. but our results showed that sdn-less promoters have significantly higher intrinsic sequence preferences than the rest of the promoters . this result implies that there might be other regulatory factors that override the strong sequence preferences to position nucleosomes, resulting in less sequence-dependent nucleosome positioning at sdn-less promoters. by contrast, sdn-enriched promoters have lower intrinsic sequence preferences than the rest of the promoters .

lower nucleosome occupancy can not guarantee higher transcription rate
we next analyzed both classes in terms of gene activity  <cit> , at the condition similar to that where nucleosome occupancy was measured. sdn-less genes have higher transcription rates and absolute mrna abundance, whereas of sdn-enriched genes are comparable to genome-wide level . in general, the level of nucleosome occupancy in promoter is inversely proportional to the corresponding gene transcription rate  <cit> . strikingly, sdn-enriched promoters have significantly lower nucleosome occupancy than sdn-less promoters . these results suggest that lower nucleosome occupancy can not guarantee higher transcription rate. we separately analyzed nucleosome occupancy for genes with high or low transcription rates in both classes . our results demonstrate that the difference in the level of nucleosome occupancy between both classes  is mainly attributable to genes with low transcription rates . interestingly, sdn-less promoters lack a substantial nucleosome-free region  directly upstream of the tss that is prevalent in most promoters  <cit> . ~ <dig> occupied proximal-nucleosome  genes, with relatively high nucleosome occupancy close to the tss coupled with relatively low occupancy at a more distal region in the promoter, show higher mrna expression levels  <cit> . there is only a small overlap  in membership between sdn-less and opn genes, implying that they capture distinct nucleosomal features.

we further investigated into the relationship between nucleosome occupancy and transcription rate. transcription rates tend to decrease with increasing nucleosome occupancy at promoters for sdn-enriched genes, while this trend is relatively weak for sdn-less genes . for promoters with similar nucleosome occupancy between - <dig> and - <dig> , sdn-less genes have significantly higher transcription rates than sdn-enriched genes . we restricted the analysis to promoters whose nucleosome occupancy is in this interval. we asked whether transcription factor  binding information contributes to the significant difference in transcription rate. indeed, sdn-less promoters are enriched with transcription factor binding sites  <cit>  compared with sdn-enriched promoters . moreover, binding sites are highly localized in linker dna  <cit>  at sdn-less promoters . these significantly discriminative characteristics disappeared when we included all members in both classes .

two distinct modes of nucleosome modulation
we examined whether there is significant difference in nucleosome properties between the two classes. sdn-less promoters are enriched with delocalized  nucleosomes  <cit>  . analysis of nucleosome fuzziness measured in another study  <cit>  reproduces a similar observation . these results suggest that nucleosome positioning at sdn-less promoters is more dynamic. nucleosomes surrounding tss at sdn-less promoters show high fuzziness . moreover, for promoters with similar nucleosome occupancy  <cit>  within the  <dig> bp upstream of the gene, sdn-less genes have significantly higher transcription rates  <cit>  than sdn-enriched genes . one possible explanation is that high rna polymerase ii occupancy, which is generally associated with high rate of transcription  <cit> , should exclude nucleosomes from more distinct positions  in the measured ensemble. two h2a.z nucleosomes flank nfr at most promoters in yeast  <cit> . as expected, sdn-less promoters are depleted of h2a.z nucleosomes  <cit>  , by contrast, sdn-enriched promoters are relatively enriched with h2a.z nucleosomes and are depleted of 'fuzzy' nucleosomes . comparison of nucleosome positions between normal and heat-shock conditions  <cit>  showed that sdn-less promoters are enriched with nucleosomes with drastic positional changes . however, the changes in overall nucleosome occupancy  at the two classes of promoters are both comparable to genome-wide level .

both sdn-enriched and sdn-less promoters exhibit higher turnover rates of histone h <dig>  <cit>  . in general, there are two main ways in which cells modulate nucleosomes: histone modification and atp-dependent chromatin remodelling  <cit> . importantly, sdn-enriched promoters are characterized by hyperacetylation, while sdn-less promoters tend to be hypoacetylation . different from other known modifications, acetylation can neutralize the positive charge of the lysine. as a result, acetylated histone tails are thought to associate more loosely with nucleosomal dna than unmodified and methylated histone tails  <cit> . we used a compendium of gene expression experiments in which various atp-dependent chromatin remodelers were deleted or mutated  <cit>  . if the remodeler regulates a subset of genes, its deletion should cause a differential change in expression. we used the kolmogorov-smirnov  statistical test to evaluate the difference in the distribution of gene expression values between a subset of genes and the rest of the genes. sdn-less promoters are highly regulated by atp-dependent chromatin remodelers, while sdn-enriched promoters show very low sensitivity to disruption of these remodelers .

discussion
previous studies have shown that the genomic sequence itself can explain ~50% of the in vivo nucleosome organization in yeast  <cit> . these results indicate that some nucleosome positions are mainly determined by the genomic sequence, while other nucleosome positions are less determined by dna. however, it is still unclear whether these two nucleosome classes could possess different properties and might influence the properties of their located genes. to address this issue, we identified two typical promoter classes whose nucleosome positions are mainly or less dependent on the underlying dna sequence, respectively. importantly, these two promoter classes can be distinguished by multiple promoter features and modes of nucleosome modulation.

sdn-enriched promoters have lower nucleosome occupancy and lower transcription rates compared with sdn-less promoters . this is a very interesting observation since the level of nucleosome occupancy in promoter is generally inversely proportional to the corresponding gene transcription rate  <cit> . we suggest that nucleosome occupancy at promoter establishes the context in which transcription operates, while transcription apparatus specifies the rate of transcription. it is well accepted that tfs bind their targets in a dynamic manner  <cit> . sdn-less promoters are enriched with fuzzy nucleosomes compared with sdn-enriched promoters , suggesting that nucleosome positioning at sdn-less promoters is more dynamic. this nucleosomal dynamics may guide transcription factors to their targets sites in a dynamic manner, although sdn-less promoters have higher nucleosome occupancy than sdn-enriched promoters .

histone modification has been thought to work in concert with atp-dependent chromatin remodelling to regulate nucleosome mobility  <cit> , but the two promoter classes employed distinct modes of nucleosome modulation: hyperacetylation for sdn-enriched promoters and atp-dependent chromatin remodelling for sdn-less promoters. these observations along with high intrinsic sequence preferences for nucleosomes at sdn-less promoters  indicate that they need to use more energy in the form of atp hydrolysis to override the underlying dna sequence to regulate nucleosome mobility. atp-dependent chromatin remodeling often alters nucleosome position  <cit> , probably resulting in less sequence-dependent nucleosome positioning and high nucleosome fuzziness at sdn-less promoters. on the other hand, sdn-enriched promoters need not use much energy  to loosen histone-dna association partly due to their relatively low intrinsic sequence preferences for nucleosomes . acetylation is unlikely to transfer nucleosome position directly  <cit> , which may maintain the contribution of the underlying dna sequence to nucleosome positioning at sdn-enriched promoters.

CONCLUSIONS
we identified two typical promoter classes according to the degree of dependence of nucleosome positioning on the underlying dna sequence. their difference in contribution of the genomic sequence to nucleosome positioning appears to be a consequence of their distinct modes of nucleosome modulation: hyperacetylation for sdn-enriched promoters and atp-dependent chromatin remodelling for sdn-less promoters. the adoption of distinct modes of nucleosome modulation by the two promoter classes may be attributable to their difference in the intrinsic sequence preferences for nucleosomes , and may result in different promoter features. atp-dependent chromatin remodeling often changes nucleosome position, probably resulting in high nucleosomal dynamics  at sdn-less promoters, while acetylation is unlikely to transfer nucleosome position directly, which leads to the well-positioned nucleosomes  at sdn-enriched promoters. our findings should facilitate the understanding of how in vivo nucleosome positioning is coordinated.

