BACKGROUND
extensive sampling and genetic studies have suggested that an endemic mosquito named anopheles irenicus resides exclusively in the northern part of guadalcanal island , along with an. farauti sensu stricto , an. hinesorum, an. punctulatus and an. koliensis  <cit> . all these mosquitoes are members of the an. punctulatus group, which was originally considered to comprise four closely related species, an. farauti laveran, an. punctulatus donitz, an. koliensis owen and an. clowi rozeboom & knight . further studies with cross-mating experiments, allozyme analysis and dna probes finally revealed  <dig> sibling species within this an. punctulatus group: an. farauti s.s. laveran , an. hinesorum schmidt , an. torresiensis schmidt , an. farauti nos.  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  an. irenicus schmidt , an. punctulatus donitz, an. sp. near punctulatus, an. koliensis owen, an. rennellensis taylor & maffi and an. clowi rozeboom & knight  <cit> . nevertheless, the origin and population structure of the group remain obscure because of the involvement of these complex cryptic species  <cit> .

a few striking differences between the endemic an. irenicus mosquito on guadalcanal and one of its sibling species, an. farauti s.s., provide an excellent opportunity for investigating their genetic relationship. as mentioned earlier, an. irenicus is only found on guadalcanal  <cit> , but an. farauti s.s. is distributed from the east through new guinea, the bismarck archipelago and the solomon islands to vanuatu and southward into northern australia  <cit> . although these two species generally breed in similar types of water bodies such as small ground pools, margins of creeks, streams and even road ruts  <cit> , they do not readily share their breeding sites. an. farauti s.s. almost always breeds in brackish water, whereas even though an. irenicus shows potential tolerance of brackish water, it is always found in breeding sites containing fresh water  <cit> .

the adult mosquitoes also have distinct patterns of host dependence: an. farauti s.s. is anthropophilic but an. irenicus is zoophilic  <cit>  and never bites humans  <cit> . little is known about the reproduction of adult an. irenicus. in natural conditions adult an. farauti s.s. require a blood meal and oviposition usually occurs  <dig> to  <dig> hours later . larval development in the laboratory is similarly irregular for both species, and delayed hatching of some eggs is common, resulting in the simultaneous occurrence of second instar larvae and pupae in the same rearing bowls .

an. farauti s.s. and an. irenicus are morphologically nearly indistinguishable , but schmidt et al.  <cit>  described some subtle though definitive differences in morphological characters including the number of proepisternal setae in adults , the number of branches of seta 5-v and seta 5-vi in pupae , and the number of branches of seta 2-iii in fourth instar larvae . schmidt et al.  <cit>  therefore differentiated them taxonomically. however, some morphological variations were noted in the an. farauti s.s. collected from australia, papua new guinea and the solomon islands  <cit> . therefore, molecular analysis is necessary to identify and study them. allozyme electrophoresis and mitochondrial dna  sequences reveal distinguishable differences  <cit> . moreover, beebe et al.  <cit>  showed species-specific ribosomal dna polymorphisms by polymerase chain reaction-repeated fragment length analysis  of ribosomal internal transcribed spacer  regions.

there have been previous studies of the distribution, habitat and morphology of an. irenicus in relation to an. farauti s.s., but less attention has been paid to their genetic variations on a finer scale. therefore, we aimed to assess this issue using both mitochondrial  and nuclear  markers. mitochondrial dna shows ample signatures of genomic events such as gene flow, migration, bottlenecks, speciation, hybridization and reinforcement  <cit> , so it might give better information for studying current as well as historical genetic events affecting these mosquitoes  <cit> . on the other hand, comparison of the its region has clarified phylogenetic relationships among many closely-related species and in the an. punctulatus group  <cit> , and will potentially make a substantial contribution to inferring the evolutionary relationships of an. irenicus.

our previous work has added some insight about the phylogeography of an. farauti s.s. in melanesia  <cit> . we have added further data from wider sampling areas of this species along with the endemic an. irenicus to shed light on genetic relationships between the species. in this study, therefore, we assessed the genetic variations between the species and particularly asked the following questions:  is an. irenicus largely or completely sympatric with an. farauti s.s. on guadalcanal?  are they monophyletic sister groups?  is there any demographic differences between them?

RESULTS
study samples
adult mosquitoes were collected from tamboko  <dig> and tavavao on guadalcanal , and all of them were an. farauti s.s. . we never collected an. irenicus on human baits. a total of  <dig> larvae were collected from  <dig> water bodies from five sites on guadalcanal: tamboko  <dig>  komimbo, sopapera, koli and patima; and from two sites on malaita: fiu and mawa . an. irenicus  were only found in fresh water on guadalcanal. the other  <dig> larvae were an. farauti s.s. and were mostly  obtained from brackish water on guadalcanal and malaita. only  <dig> an. farauti s.s. shared five out of the  <dig> water bodies with an. irenicus on guadalcanal, and all five sites were fresh water bodies.

variability in sequences
the  <dig> bp coii gene was sequenced in all  <dig> an. farauti s.s. and  <dig> an. irenicus mosquitoes collected from the solomon islands. from these sequences,  <dig> solomon island-specific an. farauti s.s. haplotypes  and  <dig> an. irenicus haplotypes  were isolated , but no haplotypes were shared between the two species. notably, the  <dig> an. farauti s.s. larvae collected from fresh water showed identical haplotypes  to those collected from brackish water and by human bait. among the  <dig> unique an. farauti s.s. haplotypes there were  <dig> variable sites . within the group, the range of uncorrected pairwise sequence divergence was 0% –  <dig> %. an. irenicus exhibited less genetic variability than an. farauti s.s.: among  <dig> unique haplotypes,  <dig> variable sites with three parsimony-informative sites were found and the uncorrected pairwise sequence divergence ranged from 0% to  <dig> %. the highest levels of haplotype diversity  and nucleotide diversity  were found in the malaita population of an. farauti s.s. an. farauti s.s. on guadalcanal showed only a  <dig> -fold greater haplotype diversity  than an. irenicus , and the nucleotide diversity was the same .

for its <dig> markers,  <dig> randomly-chosen an. farauti s.s. and seven an. irenicus samples were sequenced. all an. farauti s.s. and all an. irenicus sequences were identical, resulting in a single haplotype for each species . a combined alignment of the two haplotypes consists of  <dig> bp, of which there are substitutions at eight sites and indels at  <dig> sites.

demographic analysis and divergence time
significantly negative tajima's d values were found only for the coii gene in the an. farauti s.s.  and an. irenicus  populations of guadalcanal, suggesting a departure from neutral equilibrium . these values were also interpreted in terms of demographic events and this revealed an excess of rare variants within these two populations. strong evidence for rapid expansion of all three populations was provided by the significantly negative fu's fs values  .

hd and π are haplotype diversity and nucleotide diversity, respectively. d and fs are tests of neutrality; tajima's d and fu's fs, respectively. θf, nf and g represent the current estimates of θ, current effective population size and growth rate estimated from lamarc, respectively. nsp >  <dig> , *p ≤  <dig>  and **p ≤  <dig> 

both tests for validity  suggested that the mismatch distribution curves fitted significantly to the distribution under a model of population expansion ; however, there were clear differences in curve shape. the curve for an. farauti s.s. on malaita was comparatively flat with a plateau, suggesting slower growth over a potentially longer time. in contrast, an. farauti s.s. on guadalcanal showed a unimodal curve with a steeper leading face. this shape suggested a recent rapid population expansion after a bottleneck or after a founder effect from a small founder population. interestingly, the an. irenicus population showed a unique l-shaped mismatch distribution, indicating recent demographic expansion with low molecular diversity . although the shape of the mismatch distribution curve, particularly the slope of the leading face, can be influenced by sudden population expansion from equilibrium as well as by population bottlenecks, simulations have shown that stable populations almost never produce this type of shape  <cit> . indeed, the estimates of time τ and the current and historical population parameters θ imply a historical episode of expansion of all three populations . the probable times of initiation of population expansion  were about  <dig>  bp  on malaita and about  <dig>  bp  on guadalcanal for an. farauti s.s., and about  <dig>  bp  for an. irenicus . nevertheless, a similar type of mismatch distribution can occur when an initial population is restricted to a very small area and subsequently expands over time and space. the resulting population becomes genetically subdivided as individuals tend to mate only with geographic neighbours  <cit> . in the later part of this section we show that the extensive gene flow within islands was completely contrary to the population substructure and particularly the spatial expansion model of mismatch distribution.

τ, texp, θ <dig> and θ <dig> are, respectively: expansion parameter, time of initiation of population expansion, and θ parameter before and after expansion. values of 95% ci are within parentheses. ssd and ri are sum of squared deviations and raggedness index, respectively. nsp >  <dig> 

evidence for population expansion was also inferred from the high g values assessed from lamarc . therefore, we estimated the present-day effective female population sizes  from the maximum likelihood estimates of the current effective values of θ . the current effective female population sizes of an. farauti s.s.  and an. irenicus  on guadalcanal were almost twice that of an. farauti s.s. on malaita .

the estimated time of divergence between an. irenicus and an. farauti s.s. produced by mdiv  was  <dig>  bp. regarding the tmrca, we anticipated that all the haplotypes sampled coalesced  <dig>  units ago, corresponding to  <dig>  bp. however, the divergence time was not estimated from its <dig> because this marker system can be influenced by homogenization among different loci within multigene dna families .

phylogenetic analysis
we aligned all  <dig> an. farauti s.s. and  <dig> an. irenicus haplotypes obtained in this study along with  <dig> sequences from  <dig> commonly-occurring members of the genus anopheles in this geographical region and two outgroups  for mitochondrial coii. the final alignment thus consisted of  <dig> bp. the phylogenetic trees constructed by the mp and bayesian methods using these sequences were very similar in topology. therefore, only a consensus mp tree topology is shown in figure  <dig>  here, an. farauti s.s. haplotypes were found to be geographically highly structured and composed of two separate subgroups. in one subgroup, the two haplotypes of papua new guinea were grouped with the single haplotype of vanuatu; in the other, all an. farauti s.s. haplotypes of the solomon islands were clustered together. an. irenicus formed a monophyletic clade and grouped with the an. farauti s.s. subgroup of the solomon islands with strong support .

it was not possible to include all species from the coii for the its <dig> because their representative sequences were not available in genbank. moreover, some sequences from different taxa were too divergent with respect to the an. punctulatus group to be aligned unambiguously. so the its <dig> dataset was finally constructed with  <dig> additional sequences  representing the an. punctulatus group, rendering an. koliensis the only outgroup. the alignment of its <dig> sequences consisted of  <dig> bp. trees based on mp and bayesian approaches showed very similar topologies. the only exception was the position of an. torresiensis. in the topology obtained with the bayesian approach, an. torresiensis appears to be a sister of a clade containing an. farauti s.s., an. irenicus, an. hinesorum, an. farauti  <dig> and an. farauti  <dig> , while in the mp trees it forms a tritomy involving the outgroup  and a clade containing the remaining species . however, the relationship between an. farauti s.s. and an. irenicus was the same irrespective of the approach used. the trees for its <dig> were less robust than the coii tree in taxon richness but more informative about the extensive variation among geographical sampling sites for an. farauti s.s., and they resolved the relationships of this species more precisely. unlike the coii phylogeny, the trees based on its <dig> sequences were inconsistent with paraphyly of an. farauti s.s. in its <dig> trees, an. farauti s.s. formed a monophyletic group comprising three monophyletic subgroups, each with high support . the first an. farauti s.s. subgroup was composed of a single haplotype from the solomon islands. the second was composed of one northern australian haplotype and the vanuatu haplotype. the last major subgroup was composed of the remaining haplotypes found in australia and all the haplotypes found in papua new guinea. an. irenicus, on the other hand, was well defined and formed a monophyletic clade. an. irenicus along with an. farauti s.s. formed a sister group to an. hinesorum, an. farauti  <dig> and an. farauti  <dig> 

the phylogenetic relationships among some members of the an. punctulatus group within the australasian region were not well resolved and showed many genetically distinct lineages restricted within different geographical ranges. a detailed discussion of this punctulatus group will be published elsewhere.

population genetic structure and gene flow
genetic differentiation between all pairs of geographical samples was estimated at each sampling site. neither the an. farauti s.s. nor the an. irenicus population showed significant pairwise estimates of differentiation  within any of the islands . as anticipated, however, the level of differentiation within an. farauti s.s. between the two islands was relatively high because of the sea barrier. in particular, tamboko  <dig> , tamboko  <dig>  and tavavao  on guadalcanal were significantly different from fiu  and mawa  on malaita. the corresponding gene migration  values revealed restricted gene flow between most of the sites on these two islands . only sopapera  showed extensive gene flow with the malaita populations . differentiation between an. farauti s.s. and an. irenicus was also significant and gave better contrast when the samples were grouped together by island. significant differences were found between the two an. farauti s.s. populations on guadalcanal and malaita , and in accordance with expectation, both an. farauti s.s. populations differed significantly from the an. irenicus population . genetically, the an. irenicus population was also isolated from both an. farauti s.s. populations; interspecific gene migration is strongly restricted .

pairwise fst values, below diagonal; pairwise nm values, above diagonal. a. f. and a. i. are an. farauti s.s. and an. irenicus, respectively. g <dig>  tamboko 1; g <dig>  tamboko 2; g <dig>  tavavao; g <dig>  komimbo; g <dig>  sopapera; g <dig>  koli; m <dig>  fiu; m <dig>  mawa. patima  was not included because only a single haplotype was collected from this site.

*p ≤  <dig>  and ‡p ≤  <dig> 

our amova findings were also consistent with the pairwise fst values for the combined data . the an. farauti s.s. populations on guadalcanal and malaita and the an. irenicus population differed significantly from each other  and were responsible for  <dig> % of the genetic variance. haplotypes within these three populations related to the total samples were also significantly different  and explained most of the remaining  differences. however, variation among geographical ranges within each of the three populations was almost negligible  and could not explain any of the variation adequately . subsequently, amova for guadalcanal also showed significant population structure between an. farauti s.s. and an. irenicus  and almost no variation among geographical ranges within these two species  .

discussion
sympatric distribution
sometimes, sampling from insufficient geographical sites can lead to an erroneous inference of sympatric distributions of species that are actually more widely distributed and are sympatric only over a small part of their distribution . we collected an. irenicus from four of the seven sites at which it is known to occur on guadalcanal. on the other hand, an. farauti s.s. was isolated from six sites on guadalcanal . however, despite the failure to collect an. farauti s.s. from patima and an. irenicus from tamboko  <dig>  tavavao and koli, which might indicate an error in sampling site choice, they apparently cover most of the north of guadalcanal  and thus these two species are distributed in complete sympatry within the island.

the sympatric distribution of an. farauti s.s. with an. irenicus on guadalcanal is also apparent from the non-significant pairwise population differences  in the coii sequences of their respective clusters, which simultaneously excludes geographical structure in either an. farauti s.s. or an. irenicus. gene flow and the corresponding migration rate within the guadalcanal populations of an. farauti s.s. were extremely high. although patima was excluded because of the small sample size, a similar pattern – absence of gene flow barrier with moderate to high migration rate – was also apparent in the an. irenicus populations. the amova further detected the homogenous distribution of the two species, with only  <dig> % molecular variance between the localities sampled on guadalcanal . similarly, the wide distribution of the single its <dig> haplotype for both an. farauti s.s. and an. irenicus also implied the absence of a gene flow barrier within the guadalcanal populations.

notably, populations of an. farauti s.s. were highly differentiated at the coii locus between guadalcanal and malaita; however, the sopapera population on guadalcanal was not significantly differentiated from populations on malaita . it is possible that gene flow between populations on the two islands occurs across the sea gap, with sopapera representing the nearest population receiving immigrants from malaita. amova showed that an. irenicus and an. farauti s.s. on these two islands were significantly different among groups  as well as among populations within a group , and revealed that gene flow between the islands was restricted . moreover, it is obvious that the sea gap must have prevented the dispersal of an. irenicus from guadalcanal to malaita . rather, the simplest explanation of the apparent inter-island gene flow is that the haplotypes isolated from the two sopapera samples were both s <dig>  which is the commonest haplotype within this region. therefore, the presence of a single shared haplotype  has nullified the genetic differentiation and no difference between the populations is apparent , whereas both the guadalcanal and malaita populations are genetically isolated per se  <cit> .

sister taxa
the assumption of sister taxa is essentially based on two attributes: it must reflect true phylogenetic status and not the genetic similarity between more distant species that can result from hybridization  <cit> . phylogeny using mitochondrial coii data showed that an. farauti s.s. of the solomon islands exhibits significant differentiation from all an. farauti s.s. in other geographical regions and forms a monophyletic assemblage with an. irenicus. our previous study showed that the genetically divergent solomon islands subgroup of an. farauti s.s. arose because of repeated bottlenecks and lineage sorting for adaptation during the dispersion from papua new guinea  <cit> . therefore, the topology reveals that an. irenicus and an. farauti s.s. truly share a common ancestry.

the sub-structuring in the phylogeny of an. farauti s.s. implied by mtdna is well resolved in nuclear rdna its <dig> trees, and reveals that an. farauti s.s. and an. irenicus are sister taxa. however, the haplotypes of an. farauti s.s. collapsed into a tritomy: the solomon islands subgroup, the australia-vanuatu subgroup and the australia-papua new guinea subgroup. because of the presence of this tritomy within different geographical locations, the position of the solomon islands haplotype in relation to other haplotypes could not be detected. however, a plausibly close relationship between an. farauti s.s. and an. irenicus on the solomon islands can be inferred as implied by the coii analysis, which may indicate genealogical congruence and thus can be interpreted in terms of a common origin for both species.

regarding the second attribute  for assuming sister taxa, a small amount of introgression or hybridization can homogenize mtdna and make species appear closely related  <cit> . the solomon islands are situated between papua new guinea and vanuatu , so the an. farauti s.s. of either papua new guinea or vanuatu may have originated allopatrically, made secondary contact with the solomon islands population and generated a hybrid species . according to this hybridization hypothesis, there will be no prezygotic isolation between an. farauti s.s. clades  <cit> , so putative hybrids could be formed and viable hybrid populations would be genetically very similar to the parental an. farauti s.s. however, in this study no an. irenicus was retained with the an. farauti s.s. of papua new guinea or vanuatu . therefore, the monophyly shown by the phylogenetic trees suggests that an. irenicus is truly a near-sister species of an. farauti s.s. and not a putative hybrid  <cit>  that diverged from the ancestral an. farauti s.s. on guadalcanal.

divergence and expansion
population history revealed that an. farauti s.s. dispersed from papua new guinea to the solomon islands concomitantly with human settlement during the recent pleistocene . therefore, acknowledging the uncertainties in predicting divergence time  <cit> , we propose that it is unlikely that an. irenicus diverged from an. farauti s.s. prior to  <dig>  bp . indeed, this time is sufficient to develop the genetic variation required to evolve a new species under the influence of selection, because this process includes an unstable intermediate stage that must be traversed rapidly  <cit> . it is beyond the scope of the current study to determine the mode of speciation of an. irenicus; further work is needed to resolve the issue.

a demographic expansion of the mosquito population is expected at approximately the same time as the host  population expansion  <cit> . for an. farauti s.s. on malaita, demographic analyses indicate the population expansion occurred around  <dig>  bp  and this is somewhat after the first human settlement in the solomon islands . in contrast, a delayed but time-synchronized single expansion was observed for both species on guadalcanal . the delay in population expansion on guadalcanal might have resulted from a substantially low human  population on guadalcanal. consistent with these assumptions, anthropological history suggests that only malaita had sizeable human populations. the other islands including guadalcanal were inhabited by very few humans  <cit> , and after the last glacial maximum  human expansion occurred in the region around  <dig>  to  <dig>  bp  <cit> . although the human  population size can potentially explain the population expansion of an. farauti s.s. on both islands, the population expansion of an irenicus cannot be unambiguously explained as no census is available for its host , and it requires further assessment. nevertheless, from the maximum likelihood estimates of θf,  the effective population sizes, nf, of an. irenicus and an. farauti s.s. on guadalcanal were also twice as large as that of an. farauti s.s. on malaita. in this context, we estimate the timeframe defining the initiation of divergence of an. irenicus from an. farauti s.s.  to its final expansion  to occur during the lgm. during the lgm the sea level fell to its minimum level, which made breeding in brackish coastal regions much more difficult. it can be anticipated that unavailability of favourable breeding sites may have driven some of the ancestors to adapt to an alternative niche , readily available only on guadalcanal  <cit> . during the non-arid deglaciation following the lgm  both the sea level and the fresh water content gradually started to rise, favouring both the species that continued to oviposit on brackish water and those that started to oviposit on fresh water, and a post-lgm population expansion occurred on guadalcanal . considering all the aforementioned scenarios, it is not unreasonable to propose that a greater variety of new hosts and exposure to novel breeding sites may explain this larger value, notwithstanding similar growth rates .

CONCLUSIONS
these findings suggest that an. irenicus and an. farauti s.s. are monophyletic sister species living in sympatry, and their populations on guadalcanal have recently expanded. consequently, the findings further indicate that an. irenicus diverged from the ancestral an. farauti s.s. however, knowledge of the number of genes involved in oviposition site and host choice, mating behaviour and the anthropogenic history of this region, as well as a more comprehensive approach using additional genetic markers such as microsatellites and amplified fragment length polymorphism together with wider geographical sampling, are necessary to ascertain the origin of an. irenicus on this particular island .

