BACKGROUND
structure-function analysis seeks to elucidate how the structural attributes of a protein serve its function. the function of a carrier protein is to catalyse transmembrane solute translocation. however, without a productive conspiracy among catalysis-promoting residues in the protein fold, transport proteins would be non-catalytic . inasmuch as "... catalytic power will always appear as a result of increased transition state stabilization  ..."  <cit> , a powerful addition to the structure-functionist's arsenal would be a generally applicable method that rapidly identifies sites in the protein fold that control transition state stability . what functional characteristics or properties might such a technique probe?

the structure-function technique would be required to provide a keyhole through which to view positions in the protein at which structural perturbations affect transition state binding energy, for it is well-appreciated that a catalyst creates transition state stability by binding substrates tightly in the transition state complex  <cit> . in fact, binding energy is thought to be significant to the exclusion of all else in carriers that catalyse translocation without any change in the covalent structure of the substrate  <cit> . absent changes in substrate structure, it is implicit that the conformational motions of "alternating access" must produce a transition state complex in which the substrate is more tightly bound than in the initial michaelis complex. fundamentally, catalysis could not occur without this realization of additional binding energy in the transition state  <cit> .

the present contribution demonstrates use of the transport specificity ratio  as an analytical keyhole to capture an initial glimpse of positions in the protein fold where structural characteristics control the availability of transition state binding energy. using the escherichia coli gabp  as a model carrier protein, salient properties and utilitarian features of tsr analysis are demonstrated. the tsr parameter is shown  to be calculated from an easily performed dual-label uptake experiment, and  to depend exclusively upon changes in intrinsic substrate binding energy  realized in the transition state. together these tsr properties should enable transport structure-functionists to obtain rapid, yet incisive, first-pass view of positions in the protein fold where structure influences transition state stability and catalysis per se.

RESULTS
effect of substrate concentration on the tsr
tsr analysis as implemented in present examples consists of a dual-substrate transport assay in which gaba and na compete for uptake at the gabp active site. therefore as a practical matter it is necessary to establish conditions under which an adequate signal may be obtained from both isotope channels. this can be accomplished empirically by mixing the labelled substrates in different proportions . in the range from 1– <dig> μm  the trading of na for gaba is expected to substantially alter the fraction of active sites occupied by gaba versus na nevertheless, it is clear that the calculated tsr parameter is indifferent to the precise substrate concentration ratio. moreover, at a fixed substrate ratio , the absolute substrate concentrations may also be varied over a wide range  without affecting the calculated tsr parameter .

although these data  indicate that there is great latitude in choosing substrate concentrations for tsr measurements, it is nevertheless pragmatic to select robust initial velocity conditions wherein the substrate concentration ratio is such that equal disintegration rates are seen in both isotope channels  when the control  transporter is studied. variant transporters, exhibiting relative increases or decreases in specificity for the two substrates, will then be easily visualized as an inequality between the disintegration rates seen in the two isotope channels .

effect of protein expression level on the tsr
when distinct transporter variants are studied, it frequently is the case that the strains will express the variants at distinct and unpredictable levels in the plasma membrane, complicating the interpretation of any observed differences in transport velocity. in order to discern how expression-level affects the tsr analysis, iptg was used to induce to differing levels the lac-controlled expression of the plasmid-borne gabp gene. growth in the presence of increasing iptg concentrations caused the uptake of na and gaba to increase in proportion to the gabp expression-level , which was monitored by immunoblot . although single-substrate uptake and expression varied over a 40-fold range, the calculated tsr parameter held steady , indicating that differing expression levels would have a minimal effect on results obtained by tsr analysis.

effect of assay end-point on the dual-substrate mole ratio
single-substrate transport velocities may be estimated from the slope of the initial-rate segment of an uptake time course . unlike single substrate uptakes, which are linearly affected by deviations from the intended stopping time, the dual-substrate "mole ratio" is time-independent across the linear range studied. thus, mechanical errors affecting the "stop-time" should be largely self-correcting. indeed, the red arrow  marks the position of an indeterminate error, wherein the single-substrate data points are off the curve suggested by the remaining data. this error is seen to "self-correct" in the dual-label "mole ratio" and tsr calculations , indicating that dual-label ratio parameters can be more reliably estimated than can single-substrate velocities. in fact, many errors in time and volume will "self-correct" in the tsr calculation .

assignment of tsr phenotypes to gabp variants
when assay conditions conform to recommendations , then transporters serving as the "parental control" will exhibit superimposed initial rate segments on the uptake time courses for accumulation of the  and  labels  <cit> . clearly, the gabp variants shown in figure  <dig> do not exhibit superimposed initial rate segments, indicating in a highly intuitive visual fashion that the tsr phenotype for these variants will differ from their respective parent transporters. compared to its cys-less parent , the single-cys variant, n302c, exhibits a relative increase in preference for na . compared to its wild type parent , the ins ala  <dig> variant  exhibits a relative increase in preference for gaba .

discussion
tsr phenotyping derives from a concrete definition of catalysis
in order to initiate development of a structure-function relationship for translocation catalysis by gabp  <cit> , it was useful to adopt a formalism that describes catalysis in concrete terms  <cit>  so that structural perturbations affecting catalysis might likewise be described in terms of a concrete  phenotype – the tsr. fundamental to tsr analysis is the notion that transport catalysts use substrate binding energy to lower the translocation energy barrier   <cit> . equation  <dig> states that the catalysed activation energy () is lower than the non-catalyzed activation energy () by an amount equal to the intrinsic substrate binding energy, Δgb .



importantly, equation  <dig>  tells us that to screen for changes in catalytic power  per se, one must find an easily measured signal that reports on changes in the intrinsic substrate binding energy  used to stabilize the transition state. that the transport specificity ratio  analysis fulfills this requirement may be shown as follows.

the michaelis-menten equation in two variables
the velocity  of a simple translocation reaction, carried out from solution , is governed by a second-order rate law , wherein the apparent second-order rate constant is k.

v = k     

free carrier and substrate  are dominant under non-saturating, second-order conditions , wherein the familiar michaelis-menten relationship  reduces to the form of a second-order rate law , and the apparent rate constant may be evaluated as k = kcat/km .





although equation  <dig> may appear to be a special case, it is actually a generally valid alternative form of the michaelis-menten equation that is little used because it contains two variables,  and . equation  <dig> is valid at all substrate concentrations, producing the same saturating substrate-velocity curve as equation  <dig> . the alternative michaelis-menten form turns out to be very useful for analysing the uptake of two labelled substrates that compete for transport at the same active site.

competing substrates equilibrate with the same free carrier concentration
consider the e. coli gabp exposed simultaneously to arbitrary concentrations of its transported substrates  <cit> , gaba and na. these competing substrates, present simultaneously in the same reaction vessel, will necessarily be in equilibrium with precisely the same concentration of free carrier , allowing algebraic elimination of   when a ratio is taken between two instances of equation  <dig> .



catalytic specificity reflects the translocation energy barrier height
that equation  <dig> contains the ratio of a pair of  values has two consequences. first, since  is formally a measure of catalytic specificity  <cit> , we may recast equation  <dig> succinctly in terms of the transport specificity ratio  parameter.



secondly, since  is an apparent rate constant , transition state theory holds that its value depends upon the height of the translocation energy barrier () as indicated by this logarithmic form of eyring's equation ,



wherein k is the boltzman constant, h is the planck constant, r is the gas constant, t is the absolute temperature, and a transmission coefficient of unity is assumed.

specificity ratios depend only upon intrinsic binding energy differences
if catalytic specificity  depends upon , then by implication the tsr must be related to the intrinsic substrate binding energy – as becomes evident when equations  <dig> and  <dig> are combined,



equation  <dig> shows that kcat/km  varies with the amount of transition state stabilization afforded by Δgb, which is the intrinsic substrate binding energy . taking the ratio between two instances of equation  <dig> , and combining terms, we obtain



equation  <dig> indicates that an experimentally observed change in the tsr parameter would require a change in the underlying intrinsic substrate binding energies that determine the relative height of the translocation energy barriers for two substrates competing at the same active site.

the tsr reflects a change in substrate affinity for the transition state
the tsr phenotype is a constant
unlike first-pass analytical methods that rely on the signal from one labelled substrate, the herein described dual-label analysis leads directly to the tsr parameter – a constant . constants are intrinsically stable and reliable, reflecting fundamental reaction characteristics that survive changes in ambient conditions . the unique stability and fundamental nature of the tsr phenotype will make it particularly valuable for first-pass analysis in high-throughput screening situations, wherein protein expression levels, duration of the initial rate time course, and degree of saturation by the chosen substrate concentration may be inconsistent across large numbers of transporter variants with differing functional characteristics. this reliability is demonstrated using the e. coli gaba permease  as a model translocation catalyst. overall the present study makes clear that the dual-label tsr analysis is insulated remarkably well from many uncontrolled variables that can often compromise the validity of assays that use a single label.

tsr analysis is valid at arbitrary site-saturation levels
why the deceptively simple tsr analysis should have broad applicability can be understood from further consideration of figure  <dig>  when substrate concentrations are varied, carrier saturation levels change, producing new complexes  in changing proportions. while manipulating these complexes affects single-substrate uptake velocities significantly , the tsr calculated from these velocities is unaffected because these particular complexes  never have a role in determining the equilibrium – energetic distance () – between the free reactants  and the transition state . this fundamental reality can also be appreciated from the perspective that under non-saturating conditions , there are no complexes to consider , and thus even complicated mechanisms reduce to the simple case  in which the reaction proceeds directly from the free reactants in solution to the transition state . thus, the simple second-order reaction scheme, c + s → products, will probably never be "too simple" for the purpose of performing the tsr analysis – even though complicated transport kinetics will feature many complexes that tsr analysis seems to ignore. in truth, the missing complexes are merely irrelevant  to the value of   since these complexes would always lie energetically between  the free reactants  and the transition state complex .

tsr reliability stems from self-correcting properties
it is worth mentioning that tsr analysis has "fool-proof" qualities that derive from its inherent insensitivity to several sources of error that can seriously compromise transport measurements that rely upon a single labelled substrate. tsr calculations may be expected to "self-correct" any sources of error that have proportionally the same effect on the measurement of both isotopes – for such errors cannot affect the isotope ratio used to calculate the tsr parameter.

in order to demonstrate the expression-independent nature of the tsr parameter, iptg was used to simulate the wide range of expression levels  that might be encountered in an uncharacterized collection of transporter variants. whereas the single-isotope signals  are seen to vary directly with gabp expression, the dual-isotope tsr phenotype  varies little. this expression-independent behaviour fully complies with theoretical expectations since  the carrier concentration was algebraically eliminated , and  tsr is a "constant" , reflecting fundamental molecular properties of carrier-substrate interaction that do not depend upon the number of carrier molecules expressed in the membrane. the ability to rapidly evaluate a tsr phenotype, formally an expression-independent constant, should be of considerable practical significance for high-throughput screening operations wherein carrier expression levels could be both highly variable and impractical to document in real-time.

since tsr phenotypes are expression-independent, structure-function information gleaned from a rapid first-pass screen will remain valid irrespective of results that might be obtained from a subsequent immunoblot analysis. immunoblots do not in any event determine ctotal in the sense desired for meaningful kinetic characterization, which assumes  that ctotal consists entirely of active molecules. the possibility of partial denaturation precludes assigning a molecular interpretation to shifts in either velocity or vmax. in contrast, tsr analysis is unaffected by the presence of inactive molecules, and theoretically will always report reliably on the innate specificity properties of the active site per se – even if the measured signal emanates from a minor fraction of the carrier molecules visualized on an immunoblot.

tsr analysis detects "relative" specificity shifts
the tsr method is inherently capable of detecting new phenotypes that reflect relative specificity shifts favouring either test substrate . preliminary to these experiments, dual-substrate ratios were empirically adjusted so that control strains would exhibit superimposed  and  initial rate segments in their uptake time course . plainly, the test cases in figure  <dig> do not exhibit superimposed dual-isotope time courses, indicating two distinct Δ phenotypes – one relatively favouring na , and the other relatively favouring gaba .

the Δ phenotypes illustrated in fig.  <dig> are distinct from one another  because there are relative differences in transition state binding energies  that can be visually represented as a change in the relative position of  the hypothetical binding isotherms for either substrate . it is important to emphasize, however, that tsr analysis does not address the absolute magnitude of transition state binding energy shifts, nor the absolute magnitude of shifts in the binding curve midpoint . this point is important, and can be illustrated by examining the implications of the figure  <dig> time courses in more detail.

calculated tsr values for the n302c and ins ala  <dig> variants are, respectively about  <dig>  and  <dig>  that these numbers are both greater than  <dig> indicates  that the hypothetical transition state binding isotherm for gaba would lie to the left  of the na curve in both variants. if the measured tsr had been unity, then the hypothetical binding curves would be superimposed. if the measured tsr had been below  <dig>  then the na binding isotherm would lie to the left. thus, the n302c time course with squares increasing faster than triangles  does not indicate an absolute preference favouring na over gaba, but rather a squeezing down of separation between midpoints on the hypothetical transition state binding isotherms for gaba and na . the ins ala  <dig> time course with triangles increasing faster than squares  indicates an increase in the separation between midpoints on the hypothetical binding isotherms .

although the ability to measure only relative changes in specificity has limitations, the reader will appreciate that to a mathematical certainty no relative shift can occur in the absence of one or more absolute shifts. tsr analysis thus provides an analytical keyhole through which to scan  <cit>  the protein fold, looking for Δ phenotypes indicative of loci at which transition state stability can be controlled by amino acid side-chain structure. this conclusion cuts directly to the essence of what a translocation catalyst does – fairly respectable performance for a first-pass, rapid-screening methodology, which minimally can consist of as little as a single datum point for each variant transporter screened.

it is to be noted that since absolute specificity changes can occur in the absence of a relative specificity shift , some catalytic residues may be detectable only by more complicated kinetic studies, or possibly through independent tsr experiments with structurally distinct substrate pairs. since the tsr parameter is a constant that characterizes how the transition state interacts with a particular pair of substrates, different results may be expected with structurally distinct substrate pairs. however, the observation of a Δ phenotype always means the same thing – there has been a change in the transition state stability for translocation of one or both substrates.

tsr analysis enables a broad search for the seat of catalytic power
apart from its delightful simplicity and self-correcting behaviour, the tsr  phenotypes) is also attractive as a facile means of expanding interest in "coupled promoting motions" that are networked together in support of catalysis  <cit> . such networks  are evolutionarily conserved,  undergo conformational oscillations on the timescale of  the catalyzed reaction, and  collectively can make million-fold contributions to catalytic specificity  even though their locations are spatially distant from the active site in enzymes of known structure . inasmuch as equation  <dig> says that specificity  is a function of transition state stabilization , phenotypic changes in the tsr phenotype should report on structural perturbations that compromise as yet undiscovered networks that couple energetically to the transition state.

inquiry along this line follows up on a prominent message emerging from recent literature on enzymatic catalysis: structural elements delocalized from the active site can enhance catalytic power  by many orders of magnitude  <cit>  – so that any understanding of enzymatic catalysis based on consideration of the active site in isolation may now be considered incomplete. this delocalization of catalytic power will in all likelihood be true of transport catalysis as well – but even more so since carriers lack a traditional active site . the catalytic power  of a carrier must therefore derive entirely from conformational motions that lead to tighter ligand binding in the transition state. this crucial catalytic increment in ligand binding energy could be localized within a binding pocket only to the extent that it is possible for a conformational transition to increase carrier-substrate complementarity without at the same time causing a change in conformational energy . if conformational energy changes as the transition state forms, then one expects obligatory partitioning of transition state binding energy among multiple interactions  at highly delocalized positions throughout the protein fold. since plasma membrane transport proteins consist mainly of bundled helices that exhibit rigid-body behaviour  <cit>  it is unlikely that conformational remodelling of helix-helix interfaces could occur without changing conformational energy. thus, localized control of translocation specificity  is also quite unlikely, and instead the determinants of specificity ought to be distributed rather broadly at dynamic interfaces throughout the helix-rich structure .

"alternating access" vitiates feasibility of localized specificity control
carrier proteins exhibit a compact tertiary structure in which tightly bundled helical segments span the membrane in a serpentine zig-zag fashion with extensive helix-helix contacts throughout  <cit> . the conformational transitions of "alternating access"  thus proceed with extensive rigid-body remodelling of helix-helix interfaces. at some point in the translocation process the initial michaelis complex  is converted to a transition state complex  with realization of additional binding energy , which creates catalysis. but what part of the protein structure may be held to account for this pro-catalytic increment in binding energy?

although not concerned with catalysis per se, tanford set down clear principles from which we can infer that the binding energy used for transition state stabilization should have two obligatory sources in a helix-rich translocation catalyst – one source being dynamic motions in the protein fold. tanford understood that with "...both translocation and change in chemical potential  occurring in synchrony ..."  <cit>  via helical tilts and twists, "it is not possible to separate free energy changes attributable to direct bonding to the proteins from free energy changes attributable to rearrangement of the protein structure that may accompany the binding process."  <cit> . indeed, benkovic's recent work on dihydrofolate reductase has provided the first visualization  of the dynamic processes by which spatially distal motions in the protein fold can be coupled synchronously with active site rearrangements to create greater transition state stability.

thus when distal, energy-changing, conformational motions occur in synchrony with  reconfiguration of the bound ligand , then delocalized contributions to transition state stability must occur. although the details may vary from case to case, the operable mechanisms will probably be conceptually similar to those that now have been visualized in dynamic simulations as "...coupled promoting motions extending throughout the protein and ligands, where promoting motions refer to equilibrium, thermally averaged conformational changes along the collective reaction coordinate leading to configurations conducive to the reaction."  <cit> .

importantly, the chance occurrence of a favourable dynamic coupling interaction would be accompanied by an evolutionarily selectable substrate specificity  shift, suggesting that delocalized coupled promoting motions should be the rule rather than the exception. engineered structural manipulations that interfere with the operation of coupled networks should impact kcat/km such that elements of these networks may be rapidly detectable by tsr analysis. such use of tsr analysis prompts re-examination of philosophical issues concerning the efficacy of mutagenesis in structure-function analysis.

the ambiguity of mutagenesis reflects a truth about catalysis
many, including this author, have cautioned that mutagenesis is associated with built-in thermodynamic constraints that produce confounding ambiguity when the stated desire is to use engineered structural perturbations as a means to identify residues of an active site  <cit> . however, it needs to be emphasized that nature, also bound by thermodynamic constraints, relies continuously upon natural selection, taking meaningful advantage of the same ambiguity that the structure-functionist traditionally bemoans. this thermodynamic ambiguity provides that spontaneous mutations affecting structure at locations spatially distinct from the active site may nevertheless have pro-catalytic or anti-catalytic effects that become subject to natural selection. the evolutionary accumulation and coupling together of such pro-catalytic sites has produced now recognizable "networks of coupled promoting motions" that exist far from the active site, yet operate in synchrony with it to promote catalysis  <cit> .

that catalysis  <cit>  and energy transduction  <cit>  appear to rely upon coupled motions in the protein fold raises a question as to whether the structure-function field might benefit from a change in its outlook on the ambiguous characteristics of mutagenesis, henceforth treating ambiguity as a friend that can reveal the location of coupled networks. widely perceived as a shortcoming, this ambiguity turns out to be an accurate reflection of how nature uses the protein fold to boost catalytic power. it simply is not the case that a kcal of transition state stabilization emanating from a few residues in the active site is worth  more than a kcal of transition state stabilization emanating from the protein fold.

CONCLUSIONS
tsr analysis is a remarkably simple dual-substrate competition assay used to define the tsr phenotype of a translocation catalyst. the tsr phenotype is highly reliable because the tsr parameter is a constant, which renders its value independent of several common variables that, particularly in high-throughput screening, may be poorly controlled or only roughly estimated. a change in the tsr phenotype requires an underlying change in transition state stability  for one or both of the competing substrates. tsr-scanning mutagenesis is thus expected to identify positions in the protein fold that make contributions to transition state stabilization . the technical simplicity of tsr analysis should enable broad testing of the hypothesis that in carrier proteins the seat of catalytic power will be delocalized along helix-helix interfaces that dynamically enhance structural stability by remodelling in synchrony with transition state formation, thereby promoting translocation catalysis in a manner analogous to recently described networks of coupled promoting motions that allow dynamic interactions in the protein fold to enhance transition state stability in enzymatic catalysis  <cit> .

