BACKGROUND
buoyant gas vesicles are prokaryotic organelles that are widely distributed among bacterial and archaeal microorganisms and constitute protein nanoparticles  that may be engineered for biotechnological applications  <cit> . these organelles naturally promote flotation and increase the availability of light and oxygen to many aquatic microorganisms, especially those with photosynthetic or phototrophic capabilities. water is excluded from the interior, a property that is thought to be a consequence of the hydrophobicity of the interior surface of the proteinaceous membrane. while the exact protein composition of the membrane has been difficult to ascertain due to its extreme stability against solubilization, production of these structures is easily scaled-up and they are simple to purify by hypotonic lysis of the host and concentrate by flotation, enhancing their intrinsic value for biotechnological applications  <cit> .

genetic analysis established the importance of a gene cluster  for gas vesicle formation in large plasmids of extremely halophilic archaea    <cit> . in halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  the gene cluster was found on a 191 kb plasmid, pnrc <dig>  with transcription of gvpacno oriented rightward, transcription of gvpdefghijklm oriented leftward, and divergent promoters located in the 201 bp gvpa-d intergenic region. mutants constructed with interruptions in each of the gvp genes by a kanamycin cassette  exhibited a partially or completely gas vesicle-deficient phenotype, indicating that all of the gvp genes are necessary for wild-type gas vesicle formation  <cit> . this genetic system utilized the natural gas vesicle-deficient mutant strain sd <dig>  with a complete deletion of the gvp gene cluster, and pfm104d, a large  halobacterium-e. coli shuttle plasmid containing the entire  <dig>  kbp gvp gene cluster  <cit> .

the protein composition of gas vesicle nanoparticles has been studied primarily by western blotting analysis using antisera directed against individual gvp gene products  <cit> . initially, only gvpa and gvpc proteins were found  <cit> , but further analysis showed the presence of five additional proteins, gvpf, gvpg, gvpj, gvpl, and gvpm  <cit> . gvpa, j, and m constitute a small family of proteins  likely involved in gas vesicle membrane formation, while gvpf and l are coiled-coil proteins  with self-associative properties thought to be important for nucleation or growth of the nanoparticles  <cit> . most of these proteins  were also identified in a recent proteomic study  <cit> . in genome sequencing studies, genes corresponding to these same proteins were also found in other gas vesicle-forming microbes  <cit> . an exception was the gvpc gene, which was reported only in the haloarchaeal and cyanobacterial gas vesicle producers.

in halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  the gvpc gene encodes a hydrophilic protein with a predicted molecular weight of  <dig>  and a highly acidic pi of only  <dig>   <cit> . in this haloarchaeon, the gvpc protein sequence contains  <dig> imperfect repeats and an extremely acidic stretch located near the c-terminus. the slight similarity of the haloarchaeal repeats to the repeats in the cyanobacteria suggested that the gvpc proteins play similar roles in both haloarchaea and cyanobacteria  <cit> . in the cyanobacterium, anabaena flos-aquae, gvpc has been shown to serve a strengthening role in gas vesicles  <cit> , while in halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  insertion mutations in the gvpc gene generated vesicles with altered shape and size  <cit> . these findings suggested that gvpc proteins facilitate gas vesicles’ growth and enhance stability in strains which produce them.

the potential value of gvpc protein for bioengineering floating gvnps was established during mutagenesis of the gvp gene cluster from halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  a gvpc::κ insertion mutant was found to produce primarily spindle-shaped gas vesicles with smaller than wild-type size  and excision of most of the κ insert resulted in the production of vesicles with a peptide fused to gvpc protein that was antigenically displayed and immunologically accessible on the surface  <cit> . further studies with siv and chlamydial proteins have shown that bioengineered gvnps may be used for antigen display and elicit both humoral and cellular responses in mice  <cit> .

the genetic system currently in use for bioengineering of gas vesicle nanoparticles is technically challenging due to the large size and complexity of the gvp gene cluster  <cit> . in order to facilitate bioengineering of nanoparticles, we constructed a new halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig> derived host strain and a series of smaller, more versatile plasmid expression vectors. the work documented in this report establishes a significantly improved genetic system for expression of gvpc-fusion proteins, including an active luciferase enzyme from gaussia princeps <cit> .

RESULTS
construction of a halobacterium Δgvpc strain and gvpc expression vectors
in order to improve the genetic system for bioengineering of gvnps  <cit> , our first goal was the construction of a gvpc deletion strain, via the ura3-based gene deletion method for halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  <cit> . approximately 500-bp flanking regions of gvpc, including the first and last few codons of gvpc, were cloned into the suicide vector, pbb <dig>  <cit> , and the resulting plasmid, pbb400Δgvpc, was used to transform halobacterium sp. nrc-1Δura <dig>  after selecting sequentially for integration and excision , the resulting halobacterium sp. nrc-1Δura3Δgvpc deletion strain   showed a partially gas vesicle-deficient phenotype with small, largely spindle-shaped gas vesicles, similar to that reported for a gvpc::κ insertion mutant .

to further develop the expression system and test for complementation of the Δgvpc strain, we constructed a gvpc expression vector series . as the backbone, we used pmc <dig>  an expression plasmid with the high-level cold-inducible cspd <dig> promoter, and the ability for replication and selection in both e. coli and halobacterium, recently constructed for investigation of a β-galactosidase protein from a related haloarchaeon  <cit> . the β-galactosidase gene was excised and replaced with an adapter containing a start codon, a hexahistidine-tag , and unique restriction sites for insertion of the foreign genes, resulting in the plasmid park . a series of pcr amplified gvpc gene fragments were then inserted into the unique aflii and avrii sites in the adapter region of park to construct the park-c plasmid series containing various regions of gvpc .

engineering of the gvpc gene and expression of gvpc fragments
to determine the effect of gvpc length on production and bioengineering of gvnps, we transformed each member of the park-c plasmid series coding n-terminal regions of gvpc into the Δgvpc strain. park-c <dig> contained  <dig> amino acids of gvpc, park-c <dig> contained  <dig> amino acids, park-c <dig> contained  <dig> amino acids, and park-c <dig> plasmid and the wild-type strain contained the complete  <dig> amino acid gvpc sequence . when the phenotype of the Δgvpc  transformants were compared to the parental Δgvpc and ∆ura <dig> strains, increasing opacity resulting from increasing gas vesicle content was observed in the following order: Δgvpc < Δgvpc  < Δgvp  < Δgvpc  ≈ Δgvpc  ≈ ∆ura <dig> . these findings indicated lower quantities of gas vesicle formation in strains expressing smaller fragments of gvpc and higher quantities in strains expressing larger gvpc fragments or the complete gvpc protein.

to examine the morphology of gvnps in Δgvpc and derivative Δgvpc  strains, we treated cells to hypotonic conditions for lysis and purified nanoparticles by centrifugally accelerated flotation . the vesicle preparations were spread for electron microscopy and stained with uranyl acetate, and observed as either spindle-shaped or cylindrical-shaped structures. a representative number of gvnps were measured, confirming that nanoparticles from the parental Δgvpc strain were smaller and more spindle-shaped, as previously observed for the gvpc::κ mutant, compared to the parental Δura <dig> strain. the mean length and width of gvnps  were proportional to the size of gvpc gene fragment in park-c <dig>  c <dig>  and c <dig> , and were intermediate compared to the Δgvpc  and Δura <dig>  strains. expression of larger gvpc proteins generally resulted in production of longer and wider gas vesicles.

western blotting analysis was used to localize gvpc protein and n-terminal fragments expressed from the park-c plasmid series in Δgvpc transformants. for this analysis, confluent lawns of cells were grown and lysed by hypotonic lysis. gas vesicle nanoparticles were collected after low-speed centrifugally accelerated flotation and electrophoresed on sds-polyacrylamide gels. after transfer, rabbit antisera directed against either the his-tag incorporated at the n-terminal region of gvpc , or a synthetic gvpc peptide , were used in western blotting analysis. the western blots showed gvpc proteins of expected sizes  localized to cell lysates  and floating gas vesicle nanoparticles . as previously reported for the gvpc protein, the apparent protein sizes were significantly larger than predicted from molecular weight standards, due to its high acidity  <cit> .

luciferase expression and display on gas vesicles
in order to determine whether gvnps produced in the Δgvpc strain can be bioengineered to display foreign proteins, we expressed a synthetic luciferase gene from the marine copepod gaussia princeps fused to the gvpc gene or its n-terminal fragments  <cit> . codons in the synthetic luciferase gene were optimized to reflect usage in halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  <cit>  and the gene was inserted into the park-c plasmid series via an engineered afei site to produce gvpc-luciferase gene fusions . in order to increase the level of expression, the cspd <dig> promoter was replaced by the stronger gvpa promoter  <cit> , recently used to bioengineer extremely radiation resistant derivatives of halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  <cit> , via the kpni and ndei sites . each member of the constructed plasmid series, named pdrk-c1-l to pdrk-c4-l , was then transformed into both wild-type nrc- <dig> and Δgvpc strains, transformants were grown as lawns on agar plates and lysed hypotonically, and the gvnps purified by centrifugally accelerated flotation. to determine whether luciferase was bound to the floating gvnps, chemiluminescence activity was compared between the subnatant and the floating gvnp fraction. the results showed that gvpc-luciferase fusion protein was bound to gvnps and was enzymatically active . higher levels of activity were observed for the fusion proteins with longer gvpc-fragments or the entire gvpc protein  compared to the shorter fragments  .

interestingly, when members of the pdrk-c-l plasmid series were transformed into halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  which contains a wild-type gvpc gene, nanoparticles containing engineered gvpc-luciferase proteins were also detectable by luciferase activity  and western blotting assays . although higher levels of luciferase activity were observed bound to floating gas vesicle nanoparticles in the Δgvpc  strains compared to the nrc- <dig>  strains, luciferase activity was clearly measurable in nanoparticles in the transformed wild-type strain . moreover, the wild-type gvpc protein was also detected bound to gvnps in the nrc- <dig>  strains , indicating that two different gvpc forms may be simultaneously bound to the nanoparticles. these results extend the possible biotechnological uses of gvnps to other applications requiring nanoparticle-bound enzymes and multivalency.

discussion
we have established an improved genetic system for bioengineering of gvnps in the model halophilic archaeon, halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  a strain deleted for the gvpc gene and plasmid vectors containing highly active promoters for producing gvpc-fusion proteins were constructed. the system was tested by expressing the entire gvpc gene, n-terminal portions of gvpc gene fragments, and gvpc-luciferase fusion proteins, all of which bound to the buoyant nanoparticles. the improved genetic engineering system provides the opportunity for insertion of multiple foreign sequences and the potential for production of gvnps displaying multiple antigens. the work reported here represents a significant step forward in demonstrating the bioengineering capabilities of gvnps, including their application to antigen display and vaccine development.

the current work has capitalized on the halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig> genetic system and recently constructed expression plasmids  <cit> . these biotechnological tools have been used to overexpress, purify, and characterize a polyextremophilic β-galactosidase enzyme from an antarctic haloarchaeon, and bioengineer resistance of haloarchaeal cells to ionizing radiation by overexpression of a mammalian-type rpa protein  <cit> . the constructed expression plasmids  contain the high-copy number halobacterium sp. pgrb miniplasmid for replication and the mevinolin resistance gene for selection in haloarchaea, as well as the plasmid puc <dig> vector for replication and selection in the e. coli host. the park expression plasmids contain the cspd <dig> promoter while the pdrk expression plasmids contain the gvpa promoter. both of these promoters were reported to drive expression of genes inducible under cold temperatures  <cit> . the park and pdrk plasmids were tailored for expression of gvpc fusion proteins and represent convenient vectors for production of bioengineered gvnps.

our gvnp-bioengineering and expression system exploits genetic properties of the halobacterium sp. nrc-1Δgvpc deletion strain and recombinant capabilities of the gvpc gene from halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig> pnrc <dig> plasmid  <cit> . the Δgvpc deletion strain, constructed using our ura3-deletion method  <cit> , contained gas vesicles with smaller, more spindle-shaped vesicles observable by transmission electron microscopy. this finding is consistent with earlier observations suggesting a key role for gvpc protein in shape determination of gas vesicles in haloarchaea  <cit> . as larger gvpc protein variants were supplied via expression plasmids, we observed generally longer and wider vesicles, suggesting that the nanoparticles were increasingly strengthened. similar results were also obtained for some cyanobacteria, where a strengthening role for the gvpc protein was reported  <cit> . in one study, a. flos-aquae gvpc protein produced in e. coli could bind and strengthen the structures after native gvpc protein had been removed by urea treatment. gvpc genes have been reported in most if not all gas vesicle-containing haloarchaea and cyanobacteria, indicating that the protein may serve similar functions in these two groups of aquatic microorganisms. however, gvpc is reportedly absent in other gvp gene-containing species, a finding suggesting that it may not be absolutely essential for biosynthesis of gas vesicles  <cit> .

an interesting feature of the gvpc protein is the presence of internal repeats   <cit> . our results show that even a small subset of these repeats in truncated variants of gvpc proteins is sufficient to permit binding to gvnps. in the park-c <dig> construct, only  <dig> copies are present, while in park-c <dig>  there are  <dig>  both of these plasmids produced proteins that bound to the vesicles. the longer gvpc variants produced from park-c <dig> and c <dig> , complemented production of the nanoparticles considerably better than the smaller gvpc proteins, based on both colony phenotype and vesicle morphology. similar conclusions were previously reported for a. flos-aquae gvpc protein variants containing three or four repeats  in in vitro experiments  <cit> . in this cyanobacterial system, gvpc depleted vesicles had their strength better restored with proteins containing larger numbers of repeats. in halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  the presence of a highly acidic c-terminal region suggests a further role for this feature in stabilizing gas vesicles, likely reflecting the high salinity found in the cytoplasm.

we used a synthetic gaussia princeps luciferase gene to further assess the binding of gvpc fusion proteins to gas vesicles. initially, we found that the luciferase protein was active when produced in halobacterium via expression vectors alone  or as a fusion with the gvpc fragments or full-length protein, demonstrating that the marine enzyme was capable of adopting an active structure even after exposure to the hypersaline cytoplasm of halobacterium. further investigation showed that the gvpc-luciferase fusion proteins were bound to buoyant gas vesicles, confirming that the enzyme is likely displayed on the surface of nanoparticles. although antigenic proteins and protein fragments have been previously found to be displayed on gas vesicles, these findings now show that an enzyme may also decorate the nanoparticles while retaining its catalytic activity. moreover, when two different gvpc genes  were present, we found that both gvpc forms were bound to the nanoparticles. these results extend the possible biotechnological uses of gvnps to applications requiring multivalency.

all together, our results provide improved genetic and plasmid resources for engineering of gvnps for biotechnological applications. the original system described required the incorporation of target genes into a large plasmid containing the entire gvp gene cluster, pfm104d, and a natural mutant strain deleted for the gene cluster, sd <dig>  <cit> . the newly described system utilizes the much smaller and more versatile plasmid series, park and pdrk, containing a relatively small portion of the gvp gene region. the new system allows more facile cloning of genes of interest into the smaller expression vectors and replacement of only a single deleted gene  in the gvp gene cluster. these features will greatly facilitate expression of foreign proteins in gvnps, including antigenic proteins from pathogenic microorganisms for vaccine development.

CONCLUSIONS
gas vesicle nanoparticles  in the halophilic archaeon, halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  are successfully being used for antigen display and vaccine development. the genetic tools for bioengineering gvnps have now been greatly improved through construction of a halobacterium strain deleted for the gvpc gene and smaller plasmids for expression of foreign proteins fused to gvpc proteins. the utility of the improved system has been demonstrated by expression of an active gaussia princeps luciferase enzyme fused to gvpc and bound to buoyant gas vesicles. these results establish a significantly improved genetic system for displaying foreign proteins on gvnps and extend the bioengineering potential of these novel nanoparticles to catalytically active enzymes.

