BACKGROUND
after being discovered by barbara mcclintock in the 1940’s, transposable elements  were long viewed as integral constituents of the so-called “junk-dna”  <cit> . these genomic regions were generally considered to represent non-coding, non-functional sequences. in the past ~20 years, however, the view of transposons has changed dramatically and they have made a comeback into the spotlights. te’s are now thought to be the most important drivers of genome evolution, since they are thought to be responsible for a plethora of ways to influence genes, gene expression, and genome structure  <cit> . te’s have contributed substantially to the protein coding capacity of their host genomes through the incorporation of transposon genes sequences into functional host genes  <cit> . in plants, a good example of molecular domestication of a transposase gene concerns the far1/fhy <dig> gene-family. this transcription factor gene family is evolutionary derived from the transposase gene of a mule-type dna transposon, but is now involved in the far-red light response  <cit> . dna transposons code for transposases that can recognize and excise the entire element from the genome in a cut-paste fashion. it is assumed that genes in the far1/fhy <dig> family have evolved to encode proteins which use the dna-binding capacity to control gene expression  <cit> . many genes in various genomes have been uncovered over the years that are the result of molecular domestication of transposase genes  <cit> . daysleeper was described in  <dig> as the first essential transposase-derived gene in arabidopsis  <cit> . daysleeper structurally resembles a hat transposase. daysleeper was identified by its ability to bind the promoter of the dna-damage response gene ku <dig> in vitro and is thought to influence transcription of other genes  <cit> . daysleeper harbors an arginine and lysine-rich nuclear localization signal , “krrkkkk”, and was found to mainly be nuclear localized in arabidopsis protoplasts. the nls is followed by a bed-type zinc finger and  <dig> identifiable hat blocks , but lacks the amino acids essential for mobility  <cit> . hat blocks d, e and f make up a hat dimerization domain  <cit> . these hat blocks are defining characteristics of hat transposases in all species, although not all transposases possess all six blocks  <cit> . daysleeper is most likely derived from the ac cluster elements within the hat family  <cit> . daysleeper-like genes have been identified in various species, ranging from basal angiosperms to dicotyledonous species. these so-called sleeper-genes possess three conserved sleepermotifs, of which the third overlaps largely with hat block e  <cit> .

here, we investigated the expression pattern of daysleeper, assessed functional complementation of the daysleeper phenotype with different deletions of the daysleeper coding sequence and studied its cellular localization in planta using fluorescent protein fusions.

RESULTS
daysleeper expression
to analyze the expression pattern of the daysleeper gene, qrt-pcr was performed to measure daysleeper transcript levels. daysleeper expression was found in all tissues analyzed. expression levels were set against the expression levels found in material from one-week-old whole seedlings, using β -6-tubulin as a control . relative expression in seedlings was  <dig> times higher as compared to leaf tissue of 4-week-old plants. expression in stem tissue was low. higher expression was found in flowers and developing siliques . to obtain a more detailed expression pattern, promoter-reporter constructs were created and studied in planta. analysis of plant lines containing a  <dig>  kb stretch of dna directly upstream of the daysleeper start codon, including the 5′ utr, fused to a mgfp5:gusa gene-construct , showed that the daysleeper promoter was most active in the root apical meristem, secondary root meristems and the root central stele . in the upper part of the seedling, expression was found in the shoot meristem and the embryonic cotyledons . as the plant developed, expression was found mainly in proliferating tissues. strong expression was found in the developing flower bud . the developing pistil and the anthers displayed high expression levels as the flower developed . in the anthers, expression diminished as the flower reached full maturation . the expression in the pistil initially was rather uniform, but after fruit initiation was exclusively localized in developing seeds at later stages . in mature siliques and seeds no expression activity was observed anymore . no difference in the pattern of gusa expression was detected between plants containing the 1 kb or  <dig>  kb daysleeper upstream sequence fragments, although expression levels in plants containing the 1 kb promoter fragment seemed higher overall .

daysleeper localization
complementation of daysleeper with fluorescent protein fusion constructs
gfp:daysleeper:ha and daysleeper:yfp:ha harboring plants were created in a daysleeper  heterozygous background. these fusion proteins were expressed under control of the native daysleeper promoter, including the 5′ utr. the gfp:daysleeper:ha construct was able to complement the daysleeper phenotype and fully restore the wild-type phenotype in the next generation, whereas the daysleeper phenotype could not be restored by the daysleeper:yfp:ha construct. plant tissues were observed using confocal microscopy to study daysleeper localization in planta. gfp:daysleeper:ha was found in the nucleus of all cells of the plants . due to the depicted focal plane, figure 3b and c do not show a nuclear signal for every cell, but nuclear signals were observed in all cells. in the elongation zone of the root and the root-tip, a cytoplasmic localization was also observed  in both primary and secondary roots. these fluorescent signals were present in vesicle-like structures, which partly overlapped with the staining pattern of the membrane-specific fluorescent dye fm4- <dig>   <cit> . this was most pronounced in the epidermis of the root.

daysleeper localizes to multivesicular bodies, late endosomes and the trans-golgi network
n-terminal tagrfp- or cerulean- tagged daysleeper fluorescent fusions were expressed under control of the strong camv 35s promoter in arabidopsis protoplasts. we found that they localize in nuclei in all protoplasts, as expected from previous experiments  <cit> , but also in multi-vesicular structures  and smaller vesicular structures  in 32% of protoplasts . to further investigate the observed vesicular localization of fluorescent daysleeper fusion proteins, we used fluorescent marker constructs for different vesicular organelles. since we found that daysleeper interacts with a subunit of the escrtiii machinery , we suspected daysleeper localization to be in late endosomes and multi-vesicular bodies . in order to verify this localization, co-expression was analyzed in protoplasts in which the snx <dig>  syp <dig> and rha <dig> genes were expressed tagged with a different fluorescent protein. syp <dig> and snx <dig> are both found in the trans-golgi network, but snx <dig> localizes to sorting endosomes as well  <cit> . rha <dig> localizes to late endosomes and mvb’s  <cit> . daysleeper-containing multivesicular structures are sometimes also positive for snx <dig>  which appears to be on the outer membrane of the multivesicular structure, while the daysleeper fusion protein seems to be internalized . for syp <dig> and rha <dig> colocalization with daysleeper-fusion constructs we observed similar patterns. we found vesicles that contained two fluorescent constructs,  but the majority of vesicles were positive only for either the daysleeper-fusion protein or the marker gene. we propose that daysleeper-fusion proteins accumulate in larger vesicular structures, which are most likely mvbs .

daysleeper structure
daysleeper can homodimerize through its hat-dimerization domain
six conserved motifs of amino acid sequences, so-called hat-blocks, have been found that are characteristic for hat transposases in different species   <cit> . ac-elements do not always possess all hat-blocks; about 50% contain blocks a, b and/or c and about 75% contains blocks d, e and/or f  <cit> . daysleeper contains signatures of all blocks, although hat block b is somewhat different from the reported consensus  <cit> . in daysleeper, this  <dig> amino acid  sequence lacks a histidine at position  <dig>  as well as the asparagine and leucine at position  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . the highly conserved tryptophan at position  <dig> is replaced by a leucine in daysleeper. block f  is clearly identifiable, but the first  <dig> aa’s of this sequence are different from the consensus sequence. of these six blocks, named a to f, hat block d, e and f make up a dimerization domain in transposases. since these blocks are largely conserved in daysleeper, we tested if daysleeper is able to dimerize via bimolecular fluorescence complementation   <cit> . we created an n-terminal fusion of daysleeper fused to the n-terminal part of yfp  and a c-terminal fusion of daysleeper fused to the c-terminal half of yfp    <cit> . co-transformation of these constructs , both controlled by the strong camv 35s promoter, resulted in fluorescence reconstitution of yfp in arabidopsis protoplasts . a fluorescent signal was exclusively found in the nucleus. we also tested interaction of yc:daysleeper and yn:daysleeper. in this case localization was observed in the nucleus, but also in vesicular structures . however this combination produced a signal only in a few non typical-cells, irrespective of the transformation efficiency of protoplasts. constructs did not display fluorescence on their own, or in combination with a non-fused split-yfp moiety. this shows that daysleeper is able to dimerize. to test whether the hat-blocks d, e and f were indeed responsible for dimerization, we co-transformed protoplasts with a yn:daysleeper construct and a Δ478- <dig> daysleeper:yc construct. the shortened version of daysleeper lacks a large part of its c-terminus . although some background fluorescence can be observed, we were not able to find a reconstituted yfp signal in these experiments , indicating that the c-terminal hat blocks d,e and f are indeed responsible for homodimerization.

full-length daysleeper coding sequence is required for complemention of the daysleeper phenotype
in order to study the biological function of different regions of the daysleeper coding sequence in vivo, complementation was attempted of daysleeper mutant plants with  <dig> different deletion versions of the daysleeper coding sequence . all shortened coding sequences  were preceded by the native upstream sequence of daysleeper, including the 5′ utr. plants heterozygous for an insertion in daysleeper were transformed with pearleygate <dig> vectors with pdaysleeper::Δ1- <dig> daysleeper:ha, pdaysleeper::Δ149- <dig> daysleeper:ha or pdaysleeper::Δ478- <dig> daysleeper:ha constructs . progeny  was grown on double selection: sulfadiazine for selection of the t-dna insert in the daysleeper gene and ppt for selection of the construct with the shortened daysleeper gene. presence of the complementing construct in each line was confirmed by pcr on genomic dna. resistant seedlings were grown to maturity and progeny of these plants  were grown on double selection again. amongst the t <dig> progeny grown on double selection were in all cases , still plantlets with the daysleeper phenotype . therefore, we have to conclude that none of the three constructs can complement for the absence of an intact daysleeper gene. this indicates that all three regions deleted in the three partial daysleeper versions, the n-terminus, the central part and the c-terminus are essential for its function.

daysleeper’s n-terminus is essential for nuclear localization
full-length and shortened versions of daysleeper  were fused to the fluorophore cerulean  and were transformed into protoplasts . localization of daysleeper with central  and c-terminal  deletions were similar to the localization of fluorescent fusions of full-length daysleeper , whereas the n-terminal truncated construct  never showed a nuclear signal and was uniformly localized in the cytosol . the lack of a nuclear signal is in line with the location of the proposed nls, discussed in the first paragraph, which is missing in the Δ1- <dig> deleted protein.

discussion
we found that daysleeper is predominantly expressed in proliferating tissues . this is in concordance with the important role that daysleeper has in development and the retarded growth and flower phenotype of plants overexpressing daysleeper <cit> . we used  <dig>  kb of sequence immediately preceding the start-codon of the daysleeper gene to drive the expression of the gusa-gene . we also used shorter  and longer  stretches, but these results were comparable to the data shown in figure  <dig> .

daysleeper does not seem to possess any known protein domains other than those also found in hat transposases. although daysleeper thus seems very similar to canonical hat transposases, it must be noted that hat blocks are rather loosely defined. daysleeper contains the signatures of these blocks, but few conclusions about function can be drawn from this, since the blocks are defined on the basis of homology and not functionality  <cit> . however, blocks d, e and f have been found to be necessary for dimerization, which makes it likely that daysleeper would also be able to form dimers. we have shown in this manuscript in bifc experiments that daysleeper indeed forms homodimers .

the localization of daysleeper was studied by fusion of the protein to fluorescent proteins. it appeared that the localization of daysleeper partially depended on whether the fluorescent moiety was fused to its c- or n-terminus. when the fluorescent moiety was fused to the c-terminus of daysleeper, an exclusive nuclear localization was observed in contrast to n-terminally tagged daysleeper fusion-proteins, which showed both a nuclear and a vesicular localization. the n-terminal part containing a putative nuclear localization sequence turned out to be responsible for the nuclear localization as tagged constructs lacking this part of daysleeper showed a cytoplasmic localization. although we did find a few cells expressing the n-terminal fluorescent-tagged Δ1- <dig> daysleeper fusion-protein, the majority of cells died after transformation indicative of the toxicity of this particular fusion protein. the c-terminally fluorescent-tagged Δ1- <dig> daysleeper fusion-protein did not display this toxicity. although this protein showed a cytoplasmic localization, it was not localized in vesicular structures, . this might hint to a role of a free c-terminus of the protein in vesicular localization. dimerization of daysleeper was observed in nuclei of protoplasts. when using two n-terminal-tagged constructs also a vesicular localization was seen, again indicating the importance of a free c-terminus for the vesicular localization. however, there was no difference detectable in localization between n- or c-terminal-tagged fusion proteins in planta. these constructs seemed to be localized similarly; in the nucleus and in vesicular structures. c-terminal tagged daysleeper appeared non-functional, since it did not complement the daysleeper phenotype. we presume that the difference in localization found in protoplasts are due to the fact that the studied proteins were expressed at a much higher level than is the case in planta, where daysleeper-constructs were expressed under control of the native daysleeper-promoter.

a partially extranuclear localization was unexpected in light of daysleeper’s structure and suspected functionality. the protein was shown to bind to dna suggesting that daysleeper plays a role in the nucleus, as was found for most domesticated transposases  <cit> . we speculate therefore that daysleeper is to some extent transported out of the nucleus by an interaction partner. we have found that daysleeper can bind arabidopsis homologs of the escrtiii machinery subunit vps <dig> . the escrtiii machinery is highly conserved and its main function is to snare off vesicles from membranes. we speculate that daysleeper’s binding to vps2-homologs in arabidopsis might facilitate the translocation of daysleeper from the nucleus to vesicles. vps <dig>  has recently been shown to be partially localized to nuclei in arabidopsis roots  <cit> . further studies will have to reveal the functional implications of this interaction. based on our co-localization experiments , we speculate that daysleeper is transported from the nucleus through the trans-golgi network and targeted to mvb’s and late endosomes. we were not able to definitively show colocalization of mvb’s with daysleeper using our marker gene set, although in figure 4a multi-vesicular structures can be seen, that are not stained by snx <dig> and therefore might be mvb’s. future analysis of localization should discern the precise nature of daysleeper localization, by analyzing constructs in planta, instead of in a semi-artificial protoplast system.

CONCLUSIONS
daysleeper is a predominantly nuclear protein that is expressed mainly in meristems, developing flowers and fruits. it is able to dimerize, most likely enabled by its hat transposase-like dimerization domain. although nuclear in most cells, vesicular localization was observed in root-tips and in protoplasts. we hypothesize that the n-terminal “krrkkkk” nuclear localization motif of daysleeper is responsible for its nuclear localization, and that interaction with other factors allows it to be present outside the nucleus. we propose daysleeper’s vesicular localization is situated in the trans-golgi network, late endosomes and mvbs.

