BACKGROUND
gene expression in eukaryotes is regulated on two different levels, i.e. individual gene level and regional level in the genome. the best studied, and generally considered the major level of regulation, is the regulation at the level of individual genes. although a number of well studied exceptions have identified a number of tightly co-regulated gene clusters, such as the globin, mhc and the hox gene gene clusters  <cit> , the common model for eukaryotic gene transcription involves the binding of several transcription factors  to promoter regions and enhancers, resulting in activation of the individual genes. it has become increasingly evident that in addition to gene regulation by tf binding to regulatory sequences, eukaryotic gene expression is also regulated at a higher level, and several studies have demonstrated the dependency of gene expression on the location of the gene within the genome  <cit> .

over the past years, the relationship between gene transcription and chromosomal location has been studied in a number of different vertebrate genomes. analysis of the human transcriptome map based on sage  data from  <dig> human tissues  <cit>  revealed the clustering of highly expressed genes within specific chromosomal regions; these regions were termed "ridges", or "regions of increasedgene expression". genomic regions containing genes expressed at much lower levels were termed anti-ridges, and these regions exhibit characteristics opposite those of ridges  <cit> . a similar region-wide regulation of gene expression was later reported in the drosophila genome  <cit> . ridges were also found in the mouse genome  <cit>  and are reported to be relatively conserved between the mouse and human genome  <cit> . a later study  <cit>  showed gene expression to be regulated at a region-wide level in the human genome. insertion of green fluorescent protein  reporter constructs at  <dig> different chromosomal positions in the human genome showed that gene transcription was regulated through a novel region-wide regulatory mechanism as well as via specific transcription factors, thereby demonstrating dual mechanisms in the regulation of gene transcription.

regional differences in gene expression have been found in two distinct clades  of the metazoan phylogeny, suggesting a common mechanism of regulation of transcription in all animals. other characteristics of eukaryotic genomes such as gene density and recombination have also been implied to exhibit domain-like features  <cit> . in addition, levels of gene expression have been found to correlate with time of chromatin replication during the cell cycle, i.e. the early replication of actively expressed regions of the genome  <cit> . striking in this respect is the observed location of gene-dense and highly expressed chromosomes towards the center of the nucleus and the location of gene-poor and weakly expressed chromosomes towards the nuclear envelope in both human  <cit>  and chicken cells  <cit> . furthermore, in chicken, this spatial organization seems to correlate with chromosome size  <cit> .

the chicken genome sequence, published in  <dig>  was the first non-mammalian amniote genome to become available  <cit> ; its karyotype  consists of  <dig> autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes, with the female being the heterogametic sex . thus far, there are  <dig> known chromosomes assembled in the chicken genome, including six macro-chromosomes , five intermediate-chromosomes  and twenty micro-chromosomes   <cit> . the existence of micro-chromosomes is one of the interesting features of the chicken genome  <cit> , micro-chromosomes are also found in some primitive amphibians  <cit>  and most reptiles  <cit> . besides the huge differences on sizes, microchromosomes also exhibit higher gene density, smaller gene size, and higher recombination rates compared with those in macrochromosomes  <cit> . as the best-studied bird genome currently available, and the closest sequenced genome relative to mammals, the chicken genome is an important resource for comparative genomics, including comparative studies on gene transcription.

to investigate regional effects on transcription in birds, we analyzed chicken gene expression data across a number of different tissues to address three major questions:  if there are regional differences in the regulation of transcription in the chicken genome,  if these regions are conserved during evolution, and  the characteristics of these genomic regions in the chicken.

RESULTS
gene expression data
eight different chicken tissues were used for the analysis of whole genome gene expression profiles using chicken  <dig> k oligonucleotide microarrays . all array probes were designed from known transcripts and ests based on the chicken genome assembly washuc <dig> , and a stringent selection of probes was performed before the analysis. a total of  <dig>  probes failed to map to unique chicken ensembl genes, and these were excluded to avoid the introduction of additional noise into the analysis. in total,  <dig>  chicken ensembl gene ids located on  <dig> chromosomes were included in the expression study. these  <dig> chromosomes cover over 90% of the chicken genome, and include all macro-chromosomes and many of the micro-chromosomes. the number of ensembl genes on each of these chromosomes is shown in figure  <dig>  on average, about 70% of all the known ensemble genes on each of these  <dig> chromosomes were included in this analysis.

in this study, we define the chicken transcriptome map as the median expression levels of the  <dig>  chicken ensembl genes across eight tissues on  <dig> chromosomes. the start position of the first ensembl gene and the end position of the last ensembl gene on each chromosome were considered the start and end of each chicken chromosome. the combined size of the chromosomal sequences analyzed in this study is  <dig> , <dig>  bp, which covers 97% of the total length of build  <dig>  of the chicken  genome.

regional differences of transcription in the chicken genome
to create the chicken transcriptome map, the ensembl genes were ordered based on the middle positions of the genes on each chromosome, and a robust scatter plot smoothing  technique was applied to the median expression values of the genes on each chromosome . the resulting transcriptome map revealed clusters of highly expressed genes on all chicken chromosomes . marked differences were observed in the overall expression levels of the different chicken chromosomes, with gga  <dig>  gga <dig> and ggaz showing relatively lower overall gene expression compared to the other chromosomes. furthermore, the gene expression levels of the micro-chromosomes were observed to be higher than those of intermediate- and macro-chromosomes; the median expression level of each chromosome was observed to decrease with increased chromosome size . interestingly, the sex chromosome ggaz shows an extremely low median expression level.

to further investigate the unequal distribution of gene transcription activity along chicken chromosomes, we selected regions with clusters of the most highly expressed genes and regions with clusters of most lowly expressed genes, such that each region type covered approximately ten percent of the chicken genome. to be consistent with previous studies in humans  <cit> , here we use the terms "ridge" and "anti-ridge" to refer to regions showing the highest and lowest expression levels, respectively, in the chicken genome. similar to caron et al.  <cit> , we define ridges in the chicken genome as genomic regions with at least  <dig> consecutive running medians larger than  <dig>  times the median expression of the chicken transcriptome, i.e. all  <dig>  ensembl genes. with a running median of a window size of  <dig> genes, we identified  <dig> ridges in the chicken genome that cover approximately 10% of the genome. using the same window size, we identified  <dig> anti-ridges, which cover approximately 10% of the chicken genome; these anti-ridges are defined as genomic regions with at least  <dig> consecutive running medians smaller than  <dig>  times the median expression of the chicken transcriptome. the total number of ensembl genes located in ridges and anti-ridges is  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the mean of the median expression values of genes located in ridges across the tissue panel is approximately  <dig>  times higher than that of genes in anti-ridges . more detailed information of ridges and anti-ridges can be found in additional file  <dig> 

the distribution of the expression of the genes located in ridges and anti-ridges is shown in figure  <dig>  the majority of genes in anti-ridges is below  <dig> . this is in strong contrast with the distribution observed for ridges, which show a much broader distribution; furthermore, the majority of genes in ridges show an expression above  <dig> .

transcriptome maps in different tissues are highly correlated
to next evaluate transcriptome maps of different types of tissues, we created transcriptome maps for each individual tissue type by applying a running median on expression values within each tissue using a window size of  <dig> genes. chromosome  <dig> is shown in figure  <dig> as an example, and the transcriptome maps for the different tissues were observed to be very similar. we performed a correlation test between the transcriptome map created using the median expression values across the eight tissues and the transcriptome maps created using the expression values from each tissue type. all transcriptome maps are highly correlated, with an average correlation of  <dig> . all pair-wise correlations were highly significant, with p-values less than  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  .

random permutation tests of ridge identification
to test the significance of the number of ridges identified in our analysis, we performed random permutation tests using the same window size and threshold for ridge identification. in total,  <dig>  random transcriptome maps were generated by permutating the gene orders throughout the genome. the permutation tests, shown in additional file  <dig>  clearly show that the number of ridges identified in our analysis is higher than would have been expected merely by chance .

ridges are relatively conserved between chicken and human
the observation that highly expressed genes tend to be clustered within ridges in the chicken as well as the human genome suggests a conserved functional organization of the genome of these vertebrates. we therefore decided to assess whether genes in ridges remain associated during evolution. thus, we consider two different forms of functional constraint. the first possibility is that specific genes within a particular ridge need to be co-regulated; in this case, one would expect relatively few syntenic breaks to occur within the ridges. the other possibility is that genes do not need to co-localize with specific genes, but rather remain spatially associated with other highly expressed genes in general. in this case, one would expect syntenic breaks to occur specifically between two different ridges. random rearrangements of ridges and anti-ridges, on the other hand, would reduce the clustering of genes, and therefore abolish the effect of regional regulation of transcription. first we tested if the observed ridges were less prone to be broken down during evolution from chicken to human. previous studies comparing the human, mouse, rat, and chicken genomes identified a total of  <dig> conserved synteny blocks  <cit> . because the identification of these synteny blocks was based on chicken genome assembly washuc <dig> , we mapped the ends of these syntenic blocks to the current chicken genome assembly  , and considered each end as an evolutionary break point. in total, we mapped  <dig> break points on the washuc <dig> chicken genome assembly; we found  <dig> break points within ridges, and  <dig> break points within anti-ridges. chi-square tests showed a significantly higher average number of break points in ridges compared to regions outside ridges  and a significantly lower number of break points in anti-ridges compared to regions outside anti-ridges  .

to compare the transcriptome maps between chicken and human, we downloaded human gene expression data for the same types of tissues  from the human transcriptome map website  <cit> . using the median of the expression values across the seven human tissues for each human gene, we performed an identical analysis on the human data as the chicken expression data to identify ridges and anti-ridges in the human genome. similar to the chicken, in the human genome, ridges and anti-ridges each cover about ten percent of the genome. defining the syntenic break points in the human genome using data described by bourque et al.  <cit> , we found a total of  <dig> and  <dig> break points in ridges and anti-ridges, respectively. again, similar to results seen in the chicken, chi-square tests show a higher average number of break points in ridges compared to regions outside of ridges  and a lower number of break points in anti-ridges compared to outside anti-ridges  .

we identified  <dig> ridge-to-ridge break points and  <dig> anti-ridge-to-anti-ridge break points between the chicken and human genomes. chi-square tests showed a significantly higher number of ridge-to-ridge break points between the chicken and human genomes  compared to that expected by chance, and no significant difference in the number of anti-ridge-to-anti-ridge break points .

genomic characteristics of ridges and anti-ridges in chicken
next we evaluated whether ridges and anti-ridges were associated with other genome characteristics. positive correlations were found between chicken transcriptome map and gene density , gc content  and average intron length . as an example, the whole chromosome views of the transcriptome map, gene density, gc content, gene length, average intron length and recombination rate are shown for chromosome  <dig> ; these various parameters were similar in ridges and anti-ridges. to further investigate the specific genomic characteristics of ridges and anti-ridges, we compared the average intron length , gene length , gene density , and gc content between genes located in ridges and anti-ridges . compared to the entire chicken genome, ridges, on average, harbor genes with shorter average intron length , shorter gene length , and a higher gc content . anti-ridges, on the other hand, show opposite trends, with genes with longer average intron length , longer gene length , and lower gc content . furthermore, ridges also have a significantly higher gene density  than anti-ridges.

gene ontology term enrichment analysis for genes in ridges and anti-ridges
our results indicate that ridges are relatively conserved between human and chicken. assuming ridges are the result of evolutionary events favoring the clustering of genes with higher expression levels, one can hypothesize that genes within ridges may share similar functions or biological pathways. to investigate this possibility, we performed gene ontology   <cit>  term enrichment analysis on genes located in ridges and anti-ridges using r package gostats  <cit> . however, no significant gobp terms  were found for genes in ridges and anti-ridges after correcting for multiple testing .

discussion
gene expression data
the annotated genes on the array platform used in this study cover most of the current chicken genome assembly. the number of genes analyzed on each chromosome is also in good proportion with chromosome length , which suggests against a bias in the analysis due to uneven distribution of the genes in the chicken genome. we chose to exclude chromosome  <dig> and  <dig> from our analysis, as only  <dig> and  <dig> ensembl genes are represented on the array; this number is too low to identify any meaningful high or low expressing regions with the window size of  <dig> genes used in this analysis.

no major effect of different tissues on chicken transcriptome map
we observed high correlations  among the different transcriptome maps based on the expression data from the eight different individual tissues as well as between these transcriptome maps and the transcriptome map of the combined expression data of all eight tissues. this indicates that use of the median expression value or the expression values from individual tissues only has a minor effect on the transcriptome maps and on the identification of ridges and anti-ridges. this shows that regional differences in transcription are a general trend in the chicken genome, even among different tissue types.

regional differences of transcription in the genome
this is the first study in birds to construct a transcriptome map and to confirm the existence of regional differences on transcription regulation in the chicken genome. ridges have been discovered in several animal species from phylogenetically distinct groups, suggesting that the existence of ridges may be universal in the animal kingdom  <cit> .

gierman et al.  <cit>  showed that ridges contain up to  <dig> genes and can exert an eightfold difference on the expression levels of integrated genes. they found that gene expression levels are not highly correlated to adjacent genes, but instead more correlated to the entire block of up to  <dig> genes, demonstrating regional effects on gene transcription. the exact mechanism underlying how gene expression occurs in ridges is still unknown. one hypothesis is that evolution favors highly expressed genes to be physically close to each other, as transcription of one gene would help the chromatin of neighboring genes to "open up" during transcription. this hypothesis is in agreement with our observation of no apparent evolutionary constraint on the co-localization of specific genes, whereas we observed specific localization of specific genes within ridges . goetze et al.  <cit>  showed that ridges in general are less condensed, more irregularly shaped, and are located more closely to the nuclear center than anti-ridges. furthermore, the chromatin structures of ridges and anti-ridges are largely independent of tissue-specific variations in gene expression and differentiation state. their discovery again confirms the hypothesis that the different regional effect of gene transcription in ridges and anti-ridges is, at least in part, explained by the chromatin structure of the two types of genomic regions.

genomic characteristics in ridges and anti-ridges in chicken
many studies have shown that chicken genome characteristics such as recombination frequency, gene density and gc density correlate with chromosome size  <cit> . our results show a similar trend with regard to the level of gene expression and density of ridges. in the chicken, the median expression values decrease with increased chromosome length , which can only be partly explained by the higher gene density of the micro-chromosomes. our permutation analysis clearly shows that the organization of genes in clusters of highly expressed genes is not random and suggests a functional mechanism. this is further strengthened by our observation that the same distribution of ridges is seen when both strands of the same chromosome are analyzed separately . this is additional confirmation of region-like regulation of transcription during gene expression, since the opening of chromatin structures during gene expression will affect both strands by facilitating the access of transcription factors to target genes, thus enhancing gene expression in that region. furthermore, we also found a correlation between the transcriptome maps and gene density, gc content, gene length, average intron length, "minimal intron" density, and recombination rate in the chicken genome . a correlation between recombination rate and gc content in the chicken genome has been recently reported  <cit> , and these authors therefore link recombination rate with the transcriptome map, as reported in the current study. this can be explained by the more open chromatin structure of the transcriptionally active ridges, which would also facilitate recombination within these regions. furthermore, "minimal introns" have been reported to be gc-rich and to enhance the rate at which mrna is exported from the cell nucleus  <cit>  . these findings link the "minimal introns" distribution via gc content with the transcriptome map in the current study. this can be explained, at least in part, by the need for efficient export of highly expressed mrna from the nucleus. many genomic characteristics in eukaryotic genomes, such as ridges, early replication and recombination, appear to be linked. ridges are associated with higher expression, higher gene density, higher gc content, shorter gene introns, shorter genes, higher "minimal intron" density, and higher recombination rate . this is congruent in human studies, in which similar correlations were found  <cit> . shorter introns and shorter genes in ridges may indicate the need for increased transcription efficiency. castillo-davis et al.  <cit>  showed that introns in highly expressed genes are substantially shorter than those in genes that are expressed at low levels in the human genome, and the authors hypothesized that transcription efficiency is enhanced when intron length is shorter. the clustering of highly expressed genes in ridges therefore would result in clustering of genes with, on average, shorter introns. although gc content, gene density, gene length, average intron length, "minimal intron" distribution and recombination rate are all correlated with gene transcriptional activity in the chicken genome, the exact causative mechanisms of these relationships are still unknown.

ridges are relatively conserved between chicken and human
in comparing evolutionary break points between ridges and anti-ridges, we found a higher number of break points within ridges than anti-ridges in both the chicken and the human genome. similar as for recombination, it is possible that the more open chromatin structure within ridges facilitates an increase in the likelihood of rearrangement events, and thus in an increase in the observed syntenic breaks.

although ridges clearly show an increase in the number of evolutionary break points, we also showed a significantly higher number of ridge-to-ridge break points between the chicken and human genomes. hence, although ridges are more prone to be interrupted by evolutionary break points, there still seems to be an evolutionary constraint that favors recombination between ridges, i.e. the resulting parts of a "broken ridges" from one species were more likely to stay together with a part of another broken ridge during genome evolution, thereby keeping specific genes together within ridges. in other words genes within a ridge in one species are likely to end up in a ridge in another species even when syntenic rearrangements occur. there are in total  <dig>  1-to- <dig> human-chicken homolog genes downloaded via biomart  <cit> . of these genes,  <dig>  are located in ridges and  <dig> genes are located in anti-ridges in the human genome. 27% of these 1-to- <dig> human-chicken homolog genes  located in human ridges are also located in chicken ridges . this again supports our hypothesis that genes within a ridge in one species are likely to end up in a ridge in another species.

this result suggests that the clustering of specific genes is not so much important, but rather the clustering of any genes that are highly expressed. the relative low number of syntenic breaks within anti-ridges, on the other hand, might be linked to another feature of vertebrate chromosomes, namely the occurrence of regions with a relatively low number of genes, so called "gene deserts"  <cit> . in particular, the so-called "stable gene deserts" colocalize with developmentally active genes and genes coding for transcription factors, both gene types that generally show relatively low levels of expression. these "stable gene deserts" showed extremely low numbers of syntenic breaks  <cit> .

our results clearly show the existence of a higher level organization of the vertebrate genome affecting not only the expression of genes but also other features such as recombination and genome rearrangements during evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study describing a transcriptome map in birds. this study has revealed regional regulation of gene expression in chicken that is consistent with previous studies in flies and mammals  <cit> . since features correlating with high regional transcription are more pronounced in the microchromosomes leading to overall higher expression compared to genes on the macrochromosomes. our analysis on evolutionary break points shows that the regional regulation of gene transcription is relatively conserved between chicken and human. given the evolutionary position of chicken on the phylogenetic tree, our results provide a unique perspective for future comparative studies on transcriptome maps between vertebrate species.

