BACKGROUND
epidermal growth factor  is a key growth factor regulating cell survival. through its binding to membrane receptors of the erbb family, egf activates an extensive signal transduction network that includes the pi3k/akt, ras/erk and jak/stat pathways  <cit> . all these pathways predominantly lead to activation or inhibition of transcription factors affecting downstream mrna transcription and regulating expression of both pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins, effectively blocking the apoptotic pathway. egf-dependent signaling pathways are often dysfunctional in cancer, and targeted therapies that block egf signaling have been successful in treating tumors  <cit> .

multiple approaches have been used to advance the knowledge of the cross-talk between signaling pathways, including the mapping of the complete egf-dependent transcriptome and attempting to integrate it to build gene networks  <cit> . however, a comprehensive knowledge of the whole set of genes regulated by egf stimulation is complicated by the fact that studies have been performed on different cell lines under a variety of treatment regimes . more importantly, in most cases results have not been validated by alternative methods on a whole genome scale, but only for a subset of genes. two very thorough studies have used the hela cell line to establish the early response to egf at the protein kinase phosphorylation level  <cit> , and the transcriptional response profile in an extended time course treatment with egf  <cit>  aimed at investigating transcriptionally mediated feedback mechanisms that modulate response to egf. this wealth of information makes hela cells an ideal experimental model to attempt to study the mechanisms of egf signaling from a systems biology perspective.

microarray studies have helped to uncover the transcriptional response to many intracellular signaling pathways that are perturbed by different drugs affecting growth factor responses, contributing to a better understanding of their mechanisms of action, and potentially leading to the identification of gene signatures correlated with drug efficacy and potential side effects  <cit> . validation of microarray results by alternative methods is usually performed for genes of interest in order to distinguish true positives from the false positives expected from the inherent noise in highly multiplexed hybridization based technologies. the need for validation comes from the unavoidable fact that in microarray based hybridization assays there is always some degree of cross-hybridization to be accounted for, which may vary depending on the hybridization conditions as well as specific probe properties, such as sequence, length and gc content. the use of multiple microarray platforms in a single study could in principle be exploited as an alternative method to rt-pcr for global validation of changes in gene expression  <cit> , and to confirm the detection changes in gene expression, although microarrays suffer from compression artifacts resulting in a lack of linearity relative to rt-pcr in the magnitudes of fold change detected  <cit> .

recent developments in high throughput sequencing show promise to overcome the limitations in the specificity and dynamic range of microarrays. next-generation sequencing technology applied to gene expression profiling, known as rna-seq, can in principle achieve absolute quantitative measurements of transcript abundance and determine transcript variants with unprecedented resolution  <cit> . a comparative assessment of global expression profiling through deep sequencing relative to short oligonucleotide microarrays has already been performed 28]. however, rna-seq has whole transcript coverage and conceptually is more related to tiling arrays or exon arrays and requires far higher coverage. a variation of rna-seq known as digital gene expression  takes advantage of the sage methodology principle for sequence based expression profiling, addressing and counting tag sequences next to restriction enzyme sites  <cit> . dge is very similar in the sampling approach to long oligonucleotide probe microarray hybridization, given that both techniques take short nucleic acid target sequences to sample expression of longer rna molecules containing them, and both are 3' biased because they rely on extension of cdnas from the polya tail with a oligo-dt primer. since these are currently the two most cost effective methods for high throughput expression studies, it is of interest to assess the performance of a combination of both methodologies. microarrays and dge have already been shown to be comparable in performance  <cit> . in the present study we have used long oligonucleotide microarrays and dge global cross-validation to present a whole genome perspective of egf-induced gene transcription and its integration into functional cellular networks. using the rankprod test applied to multiple platforms, a highly reliable and complete dataset of hela specific egf-dependent regulated genes has been generated defining lists of genes not previously associated to egf signaling. by applying the recently developed globalancova test for pathway analysis of gene expression profiles, we used this dataset to gain insight into functional aspects and to explore higher order gene regulatory network relationships.

RESULTS
transcriptional profiling of egf treated cells with multiple oligonucleotide microarray platforms
global transcriptional profiling can be used to get a snapshot of the state of the cell in a particular condition. to evaluate the genes whose transcription was regulated after  <dig> h of egf treatment, treated and untreated control sample pairs were analyzed with long oligonucleotide probe based microarray platforms. in order to generate a well-characterized set of egf-stimulated and control samples, three independent biological replicate experiments were performed where hela cells were serum-starved for  <dig> h and then stimulated with egf or left untreated, and verified to show the hallmark signal transduction responses when exposed to egf . three pairs of egf-stimulated samples and the respective serum starved controls, derived after  <dig> hours of treatment from each of the same three independent experiments were subsequently analyzed on agilent, operon and illumina microarrays. normalized and raw data from these experiments are accessible in the geo database http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ under accession number gse <dig> 

for comparison of results across technologies we focused on refseq genes with associated gene symbols. this also simplifies functional analysis given that most genes with known function belong to this group of better annotated genes. initial comparison between platforms of the rates of change in gene expression expressed as log2ratios using refseq remapped probe gene symbols as common identifiers and the median value of all probes for each gene showed a variable degree of correlation. these platforms have  <dig>  refseq genes in common . the first exploration of the data trying to find shared regulated genes, showed a strikingly low degree of overlap between the lists of most significantly regulated genes, when determined by applying an absolute fold change cut-off of  <dig>  and setting a false discovery rate at 5% with significance analysis of microarrays  . the reduced overlap observed is consistent with previous reports of small intersection between lists in similar experimental designs  <cit> . we then used gene set enrichment analysis as implemented in the gsea tool  <cit>   to increase the power of the comparison of the results of all three platforms  <cit> . our gsea analysis showed a highly significant agreement between all three platforms, since each gene set identified by any of the three platforms was found to be asymmetrically distributed within the remaining rank ordered differential gene expression datasets  . this result strongly argues in favor of all platforms being able to detect the same underlying transcriptional response behavior, while differences among individual gene measurements make it more difficult to detect these common properties when focusing only on the intersection between the top significant gene lists from the individual platforms.

upon comparing different datasets, t-test based methods, such as sam, are less sensitive and more prone to give false positives than rank product-based tests  <cit> . in fact this may explain the low overlap obtained using sam derived gene lists. after proving with gsea that the datasets were truly comparable, the rankprod test was applied to determine a statistically significant gene list based on multiple platforms  <cit> . given that there are quite a few instances where data are discrepant between platforms, we used this test to identify the most likely result based on objective statistical criteria, coming up with  <dig> upregulated and  <dig> downregulated genes in response to egf based on  <dig> independent microarray platforms with an absolute median fold change larger than  <dig>  and an adjusted p-value of the rankprod test below  <dig>  .

gross egf-specific expression cell type specific biases attributable to the hela molecular karyotype were excluded by correlating expression data with copy number using array based competitive genomic hybridization .

digital expression profiling by high throughput tag sequencing
the final gene lists obtained from microarray data analyses are only a partial representation of the transcriptome due to the fact that the genes surveyed are constrained to the probes present in each array, and because the overlap in gene coverage and in differential gene expression detection between platforms is incomplete. ideally, it would be desirable to have a detailed and comprehensive gene list of egf-dependent genes. the only way to extend the validation without being limited by the probe content of each platform is to use an open technique. for this reason we used the dge methodology developed by illumina which is based on the sage principle but up-scaled on the genome analyzer i  next generation sequencing platform  <cit> . we re-analyzed aliquots of total rna from the exact same three replicate experiments that had been tested on microarrays: serum-starved and egf-treated for  <dig> h. on average,  <dig> × 10e <dig> raw sequences were obtained per sample, which after running the analysis pipeline allowed us to monitor the expression of  <dig>  × 10e <dig> unambiguously matching tags, corresponding to  <dig>  different genes  . this number has been considered sufficient by others to achieve over 90% coverage of the transcriptome, with as high or higher sensitivity than short oligonucleotide probe microarrays  <cit> .  <dig>  of the  <dig>  genes represented in every microarray platform could be detected through dge.  <dig>  genes represented in either of the  <dig> microarray platforms had no detectable measure by dge in any of the three biological replicates, whereas  <dig> detected tag sequencing targets had not been addressed by any of the microarray platforms . neither sam nor rankprod statistical analysis of differential gene expression by dge gave any significant genes after multiple testing correction. a general comparison between microarrays versus deep sequencing showed better correlation among genes that had  <dig> or more counts in their tag sequences . following, we used cat  plots  <cit>  representing the changes among the proportions of genes shared between gene lists ranked by fold change as a measure of the concordance between each of the different microarray platforms and dge compared to our reference microarray platform . we then compared all microarrays to the dge dataset , showing that there is a significant degree of agreement between the three alternative commercial array platforms and dge . these plots show that the concordance is highest between the top  <dig> genes and that, as we increase the list size, the proportion of genes shared among lists stabilizes around 45-50% between microarray platforms and around 30% between microarrays and dge. in part this is explained by the fact that egf regulates many genes and the fold changes detected by each platform are correlated but the exact ranking can vary a lot given the large number of genes affected. in agreement with this, gene set enrichment analysis showed a significant correlation between the  <dig> microarray platforms and dge .

summary statistics of the mapping of reads generated by the dge pipeline.

the rankprod analysis to integrate microarray and dge data  allowed us to define a list of  <dig> upregulated and  <dig> downregulated refseq genes in response to egf at  <dig> h  . the number of genes found significant by rankprod when combining microarray and sequencing data together is slightly lower than that found significant by microarray only. this implies that the vast majority of genes cross-validated by microarrays turned out to give concordant results by dge. even though the total number of genes was reduced, dge added  <dig> new genes not detected by microarrays to the rankprod-significant regulated gene list .

for a small collection of genes, independent experimental validation was performed using a sybr green based rt-qpcr assay on the exact same samples used in microarray and ultrasequencing experiments. some of them were further validated in additional samples in a time course experiment. most of the genes analyzed by rt-qpcr showed concordant results with all technologies used in this study . in order to assess linearity in each genomic analysis assay, we plotted the log2ratio values of the subset of  <dig> genes validated by rt-pcr  and found that dge approximated best the fold change detected by rt-pcr. it is noteworthy that while all microarray platforms had similar specificity and sensitivity in detecting changes in gene expression, dge had more false positives, particularly among genes represented by a low number of tags .

we then used multiple approaches for the functional analysis of the genes found regulated by egf including go enrichment analysis , gene set enrichment analysis , literature based network inference  and a general test applied to kegg pathways . interestingly with gsea using literature defined genesets  we were able to recover with very high significance those defined by amit et al  <cit>  as response signatures to egf in hela cells at  <dig> . this further supports that in our hands the system behaved as it has been described by others.

we applied these same tools to the reduced dataset including the overlap but also to all genes . using this approach, we detected once again the classical egf pathway plus a few other related functions such as genes known to modulate egf signaling, non-egf egfr agonists, known egf-responsive transcription factors, components of erbb receptor-associated trafficking and egfr interacting proteins .

we also analyzed an extended dataset including, in addition to the genes shared in common, those only represented by a single platform or a subset of all platforms. one of the most significant hits found when using the inclusive dataset was the copper/cadmium metallothionein metal ion homeostasis function, which includes a few of the most differentially expressed genes  <dig> hours after egf treatment and although individual platform analysis uncovered this pathway only in agilent arrays  we validated these observations using rt-qpcr for  <dig> of the human metallothionein family members. results indicate that all metallothionein genes studied but mt1f are up-regulated after egf treatment . this result went unnoticed in an egf time course treatment of hela cells  <cit>  performed on affymetrix arrays also showing consistent and progressive up-regulation of mt1e, mt1g, mt1f, mt1h, mt1m, mt1x, mt1p <dig>  mt2a  . this may be indicative of a novel function of egf which may be to activate oxidative stress protection and metal ion homeostasis through up-regulation of most metallothionein genes. this example shows that there may be inconsistencies in probe design that can lead to results that are not reproducible in other platforms and highlights the risk of picking up results that are platform biased when relying on just a single platform and the fact that there is many hidden information in already published datasets that can be uncovered using the approaches described in the present work.

egf-dependent functional networks
to further investigate the global expression response to egf treatment as well as to study the interaction between individual regulated genes and how they have a coordinated role in specific signaling pathways, we used the ipa  software, using the  <dig> genes obtained by rankprod testing . among the top molecular and cellular categories, we observed the presence of the most common functions related to egf signaling such as cell death, cell growth and proliferation  <cit> , being cancer the top disease. in all cases, the biological functions identified have a very high overlap in gene content. this is in agreement with the top regulated canonical pathways described by ipa which are: cell death, cancer, and cellular growth and proliferation. .

the top ranked networks identified by ipa are associated with cell death and survival, cellular proliferation, and tissue development and function . networks  <dig> and  <dig>  consist of genes most of which interact directly with nf-kb and erk1/ <dig>  upon egf stimulation both proteins are activated, nf-kb is activated through the akt pathway and erk1/ <dig> is activated by mek phosphorylation, being the expression of these two genes themselves not regulated at the transcriptional level upon egf treatment  <cit> .these two highest scoring networks showed a high degree of interconnectivity as shown through merging .

list of ingenuity networks and biological functions generated by mapping the  <dig> focus molecules that were differentially expressed during egf treatment according to rankprod.

we asked ourselves if this interconnectivity between networks would allow us to model a higher order network in these interactions. in order to measure pathway interconnectivity, the globalancova method was applied on the classical pathways . in this approach a global regulation score is computed for each pathway taking into account the expression values of all the genes belonging to it. again, this analysis indicated that many of the regulated pathways are not independent since they share a large number of genes . as expected, many pathways related to cell growth and proliferation, cell death and cell cycle are represented. many of the most significant pathways belonged to the signal transduction class and contained the hub proteins central to the networks found significant by ipa analysis. in addition, among disease related pathways, the top regulated ones were mostly related to cancer, being "pathways in cancer" the top one with a total of  <dig> genes and  <dig> connections .

list of globalancova derived differentially expressed kegg functions upon egf treatment indicating the total number of genes, the number of regulated genes and the number of connections  to other pathways. the number identifying each kegg category are the same used for the nodes in the graph on figure  <dig> 

discussion
egf response gene signatures and higher order network inference
most of functional analyses performed on microarray datasets are usually applied to data that were derived from a single microarray platform, where often only the expression of a few genes has been validated experimentally by alternative methods, usually rt-qpcr. in such cases, it is assumed that the measures of hundreds to thousands of targets on an array are 'true' measurements. as has been noted in many studies, and as we show in the present study, a significant percentage of probes on any single platform can show discrepancies with results derived from probes for the same target genes in different platforms or obtained with an alternative technology. the maqc landmark multi site study focused on the ability to capture global differences by different platforms and in intra platform reproducibility and sensitivity, but did not address how to integrate data derived from different platforms  <cit> .

we have focused on generating gene lists extensively cross-validated by different methodologies on the same set of samples to ask a biologically relevant question at the same time. we define a list of genes that has shown consistent regulation by egf in three different microarray platforms as well as by dge using next generation sequencing of short tags. by using this high content cross-validation based approach we are providing a large and reliable dataset capturing the egf-dependent transcriptome in hela cells. this expands the previous knowledge of this process, not only providing a robust list including previously known target genes, but also expanding it with a fair number of genes under egf-regulation that had not previously been associated to egf. in addition, we are able to define a large egf dependent gene network using the high interconnectivity observed among the minor pathways regulated by egf. the role of egf/egfr dynamic interaction networks has been studied recently with either computational approaches  <cit> , or by integration of molecular profiling, database and literature mining, mechanistic modeling, and cell culture experiments, demonstrating that egf  plays an important role in communication networks regulating blood stem cell fate decisions  <cit> .

the  <dig> h egf time point was chosen because of the high amount of transcriptional regulation which includes some well established sets of targets  and largely unknown regulatory mechanisms. the  <dig> h egf time point captures the steps following initial egf pathway activation of early response transcription factors , the negative feedback regulation mediated by their post-transcriptional targets , the increase in delayed response transcription factor activation  and the activation of the regulatory mechanisms that will determine the cell fate as either apoptosis  or continued proliferation and survival .

upon thorough functional analysis of microarray and ultrasequencing data focused on the  <dig> h time point, we were able to detect cell death, cell growth and proliferation, cellular movement and development responses to egf stimulation. these are the functional categories appearing as significantly overrepresented using a range of methods and tools with the set of genes that come out significant in the multi-platform rankprod analysis and that are present in all platforms. it allowed us to confirm that our system is behaving as would be predicted from prior knowledge. given the robust nature of our data, at the same time we can infer network relationships based on true changes in gene expression.

networks result from interconnections between signaling pathways. such interconnections occur because the same signaling component is capable of receiving signals from multiple inputs or it can distribute its signal to different pathways. we have used the genes involved in several networks as interconnecting genes to build supra-pathway structures. a major limitation was found in the fact that current versions of pathway databases are not completely up to date. many of the genes not currently included in the classical pathways could be added upon close inspection of the literature. while this does not appear to affect the major pathways involved, in any case, it reinforces them. from the  <dig> statistically overrepresented pathways only  <dig> of them have no connections with any other pathway. keeping in mind the limitations of the kegg database we can conclude that there is extensive interconnectivity between egf-regulated genes in our dataset.

the egf signaling network includes survival pathways and interacts at many levels with the apoptotic signaling network, being able to influence on the apoptotic potential of cells modulating and regulating the balance between survival and death. a thorough understanding of the genes that can be modulated by egf and all the interactions is critical for success on rationally designed cancer treatments. we observed a clear cross-talk between the egf anti-apoptotic pathways and the apoptotic pathways. egf signaling leads to the up-regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins, blocking the extrinsic  and intrinsic  pathways or inactivating of pro-apoptotic proteins. interestingly, specific cancer pathways are highly represented and interconnected among themselves and with signaling pathways involved in cancer including wnt, tgf-beta, mapk, p <dig> and other.

hubs are proteins interacting with many partners and its study is becoming of great interest. essential proteins tend to belong to biological processes that are densely interconnected and are more likely to be hubs  <cit> . interestingly, in our ipa analysis we find three main hubs linking many regulated gene networks: erk/mapk, nfkb and pi3k. while the mrna levels of the genes encoding for the hub proteins themselves are not affected by egf, we can detect strong changes in many of the genes directly connecting to them and a high interconnectivity among regulated genes pertaining to each hub's own network.

novel gene functions regulated by egf
as pointed out, most of the genes found to be regulated by egf were related to already known functions such as cell cycle, differentiation or apoptosis, which were detected as significant even when looking at the most conservative gene lists obtained by combining all platforms together.

being less conservative, one can attempt to look at the global picture of egf response by not only looking at the common intersection of genes represented in all platforms, but at the union of all the identifiers. using this approach to try to uncover novel functionalities, it was interesting to detect regulation of additional genes in categories described to modulate egf signaling   <cit> , most non-egf egfr agonists  and the cxcl1/2/ <dig> cytokines, which interestingly are cytogenetically linked to a cluster of egf family members on human 4q <dig>  along with il <dig> and are found to be co-regulated. in addition, there are changes found in mrna levels of transcription factors of the early response and delayed early response class  <cit> , some of the components of erbb receptor endocytosis and intracellular trafficking complexes  <cit>  and egfr interacting proteins  <cit> . this observation supports the existence of tight feedback mechanisms  <dig> h after exposure to the egf ligand. the purpose of these would be to shutdown egf dependent signaling through transcriptional up-regulation of inhibitors, in agreement with the results of amit et al  <cit> , along with the parallel compensatory up-regulation of other growth factors that act through the same erbb receptor family.

in the attempt to uncover additional new functions on the conserved dataset and extended datasets using several approaches, we detected a significant overrepresentation of metallothionein genes regulated  <dig> hours after egf treatment, both as the cadmium and copper ion homeostasis functional category and the 16q <dig> cytogenetic band by enrichment analysis. metallothioneins are known to be regulated by many stimuli such as oxidative stress, metal ions and glucocorticoids. indeed, the putative role of metallothioneins in carcinogenesis has been proposed recently  <cit> .our work highlights their regulation by egf, not yet reported to date.

it remains to be seen whether this regulation is a direct result of transcriptional activation by egf primary targets. indeed, the presence of ap- <dig> elements in the metallothionein promoter would provide a likely mechanism of activation by egf-dependent early response genes.

contribution to cross-platform validation
often, studies using multiple platforms have been carried out on highly heterogeneous samples with very divergent expression profiles and on a limited number of platforms, focusing on the common top regulated genes, excluding the non-overlapping, and therefore missing potentially relevant regulated genes  <cit> . because the measures of gene expression themselves cannot be directly compared among different platforms  <cit> , we found that the use of rank comparison tests can serve as a way to increase the number of regulated genes given that similarities in gene regulation are made less dependent on the magnitude of change or the gene expression measures themselves. our datasets reveal overall agreement for many genes surveyed, yet there are quite a large number of probes that give discrepant results. we performed an outlier analysis and were able to detect the highest degree of disagreement  in operon, followed by illumina and agilent . in our metallothionein example, it was evident that the major differences came from the subset of the genome represented on each platform. it is worth to note that effectively remapping of all the probes in different platforms indicated that there is a considerable number of probes that do not match refseq transcripts . stringent reanalysis of published data using these platforms should take this into consideration. in addition, we find that many probes have ambiguous matches in other transcripts, indicating them as likely mediators of cross-hybridization artifacts.

assessment of dge performance compared to microarrays
our basic analysis of the data generated in this work indicates that dge methodology is quite sensitive but noisier than microarrays themselves. previous reports that have shown improved performance of dge over microarrays have made comparisons against short oligonucleotide probe platforms such as affymetrix, and have used larger numbers of reads effectively increasing dynamic range and sensitivity at a higher cost per sample  <cit> . there appear to be many challenges to be solved to correct for this noise: first, there are many more differences found in the number of tags for specific genes in biological replicates of the same conditions than would be expected from our microarray experiments; second, the normalization applied, referring to the total number of counts, may not be the best method . our end result was the finding of higher fold changes accompanied by poorer reproducibility among biological replicates in dge data relative to microarrays. this, for the moment, makes this dge method not optimal to be taken as golden standard, pointing to the need to improve the technology or have some other means of experimental cross-validation as we reported in this study. in this sense, while adding rt-qpcr data on a few genes may still be sufficient for publication under current standards, our microarray experiments would support that global validation to confirm larger sets of genes may be more appropriate, especially when gene lists derived from these studies are exploited for data integration and systems modeling.

one unexpected finding was the considerable number of genes not detected by dge that were detected using microarrays. this absence of tag detection could in part be explained by the lack of restriction sites that would prevent these sequences from being represented in the libraries generated in the dge assay. consistent with this possibility  <dig> % of the tags from dge for which no log2ratio could be computed in any of the three biological replicates due to absence or too low number of tags, actually lacked dpnii sites.

most tags only detected by dge , had dpnii restriction sites mapped in their refseq database sequence. these are transcripts not represented in any of the three microarray platforms, but this fact does not necessarily argue in favor of dge being more sensitive.

our ability to compare up to four different platforms allows us to attempt to provide tools for identifying suboptimal probes in each of several commonly used long oligonucleotide microarray platforms. we have generated extensively cross-validated benchmark datasets that can be used to fine tune analysis algorithms both for long oligonucleotide microarray and short-read, tag-based gene expression data.

CONCLUSIONS
in our analysis using three long oligonucleotide microarrays platforms and digital gene expression we explored in depth the transcriptional response to the well-established egf-dependent signal transduction pathway.

knowing that there are biases in genomic studies that are platform dependent, our study attempted to get around this limitation to increase the confidence in the transcriptome changes detected, in order to allow more reliable analyses at the functional genomics level and to try to infer more robust networks of co-regulated genes which may benefit further genomic studies with the obtained datasets.

performance comparison between microarray and next generation based digital expression profiling suggests that the two methodologies combined may survey the transcriptome in a better way than each on its own, and therefore generate more reliable datasets and uncovering additional new functions. ongoing improvements in data quality and increased output of illumina sequencing technology make it possible to achieve higher read depth and less noise at a reduced cost, which would make dge today even more attractive as a tool for studying gene expression. even though currently rna-seq is the most comprehensive methodological approach to assess transcript abundance and complexity, dge is conceptually more comparable to microarrays. therefore, we believe dge is the ideal complementary technique for global cross-validation of long oligonucleotide microarray data applied to quantitative expression profiling.

indeed, this approach, where data from both technologies is integrated through rankprod analysis, is capable of detecting new genes that may previously have gone unnoticed acting downstream of egf and that had not been described at a global level before. for the metallothionein family this has relevance for cancer studies since these are genes often deregulated in cancer and that may be important in relationship to cancer resistance to chemotherapy. we propose that cross-validation technologies may be exported to the desired paradigm with the same advantages as the described in this paper.

