BACKGROUND
the switch from primary metabolism  to secondary metabolism  upon nutrient starvation is commonly found in most microorganisms  <cit> . the phenomenon has been known for a long time, but new details of function and regulation of the "metabolic switch" continue to emerge as we begin to apply postgenomic technology to the analysis. understanding the switch to secondary metabolism is of major importance in biotechnology, where it can contribute to the optimized production of commercially relevant secondary metabolites, such as antibiotics.

here we have used the soil bacterium streptomyces coelicolor, the model organism of the antibiotics producing genus streptomyces, to dissect its metabolic switch in unprecedented detail. reproducible growth of the filamentous streptomyces species has been a challenge, and especially producing the same quantity of antibiotics in each fermentation has been a major hurdle for conducting systems biology experiments in these species. some short gene expression time series have been reported  <cit> , the largest being a study by lian et al.  <cit> , with  <dig> time points at 1- to 3-hour intervals from  <dig> hours to  <dig> hours comparing the s. coelicolor m <dig> wild type to a pleiotropic regulator mutant, but these experiments were conducted in shaker flasks, where cultivation conditions, such as ph and dissolved oxygen, were not held constant, resulting in irreproducible fluctuations in growth from run to run.

we have overcome these problems by using a glutamate-based minimum medium which is phosphate limited and by strictly controlling the growth conditions for the fermentation of s. coelicolor. cells were grown up to  <dig> hours after inoculation and monitored for cell dry weight, co <dig>  phosphate and the accumulation of two antibiotics, actinorhodin and undecylprodigiosin . from  <dig> hours, samples were taken every hour up to  <dig> hours, and every two hours afterwards until  <dig> hours. global gene expression profiles were acquired for each sample using newly designed customized affymetrix genechips. this is the first time that the necessary reproducible fermentation has been achieved for any filamentous bacterium. the detailed transcriptome time series, which is deepest resolved transcriptomic data ever produced for an actinomycete, is currently complemented by metabolome and proteome analysis. it forms the starting point for a systems biology approach for this class of organisms which is of greatest biotechnological relevance.

RESULTS
unsupervised clustering analysis revealed a strong structure in the data: on the one hand, when clustering the samples, adjacent time points cluster closely together , and the strongest change in gene expression occurs between time points  <dig> and  <dig> hours; here the two samples are clearly separated on the clustering tree despite being just  <dig> hour apart along the growth curve. this interval coincides with the moment when phosphate in the medium is depleted and corresponds to the classical metabolic switch. on the other hand, when clustering the gene expression profiles, several major groups of genes emerge as showing highly correlated gene expression patterns. a more detailed analysis of this correlation structure identified a very fine-grained dynamic pattern of gene expression. in addition to two large groups of genes that showed consistent gradual increase or decrease of expression levels, respectively, we observed several clusters that showed a more complex, transient upregulation. detailed analysis of each of these clusters revealed that they consist of biologically coherent groups of genes, often dominated by a few large operons, and reveal an unexpectedly complex series of switching events well before and after the classical metabolic switch.

the expression measurements were validated by qrt-pcr using six genes that showed highly characteristic and very different profiles. the resulting time course profiles are highly correlated to those obtained by the microarray experiments . to verify reproducibility, the fermentation was repeated for a total of four biological replicates and microarray data collected for  <dig> time points in each of the fermentations. an evaluation of the variance between the biological replicates revealed an average standard deviation across all replicates of less than 6% for biomass concentration and remaining phosphate levels in the growth medium, and less than 10% for the production levels of undecylprodigiosin and actinorhodin. similar correlations were seen for groups of differentially expressed genes, with between-fermentor correlations for individual clusters of genes ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , indicating excellent synchronicity between replicates.

as expected, the strongest continually decreasing cluster of genes is dominated by ribosomal proteins and other proteins with functions in protein biosynthesis. these "house-keeping" genes are highly expressed initially and then gradually decline as the cells enter transition and stationary phase . this closely mimics the pattern observed in the stringent response  <cit> , and also shows strong similarity with the patterns seen in the diauxic shift of baker's yeast  <cit> .

the earliest gene expression change along the growth curve was evidenced by a cluster of genes that are mainly involved in nitrogen metabolism, including glutamine synthetase i and ii, and the signaling protein glnk : it starts off at high expression at the earliest time points . expression of this cluster rapidly declines at  <dig> h, shows another rapid transient peak around  <dig> h, and then levels off at very low expression. this expression pattern of the nitrogen metabolism genes is unexpected since it differs drastically from protein data and activity measurements made in flask cultures or on solid media  <cit> , as well as earlier expression profiles in a different medium  <cit> . the early expression of these genes is particularly surprising as the medium contains excess glutamate and is not limited in nitrogen. the nitrogen metabolism genes are regulated by glnr  <cit> , which shows the same expression trend .

overlapping with the gradual expression change in nitrogen metabolism, we observe a first and very striking switch in secondary metabolism: the cpk antibiotic biosynthesis genes ;  <cit> ) rapidly increase in expression at  <dig> h, and then equally rapidly decline again at  <dig> h, albeit not returning to their pre- <dig> h levels in all cases . as can be seen in the figure, this transient peak in gene expression of antibiotics biosynthesis genes  is strikingly preceded by a slightly earlier peak in expression of the main transcriptional activator of the cluster, sco <dig> . interestingly, the direct neighbors of the cpk genes , which are the γ-butyrolactone receptor scbr and the γ-butyrolactone synthesis genes scba and scbb  <cit> , show a similar pattern, with a rapid increase by  <dig> h, a peak in expression at  <dig> h, followed by a sharp decline after one hour. the butyrolactone system has been shown earlier to regulate cpko via scbr  <cit> . this highlights our ability of identifying putative regulatory connections by examining densely sampled time courses. a similar highly informative shift in gene expression is observed for scot , which is the enzyme thought to cleave off the expanding polyketide core carbon chains at the end of the biosynthetic pathway  <cit> . scot expression increases at  <dig> h, one hour later than the core biosynthesis genes .

one additional cluster shows a highly interesting switching pattern preceding the traditional metabolic switch: expression of these genes gradually increases to a peak around  <dig> h, and subsequently decreases again to the original level . the genes involved are a more heterogeneous group than in any of the other clusters; they include the nitrate reductase cluster  and many developmental genes, including the chaplins  <cit> , bldn  <cit>  and whih  <cit> . this is the first observation of these developmental genes expressed during a metabolic switch and is particularly significant as s. coelicolor does not produce spores in liquid media. the expression of these genes increases as though the cells prepare for differentiation, but some signal stops their expression around  <dig> h so that differentiation does not occur. it would be of extreme interest to analyze the expression of this group of developmental genes in other streptomyces species, for example streptomyces griseus, which do sporulate in liquid culture  <cit> .

the traditional metabolic switch is marked by a strong upregulation of the pho regulon, which include the phosphate regulator and transport genes  and genes activated by phor/p  <cit> , which increase at  <dig> h, as soon as phosphate is depleted from the medium . synchronously, the expression of a small gene cluster involved in the biosynthesis of a phosphate-free secondary polymer of the cell-wall increased  <cit>  . all of these  <dig> genes are among the  <dig> genes previously reported to be activated by phop  <cit> . this is followed by a gene expression change reflecting the classical signature of the metabolic switch in streptomyces: first the gene cluster responsible for the biosynthesis of the pigmented antibiotic undecylprodigiosin  is switched on at  <dig> h , followed by the gene cluster responsible for the second pigmented antibiotic, actinorhodin  after  <dig> h . in both cases, several other genes along the genome show a strongly correlated expression pattern , identifying additional putative regulatory targets of the main transcription factors involved in enacting the metabolic switch, such as a small uncharacterized cluster of genes from sco <dig> to sco <dig> 

discussion
our data allow us to outline the complex series of expression switches associated with the metabolic switch in streptomyces. to get a first idea of the regulatory events driving these successive waves of gene expression, we have focused our discussion on those major regulators that showed an interpretable gene expression profile, i.e. recognizable dynamics along the time course. not all known regulators show such a clear expression pattern, and there are several reasons to explain this. for instance, posttranslational regulation can be more important for a particular regulator, or individual genes can hybridize less than optimal on the microarray, leading to expression signals that are too noisy for detailed interpretation. in such cases, additional orthogonal experimental approaches will be required. figure  <dig> shows the most variable genes of this set. it is obvious that many of them closely parallel the expression profile of some of the major clusters: the phosphate transport system regulator sco4228/phou  <cit>  and the phosphate starvation response regulator sco4229/phor and sco4230/phop  <cit>  peak at the onset of phosphate depletion. the expression of phou is activated by phop  <cit> , consistent with the observed expression pattern. the transcriptional regulator sco5877/redd  <cit>  switch on about  <dig> h after the main metabolic switch, when the red cluster of antibiotics biosynthesis genes is induced. several less well characterized putative regulators closely follow the expression pattern of the developmental gene cluster that is repressed upon the metabolic switch. determining the mechanism of regulation using statistical causal inference in combination with targeted gene disruption experiments will be the next important step in understanding this complex system. in addition, flux balance analysis will be useful for correlating the observed sequence of expression changes to predicted re-arrangements of metabolic fluxes in central metabolism during the metabolic switch. it will be particularly important to examine other limitation conditions  for differences and similarities in their metabolic switch.

CONCLUSIONS
in addition to the genes discussed here, most of which have been studied in detail before, there is a large number of unannotated genes showing the same strong expression switches. for all genes, the complete expression profiles have been deposited in geo for further exploration .

it is evident from our data that gene expression during the metabolic switch is far more dynamic than initially expected. our densely sampled time-series allows identification of rapid complex expression changes of biological significance, as well the prediction of central regulatory relationships.

