BACKGROUND
clostridium botulinum, an obligate anaerobic spore-forming bacterium, produces botulinum neurotoxin , the most potent toxin known  <cit> . bont is classified as a category a biothreat agent by the centers for disease control and prevention  because of its lethality and ease of production, transport and dissemination  <cit> . in addition, bont poses several threats to the public health: first, the possibility of foodborne botulism represents a major potential health hazard that requires continual monitoring by the food industry. second, infant botulism has been the most common form of human botulism in the united states for more than  <dig> years and hospitalizes approximately 80- <dig> u.s. infants annually  <cit> . third, cases of wound botulism due to intravenous drug use continue to increase  <cit> .

botulism toxicity results from one of seven serologically distinct neurotoxins  that cause a severe neuroparalytic disease characterized by descending flaccid paralysis  <cit> . rarely, unique strains of c. butyricum and c. baratii may also cause human botulism through production and release of bont/e and f, respectively  <cit> . the toxin acts by binding to peripheral cholinergic nerve endings and inhibiting release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular junction. a part of the toxin is a zinc-dependent protease that cleaves target substrate proteins , located either on the plasma membrane or the synaptic vesicle, thereby preventing their binding, fusion and release of neurotransmitter. bonts cleave specific amino acids on the target proteins of the snare complex. bont/a and bont/e act on snap- <dig>  while bont/c targets syntaxin as well as snap- <dig>  the remaining toxin types  all act on synaptobrevin, but at different cleavage sites  <cit> .

the potential severity and lethality of the disease warrants sensitive and specific detection and serotyping of toxin and its typing to enable correct administration of serotype-specific antitoxin in a timely manner. although treatment with human botulism immune globulin  or equine antitoxin is based on clinical findings and should be instituted as rapidly as possible  <cit> , definitive microbiological diagnosis may take several days or even longer. this extended time to diagnosis occurs because detection of the bacterium and its toxin relies on toxicity assessment in mice  and lengthy culture assays, which, while sensitive and specific, may be time-consuming and difficult  <cit> . moreover, the availability of the mouse protection bioassay is limited due to lack of animal facilities and reagent constraints.

a readily available rapid diagnostic test would be valuable for public health and medical management of foodborne, infant, wound, or bioterrorist botulism outbreaks. quick, accurate diagnosis would enable the limited supply of equine or human antitoxin to be directed to affected patients, thereby allowing exposed but unaffected individuals to be reassured and spared unnecessary treatment with an equine serum product. a high-throughput assay would also be beneficial to the food industry, where the use of large quantities of mice is impractical.

several studies have described pcr-based assays that detect the various serotypes of bont genes  <cit> . with the advent of quantitative pcr , further studies have reported assays that detect the toxin types  generally implicated in human illness and food contamination  <cit> . however, comprehensive sequence analysis shows a high level of genetic variability within the toxin types that enables differentiation of toxin types into subtypes  <cit> . thus, existing assays may not reliably detect all known subtype variants within each botulinum toxin type.

for these reasons we have developed a novel two-step pcr-based assay that can detect both bont and other gene sequences located within the toxin gene complex. it is known that c. botulinum dna is readily attracted to botulinum neurotoxins, necessitating the use of various treatments for the removal of nucleic acids during toxin purification  <cit> . these dna sequences may be found even in highly purified protein preparations of the toxin and are therefore a reliable surrogate for the presence of bont, enabling rapid detection without using mice. as antitoxin doses are administered based on the serotype of toxin and clinical symptoms and not on the amount of active toxin present in the sample, the assay described here will provide the critical information needed for clinicians to treat affected patients. the first step in this procedure is a universal electrophoresis-based pcr that detects the presence of the c. botulinum nontoxin-nonhemagglutinin  gene, a highly conserved toxin complex gene that is found in all c. botulinum toxin types and subtypes that has been found in all bont-producing c. botulinum gene sequences examined to date  <cit> . thus, samples that contain bont can be identified irrespective of serotype, thereby providing comprehensive but not type-specific detection. a similar independent assay to detect ntnh has recently been reported by rafael and andreadis  <cit> . the second step of the assay uses qpcr to determine quantitatively the specific bont toxin type by using seven different degenerate primer/probe pairs, one for each of the seven a-g toxin serotypes. these assays successfully detected toxin genes from  <dig> of the  <dig> known toxin subtypes.

RESULTS
universal detection of the c. botulinum toxin complex gene ntnh
we tested these primers with dna purified from c. botulinum cultures of each toxin type and also included control genomic and plasmid dna from samples of e. coli bacterial colonies  as well as crude lysate from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. a specific ntnh product of  <dig> base pairs was detected in each lane containing clostridial dna representing all toxin serotypes as well as bont-producing c. butyricum and c. baratii isolates, but no band was detected in any of the controls.

we also confirmed that detection of the ntnh gene was specific to bont-producing clostridial species. table  <dig> shows the results of the universal pcr performed with dna purified from clostridial species harbouring the bont gene and those lacking these genes. a strong pcr product was detected from all samples that expressed detectable levels of bonts, but not from any clostridial strain that did not produce bonts.

a +/- indicates presence/absence of  <dig> bp band on agarose gel. samples are purified dna from bacterial cultures as described in the methods section.

b samples originate from filtered culture supernatants containing crude toxin. +/- indicates presence/absence of  <dig> bp band on agarose gel. nd = not detected, nt = not tested.

c bont e-producing strain of c. butyricum isolated from an infant case in italy.

d bont f-producing strain of c. baratii.

enon-toxin producing strain of c, baratii.

results from conventional pcr detection of ntnh. a  indicates presence/absence of  <dig> bp band by agarose gel, respectively. dna results indicate pcr detection of ntnh in purified dna from both c botulinum and other clostridial strains. culture supernatant results indicate amplification of dna within crude culture supernatants. nt indicates samples that were not tested.

we next confirmed the robustness of ntnh detection both on food samples that were spiked with purified serotype-specific c. botulinum dna and on crude toxin preparations. canned vegetables and canned meat were spiked with  <dig> μl of purified dna at dilutions down to  <dig> genomic copy of type-specific bont dna in  <dig> μl. dna was extracted from spiked samples as described in the methods section. only samples that had been spiked with clostridial dna from neurotoxin-containing strains tested positive for ntnh . as with the food samples, dna was extracted from crude toxin-containing cultures and tested for the presence of ntnh. all of the purified dna samples and most of the crude culture supernatant samples examined were positive for ntnh . the lack of amplification from some of the crude culture supernatants may be due to lack of dna extraction resulting in the presence of proteinaceous pcr inhibitors.

in addition to spiking food, we also spiked healthy infant stool with varying concentrations of bont serotype-specific c. botulinum dna as described in the materials and methods. we detected a positive pcr result in all samples of stool spiked with bont dna to an amount as low as an equivalent of  <dig> genomic copies. in the sample spiked with bont a at an equivalent of  <dig> genomic copy, we obtained a weak positive pcr result. additionally, we tested dna extracted from a clinical sample from a recent case of infant botulism, diagnosed by the mouse protection bioassay, and clearly detected presence of the ntnh gene .

++ denotes strong pcr band

+ denotes weak pcr band

- denotes no pcr band

listed in this table are results from ntnh gene detection within spiked samples of a healthy infant stool sample as described in the materials and methods. also included is the result from a confirmed case of infant botulism in california.  indicates a strong positive pcr product at the dilution tested,  is a weak positive pcr product, and  indicates no amplification detected.

quantitative type-specific detection of c. botulinum
we designed primers and probes specific to each toxin type . each set targets portions of the light chain of the neurotoxin gene in areas conserved within each subtype yet unique to each toxin type such that no cross-reactivity should occur. any base differences between strains were accounted for by incorporation of degenerate bases . as validation, figure  <dig> shows results of the type-specific qpcr performed on the plasmid standards corresponding to each c. botulinum. not only was each primer/probe set able to detect its c. botulinum type toxin gene sequence sensitively and specifically, there was also no cross-reactivity of any primer/probe set with a toxin gene sequence from a different c. botulinum type.

y = c or t

r = a or g

s = g or c

indicated in this table are the type specific primers and probes for each bont tested in this manuscript. included are forward, reverse and probe sequences and their locations within the toxin gene. bases indicated in bold represent degenerate bases: y represents c or t; s represents c or g, and r represents a or g.

to confirm the specificity of the assay, we further extracted dna from pure laboratory-cultures from twenty-nine c. botulinum strains representing twenty-two different toxin subtypes. amplification occurred only when dna from a particular bont serotype was paired with its type-specific primer/probe set, and there was no cross-reactivity between primer/probe sets of one serotype and toxin genes of a different serotype . importantly, strains known to produce or contain the genes for two toxin serotypes were successfully confirmed as such by the assay .

"+/-" indicates amplification/no amplification by real time pcr

indicated in the table are all strains tested with each type-specific bont primer and probe set. a  indicates amplification/no amplification by real time pcr.

we then tested dna-spiked food samples and crude culture supernatants for the presence of serotype-specific bont genes using the above assays. in spiked food samples, we were able to detect type-specific bont dna down to at least three genomic copies of bont dna in each sample . to determine relative levels of detections, we tested the four major causes of foodborne botulism, bont a, b, e, and f within crude toxin supernatants. positive pcr signals were seen with sample dilutions containing toxin concentrations of  <dig>  ld <dig> bont/a per ml and  <dig>  ld <dig> bont/b toxin per ml. the level of detection is greater than  <dig>  times more sensitive than the mouse bioassay for bont/a and greater than  <dig> times more sensitive than the mouse bioassay for bont/b in equivalent samples. positive pcr signals were observed with sample dilutions equal to 1ld <dig> in bont/e toxin/ml and  <dig>  ld <dig> bont/f toxin/ml. thus the level of detection for bont/e and bont/f matched or was  <dig> times more sensitive than the mouse protection bioassay, respectively .

lod indicates the averaged limits of detection for that subtype in our mouse protection bioassay with identical serotypes used in toxin complex preparations.

indicated in this table is the sensitivity of quantitative pcr for type-specific bont detection. crude toxin supernatants with equivalent toxin protein amounts are listed. values included in this table are the exact copy number of bont dna detected in crude toxin preparations at the indicated amounts of protein. lod indicates the averaged limits of detection for that subtype in our mouse protection bioassay with identical serotypes used in toxin complex preparations.

next, we did comparative testing of crude culture supernatants  against purified dna preparations from the same strains. as the crude culture supernatants contained botulinum neurotoxins, they were tested at an independent location that is registered for the use of botulinum neurotoxins using alternative equipment . all  <dig> bont-containing samples tested positive for the appropriate toxin subtype, including three samples containing multiple toxin serotypes . in addition, the mosaic c/d and d/c strains had positive pcr signals for both serotype c and d, confirming the existence of both bont/c and/d gene sequences in these strains. the results, shown in table  <dig>  indicate that this assay is equally effective at detecting and identifying bont genes regardless of the sample  or the equipment used.

abi = extracted dna run on an abi  <dig> real time pcr sequence detector.

lc- = crude c. botulinum culture supernatants run on the roche light cycler. 0- <dig> cycles = ++++,

21- <dig> cycles = +++, 31- <dig> cycles = ++, >  <dig> cycles = +

listed in this table are all strains tested by quantitative pcr for type-specific bont. all serotype primer and probe sets were tested against all strains indicated. standards indicate the plasmid standards used to determine the quantity of bont dna in each sample. strains tested on the abi  <dig> machine  included purified dna from bacterial cultures while samples tested by the roche light cycler  were from crude toxin supernatants.

with the same dna preparations described in the previous section from healthy infant stool spiked with c. botulinum dna, we were able to detect type-specific bont dna reliably within all samples spiked with bont dna at the equivalent of  <dig>  genomic copies. the stool sample from the confirmed case of infant botulism yielded a positive result with  <dig> bont/a specific gene copies detected in  <dig> μl of dna extracted from the stool sample . this confirms the result that had been obtained in the mouse protection bioassay that had been performed for clinical diagnosis.

dna extracted samples were tested by real time quantitative pcr  for detection and copy number of each bont serotype. shown are results from approximately  <dig> genomic copies of dna into each spiked sample prior to dna extraction.  indicates a positive result with bont dna copy number indicated in brackets.  indicates no amplification.

listed in this table are the three conditions we tested for serotype-specific bont dna from spiked healthy infant stool and a clinical sample of a confirmed case of infant botulism. for healthy infant stool, shown are results from samples spiked with bont dna with  <dig> genomic equivalents. the clinical sample was run without dilution.  indicates a positive result and the copy number calculated from standard curves specific to each serotype is indicated in brackets.  indicates no amplification.

discussion
the spectre of bioterrorist use of botulinum toxin presents a new and real danger to public health  <cit> , and in such an event a sensitive, specific and rapid diagnostic assay to detect the presence of the bacterium and/or its toxin will be needed. in addition, the possibility of botulinum toxin contamination of manufactured food requires constant monitoring. indeed, over  <dig> different food products have been recalled in  <dig> due to botulinum toxin contamination http://www.cdc.gov/botulism/botulism.htm. the current gold-standard assay, the mouse protection bioassay, is impractical in situations needing high-throughput analysis of multiple samples possibly at multiple geographical locations. in  <dig> the national institute of allergy and infectious disease  issued recommendations for new assays needed to detect botulism . these recommendations stated that any new assay should be "universal", should be able to detect variants of all toxin types, should be type-specific to determine proper antitoxin treatment, and should be sensitive and quantitative to determine risk assessment.

various methods that have been reported to address these requirements include immunological assays such as elisa, ecl western blotting and immuno-pcr, enzymatic assays such as endopep assays and molecular techniques such as pcr  <cit> . the assays developed thus far offer a more rapid means of diagnosing botulism, but each also has limitations in such areas as sample throughput, cost, inability to distinguish toxin types, ease of use and false negative results  <cit> .

pcr is a valuable methodology because it is sensitive, specific, cost-effective, portable, automatable, and high-throughput. however, pcr methods have certain limitations, such as the inability to distinguish between biologically active toxin genes and silent toxin genes in the bacterium  <cit> . while this is an important limitation as it is the protein toxin rather than the dna encoding it that poses the threat, this is a rare occurrence since complete loss of toxicity in c. botulinum strains is usually accompanied by loss of phage or plasmids that contain toxin complex genes   <cit> . however, the consistent presence of c. botulinum dna in even highly purified toxin preparations can serve as a surrogate marker and indicate the presence of toxin when c. botulinum contamination is suspected . several different pcr methods have been reported, ranging from conventional electrophoresis-based pcr, including multiplex pcr, to real-time pcr and probe hybridization  <cit> . each pcr-based method is reportedly faster and cheaper than the standard mouse protection bioassay  <cit> . however, most pcr assays detect a narrow range of toxin types, notably a, b, e and/or f, and do not consider the known genetic variation  within each particular toxin type  <cit> . botulinum neurotoxins, and their genes, exhibit an extreme amount of variability. currently, there have been over  <dig> toxin subtypes identified. these toxin subtypes vary by ~1-32% at the amino acid level and their genes vary by approximately the same percentage at the nucleotide level. despite this variability, we have been able to successfully detect and correctly identify the serotypes from samples representing  <dig> of these toxin subtypes.

in our study, we also use pcr technology to detect bont dna in samples attempting to match the mouse protection bioassay in sensitivity and specificity. our results show that we do surpass the sensitivity and specificity of the mouse protection bioassay in purified dna when parallel samples of known toxicity and/or bont serotype are tested.

we detect bont dna in samples reliably down to ten genomic copies in all strains of each subtype tested. in addition, our assay identified both toxins associated with our bivalent strains, while initial testing using the mouse bioassay only identified the predominant toxin in each case. the pcr assay also differentiated mosaic c/d and d/c strains from parental c and d strains; other methodologies are unable to differentiate these subtypes. with respect to the lower sensitivity of bont e detection, the data suggest that the initial genomic load of bont e dna was lower than that of other subtypes. based on the sensitivity of the assay presented here, bont e dna of the same initial genomic load as the other subtypes tested will exhibit the same sensitivity surpassing the mouse protection bioassay.

based on previous work to detect the presence of microbial 16s ribosomal dna in human plasma samples during human immunodeficiency virus  infection to determine microbial translocation, we were able to determine the presence of bacterial dna in human plasma using similar extraction and quantitative pcr techniques as described here  <cit> . clearly, when dealing with clinical samples such as stool in which pcr inhibitors may present a challenge in detection of the bont dna genes, there was a decrease in the detection limit of spiked healthy infant stool sample. however, in testing a confirmed infant botulism case in which the dna tested was obtained from stool, we were readily able to determine the presence of the ntnh gene as well as its type and concentration.

CONCLUSIONS
the two-step pcr assay described here fulfils the criteria recommended by the niaid expert panel  <cit> . the first step, universal pcr detects the ntnh toxin complex gene that is conserved in all c. botulinum strains. the ntnh gene can be used as a high-throughput screening tool to determine those samples or individuals contaminated or infected with c. botulinum regardless of the type. the second step qpcr is used to determine the specific toxin type present and to estimate the extent of contamination by determining the gene load in each sample. a measure of the bont gene load may be helpful to the food industry to detect the presence and extent of contamination. although the bont gene load may not predict the severity of illness, a fast, sensitive, and specific toxin detection assay will enable prompt administration of appropriate antitoxin therapy and assessment of the public health risk from suspect foods. with this assay's high-throughput capability and its portability, any laboratory may use it to assess quickly the possible presence of bonts either in food processing samples or in suspected cases of botulism. thus, this assay provides rapid and specific detection of bont and toxin complex genes and would enable the targeting of appropriate therapeutic agents  to infected individuals in a timely manner.

