BACKGROUND
gross chromosomal rearrangements  lead to chromosomal instability and can enable organisms to adapt to new environments. however, this instability is also present in cancer cells: 90% of solid tumours have an abnormal number of chromosomes, a situation known as aneuploidy  <cit> . the presence of additional chromosomes is known to be characteristic of these cells but their role in cancerogenesis and tumour progression is poorly understood. the issue of their impact on cancer cells is still a matter of debate  <cit> . the implementation of aneuploidy can result from previous mutations in key genes involved in mitotic checkpoints such as mad <dig>  bub <dig> or bubr <dig>  <cit> . the baker's yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae provides a suitable model for investigating the mechanisms responsible for gcrs and their effects on cellular physiology because it is easy to handle and shows a conveniently fast growth rate.

gcrs are infrequent spontaneous events and their selection in s. cerevisiae requires the use of genetic screening procedures, some of which are based on the responses of extracellular compounds such as drugs or on nutrient depletion  <cit> . in other cases, meiotic induction of strains with odd ploidy or diploid strains incapable of nuclear fusion has been performed to isolate haploid cells with one or more additional chromosomes  <cit> . surveys on the cellular physiology of these strains showed the presence of growth rate defects linked to a cell cycle delay occurring during phases g <dig> and g <dig>  <cit> . the slowing of the cell cycle gives rise to abnormal cellular phenotypes showing an abnormally large intracellular volume or the formation of elongated buds  <cit> . despite these negative effects on cellular fitness and morphology, gcrs can yield selective advantages under some environmental conditions   <cit> . gcrs also have considerable effects at the molecular level, in terms of the correlation between copy number variations  and transcription  <cit> . the results recently obtained using proteomic approaches on aneuploid strains showed the existence of correlations between cnv, transcription and translation  <cit> . this conclusion is consistent with the hypothesis put forward by torres and al  <cit> . that cellular responses may occur at translational rather than transcriptional level. proteins involved in macromolecular complexes such as ribosomes and nucleosomes have to be stoichiometrically stable to prevent growth defects  <cit> . there are two hypotheses accounting for protein equilibrium in aneuploid cells:  the activity of the translational machinery may decrease or  the excess proteins may be degraded shortly after being synthesized  <cit> . in disomic haploid strains of s. cerevisiae, mutation of the ubp <dig> gene, which enhances the proteasome activity, leads to a decrease in the doubling time  <cit> . this property suggests that the degradation of proteins is responsible for maintaining the protein balance in these cells. however, most previous studies have been performed on haploid strains, whereas little is known so far about the effects of gcrs on diploid cells.

to investigate the effects of the same gcrs in both haploid and diploid contexts, studies were performed on mutant strains of s. cerevisiae selected using a genetic screening method based on a mutated allele of the ura <dig> gene  <cit> . several types of gcrs were selected depending on the ploidy context. although aneuploidy and nonreciprocal translocation have been isolated in diploid strains, single gene duplication occurs only in haploids  <cit> . by contrast, segmental duplication and deletion have been described in both contexts  <cit> . to analyze the effects of ploidy on cellular responses, haploid and diploid revertants carrying the same gcrs were selected by inducing meiosis in diploid mutants or crossing haploid revertants with a strain bearing the ura <dig> mutated allele. various approaches were used to study the effects of these gcrs on cells, such as changes in the colony and cell morphology as well as in the growth rates. these features showed that the fitness of mutants was impaired in comparison with the parental strains. in addition, transcriptomic analysis based on microarray hybridizations showed that many of the genes involved in ribosome biogenesis and translation mechanisms are down-regulated in all diploid revertants but up-regulated in haploids. in the haploid strains studied here, several genes involved in proteasome activity and its regulation are also up-regulated. these transcriptomic data suggest the existence of two distinct responses, depending on the ploidy context. in the presence of the same chromosomal rearrangement, diploid strains show a slower translation rate, whereas haploids help to conserve the cellular protein balance by degrading the excess protein synthesized.

RESULTS
collection of the studied strains
the ura <dig> gene of s. cerevisiae, which is located on the chromosome x, encodes a multifunctional protein occurring in the pyrimidine biosynthesis pathway. this protein is composed of  <dig> active domains: glutamine amidotransferase , carbamoylphosphate synthetase  and aspartate transcarbamoylase . three point mutations located in the proximal region of the ura215-30- <dig> allele  lead to a loss of functions in the ura <dig> protein and to auxotrophy towards uracil  <cit> . this auxotrophy is due only to the lack of atcase activity, since the missing gatase and cpsase functions are compensated for by two isoenzymes present in the arginine biosynthesis pathway. only atcase reactivation is therefore required for prototrophic reversion to occur and it has been previously established that this reactivation is possible via complex chromosomal rearrangements  <cit> .

in this study, we analyzed  <dig> diploid and  <dig> haploid revertants, which were previously isolated. these mutants carry deletions and duplication events of various kinds . duplications can be classified in  <dig> different groups: segmental duplications, nonreciprocal translocations and aneuploidies. in the case of segmental duplication , the atcase region and several adjacent genes are duplicated . nonreciprocal translocation  events correspond to the duplication of the left part of the chromosome ×  as well as the deletion of part of a chromosomal arm encompassing a telomere. this event leads to the formation of a chimeric chromosome, which sometimes forms an extra chromosome leading to aneuploidy  .

revertants used to transcriptomic analysis are indicated by an asterisk.

to investigate the effects of the same gcrs on cellular behaviour in haploid and diploid strains, revertants were constructed in both contexts. unfortunately, haploid strains could not be generated from diploids carrying segmental deletions and nonreciprocal translocations. in fact, these rearrangements involve essential genes, which result in non-viable haploid strains  <cit> . meiosis was therefore induced in the diploid mutant strains carrying an aneuploidy or a segmental duplication. after sporulation, segregants were grown in minimal medium and spores still carrying the gcr were selected. the ura+ spores were conserved for further analysis. on the other hand, haploid revertants were crossed with a strain possessing the ura215-30- <dig> allele in order to obtain diploid strains. this yielded a final set of  <dig> revertants,  <dig> of which carried the same gcrs in two different genetic backgrounds .

ploidy content generates different colony morphologies
the colony morphology of laboratory strains of s. cerevisiae is generally smooth whereas those isolated from nature and vineyards show a structured fluffy pattern  <cit> . however, the same strain can also show various morphological features, depending on the carbon source used  <cit> . mutant and parental strains were plated onto a solid ypd medium containing 2% glucose. in the haploid context, the colony morphology was found to be of two kinds in the revertant a5-n strain: one with a smooth appearance and one with a granular appearance . when these two colonies were spread on minimum medium containing no uracil in order to maintain the selection pressure, only granular colonies developed. this suggests that the additional chromosome essential to uracil prototrophy is unstable in this mutant. this chromosome is therefore conserved only in cells generating granular colonies. by contrast, colony morphology of other revertants showed only one homogeneous type of phenotype differing from the parental strains. for example, the haploid parental strain has an irregular shape whereas the mutants can be either circular and smooth  or circular and rough  .

the use of other carbon sources such as glycerol , galactose , sorbitol , ethanol  and acetic acid  brought to light the existence of some more striking discrepancies between the mutant and parental strains. differences were observed, for example, between the nrt1-2n revertant and the parental diploid strain in the presence of glycerol. the parental strain has peripheral swellings with a central invagination, whereas nrt1-2n strain is circular with a fluffy appearance .

these comparisons also showed the existence of morphological differences between revertants carrying the same gcrs, depending on the ploidy context. as shown in figure 2b, colonies of the revertant d1-n were found to be smaller than the d1-2n colonies, which suggests that the ploidy has decisive effects on the cellular responses. in addition to these morphological findings, the patterns of growth on non-fermentable substrates such as glycerol and ethanol showed that the revertants' respiration capacity was preserved .

gcrs generate abnormal cellular morphologies
it was established a decade ago that the increase in ploidy level from haploidy to tetraploidy results in an increase in the intracellular volume, which induces cell shape modifications  <cit> . however, the presence of gcrs can also give rise to abnormal cellular morphological features such as pseudohyphal growth, multibudded cells and cells with elongated buds  <cit> . with a view to comparing the cellular morphology of revertants and parental strains, cells were grown in minimum liquid medium with 2% glucose up to mid-log phase and examined under light microscopy at a magnification of ×  <dig>  haploid and diploid parental strains both showed a classical ellipsoidal shape, but not the mutants . as shown in figure 2c, revertants a2-n and d1-n formed aggregates, whereas a3-2n and a4-n were more elongated than the parental strains, which suggests that an increase in the cellular volume had occurred. this increase is consistent with the delayed g <dig> phase observed in haploid disomic strains  <cit> . this time lag may be due to the regulation of the  <dig> genes thought to be involved in the cellular volume increase in s. cerevisiae such as the g <dig> cyclins encoded by the cln <dig> and pcl <dig> genes or flo <dig>  <cit> . the presence of an additional chromosome or gcrs may impair the molecular pathway, leading to the deregulation of several genes including cyclins and flo <dig> 

growth defects are more obvious in diploid revertants
to analyze the effects of gcrs on the doubling time, the specific growth rates of cells grown in minimum medium were determined during the exponential growth phase. all experiments were performed in triplicate. student's t-tests were performed on the results obtained. revertants giving a p-value <  <dig>  were taken to have a different doubling time from that of the parental strains. the diploid parental strain has a doubling time equal to one division every  <dig>  hour, whereas all the revertants except a1-2n, a2-2n and d2-2n have longer doubling times. in the main diploid mutant strains studied, the specific growth rate was even found to be twice as fast as that of euploid strains . in the haploid context, parental strain buds every almost  <dig>  hours, and the doubling time increased by a factor of less than two in the case of only three revertants  . to compare the effects of gcrs depending on the ploidy, the ratios between the doubling times of revertant and parental strains  were determined. comparisons between these ratios showed that with the same gcrs, this ratio was almost equal to  <dig> in case of diploid revertants but only about  <dig> in that of haploids, which suggests that gcrs generate two distinct responses, depending on the ploidy.

metabolic properties and atp production rates are impaired
to determine the metabolic impairments involved, various properties, including the specific glucose consumption rate  and the specific ethanol production rate , were studied. these parameters were defined as the amount of glucose consumed and the amount of ethanol produced per hour and per gram of biomass generated. as previously, all theses experiments were again performed in triplicate. student's t-tests were performed on the data obtained. the values of these parameters were found to differ between the parental and mutant strains at both ploidy levels. in diploid revertants, only a1-2n consumed glucose faster than the diploid parental strain, and the differences did not differ significantly in the case of a2-2n, a3-2n, d1-2n and d2-2n . lower glucose consumption rates were observed in the last seven diploid revertants studied . in haploid strains, three revertants showed a decrease in qglu, whereas this rate did not differ significantly in the other haploid mutants in comparison with the parental strain . likewise, πetoh was found to decrease in all the mutants except for the diploid a1-2n and the haploids a2-n, sd1-n and sd3-n .

the qglu/πetoh ratio can be used to assess the amount of ethanol produced per mmole of glucose consumed. a high qglu/πetoh ratio means that a low amount of ethanol is produced. classically, the alcoholic fermentation of  <dig> molecule of glucose results in the formation of  <dig> molecules of ethanol, as in the case of the haploid parental strain showing a ratio of  <dig> . higher ratios , suggesting the occurrence of a decrease in the ethanol production rates, were obtained in most of the haploid revertants . in the diploid strains, qglu/πetoh also increased in the five mutant strains a2-2n, nrt2-2n, sd1-2n, d2-2n and d3-2n, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . this decrease in the ethanol production rate per molecule of glucose uptake suggests that this sugar may be used differently in the mutants to achieve the atp production rates required for cell survival and proliferation.

cellular response depends on the ploidy context
to determine the effects of gcrs on the patterns of gene expression, each pair of mutants and parental strains were grown in minimum liquid medium up to mid-log phase and a comparative transcriptomic analysis based on microarray hybridizations was conducted. each experiment was performed in duplicate. results obtained on  <dig> revertants were used for further analyses depending on the reproducibility of the replicates . a global analysis of the transcriptomic data was performed on all the genes to define the proportion of genes that are differently regulated in mutants in comparison with the parental strains. results showed that up to 2/ <dig> of all the genes are misregulated in haploid mutants in comparison with the parental strain, whereas this proportion is less than 1/ <dig> in diploids.

we clustered misregulated genes in different groups depending on the ploidy and the type of gcrs. each group was then divided into  <dig> subgroups depending on whether these genes were up- or down-regulated. to identify the functional categories that were enriched in the various subgroups, the go term finder program was used  <cit> . in all the diploid and haploid revertants studied, a similar pattern of up-regulation was observed among the genes involved in energy metabolism, such as those encoding subunits of the succinate dehydrogenase complex and those encoding proteins involved in the tricarboxylic acid cycle. this finding is consistent with the fact that higher atp production rates were observed in revertants than in the parental strains. however, some differences were also found to exist between haploid and diploid revertants showing exactly the same gcrs. genes involved in the composition of the ribosome and in rna processing were found to be down-regulated in diploids but up-regulated in haploids . in addition, only haploids showed over-expression of genes involved in the regulation of the proteasome, which suggests the occurrence of hyperactivity in this complex. all in all, these data suggest not only that the cellular responses depend on the ploidy level, but also that both haploid and diploid strains require to be provided with additional energy supplies to be able to proliferate.

gcrs generate a stress response in both ploidy contexts
almost  <dig> genes in s. cerevisiae have been described as environmental stress response elements  and are known to be involved in carbohydrate metabolism or protein metabolism  <cit> . a t-test of these stress response genes in all the revertants studied here showed that  <dig> of these genes are misregulated. the most noteworthy result obtained was that esr genes are regulated differentially, depending on their ploidy context . as mentioned above, many genes involved in translation and ribosome biogenesis are differentially expressed in revertants. these genes are down-regulated in diploid strains and up-regulated in haploids . these results suggest that all gcrs induce a general stress response in these mutants, regardless of their ploidy.

one haploid revertant  is especially interesting because only  <dig> of its genes are differentially expressed, whereas the average number of regulated esr genes in haploid mutants is  <dig>  this strain contains a deletion event at the locus where the atcase region of ura <dig> is fused to the pbs <dig> gene. the protein encoded by this gene is a map kinase kinase involved in the hog signalling pathway  <cit> . the phosphorylation of the hog protein by pbs2p results in the activation of transcription factors msn2p and msn4p, which regulate many esr genes  <cit> . when the pbs <dig> gene is mutated, cells are more sensitive to the polymyxin b antibiotic  <cit> . the fact that d1-n is more sensitive to this antibiotic than the haploid parental strain shows that the kinase is not functional in this revertant. this finding helps to explain the existence of this small set of misregulated esr genes. it also suggests that all the revertants respond to gcrs acting as environmental stresses. this response is partly independent of the hog signalling pathway.

discussion
the dna content of laboratory strains of s. cerevisiae is variable, and the nucleotide divergence ranges from  <dig> % between a364a and s288c to  <dig> % between sk <dig> and s288c  <cit> . the genetic background may have an impact on several cellular features such as the sporulation efficiency, the occurrence of gcrs and the colony morphology  <cit> . for example, genetic variations between sk <dig> and s288c strains result in different colony morphologies, ranging from a simple smooth colony in the case of s288c to a complex colony with a coralline aspect in that of sk <dig>  <cit> . the presence of gcrs changes the dna content of a cell and hence its genetic background, but little is known so far about the effects of these rearrangements. the colony morphology of revertants observed on different substrates  varies considerably . in addition, the fact that the colony phenotypes of revertants carrying the same gcrs in the haploid and diploid contexts also show considerable differences suggests that ploidy plays a crucial role in the cellular responses. microscopic studies on cell shapes have also shown the existence of differences between parental and mutant strains. the parental cells have a classical ellipsoidal form, whereas the revertant cells are more elongated and can form aggregates. these changes may have resulted from an increase in intracellular volume that is proportional to the ploidy in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . one possible explanation for this increased cellular volume is that a cell cycle delay may have occurred, as in disomic strains of s. cerevisiae  <cit> .

the doubling times of most of the diploid revertants were much greater than those observed in the parental strain. in the haploid context, however, the growth rates seem to be less affected than in diploids because only half of the revertants showed longer doubling times. the variability of these doubling times may be due to cell cycle delays resulting from the mutation of key proteins such as the g <dig> cyclins encoded by cln <dig> and pcl <dig> genes or the subunit of the conserved heterohexameric mcm2- <dig> helicase encoded by mcm <dig> gene  <cit> . however, these cell cycle delays may also result from various global responses depending on the ploidy context.

to obtain further insights into the effects of ploidy on cellular responses, a comparative gene expression analysis was performed between mutant and parental strains. the results show that the number of misregulated genes range from 1/ <dig> in diploid revertants to 2/ <dig> in haploid mutant strains. go term analysis of these differently regulated genes indicated that genes involved in energy metabolism  are up-regulated in both contexts. this finding is consistent with the increase in the qglu/πetoh ratio observed in most of the revertants studied here. all in all, these data suggest that less ethanol is produced per molecule of glucose consumed, probably in order to ensure that the atp required for cell proliferation is available.

a higher atp production rate may be required for the replication or the transcription of additional genes as well as for their translation and the possible degradation of unwanted proteins. however, this excess atp may also constitute a cellular stress, as described in the case of disomic strains of s. cerevisiae and defined as an aneuploidy stress response  <cit> . among the  <dig> or so esr genes defined under various stress conditions  <cit> ,  <dig> are significantly misregulated in the haploid and diploid revertants, which suggests that all gcrs exert stresses on the cells. it has clearly emerged, however, that cellular responses depend on the ploidy context because of the symmetrical patterns of the misregulated genes between haploid and diploid strains. indeed, when some genes are up-regulated in diploid revertants, they are down-regulated in haploids and vice versa. analysis of these misregulated esr genes showed that almost  <dig> of them, which are involved in ribosome biogenesis and rna processing are down-regulated in diploid mutant strains but up-regulated in haploids. this finding suggests that the translation rate decreases only in diploids. the fact that the genes involved in proteasome regulation and activity are up-regulated only in haploid revertants suggests that the protein equilibrium may be preserved in two different ways depending on the ploidy context. diploid revertants seem to decrease the translation rate, whereas haploids increase the protein degradation rate.

CONCLUSIONS
the present comparisons on cell and colony morphology and fitness show that gcrs induced physiological impairments in all the revertants studied. it was also observed that in order to proliferate, all mutant strains require additional energy, the lack of which probably generates a stress response. the transcriptomic data obtained here suggest that the cellular responses depend on the ploidy level. to balance the protein stoichiometry, diploid revertants decrease the expression level of the genes involved in the translational mechanisms, whereas haploids increase the expression level of the genes involved in proteasome activity. these results also raise the question of how to prevent the proliferation of cells with gcrs, such as cancer cells. it would be interesting to obtained further insights into the direct contribution of the translational machinery as well as that of the proteasome activity to the fitness of both haploid and diploid mutants.

