BACKGROUND
enzymes used in industry often originate from extremophilic organisms to fit the operating conditions for biocatalysis required by the process  <cit> . these enzymes have evolved to function in ecological niches that may include very low or very high temperature, extreme ph, high salt concentration or high pressure. recombinant production of some of these enzymes presents a significant challenge for their use in biotechnology and industry due to the demands of these applications for large amounts of highly pure protein  <cit> . this is particularly relevant in the case of cold-adapted  enzymes  <cit>  as the intrinsic instability of these proteins, which is a consequence of adaptations that allow them to function at low temperatures, makes them more challenging to produce than their mesophilic and thermophilic homologues . little attention has been given to heterologous expression of psychrophilic enzymes, despite their large range of technological applications and commercial value . in this study, we present a vector suite designed to optimize e. coli-based expression of putatively cold-adapted proteins which are encoded by genes sourced from the marine arctic environment. we have opted to control the expression of our recombinant proteins by a cold-shock inducible promoter, the e. coli cold-shock protein a  promoter  <cit> . this promoter drives high levels of protein expression, comparable to the commonly used t7-system, but is induced by a downshift in temperature rather than addition of an exogenous chemical inducer  <cit> . in addition, we have utilized several well-documented solubilization tags, such as the maltose-binding protein  , the nascent chain chaperone trigger factor   <cit> , e. coli thioredoxin   <cit>  and small ubiquitin-like modifier   <cit>  as fusion partners to our candidate proteins, combined with the hexahistidine-tag  for purification . using a restriction-free  cloning method  <cit> , we have built up a suite of vectors encoding these fusion partners, based on the pcold-ii vector that encodes the cspa promoter  <cit> . this vector suite facilitates the parallel testing of several important factors for recombinant expression, solubility and functionality of putatively cold-active enzymes encoded by environmental genes of arctic origin.

methods
origins and cloning of candidate genes
the genes used in this study are part of a large bioprospecting project , which aims to discover and develop commercially useful, cold-active enzymes sourced from the arctic environment. fosmid libraries were generated from metagenomic dna purified from two sediment samples that were collected from either the sea floor of the barents sea , or the intertidal zone at kapp wijk, svalbard . the details of library preparation are outside of the scope of this publication, and in the case of the kapp wijk sample are described elsewhere  <cit> . the fosmid inserts were sequenced using  <dig> technology  <cit> , and the relevant gene sequences have been deposited to the european nucleotide archive . open reading frames were found in the fosmid sequences using the metagenemark prediction tool  <cit> . gene candidates and putative activities were identified based on homology searches using t-blast  <cit> . sequences were analyzed for the presence of signal peptides, which would target trafficking across the cytoplasmic membrane in the native host, by the signalp  <dig>  server  <cit>  using the default cutoff values. both gram-positive and gram-negative organism settings were run as the species these genes originate from are unknown. domain information was assigned using the pfam database with a threshold e-value of  <dig>   <cit> . structural homologues and predicted tertiary structures were analyzed using the homology modeling software swiss-model  <cit>  in the ‘automodel’ mode. the molecular weight and pi were calculated using the protparam tool at the expasy server  <cit> .

the candidate genes described in this paper represent a sub-set of ‘difficult’ targets from the bioprospecting project, which had previously failed in recombinant expression trials using t7-based promoter systems. previously, the genes were cloned as constructs with a variety of truncations, signal sequences or fusion tags and then expressed in various cell strains at different temperatures in attempts to obtain sufficient amounts of soluble product for characterization . truncations were designed to express individual fragments or domains annotated from pfam or trimmed to remove predicted signal peptides. the reasons for failed expression included insoluble production as inclusion bodies or toxicity resulting in death of the expression cultures . sub-cloning of genes into the pcold-ii-based vectors was done by rf-cloning  <cit> , as described below. several of the candidates were truncated based on the above-mentioned bioinformatic analyses of the sequences, our previous examples of successful t7-based expression , and on the observation that n-terminal and c-terminal truncations can reduce flexibility and increase stability  <cit> . the regions cloned are listed in table  <dig> table  <dig> summary of in silico analysis and cloning information of candidate sequences


abased on pfam and ncbi conserved domain annotations and blast homology


bdetermined from swissmodel structure homology


cdetermined from the codon frequency distribution analysis tool  and includes codons with values lower than  <dig> that are likely to hamper the expression efficiency



construction of a pcold-ii vector suite
to enable tag-removal at a later stage of purification, a tobacco etch virus  protease site was introduced to the pcold-ii vector  by annealed oligonucleotide cloning. 50 μm of each of the oligonucleotides tev5’ and tev3’  were hybridized at 95 °c for 5 min, and cooled to 4 °c.  <dig>  μm of the annealed oligos were phosphorylated by 10 u t <dig> polynucleotide kinase  in t <dig> kinase buffer supplemented with 1 mm atp . after stopping the reaction with 20 mm edta,  <dig>  pmols annealed oligos were ligated in a 1: <dig> ratio of oligos to bamhi  and ciap  treated pcold-ii vector, using t <dig> dna ligase . vectors encoding different fusion partners were generated by introducing genes for the solubility tags between the existing his-tag and tev site of the pcold-ii-tev vector using rf-cloning  <cit> . genes encoding the trx-, mbp-, tf- and sumo-tags were amplified from templates using the primers listed in additional file 1: table s <dig> that were designed using an online tool described in  <cit> . the e. coli trx gene encoding residues 2– <dig> of trx  was amplified from pet32a . the e. coli male gene encoding residues 27– <dig> of mbp  was amplified from phmgwa  <cit> . genomic dna isolated from a dh5α strain was template for the e. coli tig gene encoding residues 2– <dig> of tf  and a codon-optimized yeast smt <dig> gene  served as template for sumo  encoding resides 2– <dig>  the megaprimers containing fusion partner genes were amplified using phusion polymerase , purified with the qiaquick pcr purification kit  and inserted in the vector by linear plasmid amplification. to remove parental dna, the pcr products were digested with 20 u dpni  and transformed to e. coli xl1blue cells by conventional heat shock. sanger sequencing was used to confirm correct cloning of all vectors. information about the vectors used in this study is summarized in table  <dig> table  <dig> expression vectors used in this study

cspa
bla
cspa
bla
cspa
bla
cspa
bla
cspa
bla
cspa
bla

a
n.d. not determined 


bgiven as the region from the his-tag to the start of candidate sequence insertion site, including the tev site 



insertion of candidate genes into the pcold-ii vector suite
to introduce candidate genes into the panel of pcold-ii vectors, megaprimers of each candidate were generated by pcr and then inserted into vectors by rf-cloning as described above. clone selection was carried out by pcr screening of single colonies using a taq dna polymerase master mix . plasmids were isolated using the wizard plasmid purification kit , and sanger sequencing confirmed successful insertions of sequences to vectors.

recombinant protein expression
recombinant proteins were expressed in  <dig> deep well plates  according to the protocol described in  <cit> . plasmids were transformed into the e. coli host strains, rosetta2plyss, bl21codonplusril or arcticexpressril by heat shock. cells were grown in 4 ml 2yt medium supplemented with 2 %  d-glucose and relevant antibiotics  at 37 °c in a micro-expression plate shaker  at 450 rpm for 2–4 h until cells reached optical density at 600 nm  of  <dig> – <dig> . recombinant expression was induced by a temperature downshift to 15 °c and addition of  <dig>  mm iptg. after 16–20 h cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 1 ml of 50 mm trishcl ph  <dig> , 250 mm nacl, 1x complete protease inhibitor cocktail  and lysed by three 5 s pulses at 25 % amplitude on vibracell sonicator  with a 3 mm microtip. samples collected before and after a centrifugation at 3461 x g for 30 min were analyzed on 4–20 % miniprotean tgx precast sds-page gels  to determine the total amounts of induced and soluble protein, respectively. successful expression of recombinant protein was assessed as the presence of a band in the post-induction sample at the molecular weight predicted by its primary sequence, and was scored on a qualitative scale from  <dig> to 3:  <dig>  no visible recombinant protein;  <dig>  visible recombinant protein at similar levels as endogenous host proteins ;  <dig>  visible recombinant protein at higher levels than endogenous host proteins ; and  <dig>  visible recombinant protein at very high levels . failure of the cells to grow after transformation was taken as a sign of toxicity, and these samples were assigned a score of − <dig>  to determine the solubility of recombinant proteins, the density of the protein bands was quantified by integration of the band intensity to area from sds-page gels after coomassie staining using the quantityone software  and normalized to the culture od <dig> at harvest to correct for different growth rates. solubility was calculated as a percentage of the total expression yield after subtraction of background intensity.

chitinase assay
to measure chitinase activity, a fluorometric assay  was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. activity from 10 μl of crude extract was assayed with  <dig>  μg substrate in  <dig>  m na2hpo <dig> at 20 °c in 100 μl final volume. three different chemicals, all labeled with 4-methylumbelliferone , 4mu-n-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminide, 4mu-n,n’-diacetyl-β-d-chitobioside and 4mu-β-d-n,n’,n”-triacetylchitotriose, were used as substrate analogs of chitin. reactions were stopped with 1 m alkaline sodium carbonate. the release of fluorometric 4mu was measured using an excitation wavelength of 360 nm and emission wavelength of 450 nm in a spectromax microplate reader . the background fluorescence intensities  were subtracted form the experimental values, which were then normalized to the semi-quantitative measure of soluble protein . a chitinase extract from trichoderma viride  was used as a positive control.

RESULTS
selection of candidates and rationale for their recombinant expression
the genes tested in this study are part of a bioprospecting project that aims to discover new enzymes with potential commercial applications, and includes two putative carbohydrate esterases, two putative glycosyl hydrolases and a putative atp-dependent dna ligase. all genes originate from metagenomic dna that was purified from marine arctic sediment samples. candidate genes with sequence homology to proteins of known activity were selected based on tblast searches of open reading frames  <cit>  and pfam domain assignments  <cit>  . four of the candidates have probable extracellular locations in the native hosts based on the prediction of leader peptides, and three candidates encode two or more cysteine residues in their native polypeptide, some of which could be involved in forming disulfide bonds in the folded structures. the mature proteins have predicted isoelectric points ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> , one or two separate domains , and masses from  <dig> to 48 kda. in some cases only portions of the genes were expressed to remove signal peptides, to express only annotated pfam domains, or to minimize the numbers of low complexity regions and hydrophobic patches in an attempt to improve solubility . our candidates are typical representatives of enzyme discovery projects, which cover a set of sequences with diverse properties. because the dna was sourced from a permanently cold environment, we presume these genes derive from cold-adapted organisms and wanted to ensure low-temperature expression conditions for the recombinant protein products. the challenge was how to efficiently produce such varied and challenging enzymes in an optimal but universal way, with an acceptable yield and throughput. we decided to use e. coli as a host for expression, although this host is known to have lower growth rates and less efficient protein production at low temperatures  <cit> . to compensate for this, we tested the commercial pcold-ii vector  <cit> , and utilized its cspa promoter to direct high levels of cold-shock induced expression in e. coli. the cspa 5′utr region, which is included in the promoter region of the vector , adopts a highly stable structure allowing for efficient protein synthesis at low temperatures, such as 15 °c . basal expression from the cspa promoter is repressed by a constitutively expressed laci repressor protein that binds the lac operator  <cit> , and a 5′utr that contains a sequence that traps translation of the recombinant protein and enhances its translation  . the pcold-ii vector encodes an n-terminal his-tag for purification; so to allow its removal after expression we introduced a tev protease cleavage site into the multiple cloning site of pcold-ii . the genes from our five candidates where successfully inserted into the vector using the rf-cloning method  <cit> .fig.  <dig> environmental candidate sequences. cartoon of the sequences of all candidates annotated with leader sequences  and predicted pfam domains , drawn to scale. no pfam domain predictions were found for mz <dig>  the presence of known catalytic residues and cysteines is highlighted with black and white circles, respectively. the length of native proteins are given next to each candidate, and cloned regions are indicated with arrowed lines

fig.  <dig> cloning and expression region of pcold-ii-tev. the cold-shock protein a promoter , the lac operator, ribosome binding site  and the translation-enhancing element  regulate gene expression from pcold-based vectors. the cspa-derived 5′utr region allows low-temperature induction as it is stable at temperatures around 15 °c, but highly unstable at 37 °c. a tev protease recognition sequence was introduced at the bamhi restriction site of the cloning region of pcold-ii to allow removal of the vector-encoded his-tag from recombinant proteins. the cartoon is drawn to scale



the cspa promoter gave high total expression and some soluble protein for all candidates
in initial e. coli screens, t <dig> promoter-driven expression of the five candidates caused problems with insolubility and toxicity .

to evaluate the performance of the cspa promoter for production of our metagenomic proteins, recombinant expression was tested in three common expression strains: bl21codonplusril, arcticexpressril and rosetta2plyss . all these strains contain genes encoding rare trnas to compensate for the codon usage bias in the arctic-sourced genes  . in addition, the strain arcticexpress co-expresses cold-active chaperonines, cpn <dig> and cpn <dig> from oleispira antarctic, which impart an active protein folding system at low temperatures and is expected to be advantageous for expression of psychrophilic proteins  <cit> . successful expression of recombinant proteins, identified from their size on sds-page, was scored according to the qualitative scale from − <dig> to  <dig> described in the methods section. we found cspa drove high expression levels for all candidate proteins in at least one of the strains tested. interestingly, none of the candidates had negative effects on cell viability, either during transformation, from inoculation to log phase grown or after induction of protein expression . consequently, we were able to express candidate proteins in all strains, including the arcticexpressril strain which had previously been unusable in combination with several targets  under t7-driven expression . the explanations for this have not been elucidated; however, our data is consistent with a recent report where combining the cspa promoter system with arcticexpress was successful for expression of cold-adapted proteins  <cit>  and expands the repertoire of expression strains that can be used for these, and most likely other, candidate proteins.fig.  <dig> heterologous expression of candidate genes driven by the cspa promoter. a
cspa promoter driven heterologous expression of candidate proteins in three e. coli expression strains; bl21codonplusril , arcticexpressril  and rosetta2plyss . a qualitative scale for scoring expression success was used as described in the main text. b normalized protein expression  and solubility  of candidates after cspa driven expression in bl21codonplusril. error bars show the standard deviation between two independent experiments



the proportion of recombinant protein in the soluble fraction was evaluated for all candidates expressed under cspa in the bl21codonplusril expression strain, according to a semi-quantitative scale. all candidates were expressed in the soluble fraction with a proportion of approximately 10 % or lower compared to the total expression yield . our data is consistent with previous publications reporting that the pcold-vectors can facilitate soluble expression  <cit>  although the extent of solubility depends on the particular protein being expressed.

while the solubility of these candidates expressed in the cspa system was not dramatic, this may still be of importance for particular poorly expressed proteins where t <dig> does not appear to be a viable option; as in the cases of mz <dig> and mz <dig> where complete insolubility and toxicity had previously precluded recombinant production of these targets .

building a cold-shock inducible vector suite encoding fusion partners
as the final yields of soluble protein were still not sufficient for up-scaling for most of our candidates, we were inspired by previous findings  <cit>  to fuse established solubility partners to our recombinant proteins in an attempt to improve their solubility . we selected the small, soluble protein trx  <cit> , the large, highly soluble mbp , and two proteins that have not previously been used in combination with the cspa system: the ubiquitin-like sumo protein  <cit>  and the co-chaperone tf  <cit> , to be used as fusion partners. previously, these partners have proved successful for soluble expression in large and systematic studies . the vector suite was designed to facilitate an efficient and parallel cloning workflow of candidates as fusions to partners. only three primers per candidate are required to clone each candidate gene into the vector suite: one forward primer to generate the his, his-trx, his-mbp and his-tf fusion constructs, a second forward primer for the sumo fusion constructs required to engineer the immediate transition from sumo-tag to candidate protein, and a reverse primer which was used for all five . complementing a recent report  <cit> , we demonstrated the application of rf-cloning in building a tailored vector suite and enabling parallel cloning of candidate sequences. all vectors were tested in the e. coli rosetta2plyss strain for soluble expression of fusion partners without candidate genes, and as expected, the majority of recombinant proteins were soluble .fig.  <dig> cartoon of fusion-proteins expressed from the cold-inducible vector suite. cartoon of the affinity tag  and solubility tags  in fusion to candidate sequences  in the recombinant constructs that were generated in this study. fusion partners are removable in all constructs either by tev or sumo protease cleavage; their recognition sites are indicated by triangles. fusion partners are drawn to scale



improvement in solubility with several fusion partners
small-scale expression of all five candidates from the pcold-ii-based vector suite gave significant amounts of recombinant protein, with the exception of the trx fusion constructs . to evaluate the solubility of each candidate expressed from the vector suite, we inspected the sds-page results of cleared lysates relative to the total yields of recombinant protein produced using the qualitative scores described above. as the his-tag alone does not aid solubility, this construct served as a reference for comparing the improvement in solubility imparted by the fusion partners. we found that the large fusion partners his-mbp and his-tf cloned n-terminal to the candidates gave an outstanding improvement in solubility compared to the his-trx- and his-sumo-tags . this is in line with previous reports where mbp exceeds smaller tags for soluble expression of both psychrophilic and mesophilic prokaryotic proteins using t7-driven  <cit>  and cspa-driven expression vectors  <cit> . several studies have also been conducted on yeast, plant, mammalian and insect proteins showing a similar performance of mbp  <cit> . his-trx-fusion proteins had varying expression levels between independent experiments, and for some constructs  cell viability was negatively impacted during transformation. previous findings have shown that the trx-tag does not work consistently in combination with the pcold system  <cit> ; however as we found that the pcold-ii-trx-tev vector gave soluble expression of the tag alone, an explanation for the observed toxic effect in our system has not been elucidated.table  <dig> semi-quantitative analysis of fusion construct expression and solubility in rosetta2plyssa



aevaluated in two independent experiments by a qualitative scoring system described in the text



to summarize, we found that fusion tags, in particular mbp and tf, can be successfully utilized to improve solubility of putatively cold-active enzymes. for all candidates tested in this study, at least one condition was identified which gave rise to sufficient levels of soluble fusion protein to make further attempts at recombinant production feasible.

using the vector suite, a functional chitinase was produced
as a proof of principle, the candidate mz <dig> was chosen for functional investigation. this candidate showed a marked improvement in expression under the cspa promoter in rosetta2plyss; previous t7-based experiments resulted in completely insoluble protein , while cspa-controlled expression produced 5-10 % soluble product with only a his-tag , which increased to 80-100 % when his-mbp- and his-tf-tags were used . semi-quantitative evaluation of mz <dig> solubility with different tags showed an improvement in the order: tf > mbp > sumo = his . the two latter tags show considerable variation in solubility between parallel experiments, and were therefore considered equal. as described above, no transformants were obtained when mz <dig> was cloned in fusion with the his-trx-tag.fig.  <dig> comparison of expression level, solubility and activity of the cold-shock inducible, recombinant chitinase. a a representative sds-page gel showing the total protein produced  and the soluble fraction  in lysed rosetta2plyss extracts of mz <dig> expressed from the pcold-vector suite. asterisks indicate the presence of recombinant proteins of theoretical expected mass . m, protein standard in kilodaltons . b semi-quantitative calculation of soluble fraction of the mz <dig> fusion proteins. error bars show variation in two independent experiments. c chitinolytic activity, presented as normalized fluorescence intensities, towards three synthetic 4-methylumbelliferone-labelled  chitin analogs in the cleared lysates containing mz <dig> fused to fusion proteins. background activity from expression of ‘empty’ vectors is indicated with a dashed baseline. a.u., arbitrary units. error bars show variation in two replicates in one representative experiment



based on amino acid sequence similarity, the mz <dig> candidate was annotated as a chitinase belonging to the glycoside hydrolase family  <dig>   <cit> . this class of enzymes hydrolyze the glycosidic β- <dig> -linkage between n-acetylglucosamine  units of the chitin biopolymer, and can be endo- and exo-acting . a putatively cold-adapted chitinase of the gh18-family is industrially relevant for treatment of chitin-rich biomass at low temperatures, for biocontrol of phytopathogens in cold environments and prevention of microbial spoilage of refrigerated food .

the conserved catalytic dxdxe motif  <cit>  was found in mz <dig> based on an alignment of the mz <dig> sequence with characterized gh <dig> chitinases . the motif includes the essential, catalytic residues asp <dig>  asp <dig> and glu <dig>  corresponding to asp <dig>  asp <dig> and glu <dig> respectively in the well-characterized chib from serratia marcescens . to confirm this sequence annotation, clarified lysates containing mz <dig> fused to each of the four tags were assayed for chitinase activity  using three synthetic 4-methylumbelliferone -labeled chitin analogs. the his-, his-mbp- and his-sumo-tagged fusion-constructs of mz <dig> displayed pronounced chitinolytic activity on the 4mu-β-d-n,n’,n”-triacetylchitotriose 3) substrate , while lower levels of chitinase activity were detected on the 4mu-n,n’-diacetyl-β-d-chitobioside 2) substrate with the his-sumo and his-mbp constructs . as exo-chitinolytic enzymes act on terminal n-acetylglucosamine residues to remove either monosaccharides or disaccharides, endochitinases are required to release fluorescent products from 4mu- <dig>  <cit> , indicating that mz <dig> is an endochitinase. interestingly the his-sumo-fusion construct, which gave little or no improvement in solubility compared to the his-only construct , showed the most pronounced chitinolytic activity . this indicates that soluble expression, which was equivalent for both constructs, does not necessarily equate to a functional enzyme, as the his-tagged control was significantly less active than the his-sumo fusion. as none of the solubility tags had chitinolytic activity when expressed alone  this improvement in activity can only be ascribed to an influence of the fusion partner on mz <dig> folding. our data strengthens the observation that mbp and sumo partners can be used to promote correct folding of difficult-to-express proteins  <cit> . in addition to confirming the successful folding of the mz <dig> fusion constructs, we have provided a preliminary characterization of an endo-chitinase. as a proof of concept, a functional chitinase, representing the first recombinant endo-chitinase from an environmental arctic source was produced by using the cold-shock inducible vector suite.

although approximately 80 % of the his-tf fusion construct of mz <dig> was expressed as a soluble protein, this fusion construct has no significant activity towards 4mu- <dig> in our chitinolytic assay . we attempted to remove the his-tf-tag utilizing the tev-protease site between the tag and candidate , but tev protease treatment in a cleared lysate resulted in only approximately 10 % cleavage of the fusion protein , which may indicate that the tev-site in the linker  was inaccessible to the tev protease. a known drawback of fusion tags is they may interfere with the activity of the candidate protein by sterically hindering access of substrate to the catalytic site, or by causing the candidate to adopt a non-functional, though soluble, conformation  <cit> . although this property can be successfully exploited for expression of toxic targets  <cit> , it is generally undesirable and generates false-positive results as the candidate may remain inactive upon removal of the tag. the importance of the length and nature of the linker joining the candidate to the fusion partner has been recognized and discussed in several studies , however a systematic study of optimal linker length has not been carried out for tf-fusion constructs and will be required to fully exploit its potential as a solubility and co-folding partner in recombinant protein expression.

CONCLUSIONS
our aim was to develop an efficient screening system for putatively cold-active enzymes intended for biotechnological purposes, using metagenomic dna from the marine arctic environment as a source of candidate genes. to facilitate this, a vector suite based on the cspa promoter was designed for fast-cloning and low-temperature heterologous expression. our data show that the cspa promoter can be utilized for low-temperature production of high levels of expression for putatively cold-adapted candidate genes. the cspa system also mitigated the toxic effects that were observed with several candidates under t7-driven expression. we found that combining the candidate genes with the established mbp fusion partner substantially improved the solubility of the recombinant proteins. we have also extended the utility of the sumo protein and tf fusion proteins for soluble protein production under cspa promoter control. in workflows typical of an enzyme discovery project, a robust production procedure to obtain sufficient quantities of active enzyme is typically part of the initial screening phase. from this perspective, parallel testing of different fusion tags is extremely useful as it can help improve the efficiency of the production procedure. in summary, the vector suite facilitates a low-temperature optimized system for heterologous expression of putatively cold-active enzymes in fusion to both small and large fusion partners. the process of generating all tag-candidate combinations is simplified by using our parallel cloning strategy for candidate gene insertion.

as a proof of concept, we showed that the arctic-sourced mz <dig> candidate, a putative gh <dig> family member, was expressed in a soluble and functional form in the optimized expression system. recombinant mz <dig> showed activity towards synthetic chitin analogs when cell lysates with overexpressed fusion proteins were tested in an activity assay. the highest activity was found for the 4mu- <dig> substrate, indicating that the mz <dig> protein is an endo-chitinase.

we envision this expression system being employed in further bioprospecting endeavors for psychrophilic proteins, and suggest that it can provide a good starting point for enzyme discovery and development. moreover, the inclusion of his-tag and either tev or sumo protease cleavage sites in all constructs would allow large-scale purification and tag removal to proceed directly from successful screens for crystallization studies. finally, we suggest that such a cold-shock inducible system could be advantageous for the heterologous expression of toxic mesophilic and thermophilic proteins, where properties of the proteins are deleterious to the host cell growth  <cit> . if such proteins were expressed at temperatures below their activity optima, we would expect a decrease in their toxicity during recombinant production  <cit> .

additional files
additional file 1: 
description of dataset: initial
t
 <dig> expression data in table s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig>  primer information in table s <dig>  

additional file 2: 
sequence alignment of mz <dig> with characterized gh <dig> chitinases. .



abbreviations
glcnacn-acetylglucosamine

cspa promotercold shock protein a promoter

iptgβ–thiogalactopyranoside

hishexahistidine

trxthioredoxin

sumosmall ubiquitin-like modifier

tftrigger factor

mbpmaltose-binding protein

teetranslation-enhancing element

rbsribosome binding site

4mu4-methylumbelliferone

dw <dig> deep well plate

rfrestriction-free

tevtobacco etch virus

gh18glycoside hydrolase family 18

cpn10/60chaperonine 10/60

competing interests

the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions

gekb conceived of the study, participated in the design of the study, conducted in silico analyses and gene candidate selection, carried out all experimentation, coordinated and drafted the manuscript, tables and figures. akw participated in the design of the study, conducted initial in silico analyses and selection of candidate genes, and reviewed the manuscript. both authors read and approved the final manuscript.

