BACKGROUND
unlike mammals, the defense against microorganisms and foreign organisms in insects relies exclusively on the innate immune response composed of complex and interconnected humoral and cellular mechanisms  <cit> . the humoral response consists of the synthesis of a large variety of antimicrobial peptides  mainly by the fat body cells  and proteolytic cascades which, upon activation, lead to blood coagulation or melanization  <cit> . cellular responses include phagocytosis of invading bacteria, apoptotic bodies or small abiotic targets, and the formation of capsules around larger invading intruders such as parasitic wasps' eggs  <cit> . lastly, insect antiviral response is still poorly understood but recent studies demonstrate the increasing interest raised by this response  <cit> . the immune response is well known for dipteran insects such as flies and mosquitoes and a large amount of data is also available for lepidopteran insects. in the latter, several amps have been characterized. signal transduction pathways leading to their transcription are probably similar to those of drosophila, since regulatory motifs such as the kappab-like and gata sequences have been identified  <cit>  and transcriptional induction by immune challenge has been reported  <cit> . pattern recognition proteins such as hemolin, peptidoglycan recognition protein, beta- <dig> -glucan recognition proteins and immulectins have also been described in lepidopteran insects  <cit> . regarding antiviral response within the insect hemocoel in lepidopteran insects, recent studies suggest involvement of humoral effectors such as prophenoloxydase  <cit>  or hemolin  <cit>  and of a cell-mediated response  <cit> . an increasing number of studies focus on the lepidopteran cellular response and several effectors, including a cytokine-like, receptors or cellular adhesion molecules, have been identified  <cit> . encapsulation is a rapid event that results from the activity of hemocytes capable of adhering to invading foreign organisms, the granulocytes and plasmatocytes  <cit> . in s. frugiperda, half an hour after their injection into last instar larvae, hemocytes are already binding to the latex beads . the subsequently recruited hemocytes adhere to the one already spread on the bead in successive layers  and the capsule, with abundant desmosome-like structures, is complete around most of the beads  <dig> hours after injection .

in parasitic wasps, various mechanisms have evolved to circumvent the host immune response and allow successful pre-imaginal development  <cit> . some species, such as the endoparasitoid wasp hyposoter didymator from the ichneumonidae family, utilize endosymbiotic viruses of the polydnavirus family, characterized by circular segmented dna genomes, which protect the developing wasp against host defenses. the hyposoter didymator ichnovirus  particles are injected along with the egg into the hemolymph of the lepidopteran host spodoptera frugiperda larvae. viral replication occurs exclusively in the calyx of the wasp ovary and high concentrations of viral particles are produced  <cit> . when introduced into the lepidopteran host hemocoel, hdiv infects several host tissues and the hdiv genes that have been studied to date are rapidly and consistently transcribed  <cit> . expression of viral genes is associated with phenotypic variations resulting from physiological and developmental alterations in the parasitized larvae, which are required for successful parasitoid development. among these physiological alterations, hdiv inhibits host humoral and cellular immunity. indeed, when hdiv is injected  <dig> hours before or simultaneously with latex beads, the latter are no longer encapsulated . however, s. frugiperda hemocytes conserve the ability to adhere to the bead and to each other . hdiv-induced impaired encapsulation is due in part to disruption of the actin cytoskeleton , as observed in several other systems  <cit> . another effect of parasitism by polydnavirus-associated wasps is a reduction of prophenoloxidase  activity and of plasma melanization  <cit> . po plays a role in cuticle sclerotization, wound healing, and sequestering/killing of invading pathogens . the question as to why it is advantageous for the parasitic wasp or the virus to inhibit propo activation remains unresolved.

thus, polydnaviruses are responsible for the disruption of various insect immune components . however, little is known about the precise molecular mechanisms involved. recent polydnavirus sequencing projects allowed the discovery of a large panel of candidates as virulence or immune suppressive factors, which are encoded by the segmented dna genomes  <cit> . these polydnavirus genomes, including that of hdiv, encode a family of genes with homology with the drosophila ankyrin-repeat cactus protein, the inhibitor of nf-κb in the toll pathway  <cit> . some of these viral inhibitor kappab-like proteins have been recently shown to be potent inhibitors of the insect immune system by targeting the nf-κb pathway  <cit> . with the exception of the viral ankyrins and the viral innexins  <cit> , none of the genes identified until now in the hdiv genome have significant similarities with known genes. therefore, despite increasing available information on polydnavirus gene sequences, little is known to date about the host cellular targets of the viral gene products. parasitism often dramatically affects levels of host hemolymph proteins or enzymes   <cit> . these changes can be explained by consumption of hemolymph by the parasitoid larva or can arise from alterations in levels of gene transcription  <cit> , protein synthesis or other post-transcriptional modifications  <cit> . however, reports indicate that gene transcript levels are not changed by polydnavirus infection  <cit>  or by calyx fluid injection  <cit> . thus, there is no data today that demonstrate regulation of host transcripts by polydnaviruses or calyx fluid.

in insects, microarray approaches have previously been used for analysis of host-pathogen interactions  or host-parasite interactions . these studies generally pertain to model insects for which genomic tools are available. however, none of these well-known models are hosts for parasitic wasps associated with polydnaviruses, since this family of viruses is reported only from larval endoparasitoids that develop on lepidopteran hosts, and to our knowledge no such parasitoid attacks the silkworm bombyx mori, a model lepidopteran with a fully sequenced genome. thus, because of lack of available tools, such global analyses have not yet been undertaken with lepidopteran species hosting polydnavirus-associated parasitic wasps.

the present study was aimed at investigating by a microarray approach whether hdiv injection induces modifications in the levels of s. frugiperda gene transcript levels, resulting either directly from viral gene products or from upstream regulations or feed-back mechanisms. analysis of the nature of the host genes displaying modified transcript levels, if any, may thus provide clues on the pathways targeted by polydnaviruses and associated factors during parasitism. moreover, since we are dealing with an immunosuppressive agent, some of those genes may represent new candidate molecules involved in the lepidopteran immune response.

in this study we aimed to establish the gene expression profile of the two main effectors of the s. frugiperda immune response, the fat body and the hemocytes,  <dig> hours after injection of the polydnavirus hdiv. we report in this paper that transcript levels for several host genes are indeed modified in the two immune tissues following hdiv injection. as discussed below, a number of these genes correspond to genes previously shown to be involved in lepidopteran innate immunity.

RESULTS
a preliminary construction of four est libraries for the noctuid pest s. frugiperda  allowed us to design a microarray comprising triplicates of  <dig> cdna pcr products printed on glass slides. this cdna microarray was used to analyze the transcriptional changes in s. frugiperda tissues  <dig> hours after injection of filter-purified hdiv. at this chosen time point, the hdiv genes studied so far are all transcribed in the lepidopteran host  <cit> . ten viral cdnas were spotted on the microarray. among these genes, four  displayed significant increases in transcript levels in s. frugiperda hemocytes and two  in the fat body . these results were consistent with previous northern-blot analyses showing high levels of transcripts for these viral genes  <dig> hours post injection   <cit> .

after microarray analyses, a subset of responsive s. frugiperda genes was selected and their transcript levels were analyzed by quantitative rt-pcr  <dig> hours after injection of heat-inactivated hdiv. heat inactivation resulted in the absence of viral gene transcription, which was verified by rt-pcr for the viral innexin- <dig> gene, but did not impair entrance of heat-treated viral particles in host hemocytes . we expected this assay to provide clues whether the observed variations in gene transcript levels were related to hdiv gene transcription or were only the result of the presence of virus particles .

moreover, to ascertain that microarray results were relevant to hdiv, and did not merely reflect a global response of the lepidopteran host to the presence of an invader of small size such as a virus, we also analyzed the transcriptional profile of s. frugiperda fat body  <dig> hours after injection of the junonia coenia densovirus . jcdnv is a highly pathogenic non-enveloped virus for s. frugiperda larvae that presents a wide range of tissue tropism, including hemocytes and fat body, the latter being the main target organ  <cit> .

general overview of transcriptional profiles in s. frugiperda after injection of hdiv
as shown in table  <dig>   <dig> genes are significantly up-regulated and  <dig> genes are significantly down-regulated in s. frugiperda hemocytes,  <dig> hours after injection of filter-purified hdiv. this represents  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % of the arrayed cdnas, respectively . the s. frugiperda transcripts increase up to  <dig> -fold for the up-regulated ones , and decrease up to  <dig> -fold for the down-regulated ones . in the hdiv-infected fat body, using both sam and geneanova analyses, we detected only  <dig> transcripts  that were significantly modulated, all negatively . five genes were down-regulated in both hemocytes and fat body . fold changes in fat body are similar to those observed in the hemocytes . a quantitative rt-pcr analysis corroborated the microarray results in hdiv-infected hemocytes and fat body for a subset of  <dig> genes putatively implicated in insect immunity . after injection of heat-inactivated hdiv,  <dig> out of the  <dig> analyzed genes did not display any significant changes in their transcript level and  <dig> varied in the opposite direction when compared to the results of injection of non-inactivated hdiv . these results suggest that for these genes, the variations in transcript level probably resulted from the transcription of hdiv genes.

the transcript levels of  <dig> genes  displayed a significant increase  in s. frugiperda fat body  <dig> hours after injection of the densovirus jcdnv. genes responsive after jcdnv injection differed from those modified after hdiv injection . as opposed to hdiv injection, no gene was significantly down-regulated. this result strongly suggests that the transcriptional variations observed in hdiv-injected samples are associated with hdiv rather than merely reflect a response of the lepidopteran host to injection of small foreign invaders such as viruses. however, when the transcript levels of  <dig> selected genes were analyzed in the hemocytes, we found  <dig> genes, galectin and immulectin- <dig> that were similarly increased and decreased, respectively, by hdiv and jcdnv injection . injection of heat-inactivated hdiv led to a decrease of galectin transcript level and did not affect significantly immulectin . this suggests that variations do not reflect s. frugiperda response to injection of viral particles but rather that these two genes are targeted by both hdiv and jcdnv.

thus, both microarray and quantitative rt-pcr results indicate that hdiv injection affects s. frugiperda gene transcript levels. whether these effects are direct or not remains to be further investigated. the expression of the gene encoding the storage protein arylphorin was not affected in our experiments, in agreement with previous reports  <cit> . considering the hemocyte and fat body tissues, 4% of the arrayed genes displayed modified transcript levels following hdiv injection, the majority  of them being down-regulated . whereas classical immune challenges cause the majority of the genes to be induced or up-regulated, our finding that genes are essentially down-regulated by hdiv injection was expected, since hdiv represses immune response and development.

several of the s. frugiperda down-regulated genes  <dig> hours after injection of hdiv encode proteins related to the immune response
in the hemocytes,  <dig> genes  have either no significant similarity with sequences deposited in databases or similarity with hypothetical proteins of unknown function . based on the hypothesis that host targets for polydnaviruses and associated factors may represent key molecules in lepidopteran physiology, these novel molecules should be further investigated. of particular interest are those that are prevalent in either one of the hemocyte or fat body libraries. for example two cdnas that displayed the highest fold changes belong to large clusters in the hemocyte library .

among the  <dig> genes down-regulated in s. frugiperda hemocytes and fat body after hdiv injection,  <dig> have similarity with known proteins. at least 37%  have presumed ubiquitous functions in cell metabolism, but most of the others are potentially involved in different steps of insect immune responses, as discussed below.

genes encoding proteins previously described as involved in the insect humoral response
antimicrobial molecules
two potential antimicrobial molecules, the cobatoxin-like  and a c-type lysozyme  have lower transcript levels in hemocytes  <dig> hours after injection of hdiv compared to injection of saline buffer. conversely, lysozyme mrna levels are higher  <dig> hours after injection of heat-inactivated hdiv, as measured by quantitative rt-pcr , with higher fold changes in the fat body  than in the hemocytes . jcdnv injection also results in increased transcript levels in the fat body . cobatoxin is a cysteine-rich peptide that may be involved in antimicrobial defense  <cit>  whereas lysozyme is a widely distributed ubiquitous enzyme involved in self-defense from bacterial infection  <cit> . in drosophila adults, lysozyme genes are up-regulated  <dig> hrs after protozoan invasion and down-regulated after fungal invasion  <cit> , but transcript levels remain unchanged after microbial infection  <cit> , or infection with a picorna-like virus  <cit> . in lepidopteran insects, lysozyme genes are induced in both eggs and pre-imaginal instars in response to bacterial injection  <cit> . in s. frugiperda, our results indicate that the c-lysozyme mrna is more abundant in fat body in response to inactivated-hdiv or to jcdnv compared to control. this suggests that transcript levels of this gene increased in response to viral presence. in host-parasitoid models involving polydnaviruses, the activity of host lysozyme is reported to be inhibited by parasitism  <cit> . in heliothis virescens parasitized with campoletis sonorensis, the observed reduced plasma lysozyme activity involves inhibition at a post-transcriptional step  <cit> . our study is the first report of a transcriptional regulation of this antimicrobial gene due to polydnavirus presence and expression. down-regulation could reflect an active way of protecting both parasitoid wasp and virus from host defense.

the pro-po cascade
our results indicate that hdiv down-regulates the propo-activation system by directly interfering with transcript levels of genes encoding proteins involved in the enzymatic cascade. indeed, in this study, we found that a s. frugiperda sequence , similar to the manduca sexta propo-activating enzyme pap- <dig> gene  <cit> , is specifically down-regulated in the hemocytes  <dig> hours after injection of hdiv particles . similarly to the propo-activating enzymes , sf_ppae contains a carboxyl-terminal proteinase domain typical of the chymotrypsin family and has an amino-terminal regulatory "clip" domain . insect po is synthesized as an active zymogen , and is activated by proteolytic cleavage, mediated by a proteinase cascade plus additional factors, including immulectins. the ppaes are the terminal serine proteinases that carry out the proteolysis of the propo precursor. in m. sexta, transcription of the propo-activating enzyme pap- <dig> gene is up-regulated in hemocytes and fat body in response to a bacterial challenge and down-regulated by treatment with 20-hydroxyecdysone, suggesting that this gene is under the dual control of immune and hormonal signals  <cit> . our results show that hdiv infection down-regulates the transcript levels of the gene encoding this proteinase. conversely, injection of heat-inactivated hdiv or of jcdnv did not affect transcript levels of sf_ppae. down regulation of the sf_ppae, as well as of the immulectin gene , should thus reduce the efficiency of pro-po proteolysis, which could be linked to the inhibition of hemolymph melanization observed in hdiv-infected s. frugiperda caterpillars.

genes encoding proteins putatively involved in the insect cellular immune response and/or non-self recognition
immulectin
immulectins are c-type lectins specific to lepidoptera with a unique structure consisting of tandem carbohydrate recognition domains . they function as pathogen recognition receptors in the innate immune system by activating propo in hemolymph  <cit> , and by participating in hemocyte nodule formation  <cit>  and encapsulation  <cit> . hdiv infection down-regulates  a s. frugiperda gene with high similarity with the m. sexta immulectin- <dig> , which is induced in m. sexta fat body after bacterial challenge  <cit> . this s. frugiperda immulectin gene  seems to be preferentially transcribed in hemocytes  thus differing from other immulectin genes generally reported as synthesized in the fat body and secreted in the hemolymph  <cit> . four immulectins are known in m. sexta  <cit> , and we identified  <dig> different cdnas in the s. frugiperda libraries. one of the other immulectins spotted in the microarray  is up-regulated by jcdnv in the fat body , but is not modified by hdiv, suggesting that different immulectin genes may be differentially affected by hdiv. down-regulation by hdiv of the s. frugiperda immulectin- <dig> homologue could be linked to inhibition of encapsulation observed in parasitized caterpillars. interestingly, this gene is also down-regulated by jcdnv in the hemocytes , suggesting an important immune function of this protein.

calreticulin
in fat body, the highest fold change  was found for the transcripts related to the multifunctional ca-binding protein calreticulin . transcript levels for crt also decrease in the hemocytes . conversely, no variation in the number of transcripts was noted after injection of either jcdnv or heat-inactivated hdiv, suggesting that this variation is related to hdiv gene transcription. crt is a conserved multifunctional ca2+-binding protein, detected in a large variety of cellular compartments . intracellular crt functions as a molecular chaperone and also regulates ca2+ homeostasis  <cit> . crt is also found on the cell surface where it may play a role in cellular adhesion and migration  <cit>  or clearance of apoptotic cells  <cit> . in insects, crt has several functions, including functions associated with immunity. in galleria mellonella, crt protein was detected in the soluble fraction of hemocyte lysate and surrounding deae beads thus suggesting that crt participates in the non-self recognition of early-stage encapsulation response  <cit> . the role of crt in lepidopteran cellular response is also suggested by its presence on the surface of pieris rapae hemocytes during phagocytosis of yeast cells  <cit> . recently, a crt was identified in the venom fluid of the parasitoid wasp cotesia rubecula and shown to inhibit host hemocytes in vitro spreading  <cit> . the authors suggest that the wasp crt functions as an antagonist of host crt. in the hyposoter didymator model, the host crt gene is down-regulated in hdiv-infected larvae, suggesting a different strategy than c. rubecula. the down-regulation of crt in hdiv-infected s. frugiperda larvae occurs in the same range in both hemocytes and fat body and may thus be responsible for the decrease in non-self recognition and encapsulation efficiency.

scavenger receptor
one s. frugiperda gene that is down-regulated in response to hdiv injection  encodes a protein with significant similarities with drosophila class c scavenger receptors  . the s. frugiperda gene encodes a predicted transmembrane protein that contains a mam domain and two tandem complement control protein  domains. in drosophila, the functionally characterized sr-c, dsr-ci, is implicated in phagocytosis and mam and ccp domains are sufficient for binding of bacteria  <cit> . scavenger receptors  are probably also involved in phagocytosis in lepidoptera. indeed, adhesion of e. coli on spodoptera littoralis granular hemocytes is inhibited with polyinosinic acid, a specific ligand of srs  <cit> . since the dsr-ci recognizes a broad range of polyanionic ligands, similarly to the mammalian class a scavenger receptors  <cit> , sr-c may be the sr responsible for the attachment of bacteria to lepidopteran hemocytes. to test the involvement of s. frugiperda sr-c in cellular responses other than phagocytosis, we analyzed the transcript levels of this gene after injection of large sephadex beads. beads are fully encapsulated  <dig> hours after injection and a preliminary macroarray analysis has indicated up-regulation of the sr-c gene  <dig> hours after injection . so sr-c transcript levels were analyzed 6– <dig> hours after injection by quantitative rt-pcr in  <dig> different technical and biological conditions. results indicate that sr-c is up-regulated  in hemocytes after injection of sephadex beads , strongly suggesting that this novel sr-c plays a role in the s. frugiperda cellular response against parasites. the sr-c gene is down-regulated only when hdiv genes are transcribed . we thus found two opposite effects on sr-c gene transcript levels for the beads and the virus, suggesting that hdiv acts directly on sr-c transcript levels to impair the host cellular response.

others
in addition to the three genes discussed above, hdiv injection down-regulates genes encoding proteins potentially involved in hemocytes adhesion and migration. for example, hdiv injection alters transcript levels of the annexin ix-b , a calcium binding protein that plays a role in biological important functions such as membrane fusion and control of cell proliferation and differentiation  <cit> . in drosophila, annexin ix is an immune responsive gene that is up-regulated in response to bacterial immune challenge  <cit> . interestingly, a new discovered hemicentin-like gene , a putative adhesion molecule of unknown function, is down-regulated in infected hemocytes  as well as a transcript encoding a protein with significant similarity with the c-terminal region of the silkworm humoral lectin , an adhesive protein related to encapsulation of foreign substances  <cit> .

polydnavirus, as other immunosuppressive virulence factors, commonly results in disruption of the hemocytes actin cytoskeleton  <cit> . microarrays indicate that, besides down-regulating the two tubulin subunits in the hemocytes and in the fat body, injection of hdiv affects transcripts of several genes encoding proteins involved in actin-based motility processes, such as thymosin , profilin  and cofilin . the reason for the down-regulation of structural cytoskeleton proteins  in the fat body is not known, and could be related to modifications in cellular trafficking, mitosis, or apoptosis . actin-binding proteins are commonly found as up-regulated in genome-wide analyses of immune challenged drosophila  <cit> . inhibition of regulatory proteins of the actin cytoskeleton by hdiv is concordant with recent analyses in csiv-infected hemocytes suggesting that actin is depolymerised or synthesized in lesser amounts  <cit> .

presence of hdiv also down-regulates genes that encode proteins involved in the assembly of the extracellular matrix, such as type iv collagens, components of basement membranes. both collagen alpha- <dig>  and collagen alpha- <dig> mrnas were less abundant after injection of hdiv . components of basement membrane are secreted by hemocytes  and integrity of the basement membranes seems to play a central role in non-self recognition by hemocytes . decreased transcripts of collagen in hdiv-infected hemocytes could be related to a less efficient cellular response, although the mechanism remains unclear.

some s. frugiperda genes display increased transcript level in hemocytes  <dig> hours after hdiv injection
among the  <dig> genes that are up-regulated in the hemocytes after hdiv injection,  <dig> encode proteins with similarities with known proteins . the highest transcript levels variations were observed for the genes encoding galectin and the prophenoloxidase subunits  <dig> and  <dig> .

galectin
two genes encoding sequences similar to galectins display an important increase of transcript levels  <dig> hours after hdiv injection in s. frugiperda hemocytes . galectins are thiol-dependent β-galactoside-binding lectins found in a large variety of organisms . the s. frugiperda galectin gene is specifically transcribed in hemocytes  and encodes a protein containing a single carbohydrate recognition domain, which is more similar to the mammalian galectin- <dig> than to other described insect galectins. the s. frugiperda galectin gene is also up-regulated in hemocytes following jcdnv injection , but down-regulated after injection of heat-inactivated hdiv . in vertebrates, galectins are involved in a variety of cellular processes such as adhesion  <cit> , apoptosis  <cit>  and they possibly regulate innate immune responses  <cit> . in insects, galectins are thought to have dual functions in development and innate immunity . in anopheles gambiae, two galectin genes, gale <dig> and gale <dig> are induced by bacterial and malarial challenges  <cit> . in drosophila, the dmgal galectin is expressed in hemocytes and may participate in recognition of microorganisms or, alternatively, modulate hemocyte aggregation during infection  <cit> . it is possible that increased galectin levels in hdiv-infected s. frugiperda larvae might lead to the abnormal clumping of hemocytes observed in parasitized larvae , thus contributing to a reduction in the number of circulating hemocytes capable of forming the capsule, and to a less efficient cellular response  <cit> .

prophenoloxidase subunits
the two s. frugiperda genes encoding the two prophenoloxidase subunits  <dig> and  <dig>  showed increased transcript levels in microarray experiments. the microarray contains  <dig> cdnas encoding the ppo- <dig> protein and  <dig> cdnas encoding the ppo- <dig> protein and all of these cdnas are significantly up-regulated . this result was confirmed with quantitative rt-pcr on other biological samples . the level of transcripts for the propo- <dig> gene was still higher after injection of heat-inactivated hdiv , suggesting that the up-regulation of this gene is not directly related to hdiv transcription, but could be linked to presence of hdiv in the caterpillar and thus could reflect a response to hdiv presence. the response seems specific to hdiv since, as shown in table  <dig>  the transcript level was not changed in caterpillars  <dig> hours after injection of the densovirus jcdnv. in drosophila, none of the three propo genes is induced after microbial infection  <cit>  and enzyme activation does not seem necessary for resistance to microbial infections  <cit> . conversely, in mosquito, the expression of two pro-pos is significantly enhanced in response to microfilariae inoculation and blood feeding, respectively  <cit> . an inducible propo was identified recently in spodoptera litura, and its transcript level increases after bacterial infection  <cit> . thus the important up-regulation of the two s. frugiperda pro-po genes by hdiv, inactivated or not, may indirectly reflect a response of this insect to enveloped viruses such as hdiv. this would corroborate previous reports on a possible role of po in antiviral response in the lepidopteran larvae  <cit> . we cannot exclude that the highest level of propo transcripts detected in s. frugiperda hemocytes could also be related to a selective destruction of a subset of hemocytes that are responsible of propo enzyme production. indeed, microplitis demolitor bracovirus  selectively induces apoptosis of the granulocytes  <cit> . however, no clear hemocyte apoptosis is observed after infection with hdiv, contrary to this hypothesis. in hdiv-injected s. frugiperda larvae, concomitant to increased propo transcript levels, by  <dig> hours after hdiv injection, the sf_ppae transcript levels have decreased. this should result in a general decrease in po activation and in the inhibition of melanisation observed in parasitized caterpillars.

CONCLUSIONS
polydnavirus or calyx fluid injection was previously reported to affect host protein levels, by inhibiting translation or interfering with post-transcriptional steps in the parasitized host. the transcriptomic analysis of s.frugiperda genes conducted here shows that injection of filter-purified hdiv results in modifications of transcript levels for several host genes. we cannot assert that all the variations detected by this microarray analysis result exclusively from hdiv, but filter purification is a method that minimizes contaminations with wasp proteins  <cit> . moreover, results obtained for the genes studied after injection of heat-inactivated hdiv suggest that hdiv transcription is required for the changes observed. whether the observed variations in host genes transcript levels result from a direct effect of hdiv proteins or from upstream regulations of other genes or proteins in major pathways will need to be further investigated. the fold-changes observed for transcript levels of the down-regulated genes are relatively low , which is consistent with microarray analyses performed in other biological models and for which high fold changes are usually not observed. these results suggest that hdiv infection decreases transcript levels but does not shut-down a large panel of host genes. moderate and diversified effects on global host physiology at the immune response level as well as at the developmental level are compatible with maintenance and survival of the host during all parasitoid development. based on our knowledge on other insects, we can conclude that several of the steps in the lepidopteran host immune response are affected. down-regulation of putative pattern recognition molecules such as calreticulin and immulectin suggests a decreased recognition efficiency of foreign bodies. decreased levels of transcripts for lysozyme and ppae indicate that the humoral response is affected. finally, the cellular response seems to be impaired due to interference with transcript levels of cytoskeleton-related proteins  or scavenger receptors. the next step will be to better characterize these regulated genes at a genomic level, in order to identify common signaling pathways.

this study also raises the question of the function of the proteins encoded by genes affected by the hdiv injection in lepidopteran immune defense and development. our results suggest an important role for calreticulin, and two novel proteins, scavenger receptor and hemicentin-like proteins, in lepidopteran immune response, and makes lysozyme and po good candidates as molecules involved in virus recognition and antiviral defense.

based on the results obtained, we plan now to analyze the interaction between hdiv and the lepidopteran host s. frugiperda using a more complete microarray comprising a higher number of probes. this should circumvent the limits of the microarray analysed in this study, particularly the reduced number of genes that were screened. analyzing the transcript levels of homologues of known components of major pathways involved in insect immune response such as toll, imd or jak/stat pathways and those of genes previously shown to play a role in the formation of the hemocytic capsule, such as the plasmatocyte spreading peptide cytokine  <cit> , or integrins  <cit>  or the immunoglobulin domains-containing hemolin , should provide an enhanced outline of the immune-suppressive effects of hdiv.

to conclude, this study, although based on a simplified biological model, provides evidence that infection with the polydnavirus hdiv affects, directly or indirectly, transcript levels of lepidopteran host genes. the results obtained in the present study also validate the transcriptomic approach to analyze the complex interactions in the parasitoid-polydnavirus-host models. further use of such global approaches should result in a better understanding of the strategies employed by parasites to manipulate their host physiology, and should give new insights on lepidopteran innate immunity by allowing the identification of potential targets of the immunosuppressive polydnaviruses.

