BACKGROUND
limiting nitrogen  conditions greatly affect plant growth and bring about morphological and developmental adaptations such as increased root/shoot ratio, early transition to flowering and early senescence  <cit> . consequently, the application of n fertilizers has become a major input expenditure used to obtain optimal growth and high-yielding crops  <cit> . nonetheless, it has been estimated that less than 40% of applied nitrogen is used by crops and most is lost through denitrification, volatilization, leaching, and runoff which in turns causes pollution to the atmosphere and aquatic environments  <cit> . thus, during the last decades efforts have been directed to improve nutrient management practices and breeding for crop varieties with high nitrogen use efficiency  .

several studies have shown genetic differences in n uptake and/or grain yield per unit of n applied in different crops including maize, wheat, rice, sorghum, and barley . rice represents a major food source for about half of the world’s population, and thus its production is of great importance to food security  <cit> . as in other major crops, rice productivity in past decades has been improved not only by breeding, but also by significantly increasing the use of n fertilizers. several countries in asia have attained high rice yield levels at the expense of elevated fertilizer use yet remain with relatively low nue values  <cit> . this leaves opportunities for improvement through better n management procedures and development of varieties with high nue. increasing nue requires a better understanding of the genetics behind n uptake, metabolism and remobilization  <cit> . genetic variation of n uptake, remobilization and metabolism pertaining to nue has been reported in rice . although functional analyses have been performed to elucidate how particular genes affect physiological aspects of rice growth and yield under n limiting conditions , the broad molecular mechanisms controlling genetic variations among different cultivars for nue are far from being understood.

global transcription profiling using microarrays has been a successful approach to examine molecular aspects of nutrient and stress responses. in rice, few analyses of transcriptome responses to nitrate and ammonium starvation have been performed . however, data comparisons across studies are difficult to perform because of disparities in microarray platform and/or analysis employed and differences in growing and treatment conditions of the experiments. in addition, one of the challenges in global gene expression analysis is the large number of genes  and a discrete number of samples which pose problems to typical statistical interpretations. thus, several data reduction methods have been proposed to capture the relevant information using a smaller set of variables   <cit> . in contrast to analyses of differential gene expression, network analyses aim to explain patterns of transcriptome organization, whereby the identification of clusters, or modules, of co-expressed genes across conditions are identified. analysis of a network structure has the potential to yield insight into the regulation of a biological process or response, which can be hidden in direct comparisons of differential gene expression between conditions. in this work, we constructed and analyzed eigengene networks to identify transcriptome clusters associated with the response of rice plants to n availability. furthermore, adaptation to low n has been shown to involve a complex reorganization of multiple aspects of whole-plant metabolism  reflected in reduced levels of amino acids and proteins, secondary metabolites, notably anthocyanins, as well as alterations in carbohydrate metabolism reflected in changes in chlorophyll levels and starch accumulation  <cit> . hence, to better understand how the metabolomes of rice leaves and roots respond to n limitation, and to specifically compare the low n adapted response versus the response to a sudden reduction in n availability, we also conducted a survey of metabolic changes under sufficient and limiting n conditions providing a correlation platform with the expression responses.

RESULTS
identification of gene expression clusters associated with nitrogen limitation in leaves and roots
limiting and sufficient nitrogen conditions for rice grown in hydroponic and soil systems have been established previously by our group  <cit> . for hydroponic growth, we have determined 3 mm nitrate as sufficient n, 1 mm as mild-limiting  and  <dig>  mm as severe-limiting . in this work we used two nitrate levels, 3 mm  and  <dig>  mm  representing sufficient and severe-limiting n, respectively. rice plants were grown under sufficient  and limiting  n conditions or switched from hn to ln  or ln to hn  as described . total rna was extracted from leaves and roots and used for cdna synthesis to profile the transcriptome using microarrays. both control probe sets and probe sets that mapped to multiple loci in the genome were removed from the analysis, reducing the rice dataset from  <dig>  to  <dig>  probesets. a weighted gene co-expression network was created using the wgcna r package  <cit> . the resulting tom matrix was grouped by hierarchical clustering. a total of  <dig> clusters  of possible genetic networks were identified . the large number of clusters was further reduced by merging similar clusters in order to facilitate analyses and to allow for clusters large enough to contain significant gene ontology  terms . each of the resulting  <dig> clusters was then analyzed for functional enrichment using the agrigo analysis tool . the results of this analysis are summarized in table  <dig> and a complete list of enriched go terms is included in additional file  <dig> eigengenes for each cluster were determined  allowing us to evaluate the significance of a cluster to specific experimental conditions, in this case, each tissue and nitrogen condition combination. correlations between module eigengene value, n treatment and tissue type were calculated and the results are illustrated as a heatmap . a first observation is that samples from roots and leaves seem to show distinct responses to n treatments. ten out of the  <dig> clusters are significantly correlated  to at least one condition and five of those were significantly correlated to reduced n treatments. entities represented in these clusters could offer insight into the molecular mechanisms of adaptation to n limitation. the most significant correlations were those observed in modules  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> that presented  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ,  <dig>  ,  <dig>  , respectively . interestingly, no clusters show significant correlations to n induction treatments.figure  <dig> 
dendrogram of merged module eigengenes. the dendrogram depicts the  <dig> clusters generated by applying a dynamic tree cutting function after hierarchical clustering. original clusters   with eigengene similarity exceeding  <dig>  were merged to create the merged clusters.


summary of the number of entities and enriched go terms in each validated cluster


a complete list of enriched go terms in each cluster is provided in additional file  <dig> 
heatmap representing the strength and significance of correlations between module eigengenes and binary nitrogen condition/tissue combinations. pearson’s correlation coefficient is used as the correlation descriptor , and p-values are found in brackets. ln, limiting n; hn, sufficient n; induced n ; reduced n .

functional enrichment analysis of gene clusters associated with nitrate conditions suggests tissue-specific aspects of the nitrogen adaptation and reduction responses
gene ontology  enrichment analysis was performed on all clusters . of particular interest are the go enrichment terms of modules  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> as these were identified to most robustly reflect tissue specific responses to n limitation . modules  <dig> and  <dig> associated with the adapted ln response are enriched for molecular function terms related to nucleoside/nucleotide , purine  and atp binding . module  <dig> is correlated to ln conditions in general, while module  <dig> is associated with ln specifically in leaves. in addition to go terms common to these ln-associated clusters, module  <dig> also contains unique enriched terms associated with defense response processes  and molecular functions related to sugar/carbohydrate binding , protein binding  and protein kinase activities . interestingly, modules  <dig> and  <dig>  associated with sub-optimal n conditions in leaves show a common significant enrichment of cell-death related terms . module  <dig>  which is associated with the response of roots to reducing n conditions, reflects gene functions associated with enzyme activity at the cell wall and apoplast . these findings suggest that distinct leaf and root transcriptome-level responses are utilized by rice plants to cope with limiting n conditions. additionally, although some commonality exists in the response of rice organs to limiting and reducing n, these conditions seem to elicit distinct responses, particularly in leaves.figure  <dig> 
summary of significantly enriched go terms in modules  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  sea analysis was performed to determine enrichment of significant go terms in the clusters of interest. only significant go terms associated with the clusters are displayed. colored boxes indicate levels of statistical significance according to the scale . onto refers to the ontology category: f, molecular function; p, biological process; c, cellular component.



to substantiate our approach to transcriptome analysis, we compared the enrichment of go terms between a list of differentially expressed genes in leaves  and entities in module  <dig>  associated with ln in leaves . go terms pertaining to nucleotide and purine binding/metabolism are similarly significant in both instances lending support to the notion of the biological significance of these processes in the response of rice leaves to n limitation.

statistical analysis of module membership suggests putative transcription factor-encoding genes as candidate regulators of the response to limiting nitrogen in rice
nitrate initiates rapid changes in metabolism and gene expression where protein phosphorylation and transcriptional activation are involved  <cit> . also, several transcription factors have been identified as potential regulators of the global gene expression response to nitrate  <cit> . further, the successful identification of transcriptional regulators of glucosinolate metabolism with the use of condition-specific gene expression correlation data  <cit>  provides a proof of principle for the utility of gene network analyses to yield candidate regulators. hence, we evaluated the centrality of transcription factor encoding genes to each of the  <dig> clusters in our dataset. in order to evaluate whether any putative transcription factor-encoding genes are central to the each of the clusters, a list of all putative transcription-related entities in each cluster was obtained by assigning cluster entities to mapman bins based on their putative biological function  <cit> . the “regulation overview” pathway and the “rice_japonica_mapping_merged_08” mapping were used to extract entities assigned to the bin  <dig> “transcription” . a total of  <dig>  entities were assigned to the biological function “regulation of transcription” using this approach. next, entities within each cluster were ranked in order of decreasing module membership score. module membership  is a measure of the correlation of each entity to the eigengene describing the cluster. thus, mm provides a quantitative measure of the importance or centrality of each entity to the cluster. following the ranking of entities by descending mm score within each cluster, this list was queried for the highest-ranking entity with putative transcription factor annotation. finally, we tested the significance of the ranking . the rank of the highest ranking transcription factor annotated entity and the significance of its position is listed in additional file  <dig>  a similar outcome was obtained after performing rank analysis based on two other rice transcription factor-related annotation databases: plntfdb  and drtf  . the top-ranking transcription factor in module  <dig>  loc_os11g <dig> encoding a nac domain-containing protein, has a rank significantly higher than predicted by a random distribution . module  <dig> is most highly correlated with reducing n conditions in roots . interestingly, the next highest ranking transcription factor present in module  <dig> , loc_os05g <dig>  is also a member of the nac family of transcription factors. according to a public expression database , loc_os11g <dig> is specifically expressed during seed development, while loc_os05g <dig> is expressed in most tissues, with highest expression in roots. these observations provide us with potential candidates for forward genetic approaches to further investigate the significance of these nac transcription factors as regulators of the response to n limitation in rice.

metabolic profile of roots and leaves of rice plants subjected to limiting and sufficient nitrogen conditions
a comprehensive metabolite profile analysis of rice samples was performed in parallel to the co-expression analysis. a total of  <dig> metabolites were successfully detected and  <dig> of these were identified using an in-house library . we focused our analysis to address two main lines of comparison: between tissues and between the adaptation to limiting n  vs. n reduction  treatments. to examine the adaptation to ln condition, hn and ln conditions were compared. similarly, to obtain metabolite level changes significant to the reduction and induction conditions, shift-related changes were contrasted to plants grown under the same initial condition, i.e.  compared to ln for induction, and  compared to hn for reduction. additional file  <dig> contains a summary of the number of significant metabolites in each of the categories of interest. a higher number of biochemicals are responsive to changes in n conditions in leaves compared to roots . second, most of the differences observed in leaves occurred in response to ln and when shifted to reducing n treatment. interestingly, both leaves and roots exhibited a considerable non-proportional response pattern in reference to n level; that is, compounds which are reduced in the ln condition and have elevated levels upon a reduction treatment. this pattern is specific to the reduction and is not common with the induction treatment. significant metabolite changes were mapped to metabolic pathways using mapman   <cit>  and all identified compounds presenting significant changes in leaves and roots to different nitrate treatments are listed in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  most amino acids were found at reduced levels in leaves of plants grown in ln conditions, while the same tissue showed higher levels of amino acids when a sudden n limitation is imposed illustrating a non-proportional response . one possibility is that elevated amino acid contents observed in the reduction condition may be the result of general protein degradation processes. to address this possibility, we examined our metabolome data for evidence of increased protein degradation. however, the absence of elevated levels of post-translationally modified amino acids or dipeptides in the reduction dataset indicates that protein degradation is likely not the cause of the non-proportional patterns of amino acid abundance across n conditions . this suggests that reducing n conditions may be causing a rapid release and assimilation of organelle sequestered nitrate . indeed,  <dig> of the  <dig> proteinogenic amino acids, as well several amino acid metabolites, showed a significant increase in terms of fold change in the reducing condition. the most notable examples in rice leaves were asparagine , glutamine , arginine  and gamma-glutamylglutamine . interestingly, the compounds with the largest increase in reducing nitrogen conditions were asparagine and allantoin, both relevant compounds in nitrogen transport and storage . this phenomenon was strongest in leaves followed by roots. allantoin, a peroxisome-produced product of purine degradation, was  <dig> times more abundant in the reducing nitrate shift treatment, suggesting that this catabolic pathway may have a role in increasing n remobilization under n limiting conditions. in addition, significant changes were observed in the present dataset for other purine metabolites. amp and two catabolic products of cyclic amp  increased in response to the drop in nitrate concentration. cgmp also increased after shifting from hn to ln though the change was not statistically significant. however, it accumulated more under ln conditions . together, the changes in all these nucleotide metabolites suggest active second messenger activity involved in nitrate regulation.figure  <dig> 
overview of metabolites altered in n adaptation and n reduction conditions. diagrams of metabolic pathways are presented as mapman overview of metabolites altered in rice leaves and roots between pairs of conditions: sufficient nitrate  vs. ln  and hn vs. hn to ln . statistically significant differences  in each comparison are represented by a false color heat map .




metabolic profile of compounds associated to the nucleotide metabolism super pathway that varied in leaves and roots of rice plants subjected to different nitrate treatments. fold change  are shown. asterisks indicate significant change for the indicated t-test .

discussion
co-expression network analysis reveals enrichment of functions essential for nitrate signaling
differential gene expression surveys using microarray technology on n deficiency stress response have been reported for rice and other crops . however, differential expression analyses usually ignore the correlations that may exist between gene expression profiles. this makes it difficult to prioritize functions or to uncover the underlying regulatory mechanisms. in contrast, in the present expression network analysis, we hypothesized that gene expression profiles in response to n availability can be highly correlated and can thus be grouped into gene clusters or co-expression clusters. we have taken advantage of gene co-expression clusters to analyze rice responses to n adaptation, n induction and n reduction treatments and to gain insights on the regulation of plant responses to this nutrient stress at the molecular, metabolic and physiological levels. in such clusters, the module eigengene –a mathematical descriptor of the cluster– was used to summarize the expression profile of each cluster  <cit> . furthermore, in this work, metabolic profile analyses were included to further explore rice responses to nitrate changes.

our network analysis organized the rice transcriptome into  <dig> clusters containing genes with highly similar expression patterns under our set of conditions. further, we calculated the association of each cluster with n treatments and tissue type . using go term enrichment analysis, we found terms in the clusters that presented significant correlation with whole plant ln conditions , ln conditions in leaves , and n reduction in leaves  and roots . significant go terms in these clusters include: nucleotide/nucleoside, purine and atp binding; defense response processes, sugar and carbohydrate binding, protein binding, protein kinase activities, cell-death related processes and enzyme activities at the cell wall and apoplast . interestingly, two of the clusters correlated with adaptation to ln presented enrichment of molecular functions associated with binding to nucleotides, purines and atp. these terms comprise a wide spectrum of functions and include genes encoding proteins that use atp or gtp in enzymatic activities, transport or signaling, among others. a close examination of the annotated genes revealed that most entities encode atpases, protein kinases and receptor kinases . few others include genes for dna and rna helicases, gtpases, nucleotide transporters and a nucleoside kinase . these functions emphasize the importance of signaling processes in response to nitrate. in a similar study, beatty et al.  <cit>  compared the transcriptome changes between a wild type rice genotype with a transgenic high nue genotype after  <dig> and 26 days at three ammonia concentrations. although no n induction or reduction treatments were included, the investigators found that under limiting n conditions, several induced genes in the high nue genotype were involved in regulation of transcription and protein phosphorylation biological processes.

phosphorylation is a ubiquitous mechanism in the regulation of pathways controlling diverse processes in plants. in the case of n related processes, for example, two calcineurin b-like-interacting ser/thr protein kinases, cipk <dig> and cipk <dig>  regulate the expression of nitrate responsive genes, including nitrate transporter encoding genes and genes required for n assimilation, and affect signaling activity when n availability drops  <cit> . in maize leaves, more than  <dig> phosphorylated proteins have been analyzed, including those involved in c and n metabolism, rna helicases, and transcription and translation factors. among them are -nitrate reductase and proteins associated with photosynthesis  <cit> , suggesting tight control of these metabolic routes. in arabidopsis, rapid responses to nitrate resupply  also involve changes in the phosphorylation level of proteins with signaling functions , transcription factors and transporters  <cit> .

roles for atp in modulating different aspects of n metabolism have been reported. nitrate assimilation depends on the availability of atp and reducing power supply such as nadph and nadh  <cit> . in arabidopsis cells, storage of nitrate within the vacuole is primarily mediated by the nitrate/h+ exchanger atclca. it has been described that atclca activity can be negatively regulated by cytosolic atp levels, inhibiting nitrate influx into the vacuole  <cit> . amp is known to prevent this inhibition  <cit> . hence, physiological level of atp is a regulatory point for nitrate use within the cell. the expression of seven genes encoding different atpase isoforms is also up-regulated by n deficiency and n induction in rice shoots and roots. in addition, increased plasma membrane proton pump atpase activity results in increased net uptake of nitrate and ammonia  <cit> . in this sense, the fact that two clusters of our dataset presented several entities associated with atp binding and atpase activity suggest that atp-mediated processes have an important role in responses to n deficiency in rice.

transcription factors are also important downstream integrators of signaling pathways and control gene expression to generate responses to nutrient limitation  <cit> . a significant number of genes annotated as having transcription factor activity have been identified as responsive to n treatments in rice  <cit>  and other species  <cit> . we identified over  <dig>  entities associated with regulation of transcription in our dataset and performed a module membership rank analysis to determine whether some transcription factors may be representatives of each cluster eigengene and thus possible regulators of the members in their own cluster. we found two nac transcription factors that are highly ranked, one in module  <dig> associated with nitrate reduction treatment in roots and another in module  <dig> . potential significant roles of members of this transcription factor family in nitrate responses in plants have been documented. in an analysis of  <dig> arabidopsis array data sets, ca. 10%  of the genes that consistently respond to nitrate in roots correspond to transcription factors, and of those the third most represented family was the nacs group  <cit> . additionally, peng et al.  <cit>  reported five nac/nam transcription factor encoding genes that are up-regulated by nitrate in wild type arabidopsis plants and nine in the nitrogen limitation adaptation  mutant. other examples of n-responsive nac transcription factors include nac <dig>  a key regulator of a nitrate-responsive network reflected in arabidopsis lateral root growth in response to nitrate  <cit>  and ptanac <dig>  found to be a central regulator of root response to low n in genetic network analysis of poplar  <cit> . in wheat, a nac factor has been identified for its involvement in the n mobilization process during grain development. wheat plants with reduced tsnac-b <dig> expression display delayed senescence and 30% less protein accumulation in seeds  <cit> . therefore, nac transcription factors seem to play a role not only in rapid responses to n limitation but also in n remobilization including during the leaf senescence process  <cit> . similarly, nutrient remobilization in crops is related to degradation of macromolecules and salvage of nutrients from senescing tissues. this process may occur through autophagy and related cell death events  <cit> . detection of go terms associated with cell death and apoptosis in module  <dig> which is associated with ln in leaves is consistent with this observation. further, modules  <dig> and  <dig> , associated with n limitation in leaves share enrichment for cell death related terms suggesting that this may be a leaf-specific response to sub-optimal n conditions. the arabidopsis nla mutant has a decreased capacity to adapt to limiting n and undergoes accelerated leaf senescence in response to these conditions  <cit> .

metabolic profiling indicates rapid response for nutrient allocation under n reduced conditions
the transcriptome analysis of this work suggests that n limitation results in major reorganization of plant metabolism in a tissue and n condition specific manner. metabolite analysis supports the observations of the transcriptome data. not only are the responses of leaves and roots to sub-optimal n distinct, but so are the responses of each organ to growth at limiting n and reducing n treatments. a higher number of metabolite variations were detected in leaves compared to roots during short-term response to n availability. the metabolic profile suggests that rice plants under hn were more anabolically active  compared to those plants under ln. increased sucrose levels in response to hn suggests that leaves were operating more strongly as source tissues under the hn condition, providing carbon and energy for growth activities . some nitrogen-containing compounds changed proportionally to the nitrate level . for example, glutamine, asparagine, glutamate, aspartate and arginine were all either directly proportional to nitrate, or were not statistically different. glutamine and aspartate were also directly proportional to nitrate in roots. asparagine showed an especially strong difference in leaves and roots. interestingly, alanine, which is derived by the glutamate-mediated transamination of pyruvate, also fell into this group, resembling the behavior of aspartate, glutamate and glutamine in both leaves and roots. alanine may be involved in n balance in plants, as it can serve as a storage compound under certain stresses  <cit> . it has been reported that a barley alanine aminotransferase expressed in roots exhibits improved nue under reduced n conditions  <cit> . however, it was interesting to observe, from a physiological perspective, that some compounds in leaves behaved non-proportionally with respect to n condition; that is, their levels were lower in plants grown at limiting n but elevated sharply in plants shifted from sufficient n to limiting n. it may be important that the compounds which showed the strongest increase, in terms of fold change to the reducing condition, were those directly relevant to n metabolism such as asparagine, glutamine, arginine and allantoin. evidence for early n remobilization in shoots to support root growth has been described in mature arabidopsis plants subjected to n starvation. when undergoing long term n stress, such plants exhibit an increase in n remobilization enzyme activities in shoots; though a larger capacity of high-affinity nitrate uptake in roots was also detected  <cit> . few possibilities can explain why so many n-rich compounds  are dramatically increased as rice plants were moved from sufficient nitrate to a limiting nitrate condition:  a rapid increase in proteolysis that might be associated with a senescence response;  induction of a high affinity nitrate system, possibly triggering the more rapid assimilation of residual nitrate in the plant tissues; or  a rapid release of sequestered nitrate, presumably from vacuolar stores  <cit> . evidence for proteolysis was rather weak. a post-translationally modified amino acid form  which can be a marker for proteolysis as well as several dipeptides were detected, but their response pattern did not match the general amino acid response . the second alternative, that is a dramatic change in the dynamics of nitrate transport by a rapid induction of a high affinity system, also seems unlikely. since most of the induced transport and assimilation systems of this type described in the literature would involve gene induction, translation, and then transport to the leaves to allow assimilation and enzymatic alteration of many metabolite pools, this seems intuitively less plausible for a short-term response than a more direct regulatory mechanism . also, the expression profile of high affinity transporters represented in the array does not support this scenario. the third possibility therefore seems most likely, as it would involve protein-level mechanisms that modify transport across the tonoplast to release sequestered nitrate. this is plausible in leaves and roots if nitrate were pre-stored in both tissues and if a nitrate sensing signal were rapidly transmitted. the rate of vacuolar nitrate release has been reported in individual barley root cells, and a significant drop in vacuolar nitrate was observed in few hours  <cit> . interestingly, in those experiments the nitrate released into the cytoplasm was rapidly assimilated into other compounds consistent with the metabolite profiles of the rice plants in the present study. a rapid release of nitrate upon a reduction in available n is also consistent with the elevated levels of assimilatory amino acids  observed here. one might also expect to see a concomitant decrease in the organic acids supplying the carbon backbones for the newly formed amino acids, as it was the case for pyruvate .

in general, one can also infer that the leaves experience a net movement of carbon compounds into secondary pathways under conditions of limiting n. some of these compounds reversed their levels rapidly during the nitrate shift experiments. two compounds associated with anabolic processes were glycerol-3-phosphate  and ferulate . g-3-p is essential in the synthesis of membrane phospholipids, while ferulate is an important phenylpropanoid precursor in cell wall synthesis. in this sense, it was interesting to observe that one of the clusters  associated with the root responses to hn to ln shift condition included genes that correspond to cell wall-related go terms . it is intriguing to speculate that this may reflect alterations to cell physiology in roots that affect changes in permeability to water and nutrients.

another interesting finding from the metabolite data is the higher content of several purine metabolism compounds, specifically in reducing n conditions . as previously mentioned, enrichment of go terms relating to purine metabolism was observed in modules  <dig> and  <dig>  and module  <dig> is highly correlated with limiting n conditions in leaves . allantoin, a peroxisome-produced product of purine degradation is  <dig> times more abundant in leaves of plants subjected to reducing n conditions. the significance of this finding could be several-fold. accumulation of allantoin could indicate an increase in purine ring degradation, a pathway that has been shown to result in increased n recycling in source tissues for remobilization . particularly, n-fixing legumes utilize ureides for root to shoot n transport  <cit> . in addition, allantoin and its product allantoate are likely involved in protecting plants during abiotic stress by quenching of reactive oxygen species  . reports of the protective properties of ureide compounds in response to nutrient stress exist to date  <cit> . interestingly, a key enzyme in the purine degradation pathway, allantoin synthase, has been implicated as a substrate for the lrr receptor kinase brassinosteroid insensitive  <dig>  <cit> , providing a conceptual link between purine catabolism and a phosphorylation signaling pathway regulating plant growth.

in addition, cyclic nucleotides are considered important signaling molecules and may also be relevant for nitrate  responses. cgmp has been suggested to play important roles in plant development and responses to stresses. hormones such as abscisic acid , auxin , and jasmonic acid  have a significant effect on cytoplasmic cgmp levels which in turn alter downstream cascade of events such as the phosphorylation status of other proteins  <cit> . cgmp has also been reported to be involved in signaling pathways related to nitric oxide production especially in the induction of program cell death  <cit> , and there has been considerable research in plants related to camp  <cit> . in the present dataset we observed that cgmp, and two catabolic products of camp  all rise in response to the drop in nitrate concentration in rice leaves. together, the changes in these cyclic nucleotide metabolites suggest active second messenger activity involved in nitrate regulation.

limitations and challenges of network analysis
whereas co-expression networks with biological relevance were identified, the high computational requirement of this analysis was a major limitation. access to a computer with high ram capacity  was needed, and such resources are not readily available to most researchers. the developers of the wcgna package have identified this pitfall and have developed a function that allows users to complete an analysis on a standard computer by pre-clustering genes into "blocks" using a modified k-means method  <cit> . after blocks of similar genes are identified, tom matrices for each block are identified in each individual tom by average linkage hierarchical clustering. the dendrograms are cut with the dynamic hybrid tree cutting algorithm. after processing the clusters using several steps to ensure high module membership, similar clusters across all tom matrices are merged. previous research has found biologically meaningful genetic networks in a variety of settings using the block-wise wgcna method  <cit> . although the block-wise method accommodates for a smaller amount of required ram, a network analysis would ideally be completed on an entire data set, as pre-clustering the data could lead to artificial gene expression clusters. for this reason, an r package that can complete a wgcna analysis with a smaller memory usage is currently in development.

CONCLUSIONS
as a complementary tool to differential expression analysis, co-expression network analysis offers the advantage to capture relevant transcriptomic information using gene clusters. a set of clusters of co-expressed genes associated with the response of rice plants to different n conditions was identified to provide insights into biological process and regulation of n responses in crops. incorporating some of these genes in targeted functional studies would complement and validate their implication in this process. examination of function annotations in gene clusters with significant correlation with nitrate treatments indicated the importance of signaling transduction, transport, metabolic regulation and cell death-related processes in response to nitrate. metabolic profiling supports the observation that n reduction elicits a response distinguishable from that to limiting n adaptation, particularly in leaves. our data suggest that plants rapidly respond to n limitation most probably by remobilizing stored nitrate, and likely this response involves phosphorylation signal cascades and transcriptional regulation. developing similar type of analysis to integrate responses to multiple conditions and in diverse genetic backgrounds will be valuable for expanding our understanding of nutrient use efficiency in crops.

