BACKGROUND
huntingtin is a large protein , characterized in humans by the presence of an amino-terminal polymorphic polyglutamine  tract whose aberrant expansion causes huntington's disease , a progressive neurodegenerative disease accompanied by neuronal dysfunction and cell loss in the brain  <cit> . hd is dominantly inherited, and this observation, together with a number of important experimental results, point to the polyq tract in the mutant protein as disease-triggering  <cit> . more recently, it has been proposed that aspects of the disease might be caused by reduced activity of the normal huntingtin protein, indeed a number of biological investigations point to individual protective activities of huntingtin in brain cells  <cit> . the protein is expressed ubiquitously in humans and rodents, with the highest levels in the neurons of the cns  <cit> . its widespread intracellular localisation does not facilitate the definition of its physiological function. in addition, the large dimension of the protein makes its purification extremely problematic and its three dimensional structure remains unsolved. because of these difficulties, the study of huntingtin function has largely progressed through gene deletion and gene addition studies that have demonstrated that huntingtin is essential for embryonic development  <cit> . in addition, huntingtin is important for the survival of brain neurons where it also controls bdnf  production and delivery  <cit> , axonal transport  <cit>  and neuronal gene transcription  <cit> .

the huntingtin gene or transcript has been characterized in a number of vertebrate and invertebrate species  <cit> , and it seems to be absent in yeast and lower eukaryotes  <cit> . current data demonstrate that huntingtin is a single copy gene – highly conserved in vertebrates but poorly conserved or absent in invertebrates  <cit> . indeed, in drosophila melanogaster huntingtin shows only five regions, accounting for 36% of the whole protein, with high similarity to vertebrate homologs  <cit> , while the gene has not been detected in the nematode caenorhabditis elegans. in invertebrate deuterostomes , only cdna clones corresponding approximately to the last three hundred amino acids of the protein have been identified and used to investigate the expression pattern, suggesting that neural expression emerged as novel feature in the phylum of chordates, and was absent in primitive deuterostomes  <cit> . as further peculiarity, huntingtin does not present regions of similarity to other proteins or genes. only a conserved secondary structure domain has been identified as shared with other proteins, indeed huntingtin is notable for contributing to the definition of heat repeats , a 37– <dig> amino acid motif consisting of two alpha helices forming a helical hairpin  <cit> . the heat repeats are normally present in tandem arrays or clusters and are indicative of the ability of the protein to mediate protein-protein interactions  <cit> , however they provide only limited clues to the protein function.

current data thus provide little help in speculations as to the origin and evolution of this large protein, as well as of its q-rich domain. all comparative studies carried out so far have been focused on the protein, with few studies analyzing the gene structure in single species. in the case of a highly conserved protein such as huntingtin, a detailed comparative study of the exon-intron structure of the gene and its evolution could shed light on the evolution of this gene across chordates and help to identify the regions of the gene  evolving under different functional constraints. the current availability of complete genome sequences for a number of organisms offers the possibility to identify and annotate this large gene and to study its evolutionary dynamics in a large taxonomic sample. in this study we focus our attention on the basal chordate ciona intestinalis . this model organism is of fundamental importance in evolutionary studies, because it has the advantage of being a chordate-invertebrate: as a chordate, this species shows a body plan  and embryonic development very similar to those of vertebrates  <cit>  but, as an invertebrate, it exhibits enough genetic divergence from vertebrates to allow more incisive evolutionary and comparative analyses at protein level. thus, the large evolutionary distance separating tunicates and vertebrates   <cit>  could allow the identification of a huntingtin "signature" related to the ancestral chordate function of the gene/protein.

in this study we report the characterization of the ciona intestinalis huntingtin full-length transcript, including the 5' and 3' untranslated regions , and the definition of its gene structure using available c. intestinalis genomic sequences. we have thus carried out a comprehensive comparative analysis of the exon-intron structure of the huntingtin gene in chordates, that is between two cogeneric ascidians ciona intestinalis and ciona savignyi and eight vertebrate species, including xenopus and gallus – whose gene structures were here accurately predicted from genomic sequences.

RESULTS
the ciona huntingtin transcript
the full-length transcript of the c. intestinalis huntingtin  shows several peculiar features. it ranges from  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides  in length, depending on the usage of an alternative splicing site in the coding region and of the polyadenylation site.

the longest protein-coding region , from the first aug to the uga stop codon, is  <dig> bp long. a competing 5' splice site in exon  <dig> allows the synthesis of an alternative transcript lacking  <dig> nt  in the c-terminal portion of the encoded protein . in the first exon of c. intestinalis there are no in-frame upstream or downstream aug with respect to the inferred initiator, whereas in exon  <dig> of vertebrates there are one or two additional met codons, depending on the species: in position  <dig> in non-mammalian species, and in position  <dig> in all vertebrates. the start codon of c. intestinalis htt is unambiguously homologous to the met at position  <dig>  common only to non-mammalian vertebrates . the same situation is found in c. savignyi.

the complete 5' untranslated region  was determined by 5'race and is  <dig> bp long. as revealed by comparison with the genomic sequence, most of the sequence is encoded by the exon that contains the translation start codon. surprisingly, the first bases of the 5'utr were found neither in the first exon, nor in the genomic region  <dig> kb upstream the first exon, excluding the existence of an upstream micro-exon. on the contrary, this sequence perfectly matches the 16-bp long sequence recognized as spliced leader  in c. intestinalis  <cit> , pointing to an event of trans-splicing in the htt mrna maturation. the presence of a sl sequence in the mature htt transcript of ciona prevents both the identification of the transcription start site and the "in silico" characterization of the promoter region.

although quite short, the 5'utr contains two upstream orfs  that are out-of frame with respect the to translation start: the first uorf is located at position  <dig> and is immediately followed by a uga stop codon; the second uorf starts at position  <dig> and is  <dig> nt long . in c. savignyi, no sequences with similarity to the c. intestinalis 5'utr were found in the  <dig> kbp upstream of the first coding exon. assuming that as in c. savignyi the sequence  <dig> bp-long immediately upstream the translation start codon constitutes the 5'utr, two out-of frame uorfs  were found in this putative 5'utr. moreover, all uorfs exhibit a start codon context different from the kozak's consensus  <cit>  and there is no similarity between the uorfs of c. intestinalis and c. savignyi.

the start codon context is aaacauaauggaa in c. intestinalis, and cauugcgauggaa in c. savignyi , thus the purine  <dig> nt upstream of the start codon, and the g immediately after the start codon are conserved, suggesting a strong context of translation initiation  <cit> .

seven alternative polyadenylation  sites were experimentally identified by 3'race, and an additional site was found in two est clones, making a total of eight alternative polya sites . the possibility that some of the identified polya sites are artifactual mrna 3' ends due to internal priming was excluded by the absence of long genomic adenine stretches  adjacent to the polya cleavage site. indeed, only the most represented polya site  starts just downstream of an a3ca <dig> sequence . most polya sites are associated with a polya signal, defined as described in methods, except for two cases . moreover, the third polya signal exhibits both unusual sequence and position compared to the polya site . the resulting alternative 3'utrs range from  <dig> to  <dig> bp, while the most common 3'utr is  <dig> bp-long . the longest 3'utr contains a cytoplasmic polyadenylation element , a signal known to be involved in the regulation of translational activation of quiescent maternal mrnas during early development in animals  <cit> .

all identified alternative 3'utrs, together with the last  <dig> bp of the cds of the c. intestinalis transcripts, are encoded by the last coding exon .

no significant similarity to the c. intestinalis 3'utr was found in the c. savignyi genomic scaffold containing the htt cds, nor in the remaining genomic sequences, preventing the prediction of c. savignyi 3'utr by similarity criteria. moreover, there are no significant similarities between ciona utrs and the homologous regions of vertebrates  <cit>  and drosophila melanogaster  <cit> .

as expected from the high level of polymorphism revealed by c. intestinalis genomic sequences  <cit> , a number of positions with nucleotide differences were found in both the cds and utr of the sequenced transcript. in the cds we identified a total of  <dig> polymorphic positions, with nucleotide differences resulting in synonymous  and non-synonymous substitutions ; in the utrs both nucleotide substitutions and indels were found. nucleotide differences were also observed between our sequences obtained by rt-pcr and data obtained by re-sequencing of publicly available est clones , further confirming a high level of sequence polymorphism in this species. the observed pattern of nucleotide differences is in accordance with the evolutionary dynamics of coding and non-coding sequences, suggesting that such nucleotide differences are genuine polymorphisms.

protein analysis
the percentage of amino acid  differences between all pairs of the eleven analysed chordate proteins are reported in table  <dig>  the sequence divergence between c. intestinalis and c. savignyi is as high as  <dig> %, although these species belong to the same genus. this value is surprisingly high, particularly compared to the pairwise aa differences observed among vertebrates. indeed, the divergence between pufferfishes belonging to the same family of tetraodontidae  is only  <dig> %, and that between mammals of the same order  is as low as  <dig> % . on the contrary, the distance observed between the two ciona species is comparable to that observed between mammals and fishes. the evolutionary tree based on amino acid data confirms the high divergence between the two ciona species, and suggests the existence of long branches for these species .

the huntingtin proteins of c. intestinalis and c. savignyi are  <dig> and  <dig> aa long respectively, notably shorter than their vertebrate homologs, which are  <dig> aa long on average. this length difference can be mostly ascribed to insertions/deletions in the n-terminal region of the protein . moreover, the n-terminal regions of both ciona proteins lack the polyq domain, or any kind of simple repeat . even the proline-rich region typical of mammalian huntingtin is absent. a single histidine  or tyrosine  residue is located at a position corresponding to the vertebrate polyq stretch, suggesting low selective constraints acting on this region in the ascidian protein.

a total of  <dig> heat repeats  are present in both the c. intestinalis and c. savignyi huntingtins. these are located as tandem arrays or as single elements in the n-terminal , central , and c-terminal  protein regions . in human huntingtin, a total of  <dig> heat repeats are present, mostly clustered as tandem repeats in the n-terminal region . the analysis of htt protein alignment shows that all four ascidian heat repeats located in the n-terminal region and one repeat of the central region are also conserved in the same positions in the human homolog, whereas the heat repeats of the c-terminal region appear to be lineage-specific . thus, the presence of heat repeats at the n-terminal region seems to be an ancestral chordate character, further expanded in mammals. finally, comparing the location of heat repeats to the gene exon boundaries, we found no indications that heat-repeats are encoded by single exons in either human or ascidians . thus, the protein domain structure does not correspond to the gene structure, at least with respect to the heat domains.

gene structure comparison
the structure and size of chordate huntingtin genes  are summarized in table  <dig> and figure  <dig>  the coding region of c. intestinalis htt gene consists of  <dig> coding exons with length varying from  <dig>  to  <dig> bp  and a mean of  <dig> ±  <dig> bp . introns account for 73% of the gene . all introns are flanked by the canonical gt-ag consensus splice site and interrupt the coding sequence in all three possible phases. phase  <dig> introns are the most abundant, with an approximate ratio of 3:1: <dig> for introns with phase  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. the two alternative introns  <dig>  due to the presence of a competing 5' splice site in exon  <dig> , share the same phase , and both follow the gt-ag rule. such an alternative 5' splice site can be also predicted in c. savignyi , with the two alternative introns conserving phase  <dig> and canonical consensus splicing sites as in c. intestinalis.

the gene structure of the two ciona species is almost identical : introns interrupt the cds at identical amino acid positions and also in the same phase . similarly, orthologous exons are of consistently similar size, with substantial length differences  found only in exon  <dig>  and exon  <dig> . interestingly, exon  <dig> covers the less conserved region of ascidian huntingtin  and exon  <dig> is involved in the alternative splicing event.

the htt gene structure is perfectly conserved in the eight vertebrate species analysed, from fishes to amphibians and mammals, and consists of  <dig> exons . introns are conserved in the same phase and identically positioned in all species, with few exceptions . as in ciona, phase  <dig> introns are the most abundant, with an approximate ratio of 2:1: <dig> for introns with phase  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. exon size is also highly conserved between vertebrates and ranges from 45– <dig> bp  to 341– <dig> bp , with a mean value of  <dig> ±  <dig> bp . therefore, orthologous exons have almost identical size, and those with Δl >  <dig> bp  can be classified in three groups depending on the source of size variability:

• size differences between mammals and remaining vertebrates: exons  <dig> and  <dig> ;

• size differences among non-mammalian vertebrates: exon  <dig> ;

• size differences between  fishes and remaining vertebrates: exons  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> ;

• intron sliding: the slippage of intron  <dig> in gallus produces length variation of flanking exons in this species compared to other vertebrates but the overall amino acid length in this region is conserved .

in most cases, exon size variability reflects a propensity of the corresponding encoded protein region to accept multiple amino acid insertions/deletions: the extreme situation is found in exon  <dig>  with the presence/absence and the length variability of the polyq and polyp stretches. more interesting is the case of exon  <dig>  which contains an additional 3'end portion encoding for 15– <dig> amino acids only in non-mammalian vertebrates. similarly, length variation in exon  <dig> is found only in danio and is due to  <dig> additional amino acids encoded by the 3'end of this exon.

•  <dig> "equivalent" exons, as orthologous exons whose sequence can be perfectly aligned over their entire length in all chordates ;

•  <dig> exon-blocks, as groups of exons delimited by positionally conserved introns and containing lineage-specific introns, differently located in vertebrates compared to ciona .

thus, the equivalent exons represent 38% and 34% of the total htt exon number of ciona and vertebrates, respectively. although the total number of exons is higher in vertebrates than in ciona, there are  <dig> exon-blocks where one exon in vertebrates corresponds to two exons in ciona but only one exon-block with the opposite pattern, suggesting that intron gains and losses have occurred in both lineages. the distribution of shared-chordate introns along the gene indicates that the 5'-terminal region of the huntingtin was more prone to taxon-specific intron gain/loss compared to the remaining regions. indeed, there are only  <dig> shared-chordate introns in the 5'-terminal region, against  <dig> in the central region and  <dig> in the 3'-terminal region. consequently, equivalent exons are quite limited in the 5'-terminal compared to the remaining regions of the gene  .

the comparison of ciona and vertebrate gene structure reveals the presence of two lineage-specific coding regions:

• in exon-block b_50_ <dig>  the ciona sequence including the 3' end of exon  <dig>  plus the 5' end of exon  <dig> is absent in the central region of the orthologous vertebrate exon  <dig> , suggesting that the corresponding encoded protein region was lost by vertebrates or acquired by ascidians;

• exon  <dig> of ciona encodes an amino acid sequence also present in non-mammalian vertebrates, where it is encoded by the end of exon  <dig> and the beginning of exon  <dig> . given its presence in ciona and basal vertebrates, this sequence was most likely lost in mammals.

the existence of a possible correlation between gene structure conservation and protein conservation was examined by calculating the percentage amino acid identity  for each gene structural element shared by all chordates, that is equivalent exons and exon-blocks identified in figure  <dig>  figure  <dig> reports the % aa identity for equivalent exons  and exon-blocks  along the protein alignment, together with the mean % aa identity of the entire alignment . equivalent exons are almost equally distributed above and below the mean % aa id, however the less conserved elements correspond to exon-blocks , and the most conserved elements are equivalent exons . moreover, the most conserved equivalent exons belong to clusters of consecutive equivalent exons, indicative of a high conservation of gene structure, and are located in the central and c-terminal protein regions .

with regard to sequence conservation, a significant inverse correlation was found between % aa id and % gaps calculated separately for each gene structural element , denoting that protein regions with a higher tendency to accumulate amino acid substitutions have also a higher tendency to accept insertions/deletions.

intron analysis
as shown in table  <dig>  intron length is highly variable within species. generally, intron size does not correlate across species, and significant linear correlation between length of orthologous introns is found only in the species pairs fugu-tetraodon , xenopus-gallus  and within mammals  .

the first intron is the longest intron in four of the eight vertebrate species . using a threshold to define unusually large introns , the longest introns are mostly clustered in three regions of the vertebrate gene: two regions located at the 5' end of the gene  and one region at the beginning of the central portion  . in each of these regions, at least  <dig> of the  <dig> analysed vertebrate species contain an unusually large intron. on the contrary, there are no common gene regions where long introns cluster in both ciona species . moreover, no correspondence between regions with longest introns in ascidians and vertebrates is observed .

a search for sequence similarities in intronic regions does not identify conserved sequence tags  between the two ciona species, nor between vertebrates and ascidians. on the contrary, intron  <dig> of vertebrates contains interesting csts in more than one species pair . indeed, csts ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> bp were found in intron  <dig> in the species pairs xenopus-gallus, tetraodon-fugu, and mus-rattus. the xenopus-gallus cst has a high coding potential   <cit> , whereas the tetraodon-fugu cst exhibits a marginal coding potential , and the rodent cst is clearly non-coding, as indicated by a low cps value . moreover, the xenopus-gallus cst shows 34% amino acid sequence similarity to the cst of pufferfishes but no similarity to the rodent cst. the presence of a coding sequence in intron  <dig> is further confirmed by the prediction of a competing 5' splice site in exon  <dig> of xenopus and gallus, and of an internal cassette exon  in the two pufferfish species , with all new putative introns following the gt-ag rule. this coding region, present only in some non-mammalian vertebrates and showing a low amino acid similarity , suggests the existence of an alternative splicing isoform due to a species-specific additional or longer exon located in intron  <dig> 

gene size and repetitive elements
the variability of gene size between species is essentially due to changes in intron size , which in turn correlate well with the overall nuclear genome size of the species considered. the total intron size increases proportionally with the overall percentage of repeated elements in introns  but a linear correlation between intron size and gene size still exists when intron length without repetitive elements is considered .

as shown in table  <dig>  repetitive elements cover a high and similar fraction of introns in all mammals, and a small fraction of the two pufferfish introns. the two species of ciona show a similar fraction of repeated elements , which is almost one-third of the mammalian repetitive intron fraction. a strong prevalence of interspersed is observed in all vertebrates, except for the pufferfish, whereas in the two ascidians interspersed repeats represent almost the same or more than twice the percentage of simple repeats  . among interspersed repeats, retroelements are more abundant than dna elements in mammals and c. savignyi, whereas the opposite situation is observed in xenopus, danio and c. intestinalis.

overall, the two ciona species show a quite different distribution of repeats among classes, a situation rather surprising when compared with the similar repeat distribution observed between fugu and tetraodon and even between human and rodents.

no conservation of repetitive elements in orthologous introns in all or most analysed species is observed . in ciona, ten orthologous introns contain short low complexity repeats in both species , but there are no orthologous introns containing an interspersed repeat of the same class/family in both species.

discussion
genomic data exclude the presence of paralogs of the huntingtin gene in the genus ciona, as in both species the transcript sequence significantly matches only one genomic scaffold . the full-length huntingtin transcript of c. intestinalis shows several interesting features, such as sl trans-splicing, multiple polyadenylation sites, and alternative splicing involving the coding sequence.

the extent of sl trans-splicing has been recently investigated in c. intestinalis, revealing the esistence of polycistronic transcription units, and that about 50% of the total number of expressed genes are trans-spliced in this species  <cit> . a database search using the c. intestinalis sl sequence as a probe reveals that several full-length mrnas and cdna clones of c. savignyi also starts with the same sl sequence . considering that the trans-splicing status of individual genes is often evolutionary conserved in related species  <cit> , we can speculate that the htt transcript is also sl trans-spliced in c. savignyi and in the larvacean oikopleura dioica, a tunicate where about 12–24% of mrnas are trans-spliced  <cit> . the sl trans-splicing found in ciona htt could be responsible for specific mechanisms of post-transcriptional gene regulation different from those observed in vertebrates. indeed, the 5'utr of mammalian htt mrna contains a conserved uorf that inhibits the translation of the downstream huntingtin orf, at least in human  <cit> . uorfs are also present in the 5'utr of the two ciona species  but they are not conserved in either position or in sequence, so their functional significance is not obvious.

the htt transcript shows eight alternative polya sites, mostly associated with polya signals located at the expected position , and with a sequence corresponding to one of the ten identified single-base variants of the aauaaa vertebrate polya signal  <cit>  . moreover, the last polya signal shows exactly the canonical aauaaa sequence, in accordance with the observation that mrnas with multiple polya sites tend to use variant signals in the region proximal to the cds, and a canonical aauaaa at the 3'-most distal site  <cit> . the absence of and/or anomalies of three polya signals can be ascribed to the existence of species-specific polya signals, or to a radically different polyadenylation mechanism, as already suggested for human transcripts  <cit> .

an alternative splicing event involving the cds was fortuitously identified as being expressed in ovarian tissue. since alternatively spliced isoforms were not specifically sought by our experimental strategy, we cannot exclude the existence of other transcript isoforms. est data do not help in the identification of alternatively spliced isoforms but suggest an almost ubiquitous and low expression level of the htt gene in c. intestinalis , similar to observations in vertebrate and invertebrate species  <cit> .

overall, the maturation of the huntingtin transcript in this ancient chordate involves several processes, commonly reported as mechanisms of fine regulation of gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. some of these processes are conserved even in vertebrates, and would indicate ancestral mechanisms of gene regulation. this is true for the alternative polyadenylation  <cit> , and even for alternative splicing. indeed, hints that alternative splicing occurs in vertebrate huntingtin may be gleaned from the literature  <cit> , and our comparative analyses have highlighted the possible existence of a species-specific alternative splicing in some vertebrate species .

the exon-intron organization of the huntingtin gene is highly conserved in the two subphyla of vertebrata and tunicata. previous studies on the exon-intron structure of small genes reported an almost invariant gene structure in vertebrates  <cit> , and a hypervariability of intron position in the tunicate larvacean oikopleura compared to both vertebrates and other tunicates, suggesting also a variability of gene structure within tunicates  <cit> .

here, we show that the exon-intron structure of a large gene, huntingtin, is almost identical between the two ciona species and highly conserved between ciona and vertebrates, with about 36% of the exons exactly conserved in both taxa. assuming that introns in the same positions of orthologous genes are ancestral, the htt gene of the common ancestor of chordates should have contained at least the  <dig> introns positionally conserved in both ciona and vertebrates . however, a more comprehensive reconstruction of the ancestral chordate gene structure will require the analysis of additional species, such as sea urchins, lancelet and other tunicates.

splitting the gene into three regions, it appears that the 3'-terminal region was highly conserved in all chordates at level of gene structure, whereas the 5'-terminal was less conserved during chordate diversification , probably because of a relaxation or a modification of selective constraints. indeed, the 5'-terminal region presents the lowest number of shared introns, and several slipped exons and intron phase changes, suggesting multiple events of intron gain/loss . in vertebrates, the longest introns are again concentrated in the 5'-terminal and the beginning of the central region of the gene, avoiding regions with high conservation of gene structure . thus, we can hypothesize that the 3'-terminal gene region might have a low propensity to accept new sequences or intron expansions, because of the constraints to preserve specific functional elements. finally, the 5'-terminal of the gene contains the less conserved exon-block , characterized by high variability at level of both structure  and sequence , and by the presence of a possible lineage-specific alternative splicing . another lineage-specific sequence, lost in mammalian species, is located at the beginning of the central region , suggesting a trend to a lineage-specific evolution in the first portion of the vertebrate gene.

introns are arranged independently of the predicted heat domains of the protein in both vertebrates and ascidians. according to the exon-shuffling theory  <cit> , protein domains should correlate with the borders of their coding exons, particularly in protein categories functionally linked to organism multicellularity, such as extracellular and membrane proteins mediating cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions  <cit> . although in huntingtin there is no indication of a correlation between the boundaries of heat domains and their coding exons, we can not exclude the existence of a correlation between the structure of the gene and the unknown domain structure of the protein.

as shown in figure  <dig>  only a weak correlation was found between sequence and gene structure conservation. this observation is in accordance with the result of a recent large-scale study on gene structure evolution in  <dig> deeply diverging animals species, showing that changes in exon-intron structure are gradual and largely, although not completely, independent of protein sequence evolution  <cit> .

the htts of the two ciona species show several striking differences: the amino acid divergence is similar to that observed between mammals and fishes ; the experimentally identified 5'- and 3'-utrs of c. intestinalis did not allow the determination of the homologous utrs c. savignyi by similarity criteria; a different distribution of repetitive elements among classes is found between the two species ; no orthologous introns contain interspersed repeats of the same class/family. finally, there is no correlation between orthologous intron size of the two ciona species, whereas a statistically significant correlation has been found between closely related species showing low cds sequence divergence. all such data are in accordance with the considerable differences observed between the two ciona species in the mitochondrial genome  <cit>  and in nuclear coding and non-coding sequences  <cit> , and suggest a high evolutionary rate or a ancient origin of the two ciona species.

CONCLUSIONS
our comparative analyses of the huntingtin gene suggest that the 5'-terminal and the beginning of the central region of the gene were exposed to lower functional constrains during chordate evolution and underwent major changes at level of exon-intron organization, primary sequence, and intron size, with probable modification of the ancestral function or acquisition of new functions in vertebrates compared to ascidians. thus, it is likely that the remaining central and 3'-terminal regions of the gene are those encoding for domains playing the ancestral gene function, shared by all chordates, and thus represent the ancestral traits of the huntingtin gene. in addition, the htt gene history suggests a high evolutionary rate of ciona species compared to vertebrates and/or an early divergence time between the two ciona species. these observations, derived from a single but highly informative gene, should stimulate further evolutionary studies of the ciona genus.

