BACKGROUND
bacillus cereus is a facultative anaerobic bacterium that can cause two types of food-borne illness in humans. among these, the diarrheal syndrome may result from the production in the human host’s small intestine of various extracellular factors including hemolysin bl  and nonhemolytic enterotoxin nhe
 <cit> . the genes encoding hbl and nhe belong to the plcr regulon
 <cit> . the ability of b. cereus to produce enterotoxins and grow well in an o2-limited environment such as that prevailing in the human small intestine is controlled by both the two-component system resde and the redox regulator fnr. unlike resde, fnr is essential for b. cereus growth under anaerobic fermentative conditions and for hbl and nhe expression, irrespective of the oxygenation conditions
 <cit> . b. cereus fnr is a member of the large fnr/crp superfamily of transcription factors that bind as homodimers to palindromic sequences of dna, each subunit binding to one half-site
 <cit> . like its homologue from bacillus subtilisb. cereus fnr contains a c-terminal extension with four cysteine residues, cccc. the last three cysteine residues were identified as 2+ cluster ligands in b. subtilis fnr, the fourth ligand being an aspartate residue
 <cit> . the integrity of this oxygen-labile fe-s cluster was found to be essential for the dna binding activity of b. subtilis fnr
 <cit> . by contrast, b. cereus fnr appeared active in dna-binding protein in its apo-form . this has led to the conclusion that unlike its b. subtilis homologue, b. cereus fnr is active in both its apo-form and its holo-form 
 <cit> . however, data evidencing that b. cereus fnr could coordinate a fe-s cluster under anaerobiosis were lacking.

here, we show that purified b. cereus apofnr can bind one 2+ cluster per monomer upon incubation with iron, cysteine and cysteine desulfurase. reconstituted fnr  showed enhanced dna binding activity within the fnr promoter, but no activity difference with regard to the hbl and nhe promoters. both the apo- and holo-form of fnr interact with resd and plcr to form a ternary complex. our results lend novel insight into the molecular control of enterotoxin gene expression in anaerobically-grown b. cereus.

RESULTS
b. cereus apofnr binds a labile 2+ cluster
b. cereus fnr was expressed as a tag-less polypeptide in aerobically-grown e. coli and purified in three steps as described in methods. the mr of the purified polypeptide, as estimated by sds-page under reducing conditions  was  <dig> , consistent with the theoretical value of  <dig>  deduced from the dna sequence . the apparent molecular mass of recombinant fnr, as determined by analytical gel filtration chromatography and by sds-page under non-reducing conditions , was ca.  <dig> , indicating that tag less fnr occurs mainly as a dimer in solution. as isolated, the fnr protein was colorless, contains no detectable iron and its uv-visible spectrum did not feature any absorption band other than that at 280 nm . thus, we have successfully purified a recombinant tag-less dimeric apo-form of fnr that is amenable to further investigation in vitro.
b. cereus
fnr fe-s cluster reconstitution. reconstitution was carried out inside an anaerobic glove box as described in methods. time points at which samples were scanned by a uv-visible spectrophotometer are indicated.

the ability of apofnr to bind an iron-sulfur cluster under anaerobiosis was tested in an enzyme-driven reconstitution system involving the cysteine desulfurase  from e. coli . during anaerobic reconstitution, a brown colour developed resulting from a time-dependent increase of a broad absorbance band around 416 nm, typical for  containing proteins . after 90-min reconstitution and subsequent gel filtration, the purified brown-colored protein displayed an a416/a <dig> ratio of  <dig>  and was found to contain  <dig>  ±  <dig>  moles of iron atoms per mole of monomer. these data are consistent with the reconstitution of one  cluster per fnr monomer
 <cit> . the reconstituted holofnr was analysed by epr spectroscopy, both as isolated and after reduction with sodium dithionite. no signal was detected for the fnr sample as isolated, but a broad signal with main g values at  <dig> ,  <dig>  was observed upon reduction . these data indicate the presence of a 2+cluster, which upon one-electron reduction, converted to a paramagnetic 1+ cluster with an electronic spin s = 1/ <dig>  however, the epr signal differed from that of typical  proteins in that the resonance lines were relatively broad and showed additional features, especially at high field. as a consequence of this broadening, the gx component of the tensor was not well resolved. this might reflect some heterogeneity in the vicinity of the cluster, and could be related to the instability of holofnr upon reduction . in addition, the intensity of the epr signal was low compared to the protein concentration, although we could not give an accurate estimation of the electronic spin due to the broadening and weakness of the signal. this suggested that the protein was partially reduced, consistent with the observation that dithionite reduction caused a relatively small decrease of the chromophore absorption . attempts to further reduce the protein by using photoreduced 5-deazaflavin were unsuccessful, likely because of the instability of the cluster in the reduced state . taken together, these results suggest that holofnr contains a redox-responsive  cluster, which is unstable upon reduction.
b. cereus
holofnr after reduction with dithionite. the spectrum was acquired under the following conditions: microwave power  <dig>  mw, modulation amplitude  <dig> mt, receiver gain  <dig> , temperature 10 k. relevant g values are indicated.

exposure of reconstituted holofnr to air resulted in decreased intensity of the 416 nm absorption band associated with the  cluster over 60 min . based on the absorbance decay at 416 nm, which followed first-order kinetics, the half-life of holofnr in air was estimated to be 15 min. we conclude that the 2+ cluster of holofnr was extremely oxygen-labile.
b. cereus
fnr in response to o <dig>  spectra of b. cereus holofnr  were recorded before and 10 min, 15 min, 30 min, 60 min after exposure to oxygen. arrow indicates the trend of the spectral changes.

dna-binding properties of b. cereus holofnr
the dna-binding properties of holofnr were investigated with electrophoretic mobility shift assays  under strict anoxic conditions. figure
 <dig> shows the emsa results obtained using holo- and apofnr and the promoter regions of fnr , nhe  and hbl. because of its large size , the promoter region of hbl was divided into two overlapping fragments of 636 bp  and 610 bp . the binding specificity was evidenced from the disappearance of the complexes in competition assays using a 50-fold excess of homologous unlabelled promoter regions  and by the absence of binding with the negative control . the results showed that  all the complexes formed were stable and did not dissociate during electrophoresis,  the presence of the 2+ cluster increased fnr-binding affinity to fnr and nhe promoter regions and did not affect fnr-binding to hbl promoter regions. regarding the nhe promoter, the observed difference in apparent binding affinity between the apo- and holo- forms was narrow . also, a fairly high level of fnr  was needed to form the dna-fnr complex. these data suggest that holo- and apofnr have similar affinities for the nhe promoter.
fnr,
hbl
and
nhe
genes determined by emsa. dna probes corresponding to fnr , nhe , hbl <dig> , hbl <dig>  and a negative control  were bound with increasing concentrations of apofnr  and holofnr  as indicated. the results are representative of triplicate experiments.

fnr forms a ternary complex with resd and plcr
to determine whether fnr could interact in vitro with plcr and resd, two other regulators of nhe and hbl, far-western analyses were conducted under anoxic conditions using the apo- and holo- forms of fnr. figure
 <dig> shows that  bsa  did not bind to plcr or resd, while plcr and resd showed self-binding consistent with their capacity to oligomerize
 <cit> ,  both apo- and holofnr interact with plcr and resd and  plcr interacts with resd. these pairwise interactions were confirmed by cross-linking experiments using dimethyl suberimidate .

to determine whether fnr could interact in vivo with plcr and resd, soluble protein extracts were prepared from anaerobically-grown b. cereus cells and incubated with anti-fnr antibodies. figure
6a shows that anti-fnr antibodies could co-precipitate resd and plcr independently. interestingly, figure
6b shows that anti-fnr antibodies co-immunoprecipitated resd, plcr and fnr. these results strongly suggest that fnr, resd and plcr form a ternary complex in vivo.
b. cereus
crude extract immunoprecipitated with immobilized fnr-specific antibodies.  proteins resulting from an anti-fnr pull-down were analyzed by western blotting with anti-fnr , anti-resd  or anti- plcr  antibodies.  immunoblot analysis of the same protein samples after non-denaturing electrophoresis  using anti-fnr , anti-resd  or anti-plcr  antibodies.

discussion
this work has shown that the fnr protein of b. cereus is homodimeric and can bind one  iron-sulfur cluster per monomer. our first challenge was to accurately assemble the fe-s cluster via an enzymatic system since all our attempts to purify holofnr under anaerobiosis failed. we demonstrated that csda from e. coli was capable of assembling the b. cereus fnr fe-s cluster. interestingly, b. cereus synthesizes
 <cit> one pyridoxal 5-phosphate-containing enzyme 
 <cit>  that might be involved in fe-s cluster biogenesis. when anaerobically reconstituted b. cereus fnr was exposed to o <dig>  we observed a rapid loss of the fe-s cluster, demonstrating that fnr functions as an oxygen sensor via its fe-s cluster. importantly, the cluster of the reconstituted b. cereus fnr appeared extremely unstable, judging from its fast destruction on exposure to air. in this respect, the b. subtilis holofnr, which is the closest homolog of b. cereus fnr
 <cit>  displayed greater stability
 <cit> . sequence comparison of the b. cereus and b. subtilis fnr revealed a significant variation in the amino acid residues around the three c-terminal cysteine residues  that serve as ligands for the cluster 
 <cit> . these observations imply that the occurrence of certain amino acid residues close to the cluster ligands may affect the stability of the b. cereus holofnr, thus providing a possible explanation for its high susceptibility to oxygen damage
 <cit> . as a result, b. cereus fnr might sense subtle changes in the redox status of the cells, a property that would reflect an adaptation of the pathogenic strain to the environment of its human host.

we proposed previously that b. cereus apofnr binds promoter regions of enterotoxins only through the monomer pathway. in other words, we proposed that apofnr was active as a dna-binding protein only under its monomeric form
 <cit> . here we showed that, when produced in a tag-less form, apofnr is active as a dna binding protein under its dimeric form. in addition, we showed that dimeric apofnr-dna complexes were stable in contrast to what we observed previously
 <cit> . we conclude that  in our previous studies, tags fused at the n-terminus and c-terminus of fnr introduced steric hindrance that affected its oligomeric structure and/or dna binding activity and  b. cereus apofnr may bind dna both through the dimer and the monomer pathway under aerobiosis unlike its homologues of b. subtilis and e. coli <cit> . there are probably many variables affecting the choice for a monomer or dimer recognition pathway in vivo. among them, there is the redox state of the cell that may impact directly the ratio of monomeric to dimeric apofnr since we observed that the addition of reductant  affected the dimerization state of apofnr in solution. finally, the mechanism of apofnr dependent regulation of enterotoxin is undoubtedly complex, and further extensive experiments are required to examine the role of the monomer and dimer pathways.

the properties of the fe-s cluster indicate that fnr is essentially present in the apo- form in aerobically grown b. cereus, and may occur in both apo- and holo- forms in anaerobically-grown bacteria, the ratio between the two forms depending on the redox status of the cells, as detected by the fnr cluster . the stability of the holo form might also be modulated through interactions with dna, protein partners and  low-molecular weight thiols
 <cit> . given the higher dna binding affinity of the holo form compared with the apo form to its own promoter, we assume that higher levels of fnr  are produced under anaerobiosis than under aerobiosis . in addition, on the basis of these and earlier results, we offer evidence that fnr can  activate the expression of genes encoding the enterotoxin-activators resd and plcr and  associate with plcr and resd to form a ternary complex under both anaerobiosis and aerobiosis
 <cit> . by producing higher levels of fnr
 <cit> , anaerobically-grown b. cereus cells might produce higher levels of the tripartite fnr-resd-plcr complex and, as a result, higher levels of hbl and nhe. hence, the interconversion between apo- and holofnr may well be a key factor in controlling the regulation of enterotoxin gene expression through the fnr/plcr/resd complex.
hbl
and
nhe
enterotoxin genes in
b. cereus.  apo- and holofnr-dependent regulation in either the absence or presence of oxygen. , fnr is thought to be part of a ternary complex involving resd , plcr , fnr , acting as positive regulator.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this work brings further evidence that b. cereus fnr, unlike its counterpart from b. subtilis, is an active transcriptional regulator in both its apo- and holo- forms. this property may enable b. cereus to ensure optimal enterotoxin gene expression in response to changes in oxygen tension such as those encountered during infection of the human host.

