BACKGROUND
abiotic stresses such as low temperature, high salinity, and drought adversely affect plant growth and productivity worldwide. the entire world is facing an increasing food requirement as the population grows continuously while crop and herbage productivity diminishes due to the deteriorating environment. therefore, our understanding of the mechanisms underlying plant responses to external abiotic stresses is very important for breeding stress-tolerant crops and herbages, as well as sustaining the agricultural industry  <cit> .

a variety of adaptive strategies to cope with abiotic stresses have evolved in plants. these include morphological, physiological, biochemical, and molecular responses . hundreds of plant genes are differentially regulated in response to abiotic stresses, as demonstrated by rna-seq analyses. the complex network of regulatory genes necessary to sense and respond to abiotic stresses has been addressed. regulatory component identified so far include transcription factors , plant hormones, noncoding rnas, protein modifiers and epigenetic modifications .

the growth and development of all plants is determined by the interactions between their genome and growing environment. a multitude of complex signalling systems have evolved in plants to respond to external and internal cues to regulate growth and development under abiotic stresses. phytohormones play critical regulatory roles in these processes. generally, phytohormones control various developmental events throughout the plant life cycle, such as patterning, cell identity, and differentiation, as well as the coordinated growth of various reproductive organs  <cit> . in recent years, the metabolism and core signalling components of major phytohormones, such as abscisic acid , ethylene, jasmonic acid , auxins, and gibberellins , have been revealed  <cit> . in plants, the response to abiotic stresses is through the modulation of gene expression by phytohormone-mediated signalling processes. as summarised in recent reviews, aba remains the best-studied hormone for plant stress responses . however, other hormones, such as ethylene, ja, ga, and auxins, are being studied to a limited extent for abiotic stress responses .

medicago falcata, which is closely related to alfalfa , is an economically and ecologically important legume herbage and is widely distributed throughout the world. m. falcata is especially attractive because it can be grown in adverse environment regions, such as infertile and sandy soils, and is, thus more tolerant against drought and cold compared with alfalfa  <cit> . the combination of these traits makes m. falcata one of the best stress-tolerant candidate plant species. m. falcata also consists of numerous different genotypes, each of which has diverse growth and agricultural characteristics, indicating its agricultural importance  <cit> . a variety of genes were reported involved in tolerant mechanism of m. falcata. expression of multiple genes encoding myo-inositol phosphate synthase , galactinol synthase , early light induced protein , hybrid proline rich protein , s-adenosylmethionine synthetase , and a myo-inositol transporter-like  in response to low temperature is also associated with cold tolerance in m. falcata plants . temperature-induced lipocalin  have initially been detected as massively increased proteins in response to low temperatures. arabidopsis til <dig> is localized in the plasma membrane and its temperature response suggested a function in membrane stabilization during freezing stress  <cit> . a partial-length cdna clone encoding a til has been obtained in m. falcata responsive to cold  <cit> , implying its potential role in cold tolerance of m. falcata. as a legume species, m. falcata has the ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen through the establishment of a symbiotic association with bacteria called rhizobia, and this ability allows leguminous plants to grow in soils that are deficient in nitrogen, decreasing both the need for costly nitrogen fertilisers and the water pollution they may cause  <cit> . an organ, the root nodule, is formed to house this symbiosis. within this organ, there is an exchange of nutrients: the bacteria provide the plant with ammonia, and the plant provides the bacteria with carbohydrates. over the past several years, hundreds of plant and bacterial genes displaying differential expression during the nodulation process have been identified by transcriptome analyses in medicago truncatula and sinorhizobium meliloti , and many factors have been shown to control the nodulation process  <cit> . studies of bacterial and plant mutants have led to the identification of plant genes involved in the early stages of symbiotic nodulation  <cit> . however, a transcriptomic analysis of nodulation signalling pathway gene expression in response to abiotic stresses is lacking in the literature.

the emergence of next-generation sequencing  technologies has allowed further study of species in which the genome sequence is available or previously unexplored species in re-sequencing and de novo sequencing aspects  <cit> . the technology, which allows the sequencing of the entire transcriptome , could provide expression profiles of either coding or non-coding rnas, making important contributions to genome annotation  <cit> . transcriptome sequencing has become more and more popular in many research areas, especially for model species such as arabidopsis  <cit> , cotton  <cit> , soybean  <cit> , m. tuncatula  and non-model species, such as alfalfa , lentil  <cit> , pea  <cit> , pigeon pea  <cit>  and cucurbits  <cit> . although often used in species with a sequenced genome and high-quality gene predictions, the rapid development of software tools has allowed researchers to undertake the de novo assembly of a transcriptome based on only short sequence fragments, which has been widely applied in many plants .

in this work, we present the expression profiles of m. falcata in plants grown under dehydration, high salinity, and cold conditions. we also explore evidence for novel abiotic stress-induced phytohormone metabolism and nodulation signalling. this is the first high-throughput transcriptomic study in stress-tolerant legume herbage, and we hope that it will be a valuable resource for breeding crops and herbages with enhanced abiotic stress-resistance abilities in legumes or other species.

RESULTS
evaluation of cold, dehydration and salt stresses response of three medicago genotypes
in order to assess the resistance ability of m. falcata , we test medicago truncatula ecotypes a <dig> and r <dig> under different abiotic stresses, including cold, drought and salt stresses. the methods referred to medicago handbook  <cit>  and was modified. firstly, in the cold stress test, we find that the differences in mortalities  and root to aerial part ratios between m. falcata and m. truncatula are significant. after the treatment under −6 °c for 10 h, the mortality of pi <dig> is 80 %, whereas the mortalities of a <dig> and r <dig> are both 100 %. under −6 °c for 6 h, the mortalities of pi <dig>  a <dig>  and r <dig> are 0 %, 85 %, and 100 %, respectively. under −6 °c for 8 h, the mortalities of pi <dig> is 20 %, the other two are 100 % . since the cold stress can inhibit the growth of roots, therefore, the root to aerial ratio, which is defined as the ratio between fresh weights of root to that of aerial part, can characterize the ability of alfalfa’s resistance to cold stress. the results show that, as the cold stress time becomes longer, the root of pi <dig> can still grow in compare to that of r <dig> and a <dig> . therefore, it is obvious that the pi <dig> processes a stronger ability to resist the cold stress. secondly, drought stress is applied 7 days , 10 days, 12 days and 14 days, respectively, followed by re-hydration, three replicates. fresh weight and ratio of root to aerial part were measured. the results showed that the roots of pi <dig> have relative higher water contents. pi <dig> has the highest ratio of root to aerial part among r <dig>  a <dig>  and pi <dig>  to sum up, the m. falcata pi <dig> has the strongest ability to resist drought. in the salt stress test, we treated the soil with 0 mm , 100 mm, 150 mm and 200 mm nacl, and then collect the content of soluble carbohydrate using a phenol-sulfuric acid method. the contents of soluble carbohydrate can be used as criteria for salt stress resistance, because the carbohydrate will increase under the salt stress to reduce the damage of nacl to plantlet. based on the results, we can conclude that a <dig> has the strongest ability to resist the salt stress, pi <dig> the weakest . these results suggested that m. falcata pi <dig> is more tolerant against drought and cold stresses compared with m. truncatula. based on these results, we attend to reveal mechanisms involved in m. falcata response to abiotic stresses by using rna-seq technology.

rna-seq using the illumina platform and the de novo assembly of the transcriptome
in order to find out the early response genes of pi <dig> under abiotic stresses, we analyzed the electrolyte leakage after the rapid stresses . we picked the optimal stress treatment under which electrolyte leakage increased 2-fold or more compared with standard conditions for rna-seq. plant materials were collected under dehydration , high salinity , or cold  treatment and then rna were extracted. we developed complementary dna  libraries derived from m. falcata pi <dig> grown under abiotic stress and standard conditions: dehydration stress plantlets , high salinity stress plantlets , cold stress plantlets , and standard conditions . two libraries were constructed for one sample respectively, resulting in a total of eight cdna libraries for the rna-seq analysis. a total of  <dig> , <dig>  nt of raw sequencing data were generated from the eight cdna libraries. after a stringent quality filtration of the raw read data using the fastx-toolkit , a total of  <dig> , <dig>  nt filtered data were selected for further analysis .

to obtain a better assembly result, two assembly methods  were used for the de novo assembly of our sequencing data. the parameters used for the two methods are described in the methods section. the de novo assembled transcripts were combined with  <dig>  unique sequences . the total base count of the assembly sequences was  <dig> ,200 nt, with the unique sequence lengths ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  nt. in order to explicitly evaluate the quality of the transcripts generated by assembly, we download  <dig> mrnas already characterized in m. falcata from ncbi est database. blastn comparisons were performed between assembly sequences and est dataset. total  <dig>  mrnas had significant hits to assembly sequences. putative functions for the assembly sequences were assigned using blastx searches against the non-redundant  ncbi database, uniprot database, and m. truncatula proteome . putative functions were assigned for 50 % of the sequences. we also assigned gene ontology  and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  functional classes. annotations for genes and pathways analysed in greater detail throughout this paper were manually curated to ensure accurate analysis and interpretation. in addition, we have pursued systemic co-expression/network analysis with our rna-seq dataset using wgcna software  <cit>  and we integrated the results into falcatabase . users can explore the players that contribute to cold, salt and dehydration response conveniently.

the transcript profiles of m. falcata under dehydration, high salinity, and cold stresses were measured. we analysed the reads per kilobase per million reads -normalised gene expression counts for each sequence from eight samples. previous studies have suggested that the expression of transcripts with low rpkm scores may be statistical artefacts  <cit> . rpkm value depends by definition on the depth of the library. there are  <dig> million reads for a library on average. the mean read length is ~100 nt. based on the depth of our sequencing libraries, the results indicated that a rpkm of  <dig> reflects a 4-fold coverage of the sequence , assuming an equal distribution of reads across the sequence. sequences with rpkm <  <dig> exhibited a low transcript abundance under the conditions tested and may not provide reliable expression data. of the  <dig>  sequences assembled,  <dig>  had rpkm ≥  <dig> in at least one sample and were considered transcriptionally active. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were differentially expressed  in response to at least one stress. heatmap display of expression profile was shown in fig. 1c. overlapped transcripts between increased and decreased was also checked by venn diagram analysis and shown in fig. 1a and b.fig.  <dig> transcripts differentially expressed due to abiotic stresses. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were identified as differentially expressed in the ds, cs, and ss samples. to be considered differentially expressed, the transcript must have rpkm ≥  <dig> in at least one library, a 2-fold or greater change between the stressed and standard condition, and p-value ≤  <dig> . a a total of  <dig>  transcripts were up-regulated. b a total of  <dig>  transcripts were down-regulated. c heat map of the expression profiles of  <dig>  transcripts differentially expressed due to abiotic stresses. expression, represented by z scores, is shown for transcripts differentially expressed due to three abiotic stresses. red indicates high expression, black indicates intermediate expression, and green indicates low expression



we identified putative housekeeping genes that displayed little variation in expression but were expressed at relatively high levels . to identify housekeeping genes, we first selected genes with an average rpkm-normalised transcript count greater than  <dig>  we next selected the top 10 % of genes  with the lowest coefficient of variation   <cit> . finally, we picked up  <dig> single copy genes with the length more than 1000 nt. these housekeeping genes may be useful as reference genes in quantitative real-time pcr  or other experiments to normalise gene expression levels across different conditions  <cit> .

posttranscriptional regulation by micrornas  is an important response to nutritional, biotic, and abiotic stresses  <cit> . the sequencing of mirnas requires special library construction. therefore, the identification of mature mirnas is beyond the scope of this study. however, transcripts regulated by mirnas should contain sequences with almost perfect complementarity to known mirnas. we used the psrnatarget programme  <cit>  to screen the transcripts we identified as differentially expressed due to abiotic stresses for sequences potentially regulated by mirnas using mature mirnas from mirbase as queries. we identified  <dig>  transcripts potentially regulated by  <dig> mirnas . two of the  <dig> mirnas identified in this analysis  have been previously shown to directly regulate cold and salt responses  <cit> . additionally, researchers have identified a number of mirnas that are regulated by abiotic stresses . several of these mirnas were also identified in this analysis.

differential expression of transcripts due to abiotic stresses
a total of  <dig>  transcripts were differentially expressed in response to abiotic stresses:  <dig>  genes in ds versus sc comparison,  <dig>  genes in ss versus sc comparison, and  <dig>  genes in cs versus sc comparison . of the  <dig>  differentially expressed transcripts identified in ds,  <dig>  transcripts were up-regulated, whereas  <dig>  were down-regulated. of the  <dig>  differentially expressed transcripts identified in ss,  <dig>  transcripts were up-regulated, whereas  <dig> were down-regulated. of the  <dig>  differentially expressed transcripts identified in cs,  <dig>  transcripts were up-regulated, whereas  <dig>  were down-regulated. additionally,  <dig> transcripts were induced and  <dig> transcripts were inhibited by all three stresses concurrently.

in response to abiotic stresses, the m. falcata transcriptome alters the expression of transcripts encoding for transcription factors . of the  <dig>  transcripts differentially expressed in response to all three abiotic stresses,  <dig> were identified as tfs . these transcripts belong to  <dig> tf families. the nac and myb-related tf families were the two largest families responding to the abiotic stresses identified in m. falcata. we identified  <dig> members of the nac tf family exhibiting increased expression in ds,  <dig> members exhibiting increased expression in ss, and  <dig> members exhibiting increased expression in cs. the number of transcripts induced by cold stress was the smallest of the three stresses.table  <dig> tfs differentially expressed due to abiotic stresses

tfs with altered expression patterns between the abiotic-stressed samples and standard samples were used. the numbers of individual transcripts within a tf family exhibiting increased or decreased expression  in the abiotic-stressed samples compared with the standard sample are shown



as noted in previous studies, abiotic stress frequently influences phytohormone metabolism and signal transduction. meanwhile, phytohormones play critical roles in responding to external and internal cues to regulate plant growth and development under abiotic stresses  <cit> . to further understand how m. falcata acclimates to abiotic stresses, we evaluated our transcriptome data for differential expression genes to phytohormone metabolism and signal transduction, including abscisic acid , ethylene, jasmonic acid , and gibberellins  .fig.  <dig> expression and pathway distribution of phytohormone metabolism and signal transduction-related genes in m. falcata. a expression pattern of key genes under cold stress. b expression pattern of key genes under dehydration stress. c expression pattern of key genes under high salinity stress. additional abbreviations are as follows: crtz ; zep ; nced ; aao ; pyr/pyl ; abf <dig> ; gid <dig> ; sams ; acs ; aco ; erf ; lox ; aos ; aoc ; opr ; opcl <dig> ; jmt ; and jar <dig> . filled colours correspond with their degree of regulation by the stresses



aba signalling and its key role in the adaptation of plants to stress conditions has been the focus of many studies since the early 1990s  <cit> . thus, we queried the database for differentially expressed transcripts related to aba biosynthesis enzymes, such as crtz , zep , and nced , as well as aao  and aba catabolism enzymes, such as cyp707a . as expected, most of the transcripts for the aba biosynthesis enzyme genes displayed enhanced expression in ds, ss, and cs. however, transcripts for the aba catabolism enzyme genes showed decreased expression in ds, ss, and cs. unexpectedly, transcripts for the aao gene, which encodes for an enzyme that catalyses the final step of aba biosynthesis, showed different levels of decreased expression in all stress-treated samples. meanwhile, we determined the content of aba after cold treatment. compared with m. truncatula, the content of aba in m. falcata dropped significantly . furthermore, pyr/pyl  genes, identified as aba receptors, showed obvious decreased expression in ds, ss, and cs. abf transcription factors are the key regulators of aba signalling. interestingly, transcripts for a member of this family, named abf <dig>  and exhibiting differential expression were found; up-regulated expression was observed in the ds and ss samples, while down-regulated expression was observed in the cs samples. together with aba, gibberellins  act as a main regulating factor in seed germination; however, their role is antagonistic compared with aba. a principal pathway for ga plant hormones can be drawn from ga12-aldehyde. a stepwise analysis of ga metabolism revealed the conversion of ga12-aldehyde to bioactive ga <dig> and inactive ga <dig>  <cit> . in our transcriptome data, the ga 20-oxidase and 3β-hydroxylase transcripts showed different levels of decreased expression in all stress-treated samples; however, the 2β-hydroxylase transcripts displayed the respective increased expression in these samples . interestingly, we identified some transcripts for a ga receptor named gid <dig>  exhibiting differential expression. compared with the down-regulated expression in the cs sample, these transcripts showed up-regulated expression in the ds and ss samples.

our transcriptome data demonstrated that both ethylene and ja metabolism are altered under abiotic stress conditions. the biochemistry of ethylene biosynthesis has been a subject of intensive study in plant hormone physiology  <cit> . major breakthroughs in the ethylene synthesis pathway were the establishment of s-adenosylmethionine  and 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid  as the precursors of ethylene. based on this knowledge, we identified differentially expressed transcripts related to ethylene biosynthesis enzymes . all of the transcripts for ethylene biosynthesis enzyme genes showed enhanced expression in the ds, ss, and cs samples. in addition, jasmonates are also important regulators in plant responses to abiotic stresses and in development  <cit> . the expression of the transcripts involved in ja biosynthesis was increased in the ds, ss, and cs samples . upon further analysis, we noted that all three abiotic stresses increased the expression of transcripts related to the ja metabolic pathway, which would contribute to the increased formation of the bioactive ja compound. additionally, ethylene response factor  is an upstream component in both ja and ethylene signalling and is involved in abiotic stress resistance  <cit> . the transcripts for the erf genes exhibited increased expression in ds, ss, and cs. a reconstruction of metabolic pathways based upon the expression profiles of transcripts expressed during phytohormone biosynthesis provides evidence for previously unrecognised abiotic stress-induced pathways and reinforces the interpretation that phytohormone metabolism is modified under abiotic stress conditions. the expression of transcripts involved in phytohormone metabolism and signal transduction was confirmed with qrt-pcr .table  <dig> confirmation of the rna-seq expression profiles with qrt-pcr

the expression levels of cs, ds, ss, and sc were calculated, and pairwise comparisons  were calculated. expression ratios for the rna-seq data, shown as the fold change, were calculated for cold , dehydration , and high salinity  using the deseq programme. ratios for qpcr analyses were calculated for cold , dehydration , and high salinity  using a previously described method  <cit> . all expression ratios are presented as log <dig>  negative values indicate that the standard has a higher expression level than the treatment, and expression ratios of  <dig> indicate no difference in expression between the treatment and standard



early reports suggested that auxin might affect plant stress response and abiotic stresses might regulate the expression of auxin-responsive genes  <cit> . in our transcriptome data, few transcripts related to auxin biosynthesis showed differential expression. interestingly, an auxin-responsive gene named gh <dig> was indentified up-regulated almost 16-fold in cs. to better understand the role of auxins in plant responses to cold stress and in root development, we treated plants with either indoleacetic acid  or cold stress . the application of cold stress led to a dramatic reduction of lateral roots, nodule number, and root length. by comparison, the addition of iaa had no effect on root length; however, the number of lateral roots and nodules increased. to further investigate the mechanism underlying auxins in plant responses to cold stress and in root development, we used qrt-pcr to measure the expression levels of genes involved in auxin transport. not surprisingly, cold application appeared to inhibit the expression of aux, an important gene in auxin transport. the expression of aux increased after the application of exogenous iaa. overall, these qrt-pcr results illustrate the importance of auxin transport in m. falcata responses to cold stress and in root development.fig.  <dig> auxin application influences cold stress-induced root development. a standard condition, cold treatment, and cold treatment with iaa application phenotypes of m. falcata. b relative expression level of genes coding for the auxin transporter . c number of lateral roots under standard conditions, cold treatment, and cold treatment with iaa application. the mean values and sd were calculated from the results of the three replicated experiments. . d number of nodules under standard conditions, cold treatment, and cold treatment with iaa application. the mean values and sd were calculated from the results of three replicated experiments. . e length of root under standard conditions, cold treatment, and cold treatment with iaa application. the mean values and sd were calculated from the results of the three replicated experiments. 



nodules are legume-specific organs that are formed to fix atmospheric nitrogen through the establishment of a symbiotic association with bacteria known as rhizobia. to investigate the effect of abiotic stresses on nodule formation, we identified differentially expressed transcripts related to nod factor signalling pathways during early symbiotic nodulation . nfr <dig> and nfr <dig> have been recognised as nod factor receptors in a previous study  <cit> . transcripts for the nfr <dig> and nfr <dig> genes showed different levels of increased expression in all stress-treated samples. dmi <dig> and dmi <dig> are two components of the nod factor signalling pathway upstream of calcium spiking. dmi <dig> is a component of the nod factor signalling pathway downstream of calcium spiking and is responsible for the conversion of the calcium spiking signal. in the ds and ss samples, the transcripts for the dmi <dig>  dmi <dig>  and dmi <dig> genes displayed similar increased expression levels. in the cs sample, the transcripts for the dmi <dig> gene exhibited up-regulated expression. in contrast, the transcripts for the dmi <dig> and dmi <dig> genes exhibited down-regulated expression. enod <dig> is widely used as an early infection-related molecular marker for endosymbiotic associations involving both rhizobia and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi  <cit> . enod <dig> can be induced by several transcriptional regulators, including nsp <dig>  nsp <dig>  ern <dig>  and ern <dig>  the transcripts for the enod <dig> gene exhibited obviously decreased expression in the ds, ss, and cs samples. in our transcriptome data, nsp <dig> and nsp <dig> displayed different levels of decreased expression in all stress-treated samples. ern <dig> and ern <dig> exhibited differential expression; up-regulation was found in the ds samples, while down-regulation was observed in the ss and cs samples. rrs  act upstream of the nsp pathway to regulate the cytokinin response and nodule organogenesis  <cit> . the transcripts for the rrs genes exhibited obvious increased expression in the ds, ss, and cs samples. the expression level of the transcripts involved in the nod factor signalling pathways during early symbiotic nodulation was confirmed with qrt-pcr .fig.  <dig> expression pattern of genes involved in early symbiotic nodulation. a expression pattern of key genes under cold stress. b expression pattern of key genes under dehydration stress. c expression pattern of key genes under high salinity stress. additional abbreviations are as follows: nfr ; dmi ; nsp ; ern ; and enod . filled colours correspond with their degree of regulation by the stresses



rna-seq expression validation by qrt-pcr
transcripts known to be involved in the abiotic stress response  were confirmed by qrt-pcr to have expression patterns similar to those measured by rna-seq. additionally, the expression profiles of transcripts involved in phytohormone metabolism and symbiotic nodulation signal transduction were also measured by qrt-pcr . finally, transcripts involved in auxin transport were identified in the assembly and used to design primers for qrt-pcr analysis to measure the expression profiles in plants treated with iaa. in total,  <dig> transcripts were evaluated by qrt-pcr, with  <dig>  % consistent with the rna-seq data .

comparative transcriptomics of m. falcata and with the other legume species
previous phylogenetic analyses of the legumes have divided the family into seven major clades: cladrastis, genistoidsensulato, dalbergioidsensulato, mirbelioid, millettioid, robinioid, and inverted-repeat-lacking   <cit> . medicago truncatula is a member of the irlc clade and is closely related to m. falcata . to explore the relationship between m. falcata and other legumes at the transcriptome level, we compared the assembled and translated m. falcata transcriptome to a peptide database derived from the sequenced genomes of medicago truncatula, cicer arietinum, lotus japonicas, glycine max, phaseolus vulgaris, and cajanus cajan. a blastx comparison of the m. falcata transcriptome to this peptide database showed that  <dig>  m. falcata contigs had significant  top hits to m. truncatula . c.arietinum had the next highest number of top hits . a blastx comparison of the remaining sequences without significant hits to one of the six legume species revealed that  <dig> sequences had significant hits in the ncbi non-redundant  peptide database.fig.  <dig> comparative transcriptomics of m. falcata with six leguminous species. a representation of the legume phylogeny. b blastx comparison of the m. falcata transcriptome assembly with m. truncatula, c. arietinum, g. max, c. cajan, l. japonicus, and p. vulgaris. the top blast hit  for each m. falcata transcript to the six species is shown. contigs without significant hits were then compared with the ncbi peptide non-redundant  database. c six pairwise tblastn comparisons of legume species to the m. falcata transcriptome assembly. sequences with significant homology  shared between the six legume species and m. falcata are shown on the inner circle



to examine the degree of conservation between m. falcata and other sequenced legume species, six pairwise tblastn comparisons were performed between m. falcata and each of the six legume species . m. truncatula had the highest number of sequences with significant hits to the m. falcata database , and the greatest proportion of peptides with significant matches . all six species had at least 42 % of their proteins significantly represented in the m. falcata database. a global view of the top m. falcata transcripts and their similarity to each m. truncatula peptide  is shown in additional file 12c. of the m. truncatula loci,  <dig>  of  <dig>  had transcripts with >70 % similarity and >70 % coverage in the m. falcata transcriptome.

to more closely examine the level of global sequence conservation between m. falcata and m. truncatula, we further examined a blastx comparison of the m. falcata transcriptome assembly with the m. truncatula peptide database . the relative homology of each predicted peptide to the most similar m. truncatula protein was measured by the percent of positive sequence similarity  and percent coverage . a smooth scatter plot representing the percent similarity and percent coverage for each m. falcata sequence compared with the closest m. truncatula peptide sequence is shown in additional file 12c. a proportion  of transcripts possessed at least 70 % similarity to a m. truncatula protein. a total of  <dig>  m. falcata transcripts had at least one match to a m. truncatula gene, with >70 % similarity/>70 % coverage. of the m. falcata transcripts,  <dig>  had ≥95 % similarity and coverage,  <dig>  transcripts were between 80-95 % similarity and coverage,  <dig> transcripts were between 70–80 % similarity and coverage,  <dig>  transcripts were < 70 % similarity and coverage, and  <dig>  transcripts lacked a significant blastx hit  to a m. truncatula peptide.

discussion
several studies utilising microarrays and rna-seq have documented the responses of plants to abiotic stresses. in this study, we extended our fundamental understanding of plant acclimation to abiotic stresses through an rna-seq whole transcriptome analysis of dehydration, high salinity, and cold treatment in m. falcata. although our analysis primarily focused on phytohormone metabolism and signalling, we also explored the effect of abiotic stresses on nod factor signalling pathways during early symbiotic nodulation. our data provide the foundation for what to our knowledge is the first m. falcata gene index . we report  <dig>  unique sequences, of which more than  <dig>  respond to abiotic stresses. moreover, we report previously unrecognised transcriptional responses to abiotic stresses.

comparing the m.falcata transcriptome with other legume transcriptomes
we sequenced, assembled, and annotated the m. falcata transcriptome. the draft transcriptome consists of  <dig>  unique sequences, of which  <dig>  were annotated and the functions of the rest transcripts were unknown. of these transcripts,  <dig>  % were most similar to m. truncatula genes, and 52 % had top hits in the legume, indicating a high level of sequence conservation across the family. blast comparisons between m. falcata and six other sequenced legume species showed that our m. falcata transcriptome has good coverage of homologous sequences. compared with the other species, m. truncatula had the largest proportion of peptides with significant matches . in total, all of these six species had  <dig>  proteins significantly represented in the m. falcata database. we inferred that multiple sequences in the m. falcata assembly may divide from one single protein-coding transcript. these analyses are consistent with previous phylogenetic findings that m. falcata is more closely related to m. truncatula than other species  <cit> . the m. falcata transcriptome will provide evidence for the expression of predicted genes in the m. truncatula genome.

genes commonly expressed under abiotic stresses
we identified  <dig> transcripts containing sequences homologous to  <dig> identified helicase proteins in other plants. nine transcripts were induced by all three stresses. these transcripts were homologous to seven helicase proteins in plants, including ricinus communis, vitis vinifera, and arabidopsis lyrata, indicating that at least seven helicase genes in m.falcata could be induced to respond to dehydration, high salinity, and cold. the helicase involved in the abiotic stress response was first identified in the legume pea  <cit> . in the pea, dna helicase  <dig>  was only induced by salt and cold stress and not by dehydration stress. this induction was also tissue-specific and regulated by responses to heat and aba stress. in our data, three transcripts were similar to a dead-box atp-dependent rna helicase , and one transcript was similar to a rna helicase . the importance of rna helicases in stress responses was also reviewed in a previous research study  <cit> . an increased expression level was also observed in genes encoding for rna polymerases. eight transcripts corresponding to eight proteins from four species were induced by all three stresses and accounted for  <dig>  % of all of the polymerase transcripts identified. the relationship between poly  polymerase  and abiotic stresses has been studied in the soybean, and this enzyme was found to mediate dna repair and programmed cell death processes during responses to mild and severe stresses, respectively  <cit> . in addition, parp inactivation has been reported to increase the tolerance of plants against a broad range of abiotic stresses by inhibiting the processes of cell death and reducing energy consumption  <cit> . choline, an important precursor of the membrane phospholipid phosphatidylcholine, is used to produce glycine betaine, which functions as an osmoprotectant conferring salt, drought, and other stress tolerance in plants  <cit> . phosphoethanolamine n-methyltransferase  is believed to be a key enzyme of the choline biosynthesis pathway. note that two transcripts with sequences homologous to a putative peamt protein from r. communis were up-regulated by all three stresses.

tf expression is altered by abiotic stresses
interestingly, all the major tf families induced by abiotic stresses are directly related to either a general stress response  or a specific hormone pathway . the largest class of tfs induced by abiotic stresses in the three stressed samples was the nac tf family. a total of  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> nacs were up-regulated due to dehydration, high salinity, and cold stress, respectively. nac is regarded as a plant-specific transcription factor family member and expressed in many tissues and during many developmental stages  <cit> . a further systemic analysis of the nac transcription factor family at the genome-wide level reported that approximately 30 % of members of the nac family are up-regulated during abiotic stress in rice, with  <dig> members induced by at least three types of abiotic stresses  <cit> . additionally, in our data, the largest class of tfs induced by cold stress was the myb tf family. a total of  <dig> mybs were up-regulated by cold stress, suggesting that this tf family plays a major role in cold tolerance. a r2r3-type myb has been identified as a master regulator of the cold stress response  <cit> , and these results are consistent with our rna-seq data. interestingly, in our transcriptome data, lower numbers of tfs were up-regulated by cold stress than the other two stresses, potentially because the response to cold stress appears to be less active than dehydration and salt stresses. in our opinion, because m. falcata was originally grown in extremely cold environments, the cold-responsive genes were already expressed at a higher level. this hypothesis was inspired by a study in arabidopsis and salt cress, which illustrated that the stress tolerance of salt cress was due to stress-inducible genes that were constitutively overexpressed in salt cress but inducible in arabidopsis  <cit> .

abiotic stresses modify phytohormone metabolism and signal transduction
previous studies have demonstrated that abiotic stresses have a striking effect on phytohormone metabolism and signalling. transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses have demonstrated increased aba, ethylene, and ja metabolism in several plants . we not only reconfirm these initial findings but also extend our understanding of modified phytohormone metabolism in plants. the process from stress signal perception and the trigger of aba biosynthesis to the dynamic regulation of the aba level is an important stress signalling pathway in cells. our data demonstrate the enhanced transcript expression involved in most steps of aba biosynthesis, including transcripts for crtz, zep, and nced. the enhanced expression of aba biosynthesis pathway genes may lead to increased endogenous aba. interestingly, transcripts for the aao gene, which encodes for an enzyme that catalyses the final step of aba biosynthesis, showed decreased expression in all stress-treated samples. meanwhile, transcripts for the cyp707a gene, which encodes for an enzyme that catalyses aba catabolism, showed increased expression in all stress-treated samples. together with the aba content determined under cold stress, we hypothesise that increased endogenous aba may inhibit aba biosynthesis and advance aba catabolism to some extent, which is aimed at the dynamic regulation of the aba level and maintaining the aba level in balance. aba perception through pyr/pyl receptors is required for the basal aba signalling that promotes plant growth and normal seed production and that regulates steady state transpiration  <cit> . the expression of transcripts for pyr/pyl genes was inhibited by all three stressed samples. compared with cold stress, the dehydration and high salinity stresses both enhanced the expression of the abf <dig> genes observably and induced the expression of aba-responsive genes further. in contrast, compared with enhancing aba biosynthesis, all three abiotic stresses inhibited the conversion of ga12-aldehyde to bioactive ga <dig> and advanced the conversion of bioactive ga <dig> to inactive ga <dig>  indicating that ga plays an antagonistic role in response to abiotic stresses in m. falcata compared with aba. additionally, the antagonistic role of ga is further confirmed by the expression pattern of ga receptors, namely gid <dig>  being contrary to aba receptors in the ds and ss samples.

the process from stress signal perception to the dynamic regulation of ethylene and ja metabolism is an important abiotic stress signalling pathway in plants. compared with the downstream events in ethylene and ja signal transduction, the studies in this field are relatively lagging. our discovery sheds new light on abiotic stress-induced ethylene and ja metabolic responses. we found evidence for pathways that lead to enhanced ethylene and ja biosynthesis. in our transcriptome data, we detected three key enzymes related to the ethylene biosynthesis pathway. all of the transcripts for ethylene biosynthesis enzyme genes showed enhanced expression in all three stressed samples. consistent with ethylene, ja biosynthesis-related transcripts exhibited similar expression patterns. upon further analysis, we noted that all three abiotic stresses increased the abundance of transcripts related to the ja metabolic pathway, which would contribute to the increased formation of the bioactive ja compound. based on this knowledge, we infer that ethylene and ja have synergistically positive effects on resisting abiotic stresses. the erf gene is an upstream component in both ja and ethylene signalling. the expression pattern of the erf gene was also up-regulated, further supporting our hypothesis.

abiotic stresses modify the nod factor signalling pathways during early symbiotic nodulation
early symbiotic nodulation involves four major developmental programmes:  the perception of nod factor,  the activation of calcium spiking,  root hair deformation and infection, and  early nodulin gene induction and nodule primordium formation. a comprehensive transcriptomic analysis of nodulation signalling pathway gene expression in response to abiotic stresses is lacking in the literature. we detected several transcripts for key genes involved in the nodulation signalling pathway. nfr genes are nod factor receptors and play a crucial role in the perception of nod factor. all three stresses increased the expression of the nfr genes. the dmi <dig> and dmi <dig> genes displayed similar expression patterns. in accordance with biotic stress, we hypothesise that all three abiotic stresses may enhance the perception of nod factor and the activation of calcium spiking. dmi <dig>  which exhibits different expression patterns between abiotic stresses, may affect the perception of calcium spiking and deformation of root hairs. the expression of the dmi <dig> genes was down-regulated in the cs sample but up-regulated in the ds and ss stressed samples. the expression of the enod genes was down-regulated all together by the three stresses because the expression pattern of the enod transcriptional regulators ern and nsp were altered by these stresses. nsp genes exhibiting decreased expression levels were predominantly due to the up-regulated rr genes. we hypothesise that nsp genes are targets of the rrs-dependent signalling pathway and that mir171h gene is crucial to regulate their expression in response to abiotic stresses and during early nodule development. interestingly, the expression of the enod genes showed less of a decrease in the dehydration -stressed sample compared with the other two stressed samples, which may be due to the increased expression of ern genes. upon the above analyses, we concluded that all three stresses might negatively regulate the formation of nodule primordia.

the role of auxin in root responses to cold stress
the cold-stressed root transcripts reported here were derived from our rna-seq data and thus reflect the expression of genes not only involved in a generalised root response to cold stress but also transcripts directly related to root development. we found that cold stress reduced lateral root formation, nodule number, and root length. in addition, we found that iaa application can increase the number of lateral roots and nodules, suggesting that the cold-induced decrease of lateral root formation and nodule number are dependent upon a reduction in auxin availability. aux is an important auxin transporter. our qtr-pcr results indicate that cold application appears to inhibit aux expression. the expression of aux increased after the application of exogenous iaa. we hypothesise that cold-induced reductions in auxin availability may depend on the decreased expression levels of aux genes. interestingly, iaa application is unable to increase the length of the main root. we hypothesise that the development of the main root requires the synergy of auxins and other hormones.

CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, we here present the first whole transcriptome analysis of abiotic stresses using m. falcata and an in-depth rna-seq analysis of its transcriptomes under optimal treatment conditions. overall, these experiments and results have confirmed previously reported responses to abiotic stresses while addressing previously unknown details and fundamentally advancing our understanding of how modified gene expression patterns facilitate acclimation to abiotic stresses. we revealed the abiotic stress-responsive mechanisms underlying the metabolism and core signalling components of major phytohormones. in addition, we identified nod factor signalling pathways during early symbiotic nodulation that are modified by abiotic stresses.

