BACKGROUND
a genome contains coding information that specifies protein and rna sequences and structural information that specifies local dna conformation involved in interactions with proteins. on top of these is the subtle global tendency of a genome to move toward a preferred nucleotide composition and distribution that are characteristic for each clade. most notable is the g+c content, which vary widely  among the prokaryotes. the preferred g+c content is conserved among closely related species, as are the relative abundance of dinucleotides, trinucleotides, and tetranucleotides .

in addition, in most bacterial chromosomes, mononucleotides exhibit a biased distribution between the two replicating  strands. gc skew, as expressed by /, and at skew, expressed by /, of bacterial chromosomes were first noticed by lobry  <cit>  in escherichia coli, bacillus subtilis, and haemophillus influenzae, and later by mrazek and karlin  <cit>  in mycoplasma genitalium, mycoplasma pneumoniae, and helicobacter pylori. it was noticed that gc skews  exhibit a striking sign switch at the replication origin  and another one at the termination region in many bacterial chromosomes. from an analysis of a limited number  of bacterial chromosomes, it has been proposed that there is an overall excess of purines  or keto bases g and t  in the protein coding sequences   <cit> . these base composition skews have been recently reviewed  <cit> .

the composition skew may be extended to include a number of oligomer sequences, which are known to be or are likely to be implicated in replication, recombination, and/or repair process of genomes  <cit> . a classical example is the octameric chi sequence  in e. coli, which serves as a signal for recombinational repair of double strand breaks, and is important to the rescuing of broken replication forks . another example is the rag motif  in the e. coli chromosome, the skew of which shift abruptly at the terminus of replication  <cit> . chi and rag motifs together account for about 7% of the global gc skew of the e. coli chromosome  <cit> .

base composition skews are shaped by asymmetric accumulation of specific mutations, which are determined at two levels, namely strand-biased mutation and subsequent selection . these strand-biased mutation forces may be further classified into two basic categories: replication-driven mutation and transcription-driven mutation. several mechanisms of replication-driven mutation have been proposed based on the asymmetrical structures of the replication forks , including higher abundance of single-stranded gaps and nicks on the lagging strands that are prone to mismatch repair and cytosine deamination   <cit>  and asymmetrical enzyme machineries that replicate the leading and lagging strands. transcription-driven mutation has been proposed to include mutations associated with exposed non-transcribed strands during transcription and transcription-coupled repair  <cit> . the non-coding sequence  is under replication-related mutation pressure, and free from selection at the translation level. however, the transcribed non-cds  is still under transcription-driven mutation. the cds, on the other hand, is affected by replication-driven mutation and transcription-driven mutation plus selection at the translation level.

these mutations undergo various kinds of selection, including the shaping of the signal sequences on the chromosomes  <cit>  . a universal and powerful selection is at the translation level, in which adverse mutations are eliminated or selected against. in addition, codon usage and amino acid usage preferences in combination also select optimal mutations at this level. the facts that codons usage in bacteria shows a preference for g over c  and that more genes  are located on the leading strands than on the lagging strands of most bacterial chromosomes  <cit>  automatically lead to g excess in the leading strands  <cit> . moreover, selection pressure at the translation level may also produce biases in the usage of nucleotides, codons, and amino acids  <cit> . it has been noted that orthologs on the leading strands show lower rates of divergence than those on the lagging strands among various bacteria; this is a reflection of lower mutation pressure on the leading strand  <cit> . in many cases, these strand biases are considerable, and may be used to predict the replicating strand location of particular cds with surprising accuracy  <cit> .

the effect of mutations and subsequent selections on base composition skews cannot be readily separated in analysis. in general, the combined effect of replication-driven mutation plus subsequent selection is treated collectively as 'replication-associated pressure' , and the combined effect of transcription-driven mutation plus subsequent selection at the translation level as 'transcription-associate pressure' . while rap is directly reflected in the overall skew, the effect of tap depends on relative distribution of the cds on the two replicating strands. if cds are equally distributed between the leading and lagging strands, the effect of tap on base composition skews is nil, and if cds are present exclusively on one replicating strand, the tap effect is total.

the tap effect exerted on cds on either replicating strand is equal, whereas the rap effect has an opposite directionality on cds on two replicating strands. thus, the base composition skews of cds on the two replicating strands may be used to extract the effects of rap and tap. this general principle has been applied by lobry and sueoka  <cit>  to detect and assess rap and tap in  <dig> bacterial chromosomes using a graphic approach. these graphically deduced rap and tap were for gc and at skews combined together. it was concluded that these two forces were most evident in the weakly selected third codon position and in intergenic regions. the authors noted that the directions of the two effects are almost universal , resulting in g and t excess in the leading strands, which was compatible with the hypothesis of excess of cytosine deamination in the single-stranded state during dna replication  <cit> . in fact the authors modeled their analysis based on c-t transitions and attributed any non-conformity to the effect of tap.

in this study, using the same general principle but with a more comprehensive mathematical approach, we evaluated the rap and tap for gc skews and at skews in  <dig> bacterial chromosomes from  <dig> phyla. the results show diverse and distinct rap and tap patterns among different families of the bacterial chromosomes, and each gc and at skew-shaping force may be very different. while all the chromosomes are under significant tap, a portion of them is under no or little rap. some bacteria  exhibit high rap and high tap, some  exhibit only significant rap and little or no tap, and a few  exhibit none of either. analysis of the rap and tap shows that the cytosine deamination may be important for rap in some bacteria such as proteobacteria, but not in tap. instead, there appears to be significant involvement of transversion in the generation of base composition skews.

our study shows that chromosomes that exhibit high base composition skews generally possess high tap and rap. moreover, the trends and magnitudes of the skews can be correlated to the size and g+c contents of the chromosomes. this is in line with the notion that the base composition skews and their underlying mechanisms are important to the shaping of the bacterial chromosomes during evolution.

RESULTS
χg vs. χa: clustering of related chromosomes
the overall base composition skews with respect to leading strands vs. lagging strands over the whole bacterial chromosome are designated χg  and χa . χg is defined as the total number of g minus the total number of c divided by the total number of g and c on the leading strands, and χa is defined as the total number of a minus the total number of t divided by the total number of a and t on the leading strands.

in order to assign the leading and lagging strands, the replication origin  and termination  must be defined. oric of only a few bacterial chromosomes has been experimentally determined. for the remaining majority, prediction of oric has been based on several different parameters. for examples, worning et al.  <cit>  predicted the location of oric using biased distribution of all oligonucleotides up to  <dig> bp, and mackiewicz et al.  <cit>  use three criteria – composition skew, location of dnaa gene, and distribution of dnaa box-like sequences – for oric prediction. here we have followed the basic method of mackiewicz et al.  <cit>  to predict oric. ninety-nine bacterial chromosomes with a predicted oric were taken from mackiewicz et al.  <cit> . from the available complete bacterial sequences, oric was predicted for another  <dig> chromosomes. for circular chromosomes, the ter site was assigned to be directly opposite to oric. for linear chromosomes, the ends are where replication terminates. in total, a total of  <dig> chromosomes representing  <dig> phyla  were included in this study. of these bacteria, the largest phyla are firmicutes and proteobacteria, and in many of the analyses, they were further subdivided into classes. the sizes of the chromosomes ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mb , and their g+c contents from  <dig> to 72% .

χg and χa were calculated from the sequence of the  <dig> bacterial chromosomes. χg is statistically significant  for all except  <dig> bacteria, and χa are significant statistically  for all except  <dig> bacteria . these exceptions include four of the five cyanobacteria tested.

in the plot, related bacterial chromosomes tend to cluster together. for example, the firmicute chromosomes  are essentially all distributed in quadrant i. within the firmicutes, members of the same class also cluster together. most other bacterial chromosomes are distributed in quadrant ii. within quadrant ii, clustering is also seen for proteobacteria  and its classes. this is in accordance with the notion that the base distribution skews are evolutionally conserved.

χg vs. χa: two trends of distributions
the χg vs. χa plot also shows a general trend for the absolute values of these two values to increase in proportion . from the denser central area, the chromosomes diverge in two general directions, one toward simultaneously increasing χg and χa, and the other toward increasing χg but decreasing χa. the former corresponds to 'purine excess' in the leading strand as noted by freeman et al.  <cit>  for nine bacterial chromosomes. most of the chromosomes in this trend lie in quadrant i, and belong to firmicutes and also f. nucleatum. of these, the clostridia chromosomes  have the highest χa and χg values. the other trend, in which χg varies in inverse proportion with χa, corresponds to 'keto excess' trend also noted by freeman et al.  <cit> . most of these chromosomes lie mainly in quadrant ii, but a few are in quadrant iv. that related bacteria have the similar strengths of keto and purine excesses has also been noted by song et al.  <cit>  for  <dig> species examined.

base composition skews deviate more in non-cds
for subsequent analysis, we separate the genome sequences into cds  and non-cds . cds constitutes the major portion of the bacterial chromosomes. in the  <dig> chromosomes investigated, the fractions of cds range from  <dig> %  to  <dig> %  with a mean of  <dig> %.

cds is susceptible to both rap and tap. non-cds is more complicated in that it contains both non-transcribed and transcribed regions . the non-transcribed part is susceptible to rap only, and the transcribed part is susceptible to both rap and tap . unless transcription maps in non-cds is available, it is impossible to investigate the components that shape the skews in non-cds. in contrast, cdss provide a simpler model for extraction of information regarding the operations of rap and tap in this study.

thus, we break down χg and χa into those in the cds , and those in the non-cds . the scatter chart comparison  shows that, for most chromosomes, χgcd and χacd are nearly identical to χg and χa, respectively . this is not surprising, since cds constitute the majority of bacterial genomes.

in contrast, χgnc and χanc deviate noticeably more widely from χg and χa, respectively, for most bacterial chromosomes . most  of the χgnc values are higher than the corresponding χg values with a mean difference of  <dig> × 10- <dig>  in contrast, χanc is higher than the corresponding χa in only about 37% of the bacteria regardless of their phylogenetic groups. the deviations of skews in the non-cds and the cds presumably reflect the difference in the mutation pressures and selection pressures exerted on these sequences, which are expected to be lower in non-cds.

rap and tap are estimated from base composition skews in the cds
the base composition skews in the cds may be used to estimate rap and tap under the assumption that the effects of the two forces are independent of each other. this assumption is reasonable, because, considering the relatively low magnitude of the base composition skews, it is very unlikely that any nucleotide position is simultaneously affected by rap and tap.

the gc skew in the cds on the leading strand  and on the lagging strand  may be represented, respectively, as:

 σgd = σgt + σgr 

 σgg = σgt - σgr 

where σgt and σgr are gc skews shaped by tap and rap in cds, respectively.

from these, σgt and σgr may be derived as:

 σgt = / <dig> 

 σgr = / <dig> 

similarly, the at skews generated by tap  and rap  may be derived from at skews in the cds on the leading  and lagging strand  as:

 σat = / <dig> 

 σar = / <dig> 

it is noteworthy that σgd - σgg and σad - σag correspond to 'Δgc skew' and 'Δat skew', respectively, described by rocha and danchin  <cit> , which are defined as the difference between the average skews of the genes in the leading strand and those in the lagging strand.

patterns of base composition skew-shaping rap and tap among bacterial families
with the above equations, the base composition skews in cds and the rap and tap effects for the  <dig> bacterial chromosomes were derived . σgd is statistically significant  in all bacterial chromosomes except for five , and σgg is significant in all except twelve. σad is significant in all except thirteen, and σag is significant in all except thirteen . statistically insignificant σgg and σag values, however, should not necessarily be taken as an indication of a lack of a tap on the base composition skews in cds on the lagging strand , but may reflect effect of the counteracting of rap on the skews in these bacteria.

different phyla exhibit distinct patterns of skews in base compositions and cds , and within the same phylum different species tend to exhibit similar patterns. for example, the firmicute chromosomes  have the highest χcds, χgcd, and χacd. in contrast, the cyanobacterial chromosomes  have essentially no χcds, χgcd, or χacd. most phyla also display distinct patterns associated with the calculated effects of rap and tap on the base composition skews. most strikingly, the spirochaete chromosomes  have large and approximately equal σgt and σgr values, together with large σat and σar values of opposite signs. in contrast, all these values are nearly zero in actinobacterial chromosomes .

to assess the general effects of rap and tap in seven larger phyla, their averaged σgt, σgr, σat, and σar values are calculated and listed in table  <dig>  from the list, some general trends may be seen. the σgt averages are very small  and vary widely in three phyla , but are relatively large in the other four phyla, particularly in the spirochaetes  and firmicutes . the σgr averages are positive in all seven phyla and range from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . therefore, it appears that there is a general trend of bias toward g excess for both rap and tap in most of the bacteria.

*standard deviations are listed below the averages. absolute values of σgt, σgr, σat, and σar equal to or smaller than  <dig>  are in parentheses.

the σat averages are positive in all the phyla  except in cyanobacteria . in contrast, the σar averages are negative  in five of the seven major phyla and near zero in the other two . therefore, tap is generally biased toward a excess in all the seven major phyla, while rap is biased toward t excess in five major phyla and very low or non-existing in the other two.

the effect of tap depends on χcds
χgcd may be quantitatively presented as:

 χgcd=σgr+cdsdcdsd+cdsg⋅σgt−cdsgcdsd+cdsg⋅σgt,
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaaiigacqwfhpwycqwghbwrdawgaawcbagaem4yammaemizaqgabeaakiabg2da9iab=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@664d@ 

where cdsd and cdsg are the total lengths of cds on the leading and lagging strands, respectively, or

 χgcd = σgr + χcds·σgt, 

where χcds=cdsd−cdsgcdsd+cdsg
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaaiigacqwfhpwycqwgdbwqcqwgebarcqwgtbwucqgh9aqpdawcaaqaaiabdoeadjabdseaejabdofatnaabaaaleaacqwgkbazaeqaaogaeyoei0iaem4qamkaemiraqkaem4uam1aasbaasqaaiabdeganbqabaaakeaacqwgdbwqcqwgebarcqwgtbwudawgaawcbagaemizaqgabeaakiabgucariabdoeadjabdseaejabdofatnaabaaaleaacqwgnbwzaeqaaaaaaaa@47f8@

similarly,

 χacd = σar + χcds·σat 

equations  and  are based on the assumptions that  the tap effect  is equal on the leading and lagging strands, and  the rap and tap effects are independent. such assumptions are supported by the results of tillier and collins  <cit>  in their analysis of  <dig> bacterial species. moreover, σgcd and χacd values calculated from  and  differed from the actual values only slightly. the mean of errors is  <dig> × 10- <dig> ±  <dig> × 10- <dig>  for χgcd, and  <dig> × 10- <dig> ±  <dig> × 10- <dig>  for χacd.

equations  and  bring in the third main factor in determining the base composition skews in the cds of bacterial chromosomes, χcds. the χcds values vary between - <dig>  to  <dig>  with a mean of  <dig>  among the  <dig> bacterial chromosomes. when χcds approaches zero , the skews are contributed to by rap only.

the firmicutes have the highest χcds , which, in combination with moderately high σgr and σar values, produce the highest χgcd and χacd among all the bacterial groups . the high χcds values in the firmicutes have been noted to be associated with the presence of a polc gene in the genome  <cit> : chromosome containing both polc and dnae have an average χcds of  <dig> , whereas for chromosomes containing only dnae have an average χcds of  <dig> . the reason for this correlation is not clear.

both tap and rap correlate positively with χgcd and χacd
the relative contributions of rap and tap to the base composition skews in the cds were compared by plotting χgcd and χacd against σgr, σgt, and χcds·σgt, and against σar, σat, and χcds·σat, respectively . χgcd is strongly correlated to σgr , and the linear regression line intersects the axes near the origin with a slope of  <dig> . χgcd is only moderately correlated with σgt , but is strongly correlated with χcds·σgt  as expected. the χgcd vs. χcds·σgt regression line also intersects near the origin, and the slope of this line is  <dig> .

m, slope of linear regression line; r, correlation coefficient

similarly, χacd is also strongly correlated to σar . the linear regression line for χacd vs. σar passes near the origin, and has also a slope of  <dig> . χacd is weakly correlated with σat , but is strongly correlated with χcds·σat  as expected. the χacd vs. χcds·σat linear regression line also intersect near the origin with a slope of  <dig> .

these results indicate that the relative contribution to either χacd or χgcd by rap and tap  is approximately 60% and 40%, respectively, across the bacterial spectrum. these average values, however, are not good reflections of rap and tap in individual species, which may deviate from these average ratios significantly.

the skews in the non-cds is more correlated to rap than to tap
regression analysis of the effect of rap and tap on the base composition skews in the non-cds  shows that χgnc and χanc are not only strongly correlated with σgr  and σar , respectively, but also moderately correlated to σgt  and σat , respectively, and moderately correlated to χcds·σgt  and χcds·σat , respectively. the latter two sets of correlation presumably are due to the presence of transcribed sequences in the set of non-cds, which would be under transcription-driven pressure, but not translation-driven pressure. the transcribed non-cds cannot be readily separated from the non-transcribe non-cds, and therefore the rap and tap on the two groups of sequences cannot be separately evaluated from figure  <dig> 

the rap and tap trend analysis disfavors the cytosine deamination model
the rap and tap analysis may be used to examine the cytosine deamination model  <cit> , which proposes that base composition skew is generated by preferred deamination of cytosine in single-stranded dna such as the lagging strands during replication and the sense strands during transcription  <cit> . if strand-biased cytosine deamination plays a major role in shaping base composition skews during replication and transcription, the result of c to t transition would be reflected as a negative correlation between σgr and σar and between σgt and σat, respectively.

correlation analysis between these forces with a weight adjustment for different g+c contents in the  <dig> chromosomes is shown in figure  <dig>  the analysis shows a weak negative correlation between weight-adjusted σgr and σar . for individual clades, negative correlation is strong in the α-, β-, and γ-proteobacteria , moderate in the ε-proteobacteria , and insignificant in the δ-proteobacteria . of all the firmicutes, only the mollicutes shows a  significant correlation . no significant correlation exists in other phyla, which, in some cases  is due to the small sample size. therefore, the cytosine deamination model appears to be only applicable to rap in the proteobacteria  and the mollicutes.

a weak positive correlation was seen between weight-adjusted σgt and σat in the  <dig> chromosomes . examination of individual phyla shows only significant positive correlations  in α-proteobacteria and ε-proteobacteria, and clostridia in firmicutes. no significant correlation exists in other phyla, which, in some cases, is due to the small sample size. the lack of negative correlation here indicates that the cytosine deamination model does not play a major role in shaping tap in most if not all bacteria.

rap at three codon positions reveals lacks of rap in some bacteria
the three positions of codons are under different selection pressures at the translation level. the third position is 4-way or 2-way degenerate for most amino acids, and enjoys the largest freedom for synonymous substitutions. the g+c content of a bacterial chromosome is principally shaped by the g+c content at this position  <cit> . the g+c content of the other two positions correlate only weakly with the g+c content of the chromosome, but still exhibit biased preference for different bases: a significant overrepresentation of g and underrepresentation of t at the first position and overrepresentation of a and t and underrepresentation of g at the second position. in our tabulation of the  <dig> bacterial chromosomes, frequencies of occurrence are  <dig>  and  <dig>  of g and t, respectively, at the first position,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  of a, t, and g, respectively, at the second position. these biases constitute part of the selection at the level of translation.

we investigated rap and tap at the three codon positions in all the bacterial chromosomes. the plots of σgr and σar at these positions against the overall σgr and σar  showed strong linear correlation between them . the σgr and σar effects  are the strongest at the third codon position as expected. the effect is significantly lower at the other two positions. notably the three trend lines intersect at the origin, indicating that some bacteria possess nearly no overall σgr and σar as well as σgr and σar at all three positions. this means that, for these bacteria, there is very little or no rap.

tap at three codon positions reveals omnipresence of tap in all bacterial chromosomes
in contrast, in the plots of σgt and σat at the three positions against the overall σgt and σat, none of the three linear trend lines intersect at the origin . even for the bacterial chromosomes that exhibit no or little overall σgt and σat, their σgt and σat values at the three codon positions are far from zero. in these chromosomes, tap is all positive on the first codon position, but is cancelled out by the negative effect on the other two positions. the lack of any all-zero case indicates the presence of considerable tap in all the bacterial chromosomes.

the σgt correlation plot  showed the strongest tap effect at the first and third positions . the strong correlation at the more relaxed third position is expected. the strong and all positive effect at the first codon may be attributed to the selection for overrepresentation  of g at that position in all the bacteria. there is essentially no correlation  at the second position. σgt at the second position is negative regardless of the overall σgt, presumably reflecting the underrepresentation  of g at this position.

in the σat correlation plot , all three positions exhibit a moderately strong linear correlation . the all positive σat values at the first position presumably reflect the underrepresentation of t  at this position .

g+c content is strongly correlated with base composition skew
examining the skews and other parameters of the  <dig> chromosomes  revealed a number of exceptional cases that exhibit skew patterns atypical for the particular clade. interestingly, these atypical skews are accompanied by atypical g+c contents. for example, the six species of rickettsiales  display atypical skews parameters among the α-proteobacteria. they also stand out in this clade as displaying unusually low g+c contents . moreover, two closely related spirochaetes, treponema denticola and treponema pallidum  differ greatly in skew parameters as well as g+c contents.

to investigate the correlation between the g+c contents and the skew parameters, the g+c content of the bacteria was plotted against the skew parameters . the results show that g+c content is strongly and inversely correlated with σgt , but loosely and inversely correlated with σgr . χgcd also shows an inverse correlation with g+c content . these inverse correlations are most evident in the actinobacteria  and proteobacteria , but are looser in firmicutes .
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaaiigacqwfdpwccqwghbwrdaqhaawcbagaem4yammaemizaqgabagaemouaifaaaaa@3387@, σgcdt
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaaiigacqwfdpwccqwghbwrdaqhaawcbagaem4yammaemizaqgabagaemivaqfaaaaa@338b@, χgcd, σacdt
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaaiigacqwfdpwccqwgbbqqdaqhaawcbagaem4yammaemizaqgabagaemivaqfaaaaa@337f@, σacdr
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaaiigacqwfdpwccqwgbbqqdaqhaawcbagaem4yammaemizaqgabagaemouaifaaaaa@337b@, and χacd are plotted against the g+c content , and the size  of the chromosomes. the linear regression lines are in red. the symbols for the bacterial chromosomes are as in figure  <dig> 

g+c content is strongly and inversely correlated with σat  but not with σar . χacd is only weakly and inversely correlated with g+c content . g+c content is also loosely correlated with the size of the bacterial chromosomes  as previously noted  <cit> . therefore, correlation between the chromosomal size and the skew parameters were also examined . the analysis shows an insignificant correlation between the chromosomal size and σgr  and σar , but a weak negative correlation between the chromosomal size and σgt  and σat .

there appears to be a general trend toward decreasing magnitudes of the skew parameters with increasing chromosome size. the gc skew parameters converge from positive values toward zero; whereas the at skew parameters converge from positive and negative values toward zero. this seems to suggest that larger bacterial chromosomes are under lower rap and tap.

discussion
omnipresence of tap
the present study of the base composition skews reveals widely variable patterns of skews as well as the underlying shaping forces, suggesting extensive diversification of the mutation and selection spectra during evolution of the bacterial chromosomes. analyzing base substitutions between orthologs in  <dig> closely related strains in  <dig> clades, rocha et al.  <cit>  have previously reached similar conclusions. based on this, these authors proposed that the skew shaping process is multifactorial. the same conclusion may be drawn from the current study.

the rap and tap analysis at the three codon positions  reveals interesting contrasts between the two. most remarkable is the omnipresence of tap, in contrast to the absence of rap in portions of the bacteria. the analysis also shows that tap is  contributed by selection pressure at the translational level that generates the biased base composition at the first two codon positions. it implies that the apparent lack of tap in some bacterial chromosomes does not reflect the absence of it, but rather cancellation among the effect on the three positions.

comparison with previous studies
the basic principle of deducing rap and tap by comparison of base composition skews in the cds on the two replicating strands used in this study is similar to that employed by mackiewicz et al.  <cit>  and lobry and sueoka  <cit> .

mackiewicz et al.  <cit>  performed 'detrended dna walks' on seven bacterial chromosomes, which displayed base composition skews on a two-dimensional plot. dna walks on nucleotides in the cds on two complementary strands of the chromosomes were added or subtracted. addition of the skews would cancel the effect of rap, thus revealing other mutation and selection effect . subtraction, on the other hand, would cancel the effect of tap, and leaving rap. the subtraction  curve would exhibit a sign switch whereas the addition  curve would exhibit a maximum and minimum at the origin and terminus of replication. the results of such analyses were available for the chromosomes of b. subtilis  <cit>  and b. burgdorferi  <cit> .

in their analysis of  <dig> bacterial chromosomes, lobry and sueoka  <cit>  plotted gc and at skews at the third codon positions on the two replicating strands against each other , from which rap and tap were derived graphically. the presence of rap separates these skews on the leading and lagging strands into two distinct groups, and the distance between the centers  of the two groups  is taken to represent rap. the authors assumed that, in the absence of tap, bi would intercept the midpoint  , and that a deviation from that  would represent tap.
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwgcbgqdawgaawcbagaegymaedabeaakiabg2da9maakaaabagaeiikagiaemieag3aasbaasqaaiabikdayaqabagccqghsislcqwg4baedawgaawcbagaegymaedabeaakiabcmcapmaacaaaleqabagaegomaidaaogaey4kasiaeiikagiaemyeak3aasbaasqaaiabikdayaqabagccqghsislcqwg5bqedawgaawcbagaegymaedabeaakiabcmcapmaacaaaleqabagaegomaidaaaqabaaaaa@42e1@. line bi  intercepts the midpoint .  scenario ii – presence of both rap and tap. tap exerts asymmetric effect on cdss on both the leading and lagging strands, thus pushing bi away from the midpoint . the relative strength of tap corresponds to bii , the distance between bi and the midpoint. modified from lobry and sueoka  <cit> .

it is noteworthy that the relative rap and tap thus deduced were for both gc and at skews combined. they may further be broken down into rap and tap specific for gc and at skews by applying vector analysis, i.e., rap for gc and at skews corresponding to y <dig> - y <dig> and x <dig> - x <dig>  respectively ; and 'tap' for gc and at skews corresponding to yc -  <dig>  and xc -  <dig> , respectively . by applying this method on the original data of lobry and sueoka  <cit> , we extracted relative rap and tap values from  <dig> bacterial chromosomes that are included in our study, and compare them to those derived mathematically in this study. correlation is very high  between their and our rap values for both gc and at skews. correlation is also very high  between their and our tap values for at skews, but slightly lower  for gc skews.

asymmetric cytosine deamination model
our rap vs. tap analysis  shows that the cytosine deamination model may be applicable to rap in a number of clades, but not a major contributor to tap in all bacteria. this suggests that, if the model is applicable, the exposed single strands during replication and during transcription may differ in length, binding proteins , and other characteristics.

our conclusion appears to be different from previous studies that favor the cytosine deamination model for tap . however, the previous studies are based on investigation of a small number of actively transcribed genes from proteobacteria. for example, the conclusion of francino and ochman  <cit>  was based a phylogenic comparison of an approximately  <dig> -kb actively transcribed non-cds in  <dig> e. coli strains. the e. coli chromosomes  in the present study exhibit very low or statistically insignificant χa and σat, but moderate χg and σgt, indicating a lack of a major contribution by cytosine deamination.

it is noteworthy that the number of bacterial genes highly expressed during exponential growth appears to be relatively small  <cit> , and, there is evidence for the absence of cytosine deamination effect in the transcription of cryptic genes  <cit> . thus, it is possible that either the small sample in the previous studies is not representative for chromosomes as a whole, or that the previously postulated cytosine deamination effect on tap acts only on a small number of highly expressed genes, and represents only a minor fraction of overall tap.

on the other hand, our analysis shows that cytosine deamination may play a significant role in rap in α-, β-, γ-, and  ε-proteobacteria, and mollicutes. this is in general agreement with the base substitution analysis of rocha et al.  <cit> , which shows cytosine deamination is applicable in rap in bordetella , e. coli , neisseria , and streptococcus , but not in, bacillus and staphylococcus , and rickettsia . the latter, being intracellular parasites, may be considered an exceptional case.

in contrast to the situation in proteobacteria, cytosine deamination cannot be applicable to rap in most firmicutes . this suggests a major difference in the state of single-stranded dna exposed during replication in these two phyla of bacteria. in proteobacteria, both strands of the chromosomes are replicated by dnae. in contrast, the firmicute genomes encode an additional replicase polc  <cit> , which is known to replicate the leading strand in b. subtilis  <cit> . perhaps the two distinct systems generate single-stranded intermediates of very different states.

the distinctly different cytosine deamination effects between these two phyla of bacteria correspond to the separation of the base composition skews into the 'purine excess' trend in the firmicutes and 'keto excess' trend in the proteobacteria . the cytosine deamination model has been found to be the most likely cause of tap in other studies  <cit> . however, the sample size  was considerably smaller than that in this study, and no clade-based analysis was performed.

skews and g+c content
in this study we found weak or no correlation between g+c content of the chromosomes and rap on base composition skews, but a relatively strong negative correlation between g+c content and tap on both gc and at skews . this is in line with the facts that the chromosomes with low g+c contents are mainly those of firmicutes, and that the taps for both gc and at skews  are highest in the firmicute phylum . the taps may also be analyzed by examining the relationship between g+c content and base composition in cdss in the bacterial chromosomes , which shows that the g and c contents or a and t contents in cdss do not vary in the same proportion to the g+c content of the chromosomes. at lower g+c contents, there is a distinct bias toward more gs than cs and more as than ts  in cds on both replicating strands. at higher g+c contents, the trends are reversed albeit with lower deviations from the norms. these four biased trend lines correspond to the taps, and are highly correlated with g+c content . this is in accordance with the linear correlation between σgt or σat and g+c content .

chromosomal sizes and skews
because of the positive  correlation between the g+c content and size of bacterial chromosomes  <cit> , it is not surprising to find that there is also a weak negative correlation between the chromosomal size and the taps . however, there is an under-representation of larger bacterial chromosomes in the current set of sequenced genomes. it is possible that the convergence towards zero skews, taps, and raps observed in the larger chromosomes  may be due to the small sample of large chromosomes. this remains to be investigated when more large bacterial chromosomes are sequenced.

on the other hand, the diminishing skews, taps, and raps in large chromosomes may be real and reflect an evolutional trend. it is reasonable to assume that the larger chromosomes have generally evolved from smaller ones  by acquiring extra genes necessary for more complex structures  and contingency functions  that provide adaptability and a competition edge. under this premise, the increase in gene number  is accompanied by an increase in g+c content and decrease in rap, tap, and base composition skews. if such an evolution trend is real, it suggests that rap and tap were stronger among ancestral bacteria.

the rap and tap analysis in this study may provide guidance for further bioinformatic and genetic investigations into the underlying principles for these mutation and selection forces. the best candidates for such investigations are probably closely relative species with distinct base composition parameters, such as the aforementioned rickettsiales chromosomes , which display remarkably low g+c contents and high σgr, σgt, and σat compared to other α-proteobacterial chromosomes, and the chromosomes of two spirochaetes, t. denticola and t. pallidum  that differ greatly in g+c contents and σat . moreover, the chromosomes of moorella thermoacetica and thermoanaerobacter tengcongensis  are also unique among the clostridia in displaying atypically low χgcd, χacd, σgt, and σat. all these provide opportunities for comparative investigation to uncover the underlying genetic elements.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary we have analyzed the base composition skews and the underlying mutation/selection forces associated with replication and transcription among  <dig> bacterial chromosomes in  <dig> phyla. the diverse patterns that are characteristic for different clades provide clues to the evolution that shape these skews. the correlation among the skews, the g+c content, and the size of the chromosomes also hints at the direction of the trends of the evolution.

