BACKGROUND
while genomic transfers from retroviruses to eukaryotic hosts are well known and expected, transfers from non-retroviral rna viruses to eukaryotes are unexpected  <cit> . non-retroviral rna viruses lack the coding for reverse transcriptase and the integration machinery needed for successful transfer to dna genomes. however, several recent studies have provided evidence for widespread viral transfer to fungi <cit> , animals  <cit> , and plants  <cit> . these transfers have been termed nirvs  because the integrated elements differ from endogenous viruses in their requirement for co-option of integration machinery and in their normally subgenic architecture  <cit> . a nirv is a subclass of paleovirus or endogenous viral element . unlike other paleoviruses, there is no evidence that a nirv has ever coded for an active endogenous viral genome or is capable of copying itself as with endogenous retroviruses. several studies have implicated and identified the signatures of retrotransposon activity in association with nirv formation  <cit> .

because nirvs are a form of "fossil" viral element, their recognition permits, for the first time, study of the deeper evolution of non-retroviral rna viruses and an understanding of the timescale of genomic interactions. the ages of nirvs have turned out to be much older than those age estimates from molecular clocks based on nucleotide substitution rates. horie et al.  <cit> , for example, assigned a date of > <dig> my for the integration of bornaviruses into primate genomes based on phylogenetic clades of nirvs from genome assemblies. the determination of orthology can be complicated by gene duplications and horizontal transfers of nirvs among hosts  <cit> . homology is unambiguous when the dated nirvs are monophyletic and share integration locations . taylor et al.  <cit>  provided a minimum date of about  <dig> million years for filovirus-like np gene nirvs based on the shared integration location and monophyly in rodents that have dated fossil records. still, the timescale of host interactions for nonretroviral rna viruses  remains poorly studied.

the biological significance of nirvs beyond that of a viral fossil record remains controversial. have nirvs been co-opted by eukaryotic hosts for a novel or an antiviral function? thus far, evolutionary evidence for maintenance of nirvs among host species has been ambiguous. although the vast majority of known nirvs have disrupted open reading frames , extended orfs and rna transcripts of nirvs have been identified in mosquitoes  <cit> , yeast  <cit> , primates  <cit>  and plants  <cit> . but these cases of nirv rna expression involved only one or two species per group and, with the exception of the arabidopsis iaa-leucine-resistant protein  <dig> , could be the result of transcriptional noise. evidence of significant selective maintenance among species in the yeast-totivirus nirv is complicated by the dearth of known orthologs  <cit> . there is some evidence for evolutionary maintenance in the mammal-filovirus-like np nirv system  <cit>  and in the primate-borna virus systems  <cit> . but in each case, a substantial proportion of the species in the analyses of nirv maintenance had disrupted orfs. as such, the existing evolutionary analyses of nirvs in mammals indicate more a slowed rate of erosion in codon structure than selection for maintenance of an orf  <cit> . presently, it is difficult to determine when or if selective maintenance has occurred in known nirvs because the comparisons normally involve sparse taxonomic sampling and distantly related host genome assemblies. an improved test of the selective maintenance of nirvs would involve a comparison of regions that lack orf disruptions and have demonstrated positional homology within a closely related group of animals such as a genus.

filovirus-like nirvs in mammals are candidates for a more detailed study of selective maintenance. taylor et al.  <cit>  isolated copies of the np-like gene from specimens of the big brown bat , the little brown bat  and the tammar wallaby , but each of these nirvs appeared to be pseudogenized. belyi et al.  <cit>  detected an extended open reading frame of a vp35-like gene from a blast query of the ncbi genome assembly of the little brown bat . as filoviral vp <dig> has been shown to interfere with host defences, the acquisition of a mammalian nirv has been proposed as a putative co-option to interfere with viral infection  <cit> . the presence of an open reading frame of a nirv in a single genome assembly could be associated with function or merely indicate a recent integration where there has been insufficient time to accrue orf disruptions. pseudogenization for bats could also be a slow process compared to similar-sized mammals, requiring an estimated  <dig>  my of neutral evolution just to reach a 50% probability of orf disruption  <cit> . several mammals including mouse and rat have been identified as possessing the filovirus np-like nirvs  <cit> , but only the tarsier, tammar wallaby, and little brown bat have been identified as possessing the vp35-like nirvs  <cit> . none of the blast-matched vp <dig> nirvs have been verified by independent dna sequencing. one limitation of the blast approach for identifying nirvs is the tendency for underestimation of nirvs when only known viral genes are used as queries. when clades of nirvs are detected that are divergent from known viruses, their membership might be underrepresented. one way around this problem is to carry out secondary blast searches with the divergent nirvs as queries  <cit> . more nirv sequences from vp <dig> would be particularly important in testing the hypothesis  <cit>  that known filoviruses form two divergent clades  and . it is presently unclear if the vp35-like nirvs form the same phylogenetic associations with known filoviruses  <cit>  as found with the other filovirus-like nirvs.

here we test for the evolutionary maintenance of filovirus vp35-like and np-like nirvs in the bat genus myotis. myotis is a diverse genus of mammals  and is thought to have radiated from asia to every continent save antarctica over the past  <dig>  my  <cit> . there are several congruent studies of both nuclear and mitochondrial genes  <cit>  that find three main geographic clades of myotis . we test positional homology by pcr amplifying between the vp <dig> nirv and a neighboring gene. we also compare the evolution of np and vp35-like nirvs in myotis. the results provide evidence that filovirus-like integrations are more widespread in mammals than previously thought and that these transferred genes have been exposed to positive selection and selection for open reading frames in bats.

RESULTS
tblastn searches of the wgs database using the filovirus-like vp <dig> nirv of myotis lucifugus  as a query sequence, yielded three previously unknown mammal species matches with expect values <10- <dig> . the chinese hamster , mouse and rat had significant matches using this bat query, with hamster having the best match for these rodents. the strongest match in rats  had a highly significant blast match to the mouse genome . we note that the known marsupial vp35-like nirv did not appear as a match when the myotis lucifugus sequence was used as a query, presumably a result of a blast analysis where subjects are from divergent clades. when the vp <dig> of marburgvirus was used as a query, different contigs of the chinese hamster  had the best matching sequences in the wgs. likewise, when np of marburgvirus was used as a query, the chinese hamster again had the best match. we also detected a new np-like nirv from the naked mole rat .

we tested for positional homology and integration by dna sequencing pcr products in myotis. a translated blast of the myotis lucifugus contig  with the vp35-like nirv revealed a neighboring line- <dig> reverse transcriptase element  with the best match being from bos taurus . a nucleotide blast using the primers from the line- <dig> element and the vp35-like region as queries, and the myotis lucifugus genome assembly  as a database, yielded only a single match to the targeted region of cont <dig>  . dna sequence from a pcr product using a primer in this line- <dig> element and a primer in the vp35-like region suggested the positional homology the myotis sp. sequences used in the present study. two of the pcr products  for the intergenic region failed to yield clean sequence so an additional intergenic primer was used. another pcr was carried out to obtain overlapping sequence from the remaining vp35-like region in the examined bat specimens. although all of the bats examined in the genus myotis had a vp35-like element, none of the other genera of bats assayed for vp <dig> yielded a positive amplicon . np-like amplicons were obtained in several species of bat, but reliable sequence was obtained from only myotis and eptesicus. more genome assemblies of bats are needed to determine if this lack of a match is due to sequence divergence of the primer sites or to the lack of filovirus-like nirvs. still, the finding of vp35-like dna sequence with the same upstream neighboring line- <dig> element in the genus myotis establishes positional homology for the vp35-like elements. we also note that an old world species  has the same putative 5' direct repeat and canonical transcription start site  in the same location  as that identified by belyi et al.  <cit>  for the new world species, myotis lucifugus. strongly repetitive sequence appears to have shortened our sequence reads for other species of bats in the intergenic area. our result supports homology among bat inserts for vp <dig> and the hypothesis that bat nirvs result from target-primed reverse transcription of filoviral mrna by line elements  <cit> . the positional homology of the previously unknown rodent vp35-like sequences was established by comparisons of synteny between mouse and rat genomes. the vp35-like element on chr  <dig> of the rat and on chr  <dig> of the mouse appear to be in markedly syntenous genome locations, supporting positional homology .

more evidence of homology for the filovirus-like sequences in the genus myotis is provided by phylogenies that match the expected species trees. prottest determined that the jtt+g model was the best fit with the aic criterion for both amino acid alignments. the k80+g model was determined to be the best model for the nucleotide alignments of the two nuclear genes. the tn93+g+i substitution model was determined to be the best-fit model for the mitochondrial gene sequences of the genus myotis. for each of the three genes  sequenced, the estimated phylogenetic tree was similar in topology. that is, there is a north american, south american, and old world clade for most genes . this finding suggests that for each nirv, the integration predated the radiation of myotis from asia. the relationships within each continent are also nearly identical across genes. for example, the neotropical species myotis riparius and m. nigricans are strongly supported as sister taxa in every gene tree. most of the specimens were closely related to conspecifics on the mitochondrial gene tree . sequences of myotis blythii and myotis muricola browni were distantly related to known mitochondrial sequences from the genus myotis or others from the present study. consistent with our results, stadelmann et al.  <cit>  concluded that specimens identified as m. muricola browni from the phillipines belonged to an undescribed or different species from m. muricola. we also note that the specimen identified as m. nigricans groups with one of the two known clades of m. riparius on the coi tree and not with the m. nigricans clade. this discordance with species names could be a reflection of the difficulty in morphological diagnosis of species in the genus. we detected three copies of np-like genes and one copy of the vp35-like gene in the most recent genome assembly for myotis lucifugus . the two additional np-like copies in m. lucifugus form a distinct basal clade to the np-like gene sequences isolated in the present study from bats . however, the two basal paralogs lack significant similarity at the nucleotide level  to the np-like sequences from the present study. where there are additional disagreements among genes, the support values are weak, suggesting a lack of signal rather than non-orthology. similar topological patterns are observed for the vp <dig> and np phylogenies in bats based on amino acid alignments . the largely congruent topologies for each gene to the expected species tree supports the notion that the nirv formations occurred before the myotis species radiation and geographic expansion to the new world. that is, the nirv copies that we isolated appear to be ancient orthologs.

the determination of orthology and positional homology permits estimation of minimum ages of viral-host associations. for myotis, the vp35-like gene is estimated to have had an orf for at least  <dig>  my . the timescale estimates are based on the dating of the divergence of myotis with multigenic molecular analyses and at least two internal fossil calibrations  <cit> . the insertion of the np nirv predates the common ancestor of eptesicus and myotis, which has been estimated at  <dig> my  using multiple fossil calibrations and loci  <cit> . the proposed minimum age of the rattus/mus common ancestor based on dating of the oldest fossil record of the genus progonomys  is  <dig>  my  <cit> . although knowledge of the timescale of mammalian radiations is in a state of flux, it is clear that np-like and vp35-like genes are ancient and independently integrated in rodents and in bats.

the two nirv loci in myotis appear to be evolving under different selective regimes. the orf for vp35-like elements has been maintained during the radiation . the few heterozygous sites found also failed to disrupt the reading frames. further analyses indicate that the lack of observed orf disruptions in the genus is unlikely to be due to chance or to a lack of sufficient evolutionary time for disruption. first, independent deletions  are observed that fail to disrupt the reading frame . as about 83% of indel mutations are expected to disrupt the orf  <cit> , it is unlikely  that two independent large indels would be shared by several taxa and still maintain the open reading frame over millions of years of neutral evolution. as most indel mutations are less than eight nucleotides  <cit> , the presence of only large indels in the vp35-like region of myotis suggests that many smaller indels have been culled by selection. but, even if indels are ignored as a source of orf disruptions, our simulations indicate that at least twelve premature stop codons are expected per alignment under neutral evolution for the vp35-like element in myotis . the k80+g model was input for the parametric simulation . the observed value of zero stop codons per alignment had a frequency of  <dig>  in the parametric simulations under no selection for orf maintenance. thus, with over  <dig> my of neutral evolution in myotis, orfs in the vp35-like region are not expected to be observed from chance alone. the same timescale of evolution revealed ongoing orf disruption of the np-like nirv  elements of bats . at least one orf disruption of the np-like nirvs is shared among species of myotis. taken together, the indel and simulation analyses suggest that there has been selective maintenance of the orf for the vp35-like genes but not for the np-like genes in myotis during their radiation across continents. finally, bayesian evolutionary models that accommodate codon usage differences revealed a pattern of positive selection for the vp35-like genes. a model that allows for positive selection  was a better fit  than a model that does not allow for positive selection . eliminating the lucifugus sequence from ny to yield the same taxon set as the np gene alignment still resulted in a significance level of p =  <dig> . site specific analysis in selecton indicated that  <dig> codon positions in the vp <dig> nirv alignment had lower confidence interval bounds for ka /ks of >  <dig>  indicating positive selection at these sites . similarly rel analysis in hyphy found  <dig> sites  to be under significant positive selection . the np-like gene alignment for myotis lacked a significant improvement in fit with a model that accommodated positive selection . our results suggest that filovirus-like elements have been co-opted by bats and that a vp35-like gene has been well maintained and modified by selection for over >  <dig> my.

we attempted to carry out rt-pcr of the vp35-like region in myotis lucifugus to test for gene expression. however, no rna product was detected, despite observing an rna band for the actin gene . it remains unknown if there is an expression product for vp <dig> in bats or if expression is induced under specific conditions such as filoviral infection. although filovirus np-like genes have previously been detected in marsupial est databases  <cit> , we detected no vp35-like nirvs in est databases. it is clear that filoviruses have undergone significant coevolution with mammalian hosts as they have developed several mechanisms to counter mammalian host immune responses. notably, some of these countermeasures involve vp35-mediated suppression of rna silencing  <cit> , dsrna binding activity and antagonism of the interferon response <cit> . as belyi et al.  <cit>  note, vp35-like gene expression could be a coevolutionary answer of mammals to the multifarious immunosuppressive role of viral vp <dig>  while at least two sites in the interferon-binding motif of vp <dig> of myotis appear to have undergone selection to change their residues, most other residues in this area appear to be exposed to varying degrees of purifying selection . although there has been significant progress in understanding the function and structure of vp <dig> in ebolaviruses, it is important to realize that functions such as interferon inhibition likely differ among filoviruses  <cit>  -- the clade that contains the bat vp35-like genes is quite divergent from ebolaviruses. in essence, the functional interactions of the filovirus-vp35-like nirvs with viral products remain unknown. ideally, closely related exogenous and endogenous filoviruses will be discovered that will enable the development of an experimental system to study function.

our results show that vp35-like and np-like nirvs are even more taxonomically widespread in mammals than thought . with our discovery of new nirvs in rodents and  <dig> species of vespertilionid bats, the results support two major clades of filovirus-like nirvs in mammals. however, these clades lack a strict association with placental and marsupial mammals . one clade contains ebolaviruses, lloviu virus, marburgviruses, marsupials and the chinese hamster, and the other contains only placental mammals . the hamster and the wallaby genomes contain nirvs within the ebolavirus/marburgvirus clade. note that taylor et al.  <cit>  found the same root location that we found here when they used related  sequences for outgroup rooting . the filovirus-nirv phylogenies are consistent with host jumps between placental and marsupial mammals. however, more nirvs from mammalian genomes are needed to address the timing of host switches. the recently discovered lloviu virus  <cit>  from a bat , is only distantly related to the nirvs from bats  in the present study. however, closely related nirvs and exogenous viruses seem to be rare -- a pattern predicted by the antiviral hypothesis for nirvs. viromes of new world vespertilionid bats, including filovirus nirv-containing myotis lucifugus and eptesicus fuscus, have been shown to be very diverse, but lacking in filoviruses  <cit> . experimentation is needed to directly test the antiviral function hypothesis for nirvs in bats.

CONCLUSIONS
the results indicate that the largest species radiation in mammals could be associated with the maintenance of a "living" fossil copy of the vp35-like gene co-opted from filoviruses. the results reveal a rare example of non-retroviral viral genes that have been successfully co-opted by mammals.

