BACKGROUND
dengue virus has four serotypes  that show substantial genetic diversity both within and between serotypes. sequence comparison studies showed 30–40% difference in amino acid sequences between serotypes  <cit> . the amino acid differences within each serotype are lower but the observed intra-serotype diversity is sufficiently large to warrant the definition of clusters of dengue virus variants  <cit> . studies of genetic diversity have focused on clade diversity and replacement  <cit> , mutation spectra  <cit> , conserved regions  <cit>  and implications for clinical manifestations  <cit> . several studies have focused on the analysis of antigenic diversity  of dengue virus; these studies focussed on experimental mapping of antibody recognition sites  <cit>  and t-cell epitopes  <cit>  and subsequent analysis of their diversity. recently, simmons et al.  <cit>  analyzed the t cell responses of individuals infected with dv <dig> by elispot assay and identified  <dig> peptides of several dengue proteins as potential novel t-cell epitopes.

generally, there is a correspondence between genetic and antigenic evolution of viruses, but genetic changes may result in disproportionately large antigenic changes  <cit> . while genetic and antigenic diversity in dengue virus strains had become evident  <cit> , large-scale and detailed systematic analyses that explore their relationship have not been reported. understanding this relationship is important for the study of vaccine development, especially in rapidly mutating viruses. in this paper, we will focus on protein sequence diversity, and thus consider only genetic variations that affect the protein sequences.

biological studies of antigenic diversity require great experimental effort, even for a single viral protein. consequently, most research groups focus on studying small number of viral sequences. rapid accumulation of sequence data from both classical and genomic/proteomic approaches makes the experimental studying of antigenic diversity difficult and time-consuming. a bioinformatics approach is necessary to support large-scale antigenic analysis of viral diversity, which can complement laboratory experiments.

in this study, we have developed a bioinformatics method to analyze antigenic diversity in the context of t-cell mediated immune responses. we studied antigenic diversity of more than  <dig> dengue virus protein sequences reported in the ncbi entrez protein database  <cit> . the study aimed to identify a minimal set of sequences that encodes the complete antigenic diversity of short peptides from all known sequences in dengue virus serotypes. short peptides, principally 9-mers were studied because they represent the predominant length of binding cores of t-cell epitopes. we analysed the relationship between short-peptide antigenic diversity and protein sequence diversity of dengue virus; the analysis was performed at two time points to help understand the effects of the accumulation of sequence data to the relationship. we have also analyzed the effects of sequence determinants on antigenic diversity of short peptides. this study provides a framework for large-scale, systematic analysis of antigenic diversity for the protein sequences of any virus. we did not analyze b-cell epitope antigenic diversity because of their complex conformational nature. although linear b-cell epitopes exist and our method can be used to study them, very often, they also show conformational preferences and dependence on the context of a protein antigen  <cit> . further, only approximately 10% of b-cell epitopes from native proteins are linear  <cit> .

RESULTS
dengue serotype protein datasets
data of june  <dig> , collected from the ncbi entrez protein database, contained a total of  <dig> sequences representing the ten proteins encoded by the genomes of the four serotypes . the number of these reported sequences increased nearly three-fold during the following  <dig> months . the removal of duplicates  reduced these collected sequences to  <dig>  and  <dig>  unique sequences . more than 64% of the sequences collected in  <dig> were identical and redundant, and this redundancy increased by approximately 10% in  <dig> . the number of reported unique sequences varied greatly among the proteins, ranging from  <dig> ns4a to  <dig> e sequences in  <dig> set . minor errors of annotation, mainly of the cleavage sites, were corrected prior to analysis for  <dig> sequences .

intra- and inter-serotype amino acid sequence identities of dengue proteins
earlier studies of dengue proteins, mainly e and ns <dig>  <cit> , have shown substantial amino acid sequence diversity both within and between the serotypes. in our study, we surveyed the extent of amino acid variation and conservation among dengue viruses by calculating pairwise percentage amino acid identity of unique sequences for each dengue protein, intra- and inter-serotype, using the large dengue data set of  <dig>  the intra- and inter-serotype percentage sequence identities  for all dengue proteins are shown in table  <dig> 

the intra-serotype percentage sequence identity was between 92% and 99%, except for c, pm, e and ns <dig> of dv <dig>  which showed minimum sequence identities ranging from 79% to 89%. in contrast, the average inter-serotype percentage sequence identity was in the range of 60–79%, except for ns2a. the ns <dig>  ns4b and ns <dig> proteins are highly conserved across the serotypes, with average sequence identities in the range of 77–79%, probably because of their involvement in forming the rna replication complex  <cit> . the ns2a protein is the most diverse across the serotypes , although it is highly conserved within each serotype. the inter-serotype diversity observed for ns2a is comparable to the inter-flavivirus diversity of the envelope protein, which shows approximately 40% amino acid identity  <cit> .

minimal sequence sets representing dengue virus antigenic diversity
in addition to identical protein sequences, another source of sequence redundancy, relative to this study, is the presence of antigenically redundant sequences. these sequences exist because of the identity of many amino acid residues among the individually unique protein sequences , resulting in the presence of targets of t-cell mediated immune responses  that are identical among viral variants. antigenically redundant sequences can be removed without loss of information on antigenic diversity among the sequences sets. for example, if in a dataset of three sequences, all of the overlapping 9-mers in one sequence have a match in at least one of the other two sequences, the antigenic diversity of this sequence can be covered by the other two sequences combined, thus rendering the first sequence antigenically redundant .

the removal of antigenically redundant sequences using our bioinformatics method  resulted in a further reduction of the number of dengue unique sequences to a total of  <dig>  or  <dig> . those two sets represent the complete antigenic diversity of short peptides for all four dengue serotypes . the increase in the number of unique sequences required to represent the complete antigenic diversity of short peptides in the four dengue serotypes in  <dig>  is an indication that more short-peptide antigenic diversity was found in the new sequences accumulated in the database. however, the percentage of unique sequences required to represent the complete short-peptide antigenic diversity of all four dengue serotypes in  <dig> decreased  because of an increase in antigenic redundancy. this observation indicates that the increase in the number of unique protein sequences  deposited in public databases is generally accompanied by a slower increase in short-peptide antigenic diversity.

characterization and application of sequence variables that affect antigenic diversity
we examined the effects of sequence determinants, such as number and length of sequences, on the short-peptide antigenic diversity of dengue virus. these analyses were carried out using test datasets of different numbers of sequences  and different lengths  that were randomly selected from a set of dv <dig> envelope protein sequences with repeated sampling for  <dig> times. antigenic diversity analysis of each test dataset was performed to identify a minimal set of sequences that represents the complete short-peptide antigenic diversity for each dataset. these minimal sets were used to analyze the effects of the sequence determinants on antigenic diversity.

effects of number of sequences on short-peptide antigenic diversity
an increase in the number of unique sequences in a dataset reduces the fraction required to represent the complete short-peptide antigenic diversity . this observation reflects an asymptotic relationship between the number of unique sequences and the percentage of the complete short-peptide antigenic diversity that is covered . asymptotic curves were observed for all proteins of the four dengue serotypes . the shape of the curve indicates that a single sequence will cover only a small proportion of the total short-peptide antigenic diversity and that for proteins with a large number of unique sequences, the addition of a single new variant sequence has little effect on the overall antigenic diversity.

effects of length of sequences on short-peptide antigenic diversity
a decrease in the length of sequences of a dataset reduces the fraction required to represent the complete short-peptide antigenic diversity of the dataset . this reduction was achieved by removal of two types of redundancy: identical fragments and antigenically redundant fragments. the number of identical fragments increases significantly with a decrease in the length of the fragments because of the limited variability associated with smaller size. hence, the effect of sequence length is significant, especially for very short fragments , for which only ~7% of the unique fragments were required to represent complete antigenic diversity of the short fragments . overall, the results indicate that short-peptide antigenic diversity has a near-linear relationship to sequence length .

discussion
in this study, we applied a systematic bioinformatics approach to collect, clean, organize and analyze the antigenic diversity of short peptides in reported protein sequence data of dengue virus. we have developed a computational method for the analysis of antigenic diversity in the context of t-cell mediated immune responses. the method was applied for the analysis of short-peptide antigenic diversity of dengue virus to determine a minimal sequence set that encodes the complete antigenic diversity of linear epitopes within each dengue virus serotype. we studied the relationship between short-peptide antigenic diversity and protein sequence diversity of dv and also explored the effects of sequence determinants on viral antigenic diversity. our analysis showed that the minimal number of unique sequences required to represent complete antigenic diversity of linear epitopes in dengue virus is significantly smaller than that required to represent complete protein sequence diversity. short-peptide antigenic diversity shows an asymptotic relationship to the number of unique sequences and linear relationship to the length of protein antigens.

the minimal sequence set that encodes the complete short-peptide antigenic diversity for each dengue virus serotype was derived through removal of identical sequences and antigenically redundant sequences . both reductions occurred without any loss of information on antigenic diversity among the sequences. the largest reduction was accomplished through the removal of identical sequences, since only 36%  or 25%  of the sequences were unique. the identical sequences originated from dengue virus strains that were unique variants with respect to the whole polyprotein, but were identical to other dengue strains with respect to individual proteins, resulting in many duplicate protein sequences. the removal of antigenically redundant sequences also involved a significant proportion of the sequences, approximately one-third of all unique sequences , reflecting the high antigenic redundancy among the dengue virus variants, which often differed by only a few amino acids. despite significant reduction achieved by reducing the collected sequences to minimal sequences, a large number of protein sequences,  <dig> in  <dig> and  <dig> in  <dig>  were still required to represent the complete short-peptide antigenic diversity of dengue virus.

it is clear that antigenic diversity in the reported dengue sequences is large. with many asymptomatic human and animal carriers of dengue viruses representing a huge reservoir for emergence of new strains  <cit> , the diversity is expected to increase, although at a progressively slower pace. this is because antigenic redundancy increases when the number of sequences increases; we observed that when the dataset for a particular protein reaches approximately  <dig> sequences, the effect of addition of new sequences to increasing antigenic diversity is marginal.

our study of factors that affect antigenic diversity provided insight into dealing with the increasing t-cell epitope antigenic diversity in the context of vaccine development. length of sequences had the largest effect on short-peptide antigenic diversity. the asymptotic behaviour of antigenic diversity increase was observed for the increase in the number of sequence variants. for practical purposes of vaccine formulation, antigenic diversity cannot be represented by whole protein sequences because it is not feasible to use these sequences for systematic experimental analysis: they are long and their number is increasing rapidly. the implication is that conventional vaccination strategies, which utilize whole attenuated pathogen with little knowledge of the specificity of immune responses they elicit, may not be suitable for providing protection from multiple variants of viruses. furthermore, it may be difficult to optimize such vaccine according to the human leukocyte antigen  profile of the population receiving the vaccine  <cit> , as neither the identities of the hla molecules that bind t-cell epitopes, nor the epitopes themselves are known.

the more effective vaccine strategy that we propose is to focus on short segments of proteins  that are known to be specific targets of immune responses , particularly those that have high concentration of t-cell epitopes  <cit> . by combining selected sets of short antigen fragments that represent t-cell epitope antigenic diversity, complete sets of viral targets can be covered in a "divide-and-conquer" approach. this may provide a promising basis for multivalent peptide-based vaccines against dengue virus. however, this strategy does not address the dengue virus-specific problem of protection versus immunopathology during secondary infections with a different serotype  <cit> .

several caveats need to be considered in a study such as this. first, it is well-known that not all hla-restricted epitopes are 9-mers  <cit> . this may impact the interpretation of our results, which were based only on 9-mers, and hence may not give a true representation of dengue t-cell epitope antigenic diversity. we selected 9-mers because they represent the typical size of hla class i t-cell epitopes, as well as the binding core of hla class ii t-cell epitopes  <cit> . we performed the same analysis with peptides of 8-mers and 10-mers. the results showed no significant difference as compared to the analysis of 9-mers .

the second caveat is the sampling bias in dengue virus sequences reported to the public databases. only dengue sequences that have been studied are reported, and viruses collected in accessible locations, associated with notable disease outbreaks or of known immunological properties are preferentially studied. consequently, certain dengue proteins have been studied intensively, while the others remained largely unstudied. for example, sequences of the envelope protein, known to be important for immunological activity and viral entry into host  <cit> , were the most abundant in our dataset , while that of ns4a, which is relatively unknown for immunological activity, was under-represented. in addition, for majority of the proteins, a large portion of the reported sequences were incomplete in length. for example, 95% of dv <dig> ns <dig> collected sequences were incomplete in length . however, the data used in this study was the most representative available and the large sample size for majority of the proteins helps to decrease the margin of error due to sampling bias. in addition, the reported sequences represent highly pathogenic strains isolated during dengue outbreaks.

there has been no significant increase in the number of unique sequences for dengue virus since the last analysis . the september  <dig> data set contained a total of  <dig>  dengue unique sequences. this was an increase of  <dig> unique sequences from the  <dig> data set. the increase, approximately 10%, was not expected to significantly affect the results observed for  <dig> data set. therefore, we did not perform the analysis of antigenic diversity on the  <dig> data set because of the small increase in the number of unique sequence.

CONCLUSIONS
this study has provided evidence that there are limited numbers of antigenic combinations in variant protein sequences of a viral species and that short regions of the viral proteins are sufficient to capture antigenic diversity of t-cell epitopes. the approach described herein has direct application to the analysis of other viruses, in particular those that show high diversity and/or rapid evolution, such as influenza a virus and human immunodeficiency virus .

