BACKGROUND
cyanobacteria are a unique phylogenetic group of bacteria and are the only known prokaryotes capable of oxygen-evolving photosynthesis. cyanobacteria occupy diverse ecological niches and exhibit enormous diversity in terms of their habitats, physiology, morphology and metabolic capabilities. due to their numerical abundance, most notably in marine environments, cyanobacteria have profound impact on almost all biochemical cycles that shape life on earth. they are major players in global oxygen supply, carbon dioxide  sequestration, nitrogen fixation, as well as the primary phototrophic production of biomass. the latter capability, the utilization of atmospheric co <dig> and sunlight for growth, has triggered renewed interest in the organization of cyanobacterial metabolism: cyanobacteria are considered a promising resource for third generation biofuels and have attracted interest for a variety of related biotechnological applications  <cit> . however, while substantial knowledge is available for several model strains, the diversity of cyanobacterial metabolism remains poorly understood.

with the advent of novel sequencing techniques and the completion of several genome sequencing projects, a considerable number of complete cyanobacterial genome sequences are now available. this increasing number of sequenced genomes provides new opportunities for understanding microbial diversity and metabolic organization in diverse environments. here, we report a whole genome comparison of multiple phototrophic cyanobacteria. our focus is to describe the genetic diversity found within cyanobacterial genomes and to describe metabolic adaptations and diversity of several strains with different environmental background. our work builds upon several previous studies on cyanobacterial genomic diversity and evolution  <cit> . for example, raymond et al.  <cit>  have previously compared five whole genome sequences from all groups of photosynthetic prokaryotes, with the aim to identify genes that play an essential role in phototrophy and to understand the advent and developement of photosynthesis. their results showed that the genomes of the studied organisms resemble mosaics of genes with very different evolutionary histories and that orthologs common to all five genomes showed a distinct lack of unanimous support for any single phylogenetic topology. the importance of horizontal gene transfer  for cyanobacteria was later corroborated by the work of zhaxybayeva et al.  <cit> . shi and falkowski  <cit>  demonstrated an overall phylogenetic discordance among putative orthologous protein families from  <dig> genomes of cyanobacteria. the authors identified a core set of genes that was argued to be resistant to hgt and on which a robust organismal phylogeny can be constructed. molecular synapomorphies, protein signatures that are present in an indicated group but not in other cyanobacteria or bacteria, were described by gupta et al.  <cit>  to further understand the evolutionary relationships between cyanobacteria. mulkidjanian et al.   <cit>  conducted a comparative analysis of  <dig> cyanobacterial genomes, with a focus on the origin of photosynthesis, and concluded that modern cyanobacteria inherited their photosynthetic apparatus from ancestral anaerobic phototrophs and not by lateral gene transfer from other phototrophic bacterial lineages. recently, also several ocean sampling expeditions investigated microbial diversity in marine environments  <cit> , again confirming substantial oceanic microbial diversity and considerable heterogeneity of microorganisms at the genomic level, specifically for prochlorococcus, one of the most abundant genus of cyanobacteria.

here, we augment the view on cyanobacterial genomic diversity with the identification and detailed analysis of putative orthologous genes across  <dig> cyanobacterial whole genome sequences. our analysis is not restricted to a single genus of cyanobacteria but seeks to integrate representatives of cyanobacteria from almost all known environments. unlike several previous studies, we do not aim to reconstruct evolutionary trajectories, but rather seek to describe differences and similarities in genome content. our main focus is the role of metabolic genes of central carbon metabolism and hence metabolic functionality across diverse strains. the manuscript is organized as follows: first, we define clusters of likely ortholog genes, denoted as clogs, based on pair-wise comparison of protein sequences. subsequently, we investigate the core and pan-genome of cyanobacterial strains and discuss codon usage analysis, as well as gene sharing and phylogenetic congruence. in the final three sections, we focus on the diversity of cyanobacterial metabolism and discuss how specific enzymes, and hence metabolic pathways and capabilities are distributed across selected cyanobacterial strains.

RESULTS
genome analysis and ortholog cluster
starting point of our analysis are the genome sequences of  <dig> selected cyanobacteria, as obtained from genebank . the chosen strains are not restricted to a single genus but were selected to represent the known genomic and metabolic diversity found in the cyanobacterial phylum, including eight marine and eight freshwater strains. the selected cyanobacterial strains include the model organisms synechocystis sp. pcc  <dig>  synechococcus elongatus pcc  <dig> and cyanothece sp. atcc  <dig>  several nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria , as well as two thermophiles originally isolated from hot-spring environments. details on the choice of strains are provided in methods and a summary of the properties of the selected strains is given in table  <dig>  a phylogenetic tree based on 16s rrna is shown and discussed further below.

a summary of the  <dig> different cyanobacterial strains considered in this study. given is the respective abbreviation, type of the cyanobacterial species which is based on their type of rubisco  <cit> , genome size , c+g content, the number of identified genes and the percentage of coding dna according to img database  <cit> , the ability of the strain to fixate nirtrogen, habitat and cell arrangement. within the column for habitat marine strains are marked by an m, fresh water by an f, thermophile strains are marked by a t. cell arrangement is subdivided in single cells  and filamentous cell arrangement . the division of the strains into different subsections is according to  <cit> .

to investigate genomic diversity, we aim to identify groups of ortholog genes, based on a pair-wise all-against-all comparison of identified protein sequences. two protein sequences are regarded as likely orthologs if the reciprocal comparison results in a bidirectional hit rate  larger than a given threshold. subsequently, likely orthologs were assigned to clusters by merging ortholog pairs. clusters of likely ortholog genes were then checked for consistency and, if applicable, split into separate clusters. in this way, gene pairs within one cluster that exhibit a bhr below a given threshold are avoided. we restrict the analysis to the chromosome, plasmids are not considered. details of the algorithm are given in material and methods. our approach follows earlier approaches to detect putative orthologs across several genome sequences  <cit> . however, we adopt rather stringent criteria to avoid inclusion of erroneous non-ortholog pairs, at the expense of potentially underestimating the number of true orthologs.

our algorithm results in  <dig> distinct clusters of likely ortholog genes , distributed across all  <dig> strains . figure  <dig> shows a histogram of the number of assigned genes per clog. the majority of clusters, almost 60%, consists of a single gene , whereas only a small number of clusters have more than  <dig> or  <dig> members. clogs with exactly  <dig> members are overrepresented, indictated in figure  <dig> by a vertical line. overall, the distribution differs slightly from the results provided in the cog database  <cit> . therein, considering only the two cyanobacterial strains  included in the database, clusters of ortholog genes tend to be comprised of more genes, often including multiple genes from the same strain.

to obtain insight into the organization of the cyanobacterial genomic diversity, each clog is assigned to a cyanobacterial strain if one or more member of a clog is present in the respective genome. figure 2a shows a histogram of the number of clogs as a function of the number of associated strains. we can distinguish between core genes , those that are assigned to all  <dig> strains, shared genes , those that are found in more than one but not in all strains, and unique genes  that have no likely ortholog in any other of the  <dig> genome sequences. figure 2b shows the number of clogs assigned to each cyanbacterial species, highlighting the contribution of core, shared, and unique clogs. the data is provided as additional file  <dig> 

we observe that the majority of ortholog clusters is associated with a single genome, and therefore represent unique genes with no likely ortholog in any other of the considered strains. the number of clogs shared among two or more genomes then quickly drops. we note that the scale in figure 2a is logarithmic. however, a significant number of clogs is again assigned to the core genome. clusters of likely ortholog genes that are present in all  <dig> cyanobacterial genomes are more frequent than clusters that are only shared between any given number, but not all, strains. the set of core clogs is in good agreement with the results reported in mulkidjanian et al.   <cit> . specifically, when using syn <dig> as a reference, almost all genes assigned to a core clog  in our analysis are likewise a member of a core cyanobacterial clusters identified by mulkidjanian et al.  <cit> . our results are also in good qualitative agreement with several previous studies on other bacterial lineages. for example, hogg et al.  <cit>  observed a similar distribution for  <dig> sequenced strains of haemophilus influenzae. extending the pan-genome concept to higher taxonomic units, lapierre and gogarten  <cit>  report a shared core genome of approximately  <dig> genes across more than  <dig> sequenced bacterial genomes. in both cases, corresponding to the results shown in figure  <dig>  a u-shaped distribution was observed, such that unique and core genes are overrepresented compared to any single set of genes assigned to a finite number of genome sequences.

the cyanobacterial core- and pan-genome
whole genome comparisons offer the possibility to extrapolate the observed results beyond the number of strains explicitly considered in the comparison. in this respect, pan-genome analysis has recently emerged as a novel approach to estimate the size of the gene repertoire accessible to any given species  <cit> . a number of recent studies have found consistently that the number of genes accessible to a bacterial species is usually orders of magnitude larger than the number of genes contained in the genome of any single organism. these results have a direct implication for resource allocation and whole-genome sequencing projects, as they can potentially predict how many new genes are identified every time a new genome of the species of interest is sequenced.

for the size of the bacterial pan-genome, divergent results have been obtained for different species. hogg et al.  <cit> , reported a finite pan-genome for haemophilus influenzae, extrapolating from  <dig> whole genome sequences, while results for streptococcus agalactiae indicate an infinite asymptotic pan-genome  <cit> . these results may indeed reflect differences in ecologial niches and evolutionary history. however, a fundamental objection to mathematical extrapolation has been raised recently  <cit> . as argued by kislyuk et al.  <cit>  such extrapolation estimates are likely to be spurious because they depend on the estimation of the occurence of extremely rare genes and genomes, respectively, which are problematic to estimate precisely because they are rare. therefore, we do not give any estimate for the total cyanobacterial pan-genome. nonetheless, we consider several key findings to be valid: there is a core genome that is shared between all  <dig> cyanobacterial strains considered here. the asymptotic size of the core genome when exptrapolated to all cyanobacterial strains is currently unknown. furthermore, there is no indication that the cyanobacterial pan-genome is closed. therefore, the results shown in figure  <dig> provide a strong incentive for further genome sequencing even of closely related strains.

a second issue relates to the possible functional and evolutionary differences between shared, core and unique genes. common to all recent studies is that the number of unique genes, and those that are only shared between a small number of genomes, represents a rather large proportion of the total gene repertoire  <cit> . a variety of hypotheses with respect to the origin of such a distribution have been put forward. for example, core genes are often assumed to be predominantely related to housekeeping functions  <cit> . unique genes, on the other hand, may be characteristic to specific environments and are assumed to be subject to extensive hgt  <cit> .

we tested this assertion by comparing the annotation obtained from gene ontology  database  <cit> . an analysis of the go annotation of core clogs reveals a significant enrichment of genes related to "translation" , "dna repair" , "gene expression" , "rna processing/modification" , diverse transporting processes , as well as several metabolic and biosynthetic processes . genes of the unique clogs are enriched with the annotation "defence response" , "dna integration" , and are in particular enriched in annotations of regulatory processes. the latter may implicate a conservation of a functional core, such as metabolism and gene expression machinery, whereras regulatory properties and interactions are more specific to diverse environments. a complete list of the enriched go terms is provided in additional file  <dig>  algorithmic details are given in the methods. we also need to point out a possible bias due to a significant enrichment of go annotated genes in the core clogs , whereas genes associated with unique clusters are more likely to have no go annotation. this imbalance can be explained by the fact that go annotations are mainly based on blast searches in other species and unique genes can therefore be expected to have fewer matches. furthermore, a significant fraction of unique genes may also be due to annotation errors or be non-functional as part of an ongoing process of genome reduction and pseudogenization  <cit> .

codon usage analysis
to further elucidate the difference between core and pan-genome, we compared the codon usage of the respective clogs across the  <dig> cyanobacterial genomes. to this end, the relative abundance of each nucleotide triplet for each amino acid was estimated and we calculated dg <dig> g <dig> as the sum of squared differences in codon usage between any two groups of genes, g <dig> and g <dig>  respectively. see methods for algorithmic details. we found considerable differences in codon frequencies for the set of core genes between different strains, indicating adaptation of the codon usage to the respective strain. for all  <dig> strains, the codon usage frequency was found to be significantly different between the set of core and unique genes. to quantify the difference in codon usage between the set of of core and unique genes, we use the ratio rx of the sum of squared differences in codon usage between core/core and core/unique genes for each strain. this ratio ranges from rx =  <dig> for pro <dig> up to rx =  <dig> for syn <dig> and mic <dig>  a table with detailed information is provided as additional file  <dig>  the difference in codon usage between core and unique genes within any single strain typically exceeds the differences between core genes, as well as between unique genes, across different strains. the difference in codon usage between core and unique genes is lowest in the rather small genomes of the three prochlorococcus strains pro <dig>  promed <dig>  and pro <dig> 

gene sharing and phylogenetic congruence
we are interested in the relationships between cyanobacterial species based on gene sharing, as compared to 16s rrna analysis. figure 4a shows a phylogenetic tree obtained from 16s rrna, using phylip  by felsenstein  <cit> . several options to estimate similarity based on assignment of clogs are available. here, we use a simple measure based on the number of clogs common to two strains divided by the total number of clogs associated with both strains combined. the respective distance tree is shown in figure 4b. both trees exhibit a high degree of similarity, with only minor topological differences. in both cases, the prochlorococcus strains form the closest related cluster. we note that we do not consider phylogenetic trees of individual gene families, where a higher degree of phylogenetic discordance must be expected  <cit> . likewise any estimate of distance based on shared clogs is likely biased by genome size, which again reflects evolutionary distance as determined by 16s rrna analysis. table  <dig> gives a pair-wise comparison of shared clogs between all  <dig> cyanobacterial strains. the table confirms the close association of the three prochlorococcus strains with syc <dig> with respect to shared genes.

a table of shared clogs. each entry shows the number of clogs associated with both strains. the left-most column in each row gives the total number of clogs associated with each strain.

the metabolic network is highly conserved
going beyond pan-genome analysis, we are particularly interested in the organization and diversity of cyanobacterial metabolism. to identify those clogs that can be associated with metabolic function, we utilize the enzyme commison  number of each gene, as obtained from the kegg database: a clog is regarded as metabolic if the respective set of orthologous genes can be assigned to one or more ec numbers associated with a specific enzymatic activity. we note that due to the hierarchical classification scheme, this assignment may also include broad enzymatic categories, as well as a limited number of non-metabolic enzymatic functions. see methods for algorithmic details and some caveat.

using the set of clogs described above,  <dig> clogs of the  <dig> can be regarded as metabolic. we note that due to bifunctional enzymes or inconsistent and erroneous annotation clogs may be assigned to more than one metabolic function. however, in our case only  <dig> clogs  are assigned to more than one ec number, with a total of  <dig> distinct ec numbers assigned across all clusters. these results indicate that inconsistent annotation does not significantly constrain our analysis, even without prior filtering or manual curation. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of metabolic clogs across the unique, shared and core genome. clogs assigned to metabolic function are highly overrepresented within the set that is common to all  <dig> cyanobacterial strains, with about 55% of all core clogs associated with metabolic function. obviously, cellular metabolism, defined here as genes assigned to enzymatic function, constitutes a large fraction of the core genome. figure  <dig> gives the percentage of clogs assigned to enzymatic function across all  <dig> strains considered in this study. the number of enzymatic clogs increases linearly with the number of total clogs assigned to each strain, with an offset of about  <dig> core enzymatic clogs. however, the correlation between number of enzymatic and total clogs is rather weak and dominated by the contribution from enzymatic core clogs. a further analysis of the respective pathways and enzyme classes associated to clogs revealed no obvious difference between unique and core genes, that is, no particular enzymatic category or pathway was strongly overrepresented in either class. nonetheless, a number of core pathways can be identified that are common to all  <dig> cyanobacterial strains. among the highly conserved pathways are the calvin benson cycle, the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway, nucleotide synthesis, and amino acids synthesis. however, with respect to the latter, a number of phosphatases and transaminases are not annotated in several strains.

the diversity of cyanobacterial metabolism
a multifaceted picture is obtained, if we look how specific enzymes, and hence metabolic capabilities, are distributed across the  <dig> cyanobacterial strains. to this end, we first limit the analysis to shared ec numbers. of the total of  <dig> distinct ec numbers, assigned across all clusters, a subset of  <dig> ec numbers is associated with more than one, but less than  <dig> strains. figure  <dig> provides a clustered heatmap of the association between these  <dig> shared ec numbers and the  <dig> cyanobacterial strains. ec numbers were clustered using the matlab function clustergram with distance 'hamming'. overall, we can distinguish between four broad categories: first, shared ec numbers that are predominantely annotated with the prochlorococcus strains, pro <dig>  promed <dig>  pro <dig> and syc <dig> . second, shared ec numbers that are only annotated to a small number of strains . third, shared ec numbers that are annotated to a large number of strains , and, fourth, shared ec numbers that are annotated to almost all strains, except the three prochlorococcus strains and syc <dig>  we note that figure  <dig> again underscores the similarity between the three prochlorococcus strains and syc <dig> that is already apparent in figure  <dig> and table  <dig> 

investigating the associations more closely confirms differences between the four groups. exclusively associated with the four strains promed <dig>  pro <dig>  pro <dig> and syc <dig> are the two ec numbers ec  <dig> . <dig> , a malate:quinone oxidoreductase involved in the tca cycle and ec  <dig> . <dig> , a cystathionine gamma-synthase which catalyzes one of the essential steps in the synthesis of the amino acid l-methionine. for most other strains the synthesis pathway of methionine is unclear. no ec numbers are solely associated with the three prochlorococcus strains, but no other strain. vice versa, group d contains a set of  <dig> ec numbers that are associated with all strains, except the three prochlorococcus strains promed <dig>  pro <dig>  pro <dig>  this set includes ec  <dig> . <dig> , a nitrite reductase, and ec  <dig> . <dig> , a nitrate reductase. indeed, it was widely assumed that nitrate is unavailable for prochlorococcus because none of the sequenced laboratory strains contain the respective gene for nitrate utilization  <cit> . however, this view was recently challenged as metagenomic sequence data revealed that several prochlorococcus ecotypes may contain nitrate reductase genes  <cit> . ec numbers that are not annotated for the prochlorococcus strains and syc <dig>  include several enzymatic activities of central metabolism, such as ec  <dig> . <dig>  , ec  <dig> . <dig>  , and ec  <dig> . <dig>  . a comprehensive list of differences in ec annotations between group a and group d is given as additional file  <dig>  a detailed discussion of genes involved in central metabolism is provided below.

cyanobacterial storage metabolism
as phototrophic organisms, most cyanobacteria rely on indigenous compounds that act as storage and allow to maintain cellular function during the night and in the absence of light. the most prevalent storage compound in cyanobacteria is glycogen, a branched polymer synthesized from glucose-6-phosphate. glycogen is assumed to be accumulated during the day and mobilized during periods of darkness.

accumulation of glycogen is also relevant under conditions of nitrogen limitation. all  <dig> strains considered here possess the necessary enzymes for glycogen synthesis and mobilization. in particular, a clog that is annotated with the enzyme agp  belongs to the core genome and is associated with all  <dig> strains. likewise, the enzymes gs  and gbe  are annotated for all  <dig> cyanobacterial strains. the respective enzymes are associated with different clogs and are therefore not necessarily orthologs within all strains. the enzyme responsible for glycogen mobilization gp  is again associated with all  <dig> strains, albeit not as a single clog. see table  <dig> for an overview. we note that in all cases where an enzyme is associated with more than one clog, there usually is a dominant clog associated to almost all strains and a small number of secondary clogs whose members are annotated with the same enzyme. on closer inspection, this distinction is not an artifact of the clustering algorithm, but is supported by pair-wise comparisons of the respective sequences.

a summary of the genes involved in the synthesis and mobilization of the different storage compounds within the  <dig> cyanobactrial strains. black dots represent the number of genes associated with a clog assigned to the specific enzymatic function. columns correspond to different clogs that may be assigned to the same enzymatic activity. abbreviations are: agp: adp glucose pyrophosphorylase , gs: glycogen synthase , gbe: glycogen branching enzyme , gp: glycogen phosphorylase , cpha: cyanophycin synthetase , cphb: cyanophycinase , phaa: pha-specific β-ketothiolase/acetyl-coa acetyltransferase , phab: pha-specific acetoacetyl-coa reductase , phac/e: poly  synthase .

compared to glycogen, other storage compounds are less ubiquitous. nonetheless, for the majority of strains, the enzymes for cyanophycin synthesis and mobilization are annotated. cyanophycin is a polymer composed of aspartate and arginine and serves as a source of nitrogen and carbon in several cyanobacteria. as in the case for glycogen, the enzyme for cyanophycin synthesis  is associated with several clogs, whereas the enzyme for cyanophycin mobilization  is confined to a single clog. both enzymes always occur together. that is, no strain is annotated only with synthesis or mobilization, with a single exception for syc <dig>  however, in this case, the associated singleton clog is likely to be a erroneous annotation. the respective gene is annotated as a putative cyanophycin synthetase in cyanobase, but the similarity to other known genes encoding cyanophycin synthetase is low.

less prevalent than cyanophycin is the utilization of poly-beta-hydroxybutyrate  as a storage for carbon. phb is a nontoxic biodegradable polyester of biotechnological importance, whose production by genetically engineered cyanobacteria was discussed recently  <cit> . among the  <dig> strains considered here, the corresponding enzymes for synthesis of phb are annotated only for synechosystis sp. pcc  <dig>  and microcystis aeruginosa nies- <dig> . we note that although the strain aca <dig> is also associated with the clog annotated with phaa , the strain lacks the remaining steps for phb synthesis. the respective gene in aca <dig> is a close variant of phaa that is not specific for phb synthesis. we emphasize that all storage compounds are of high biotechnological interest.

the diversity of cyanobacterial central metabolism
beyond storage compounds, tables  <dig> and  <dig> summarize the presence of several key enzymes within cyanobacterial central metabolism across all  <dig> strains considered in this study. in contrast to table  <dig>  the tables do not distinguish between individual clogs associated with the same enzymatic function. a detailed depiction of individual clogs is provided as supplementary material . for each enzyme usually a dominant clog exists in addition to a smaller number of secondary clogs. a graphical depiction of annotated pathways is given in figure  <dig>  tables  <dig> and  <dig> allow for a detailed analysis of metabolic function. first, we note that all key enzymes of the calvin-benson cycle, responsible for co <dig> fixation, are annotated in all  <dig> strains . likewise, for all enzymes belonging to the pentose phosphate pathway , respective clogs are associated with all strains . a more diverse picture is obtained for other key metabolic pathways. the enzyme fbp  is not annotated for all strains and absent in all alpha-cyanobacteria, including the prochlorococcus strains. however, taking into account results from a recent reconstruction and stoichiometric modeling of the strain syn <dig>  the enzyme was found to be not essential for biomass formation  <cit> . to some extend, its function can also be substituted by the bifunctional enzyme sbp , present in all strains considered in this study. likewise, the enzyme pfk  is not annotated for several strains, most notably again the prochlorococcus strains. we note that pfk is essential for glycolysis, in its absence utilization of glycogen as a carbon and energy source has to proceed exclusively via the ppp. other enzymes of the glycolytic pathway, such as fba, gap, pgm, and pyk are annotated for all strains . in contrast, pyruvate metabolism, summarized in table  <dig>  is rather fragmented. while clogs annotated with the pep carboxylase  are associated with all strains, the back reaction via the pepkinase is rather rare and annotated only for three strains. pepc catalyzes the anaplerotic conversion of pep to oxaloacetate and inorganic phosphate pi, and is essential for replenishment of tca cycle intermediates. clogs annotated with the right-hand side of the tca cycle, resulting in the formation of 2-oxoglutarate, are ubiquitous for all strains. the metabolite 2-oxoglutarate is considered to be a sensor for the nitrogen status of cyanobacteria  <cit>  and serves as a precursor for several amino acids and nucleotides.

a summary of the genes involved in central carbon metabolism: glycolysis and the calvin benson cycle. black dots represent the number of genes assiated with clogs assigned to the respective enzymatic function. the table does not distinguigh between individual clogs assigned to the same enzymatic function. abbreviations are: gpi glucose-6-phosphate isomerase , fbp fructose- <dig> -bisphosphatase , sbp fructose- <dig> -/sedoheptulose- <dig> -bisphosphatase , fba fructose-bisphosphate aldolase , tpi triosephosphate isomerase , pfk phosphofructokinase , gapdh glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase , pgm phosphoglycerate mutase , eno enolase , pyk pyruvate kinase , pgk phosphoglycerate kinase , rpi ribose-5-p isomerase , tkt transketolase , taldo transaldolase , prk phosphoribulokinase , rpe ribulose-5-p 3-epimerase , rbco ribulose  <dig> -bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase .

a summary of the genes involved in central carbon metabolism: the pentose phosphate pathway , pyruvate metabolism and the tca cycle. black dots represent the number of genes assiated with clogs assigned to the respective enzymatic function. the table does not distinguigh between individual clogs assigned to the same enzymatic function. brackets indicate genes that are annotated with a different function as the respective clogs they are assigned to. these cases may represent erroneous annotation or bifunctional enzymes. abbreviations are: gpd g6p dehydrogenase , 6pgd phosphogluconate dehydrogenase , 6pgl phosphogluconolactonase , pepc pep carboxylase , me malic enzyme , pps pyruvate water dikinase , pepk pep carboxykinase , pdh pyruvate dehydrogenase , cs citrate synthase , aco aconitase , icd isocitrate dehydrogenase , stk succinate thiokinase , sdh succinate dehydrogenase , fh fumarate hydratase , mdh malate dehydrogenase  and mqo malate:quinone oxidoreductase .

the subsequent steps within the tca cycle are highly fragmented. no clogs are associated with the enzyme complex 2-oxogluterate dehydrogenase , catalyzing the conversion from 2-oxogluterate to succinyl-coa. the lack of ogdh corrosponds to the known fact that cyanobacteria do not possess a conventional tca cycle. nonetheless, it is generally believed that the tca cycle is able to carry cyclic flux and is therefore able to fulfill its respiratory function in the absence of light. within the reconstruction of knoop et al.  <cit>  the cyclic flux through the tca cycle was realized by a metabolic bypass that complements the missing enzyme complex, via three steps involving glutamate decarboxylase , 4-aminobutyrate transaminase  and succinate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase . however, only recently, a proper bypass of the ogdh was identified. zhang and bryant report that in the strain syc <dig> a novel 2-oxoglutarate decarboxylase  and succinate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase  together convert 2-oxogluterate to succinate and thus close the tca cycle  <cit> . the respective clogs are shared between all strains, except the three prochlorococus strains, syc <dig>  and syc <dig>  see table  <dig> for an overview. the existence of a bypass also explains that the succinate thiokinase , otherwise an essential enzyme within the tca cycle, is only annotated for a small number of strains. we speculate that in these few cases the enzyme stk serves mainly to produce succinyl-coa. furthermore, several strains lack clogs annotated with the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase . for these cyanobacteria cellular respiration via the tca cycle is significally impaired. clogs associated with the enzyme fumarate hydratase  are present for all cyanobacteria. however, for syc <dig> and glo <dig>  the original genes are annotated differently, representing either erroneous annotation or a bifunctional enzyme. extrapolating results from a metabolic model of syn <dig> , the enzyme fh is essential to recycle fumarate, which is an obligate byproduct during growth. in addition, several other enzymes are only annotated in a subset of the considered strains. in particular, the malic enzyme  and the malate dehydrogenase  are absent in all alpha-cyanobacteria. however, for these strains, the function of the latter can be substituted by the malate:quinone oxidoreductase , which catalyzes the irreversible oxidation of malate to oxaloacetate. overall, the assigmment of clogs to the  <dig> cyanobacterial strains considered here reveals a complex picture and considerable metabolic diversity in enzymes of the core carbon metabolism.

CONCLUSIONS
the rapidly increasing number of complete microbial genomes offers new possibilities to understand microbial diversity in complex environments. in this work, we have presented a whole genome analysis of multiple phototrophic cyanobacteria, with the aim to gain insight into the diversity of cyanobacterial metabolism from a genome perspective. cyanobacteria exhibit an enormous metabolic diversity and occur in almost all environments where light is available, and are therefore particularly suited for a comparative analysis of genetic diversity. the basis of our analysis was the definition of clusters of likely ortholog genes , and how these are distributed across the  <dig> cyanobacterial strains considered in this study. we found that of the  <dig> distinct clogs identified across all cyanobacterial strains, the majority  consist of single genes that have no likely ortholog in any other considered strain. about 3% of clogs are assigned to all strains, constituting the core genome shared among all strains considered in this study. the remaining clogs are assigned to more than one, but not all strains. we note that the set of core clogs does not represent a minimal set of genes to sustain life.

several conclusions can be drawn from the distribution of clogs: first, we find no indication that the pan-genome of cyanobacteria is closed. rather, the number of total clogs increases indicating that no small number of sequenced strains is sufficient to explore the full diversity of the cyanobacterial genome. while such extrapolations must be taken with caution  <cit> , these result at least provide a strong incentive for further sequencing projects. second, the set of core and unique clogs differs in with respect to enriched annotations. core clogs exhibit a significant enrichment of genes with annotations that are commonly associated with household functions, such as "translation", "dna repair", "gene expression", "rna processing/modification", diverse transporting processes, as well as several metabolic and biosynthetic processes. the annotation of genes of unique clogs are enriched with terms pointing to more specific functions, such as various regulatory processes. furthermore, we found that codon frequencies are different for core clogs between different strains, indicating adaptation of codon usage to the respective organisms.

a focus of our work was to explore the metabolic diversity of cyanobacteria from a genomic perspective. clogs assigned to metabolic functions are strongly overrepresented within the set of core clogs common to all strains considered in this study. investigating the distribution of individual clogs in more detail, our analysis revealed a diverse picture of the presence of core metabolic pathways within all trains. several key pathways in central metabolism are highly conserved, such as the pentose phosphate pathway and the calvin-benson cycle. however, other parts of the metabolic network, most notably pyruvate metabolism and the tca cycle, are highly fragmented. in contrast to conventional functional annotation, the annotation of enzymatic function offers the advantage that the functional context of assigned clogs, in terms of pathways and adjacent reactions, can be taken into account. therefore the analysis allows to assess the presence or absence of certain enzymes in terms of metabolic function, providing stronger criteria to judge erroneous annotation or reliability of the associated clogs. for example, the incompletely annotated tca cycle of cyanobacteria puts constraints on its ability to provide the precursors for cellular respiration. this deficiency, in term, has consequences for the functional role of other assigned reactions, such as the succinate thiokinase . the latter is therefore unlikly to assume its usual role, and correspondingly is annotated only for a small number of strains. in this respect, we consider our analysis also as a first step in automated network reconstruction. large-scale models of cellular metabolism are becoming increasingly important for a variety of biotechnological applications, but are currently often restricted to a small number of model strains  <cit> . reconstruction of multiple strains can greatly benefit from a thorough analysis of metabolic diversity found among the set of already sequenced cyanobacteria. we expect that an iterative process, from genome analysis to model construction will eventually lead to a leap in understanding of the metabolic and ecological capabilities of bacterial species and to advanced eco-systems biology.

