BACKGROUND
in order to assess biodiversity response under climate change, hannah et al.  <cit>  recently emphasized the need to apply simulation models operating on a regional scale. moreover, species respond differently to climate change because of different adaptations to their environment  <cit> . as a consequence, single-species models with a regional focus are essential to fully understand the manifold impact of global climate change. however, even though recent simulation tools have occasionally been applied for climate-sensitive animal species , spatial plant population models are extremely scarce .

in this study we show how climate change may affect the long-term population dynamics of the raisin bush, grewia flava dc, a common, fleshy-fruited, woody plant species of south african savannas. understanding the population dynamics of grewia flava is a crucial task, because it is widely involved in the shrub/bush encroachment process . shrub encroachment, i.e. the increase in woody plant cover, is a major concern for conservation and savanna rangeland management, due to its adverse effect on livestock carrying capacity  and biodiversity . in the context of global climate change, increase in woody plant cover has primarily been investigated in association with elevated co <dig> . for example, bond et al.  <cit>  suggested that higher rates of atmospheric co <dig> will have a positive effect on the post-fire regrowth of woody plants resulting in an increase in woody plant cover. unfortunately, appropriate data verifying this hypothesis are not yet available.

here, we present a different approach. we used spatial grewia model  , a stochastic, spatially-explicit computer model to evaluate the impact of precipitation pattern change on grewia flava population dynamics. in semi-arid and arid savannas, rain is the most important environmental parameter governing crucial life history processes in woody plants  <cit> . hence, climate change related shifts in precipitation pattern will potentially have severe consequences for woody plant population dynamics. as a regional focus for our study we considered the southern kalahari, the near centre of grewia flava's distribution. in this area, recent climatological studies proposed either a decrease in mean precipitation of 5–15% by the year  <dig>  <cit> , or an increase by up to 30–40% , as well as alternating phases with low and high rainfall, typical for southern africa  <cit> . the large divergence between the various precipitation scenarios raises the question how woody plants would react along this spectrum. therefore, we have set up a systematic sensitivity study to explore grewia flava population dynamics along precipitation gradients, so as to detect possible thresholds in the response of this species to continuous variations of a crucial environmental driver.

RESULTS
by implementing relevant ecological processes of grewia flava population dynamics into the sgm , we developed a standard scenario, based on annual rainfall for the period  <dig> –  <dig>  this standard scenario led to stable population dynamics . to compare population trends between four climate change scenarios we then used simple linear regression to calculate the z-value, i.e. the slope of the year – shrub density relationship.

 increase in precipitation
an increase in the frequency of high rainfall years resulted in an increase of the z-value . for example, a 20% increase in high rainfall years yielded a mean z-value of  <dig>  . with an increase of 50%, the maximum z-value was  <dig> . this upper limit could be clearly assigned, because the carrying capacity of cell type t had been reached, i.e. no further recruits were able to establish in the sub-canopy of trees. even though additional juveniles may still emerge in cell type m, they are prevented from reaching the open due to a low probability of pmatrix. additionally, fire mortality is higher in cell type m.

 decrease in precipitation
a decrease in mean precipitation resulted in a negative population trend  with a lower limit of z at - <dig>  . a 10% increase of plow, corresponding to a probability of occurrence of low rainfall years of plow =  <dig> , yielded a mean z value of - <dig> . this continued to z = - <dig>  for a 40% increase of plow. above a 60% increase of plow 30% of all replicate runs resulted an extinction of the grewia flava population within the  <dig> year time frame . comparing the upper and lower limits of the z-value for scenario  and , negative effects associated with an increase in drought events were more effective than the positive effects related to higher recruitment rates associated with comparable rainfall excess .

 increase in inter-annual variation of precipitation
an increase in inter-annual variation between low and high rainfall years below 100% did not cause any significant departure from stable population dynamics. however, above a threshold value of 100%, corresponding to a reduction of paverage from  <dig>  to less than  <dig>  , we observed a decrease in the mean z-value. for example, for an increase in variation of 150%, z was - <dig>  . here, rainfall almost exclusively occurred as either high or low . considering the negative and positive effects of low and high rainfall years, negative effects, such as drought, outweighed positive effects associated with enforced recruitment in high rainfall years.

 increase in temporal auto-correlation of precipitation
despite constant mean and inter-annual variation in precipitation, increasing period length  and intra-cycle variation  led to negative population trends and a decrease in z-value . here, we found varying icv thresholds for the pl scenarios tested, i.e. an abrupt departure from stable population dynamics. for example, a 10-year alternating rainfall cycle with an increase of  <dig> % in icv  yielded a z-value of - <dig> , whereas population dynamics were stable for an icv of 70%. further thresholds were found above 60% icv for a pl value of  <dig> years, 50% for  <dig> years, 40% for  <dig> years and 15% for  <dig> years. in the latter case, a large proportion of the population became extinct below 50% icv where z was close to its lower limit. it is noteworthy, that we found no significant difference between similar pl scenarios that began with different phase conditions.

discussion
based on our simulation results, we have demonstrated that climate change predictions of precipitation pattern for the southern kalahari may significantly affect grewia flava population dynamics. this enables us to estimate the possible consequences for land use management and biodiversity due to the keystone function of grewia flava in the shrub/bush encroachment process.

what are the implications of climate change related population trends for regional biodiversity and rangeland condition?
 increase in precipitation
a climate change related increase in precipitation is commonly rejected  <cit> ). however, based on a 28-year atmospheric circulation model, mason et al.  <cit>  proposed an increase in mean annual rainfall of 30–40% for the southern kalahari. yet, due to the model's insensitivity to topography, the authors also emphasize uncertainties in their predictions. this scenario would result in a strong increase in shrub density as indicated by a positive mean population trend for the sgm simulation period . here, fire and drought mortality rates are too low to compensate substantial increase in juvenile recruitment associated with high rainfall years. on rangelands with domestic livestock this process may be strongly enhanced: in an earlier model version it was shown that cattle feeding on the foliage of grewia flava may disperse seeds into the open matrix vegetation through dung deposition and thus facilitate shrub encroachment  <cit> . in this case we propose that an increase in precipitation will result in a catastrophic deterioration of current rangeland conditions within several decades. as a further consequence, biodiversity will most likely decrease due to the homogenization of woody plant community structure  <cit> . an increase in structural homogeneity due to shrub encroachment has been shown to adversely affect species diversity in both plants and animals .

 decrease in precipitation
the majority of climatological studies propose a decrease in annual precipitation of 5–15% by the year  <dig>  <cit> . for a 10% increase in the probability of occurrence of low rainfall years  we found a negative trend for grewia flava population dynamics . high frequency of low rainfall years resulted in an increase of drought-related mortality and the reduction of shrub density. increases in the probability of occurrence of low rainfall years of more than 40% lead occasionally to population extinction within the sgm time frame. however, we believe that under natural conditions population dynamics of grewia flava may also stabilize at a lower level, as suggested by its distribution in arid parts of the southern kalahari where droughts are more frequent . even though precipitation decrease may mitigate the risk of local grewia encroachment, a strong reduction in shrub density may lead to cascade effects in the food chain because the fruits are an important component in the diet of animals and humans in an environment where food resources are otherwise scarce  <cit> .

 increase in inter-annual variation of precipitation
the inter-annual variation in precipitation, i.e. frequency and magnitude of extreme rainfall events, has been predicted to increase with ongoing climate change within the next decades . rates may range between 10–20% for the southern kalahari  <cit> . for this scenario sgm produced no significant departure form stable population dynamics . thus, we propose that the predicted increase in inter-annual variability will have a low impact on the natural population dynamics and shrub density of grewia flava. however, this may differ for rangelands with high cattle grazing: an earlier model version showed that increase in the probability of extreme rainfall years can increase shrub encroachment if additional seed dispersal by cattle into the matrix is considered  <cit> .

an increase in variability of more than 100% revealed a significant threshold behavior with a negative grewia flava population trend. above this threshold frequent droughts kill the offspring and inhibit emergence. ecological theory generally suggest that population viability decreases with increase in environmental variability or stochasticity  <cit> , because favorable events have a limited positive impact due to the carrying capacity, whereas unfavorable events have a full negative impact  <cit> . however, to our knowledge, the general character of this relationship has not been studied in detail yet. thus, the pattern described here provides new insights into the relationship between environmental variability and the corresponding population dynamics.

 increase in temporal auto-correlation of precipitation
tyson  <cit>  showed evidence of periodic, non-random rainfall oscillations with a period of ca. 18– <dig> years in southern africa. this distinct pattern has recently been associated with el niño/la niña phenomena and may increase under climate change  <cit> . since we did not simulate actual total rainfall we used values of icv, i.e. intra-cycle variation and pl, i.e. period length to evaluate the impact of climate change related increase in positive auto-correlation of rainfall. in our study region, kruger  <cit>  found an oscillation with a pl value of  <dig> years between  <dig> and  <dig>  the icv values used in our simulation experiments refer to an increase in the probability of an extreme rainfall category and are thus difficult to compare with the cyclic variability of actual total rainfall. however, we compared the icv values from our model with departures of annual rainfall from the inter-annual mean of a typical rainfall oscillation provided by kruger  <cit> . based on this, we infer that an icv value above 60% resembles a realistic rainfall variation between favorable and unfavorable periods of a 22-year oscillation. although we did not find a negative impact on grewia flava population dynamics for this scenario, a slight increase in icv combined with an increasing length of el niño/la niña phases might have a significant negative impact on the population viability of grewia flava . this will have profound consequences for other organisms which depend on, for example, fruit provision.

as a further corollary, our results confirm current ecological theory that positive auto-correlation with constant average and inter-annual variation of a driving environmental parameter can reduce population viability and lead to extinction . in terms of the internal model processes of sgm, this means that negative effects in drought years  outweigh positive effects in wet years . this is noteworthy, as mean annual rainfall and inter-annual variation was kept constant. until now, this has been primarily shown in solely theoretical studies with under-compensating population dynamics  or individual-based animal models . to our knowledge this is the first empirical-based, plant population model that showed evidence of population persistence being negatively influenced by positive auto-correlation through a periodically fluctuating environmental driver.

parameter sensitivity and predictive power of sgm
in order to assess the predictive power of sgm it is important to discuss the inference of actual precipitation amounts on probability values. threshold values for extreme rainfall years are based on expert knowledge and may vary depending on the plant species considered. moreover, percentage changes in extreme rainfall years, as applied in our model, are not necessarily equivalent to percentages changes in mean annual rainfall. for example, an increase in 'high' rainfall years by 10% represents an increase in mean annual rainfall of approximately 10%, depending on actual precipitation amounts in each 'high' rainfall year. thus, it is important to derive principal population trends from the sgm model results rather than absolute predictions. another issue regards the temporal dimension: long-term sgm simulation periods deviate from short-term predictions of climate change. however, population trends applied for only a few decades may yield biased results due to the cyclicity of grewia population dynamics . finally, we stress that potential deviations in the annual probability of drought mortality may modify the output of the model. for example, a sensitivity analysis showed that a 100% increase in drought mortality for adult shrubs decreased the model output by 10% .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have shown that climate change may have severe and sometimes unexpected implications at a regional species level. a woody plant like grewia flava is relatively long-lived, fire and drought-resistant. intuitively, this would suggest a low climate change impact on grewia flava population dynamics. however, we found that despite grewia flava's capability to survive in a harsh environment, it may be strongly affected when rainfall decreases as predicted, or increases in periodical fluctuations. this may also include possible range shifts in regional distribution which have not been studied here. based on the model and the climate change scenarios analysed, it would be inappropiate to forecasts changes in the geographical distribution of grewia flava, because sgm parameters have been estimated and validated for populations in the kimberley region of the southern kalahari. moreover, current geographical distribution suggests that buffer mechanisms may facilitate survival in more arid parts of the southern kalahari .

decrease in rainfall may reduce the severity of grewia flava encroachment in the southern kalahari. however, increase in rainfall will likely enhance this process. a shift from typical open grassland with solitary trees towards wide spread, homogeneous grewia flava thickets implies negative cascade effects for other species, resulting in the loss of biodiversity  <cit> . as a further consequence, local rangelands are likely to be reduced in their carrying capacity of domestic livestock with negative effects for economic sustainability. moreover, a shift in precipitation pattern may have further consequences, such as the alteration of fire regimes, grass biomass production or woody plant carbon uptake.

