BACKGROUND
high-throughput single nucleotide polymorphism  genotyping assays generate large amounts of data, which usually is presented as scatter plots of signals corresponding to the two snp alleles. a robust snp genotyping assay is characterized by large distances between the three clusters that define the genotypes and small distances between the data points within each cluster. numeric quality measures for the scatter plots would allow objective and automatic assessment of the success of a snp assay.

"silhouettes" were introduced in  <dig> as a general graphical aid for interpretation and validation of cluster analysis  <cit> . in a silhouettes calculation, the distance from each data point in a cluster to all other data points within the same cluster and to all data points in the closest cluster are determined. thus silhouettes provides a measure of how well a data point was classified when it was assigned to a cluster by according to both the tightness of the clusters and the separation between them. this feature renders silhouettes potentially well suited for assessing cluster quality in snp genotyping methods. in high-throughput snp genotyping, silhouettes could be used for assessing the quality of automatic genotype assignment by alerting the operator if the quality of the genotype clusters fall below a certain limit. during assay development and optimization, silhouettes could be used to compare the performance of a genotyping assay at different reaction conditions. it could also be applied for comparing the robustness of different snp genotyping technologies.

in this study we created a program  to calculate numeric silhouettes for assessing the quality of genotype clusters obtained in snp genotyping assays. we show the utility of silhouettes and the program by applying it to our "in-house" developed four-color fluorescence minisequencing system for snp genotyping in a microarray format  <cit> . single nucleotide primer extension  is the reaction principle underlying several of the commonly used systems for genotyping single nucleotide polymorphisms   <cit> . in minisequencing a dna polymerase is employed to specifically extend a detection primer designed to anneal directly adjacent to the snp position in the complementary dna strand with a single labelled nucleotide analogue. the dna polymerase is the most important factor that determines the efficiency and specificity of the primer extension reaction, irrespectively of the assay format. we used silhouettes to compare the performance of three new commercially available dna polymerases to the thermosequenase dna polymerase, which is routinely used in minisequencing assays in many laboratories, including our own. we found silhouettes to provide a relevant measure, in addition to signal-to-noise ratios and genotyping success, for selecting the most favourable enzyme for our assay.

RESULTS
we created a program, denoted clustera, for calculating numeric "silhouettes" for clustered data, such as for example the three clusters of signal ratios commonly obtained in snp genotyping assays. figure  <dig> illustrates the silhouette calculation for one data point in a typical scatter plot obtained in a snp genotyping assays. a silhouette close to  <dig>  is obtained when the average distance from a data point to the other data points within its own cluster is smaller than the average distances to all data points in the closest cluster. a silhouette close to zero indicates that the data-point could equally well have been assigned to the neighbouring cluster. a negative silhouette is obtained when the cluster assignment has been arbitrary, and the data point is actually closer to the neighbouring cluster than to the other data points within its own cluster  <cit> . the mean value from the silhouette calculations for all data points in each cluster yield an "average silhouette width" for the cluster.

here, we applied clustera to calculate "silhouettes" for comparing the quality of the genotype clusters obtained in our "in-house" tag-array minisequencing system. for each scatter plot, the mean of the average silhouette widths for the three genotype clusters were used to define a "silhouette score" for each snp assay. thus the silhouette score condenses the cluster quality for each snp assay into a single measure that ranges from  <dig>  to - <dig> . when calculating the silhouette score, the distance between data points can be measured either in one dimension, for example on the x-axis, or in two dimension using vectors, as illustrated in figure  <dig>  in our tag-array minisequencing system we used distances measured only in one dimension, along the x-axis, where the signal fraction  is plotted, since this is the major determinant for genotype assignment in our system. the logarithm of the sum of the signals from both alleles  plotted on the y-axis is only used to set the cut-off values for failed genotype calls. figure  <dig> shows nine examples of snp genotype clusters that yielded different silhouette scores. negative controls and assays with signals below signal cut-off level are not shown in figure  <dig> since they are not included in the silhouette score calculations.

the examples in panels e, f and g of figure  <dig> illustrate how different clustering patterns can yield similar silhouette scores. based on the results from the scatter plots used to assign genotypes in this study, our recommendation is to accept the results from snp assays with silhouette scores > <dig>  and to fail the whole assays if the silhouette scores is < <dig> . individual genotype calls for assays where the silhouette score falls between  <dig> – <dig>  may be accepted or failed after visual inspection. excluding some of the outliers will then increase the silhouette score. our recommendations is in line with liu et al., who have included silhouette calculations in the complex algorithm used to interpret the data from the affymetrix 10k husnp hybridization microarray  <cit> .

here we exemplify the use of silhouette scores by comparing the performance of the termipol, therminator, klenthermase and thermosequenase dna polymerases in the tag-array minisequencing system  <cit> . twenty-six snps were analyzed in both polarities in  <dig> dna samples in two independent experiments. as our tag-array genotyping system utilizes an "array of arrays" format  <cit>  with  <dig> subarrays on each microscope slide, we were able to test all four enzymes in all samples on the same slide at exactly the same conditions, to facilitate a fair comparison between the enzymes.

 <dig> duplicate experiments, each with duplicate snp assays in both dna polarities, were performed and the results are composite values from both experiments.

 <dig> the silhouette scores were calculated as described in figure  <dig>  the average and the median score for all snps are given for each enzyme together with the number of snp assays  and frequency  where an enzyme yielded the highest silhouette score.

 <dig> signal to noise ratios  were calculated from each spot by dividing the fluorescence intensity values from the fluorescently labelled ddntp/ddntps corresponding to a true genotype  by the fluorescent intensity value from the other ddntps . the average s/n ratios are given together with the number of snp assays  and frequency  where an enzyme yielded the highest s/n.

 <dig> number of genotype calls  and call rate . the genotype obtained from the majority of the assays was considered to be the correct one. the percentages of the samples not accounted for in the table failed to give genotypes.

in the comparison between the enzymes, klenthermase displayed the highest average silhouette score, thermosequenase had the highest median silhouette score and also obtained the highest silhouette score most frequently . in addition to the silhouettes scores, that represent a measure of the robustness of a snp assay, the signal to noise ratios  and the genotyping success was assessed . all four enzymes performed satisfactorily in our minisequencing assay taking into account the non-stringent genotyping criteria used. however, performance varied between the evaluated features with high error rates for therminator and thermosequenase. klenthermase showed the best results over all and, also taking into account the cost, would be the enzyme of choice based on the results from this study.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that "silhouette scores" for assessing the cluster quality is well suited for comparing the performance of snp assays. here we used a one-dimensional calculation of the silhouette scores, by measuring the distances between the data-points along the x-axis only. a two-dimensional silhouette calculation using vectors should be applied when genotypes are assigned by scatter plots with the fluorescence signals corresponding to the two alleles on the y- and x-axis. both options are available in the clustera program that also calculates mean, variance and f-statistic for the input data set. the program is freely available through our website . we believe that the clustera program for calculating silhouette scores created in the present study is a useful and general tool for any genotyping system, where the genotypes are called by cluster analysis with the aid of scatter plots.

