BACKGROUND
duplication events  are prevalent through the evolutionary history of flowering plants  <cit> . these duplications are potential sources of genes with new functions, thus contributing to taxonomic diversity. however, some duplicates might be loss as the protein or transcriptional network balance is maintained . in certain situations, some genes are actually returned to a single copy status. in general, single copy genes may occur in two ways following duplicastions:  a neutral process in which dosage-insensitive duplicate genes are not under selection to lose randomly in the genome, and  the other is involved in selection that dosage-sensitive genes are more likely to repeatedly restore to a single copy, occurring as duplication-resistant . using comparative genomics, several studies have focused on characterization of single copy genes in plants. in earlier studies, single copy genes were analyzed only in a few genomes   <cit> , thus there remains a lack of understanding about many of the evolutionary and functional characteristics of such genes. de smet et al.  <cit>  were the first to investigate the existence of single copy genes in  <dig> flowering plants, and from that study proposed that a subset of these single copy genes were under strong selective pressure to remain as a singleton. in addition, these single copy genes were highly conserved and were found to participate in essential housekeeping functions. however, the authors did not further examine the underlying species-specific differences related to single copy genes. in fact, following the lineage divergence, the mechanisms by which single copy genes having been experienced birth and death within different lingages might be diverse, thereby making characterizing the single copy genes complicated.

traditionally, single copy genes were primarily used as markers in plant systematic studies,  . compared with use of rdna sequences, such are not subject to concerted evolution and thus facilitate homologous comparison  <cit> . perhaps more importantly, there are a large number of single copy genes in plant genomes, thus providing wide range of markers. the single copy genes listed above were first identified in a single genome, thus when used to phylogenetic reconstruction at a higher taxonomic level, it was not clear if there is a paralog in other genomes. it is therefore necessary to identify a set of single copy genes shared by multiple genomes to better resolve these phylogenetic trees. similar studies have been completed in arabidopsis, populus, vitis and oryza
 <cit> . however, the number of genomes investigated was too low, and attention was focused only on protein-coding sequences, without inclusion of intron sequences. this is of importance as intron regions are often used to explain some phylogenetic hypotheses. for example, the 7th to 10th introns of the nepgs gene  from oxalis  are used as a phylogenetic marker at lower taxonomic levels  <cit> . it is therefore important to further evaluate the effects of intron on phylogeny reconstruction when using single copy genes.

in this present study, single copy genes were identified and characterized from the previously sequenced genomes of  <dig> angiosperms. codon choice may affect various molecular mechanisms, including protein folding, exon splicing, translational accuracy and efficiency . thus to evaluate codon bias, codon usage indices were measured among the single copy genes. in addition, the selective constraints imposed on single copy genes were also examined. we also assessed the reliability of phylogeny developed from identified single copy genes.

RESULTS
identification of single copy genes
the percentage of single copy genes identified in  <dig> angiosperm genomes ranged widely, from approximately 8%-35% . the lower percentage was for brassica rapa and glycine max, while the higher was for ricinus communis and carica papaya. when collinear genes were examined within each lineage, there was a significant and negative correlation between the number of duplicate blocks and the number of single copy genes . in each genome there were a number of species-specific singletons. the ratio  was between approximately 10%-68%. there was no significant correlation between the number of duplicate blocks and the number of singletons. however, we did note that an increase in genome number was associated with a decrease in the number of shared single copy genes among different lineages. the identified single copy genes  across  <dig> angiosperm genomes are listed in additional file  <dig> table  <dig> 
identification of single copy genes and the predicted replicate blocks within each lineage



aquilegia coerulea

arabidopsis lyrata

arabidopsis thaliana

brachypodium distachyon

brassica rapa

capsella rubella

carica papaya

citrus clementina

citrus sinensis

cucumis sativus

eucalyptus grandis

fragaria vesca

glycine max

gossypium raimondii

manihot esculenta

mimulus guttatus

oryza sativa

phaseolus vulgaris

populus trichocarpa

prunus persica

ricinus communis

setaria italica

solanum lycopersicum

solanum tuberosum

sorghum bicolor

thellungiella halophila

theobroma cacao

vitis vinifera

zea mays
the singleton is referred as a single copy gene which no orthologs are found in other lineages.



gene ontology  enrichment analysis of single copy genes
we conducted go enrichments of species-specific single copy genes and the united all single copy genes in all  <dig> species. the top two enriched go terms in the three go categories  were consistent among individual species and united across all the  <dig> species . in the cc terms, the top two enriched go terms were related to cell and organelle, the bp terms were related to cellular and metabolic processes, and the mf terms were related to binding and catalytic activity. details of the high level of the function enrichment of single copy genes were in the additional file  <dig> figure  <dig> 
go term enrichments of united all single copy genes across  <dig> angiosperm genomes. the vertical axis shows the percentage of annotated sequences within each go categories. only the top six go terms are showed. cc: cellular component; bp: biological process; mf: molecular function.



effective number of codons 
the nc values  <cit>  were computed to characterize codon usage bias in single copy genes. this measure is independent of gene length and amino acid composition and ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig> . we found that single copy genes in  <dig> eudicot species showed stronger codon bias than non-single copy genes . however, the opposite was true for sorghum bicolor, zea mays, setaria italica, o. sativa and brachypodium distachyon, all grass species.

expression level, codon adaptation index  and gc content at the third positions in codons 
rna-seq data obtained from four species were used to examine differences in expression levels. the results were consistent with that obtained in earlier studies in that high expression levels were found in the single copy genes . however, the cai values   <cit>  was inconsistent with the expression levels in o. sativa and z. mays where higher cai values occurred among non-single copy genes . several studies indicated that there is either a weak or strong negative correlation between gene expression level and gc <dig> content . our results partially revealed that the gc <dig> values were significantly lower for single copy genes than for non-single copy genes in the  <dig> plant species examined .

alternative splicing 
alternative splicing is a major factor in increasing species diversity and regulatory complexity  <cit> , and has significant effects on the evolution of coding exons  <cit> . to assess the as difference between single copy genes and non-single copy genes, as data sets from different growth and developmental stages, or multiple organs of a. thaliana and o. sativa were analyzed. single copy genes had on average, increased levels of as relative to gene families containing at least  <dig> in-paralogs. in contrast, those gene families with 1– <dig> in-paralogs had a higher proportion of as than did single copy genes .figure  <dig> 
distribution of alternative splicing  events between single copy genes and other family genes. the vertical axis represents the proportion of genes for which as is found. the horizontal axis represents the different numbers of as. the significance of as differences between single copy genes and family genes is calculated by the use of the analysis of variance  with subsequent post-hoc tests .



phylogeny reconstruction using single copy genes
twelve shared single copy genes of  <dig> angiosperm genomes were used to evaluate the power of phylogenetic reconstruction. maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees were reconstructed using individual and concatenated twelve shared single copy genes. when an individual single copy gene was used, relatively high incongruence was observed among the individual single copy genes, except that the grass species possessed consistent topology with high bootstrap values . the concatenated twelve shared single copy genes recovered an identical topology with proposed by apg iii  <cit>  .figure  <dig> 
maximum likelihood  phylogenetic tree bases on the  <dig> shared single copy genes. numbers above nodes are bootstrap proportions from  <dig> pseudoreplicates. o. lucimarinus, m. pusilla, v. carteri and p. patens were used as outgroups. the letters embedded below nodes: a = grass; b = eudicots; c = asterids; d = rosids; e = malvidae; f = fabidae; g = brassicaceae. the double slashes indicate outgroups.



to assess the role of introns in phylogenetic reconstruction, a second set of phylogenetic trees were recovered using single copy genes with the inclusion of introns. again, high incongruence was observed among the individual single copy genes. similarly, grass species still recovered well with high bootstrap values . the concatenated twelve shared single copy genes recovered a fully resolved topology for all  <dig> plant species, with 100% bootstrap values for every node except for one . however, there were some artificial branches generated by the presence of introns. for example, the v. vinifera was sister to p. vulgaris and g. max other than rooting the large rosids group  <cit>  and on the other side, gossypium raimondii and theobroma cacao in the malvidae group clustered with the fabidae group with a 100% bootstrap value.

discussion
varied number of single copy genes within angiosperm genomes
de smet et al.  <cit>  have previously reported single copy genes in  <dig> angiosperm genomes, but they focused on the conserved single copy genes across multiple lineages other than characterize the species-specific single copy genes. additionally, those genes with duplicates in up to three species can be regarded as single copy genes, thus the number of shared single copy genes may be higher than the species-specific single copy genes. for example, there were  <dig> shared single copy genes between a. thaliana and a. lyrata according to previous reports but we have only identified  <dig> and  <dig> single copy genes in those two species, respectively. in our study, large variance in the number of single copy genes within angiosperm genomes was found. this copy number divergence was partly attributed to duplication events within each genome. in particular, whole genome duplication can lead to an instantaneous change in gene content. if single copy genes were present as a result of selective pressure, one copy would inevitably be lost in the subsequent evolutionary step. it is not clear what mechanism dictate which single copy genes will remain, and which will be lost. the negative correlation between the number of duplicate blocks and the number of single copy genes indicated that duplicate events greatly impact the number of single copy genes, so some homologous single copy genes may not be equally restored to single copy status, due to different duplication frequencies across different lineages. in addition, the early duplicate cues can be disrupted by the unequal crossing-over, gene conversion, retroposition, etc., thus complicating the relationship between the duplicate events and the single copy genes . moreover, except for duplication-resistant genes, other duplicate genes may randomly revert to single copy status as dosage-insensitive genes are more likely to exhibit copy number variation  <cit> . therefore, it was not entirely surprising that the number of shared single copy genes decreased as more genomes were compared.

characteristics of single copy genes
the cell and organelle location indicated that a large proportion of single copy genes coded for intracellular and organelle components. this suggested that single copy genes may be involved in a cascade of processes in which single copy genes are first coded in nuclei, and then transported to organelles where single copy genes are very common. in order to maintain proper stoichiometric balance with interacting partner that are encoded in the organelle genome, single copy genes coded in nuclear genome may tend to remain in a single copy status  <cit> . it is noteworthy that one of the most enriched mf terms of single copy genes were related to binding functions. thus, many single copy genes may participate in the formation of macromolecular complexes to maintain essential metabolic processes. because those complexes are sensitive to the stoichiometric balance  <cit> , single copy genes would need to be duplication-resistant.

codon usage bias can be used to analyze selective pressure operating on genes. based on the nc values, there was a strong codon bias for single copy genes than for non-single copy genes in eudicots. in addition, there was a weaker correlation between nc and gc <dig> values for single copy genes than for non-single copy genes . this may provide indirect evidence that translational selection more strongly dictates codon usage bias other than compositional bias for single copy genes in eudicots. there was more strongly negative correlation between the nc values and the gc <dig> values in grass species. thus, relative to that in eudicot species, more compositional bias may occur among the single copy genes in monocot species. in addition, in light of the differential cai indices, we estimated that some single copy genes follow distinct evolutionary routes after eudicot-monocot divergence. strong evidence for this hypothesis is that eudicot species share a common genome triplication, different from monocot species . previous studies also provided direct evidences that eudicot and monocot species share different features of codon usage . we concluded that a clear distinction among codon usage of single copy genes between eudicot and monocot species was evident and beneficial to experimental verification in the future.

the gc <dig> values tended to be lower in single copy genes than in non-single copy genes indicating higher gene expression levels, consistent with that observed in earlier studies. this was also confirmed in part by the rna-seq analysis from the o. sativa, z. mays, p. vulgaris and g. max in our study and previous study of de smet et al.  <cit>  which based on expression levels of single copy genes in a. thaliana. therefore, single copy genes might be under stronger selective constraints  <cit> . but the relationship between gene expression level and gc <dig> content needs to be further validated. similar to previous studies, the more conservative evolution of single copy genes was supported by the values of ka and ks in two species pairs, a. thaliana vs g. max and solanum tuberosum vs s. lycopersicum, which represented different taxonomic levels in our study . our results revealed that as events were significantly correlated with the gene number of gene family and that single copy genes had on average, a lower number of as events relative to low copy family genes. according to earlier reports  <cit> , this suggested that as may impose a stronger selective constraint on low copy family genes than on single copy genes. previous studies found that as and gene duplication did not evolve independently  <cit> . the gene duplication can result in the loss of as because the functions of different as isoforms may be kept by different duplicate genes. the large family genes tend to have less as due to multiple rounds of gene duplication, but the ancient duplicate gene may undergo neofunctionalization by acquiring new functional as isoforms. we speculated that a large set of small gene family may experience the loss of in-paralogs and the functions of former in-paralogs may be complemented by the new as isoforms of remaining gene copies, thus showing higher level of as. furthermore, ner-gaon et al.  <cit>  found that the increase of genome size can lead to the additional as increment in eudicots other than in monocots because the expansion of genomes in monocots was mainly due to the nested retrotransposons within noncoding regions other than within genes. taken together, a more detailed investigation of species specificity, evolutionary mechanism specificity, and function specificity corresponding to single copy genes should be undertaken in the future.

phylogenetic reconstruction using single copy genes
the use of molecular characters provides a wealth of new information that sheds light on many components of the plant tree of life. the advantage of the single copy genes is their bi-parental inheritance , and the absence of paralogs  <cit> . these features are useful for use in studies aimed at unraveling patterns of reticulate evolution, hybrid formation, and parentage of polyploids  <cit> . in our study, the use of individual single copy genes was not able to resolve a clear phylogenetic tree in most instances. this may be due in part to:  a scarcity of informative characters, and  the incongruence between different single copy genes. this might be remedied by analysis of concatenated multiple shared single copy genes. with the addition of the intron sequences, the phylogenetic tree was fully resolved. but if it were true, several evolutionary pathways among plant kingdom would require major modification. so such a phylogenetic tree was unreasonable. one explanation for this contradiction was that the systematic error leading to tree reconstruction artifacts was produced due to the presence of a huge number of non-phylogenetic signals in intron sequences . these systematic errors would not only average out by addition of number of sites but can dominate the true phylogenetic signal  <cit> . therefore, caution should be followed when intron sequences are included in single copy genes, especially at higher taxonomic levels. thus, we suggest that introns within single copy genes will be more specially suited to recover the relationships of intra-species.

CONCLUSIONS
the number of single copy genes varied greatly within angiosperm genomes, and these genes may be involved in essential metabolic processes. in general, single copy genes in eudicots had a stronger codon usage bias than in monocots. the higher gene expression level and more conservative sequences suggested that single copy genes have a preferential role in biological pathways. but the single copy genes did not always exhibit a higher cai value. so based on complex evolutionary mechanisms of single copy genes, there were also some species-specific characteristics among different lineages. as for the as events, the selective constraints of single copy genes were stronger than for high copy family genes, but lower than low copy family genes, suggesting a moderate selective constraint. in view of our phylogenetic test, single copy genes are good sources for molecular markers to complement data from chloroplast sequences and rdna, yet the inclusion of intron sequences may produce artifacts.

