BACKGROUND
cluster analysis is an exploratory technique that might reveal classes or groups of genes that act in consort during a biological process. a distance or dissimilarity is calculated between the expression vectors of each pair of genes. a statistical clustering algorithm is then employed which places a pair of genes in the same cluster if their expression profiles are similar as judged by the distance measure employed. the exact details of achieving this goal varies from one algorithm to the next. in addition, more complex and relatively modern algorithms offer the users with several choices of tuning parameters. the resulting grouping may be quite varied .

the problem of selecting the "best" algorithm/parameter setting is a difficult one. a good clustering algorithm ideally should produce groups with distinct non-overlapping boundaries, although a perfect separation can not typically be achieved in practice. figure of merit measures  such as the silhouette width  <cit>  or the homogeneity index  <cit>  can be used to evaluate the quality of separation obtained using a clustering algorithm. the concept of stability of a clustering algorithm was considered in  <cit>  . the idea behind this validation approach is that an algorithm should be rewarded for consistency. they compared the results of clustering with the full data and the reduced data after reducing the expression profiles by one unit. in this paper we provide two case study examples where we evaluate the relative performances of six well known algorithms. in doing so, we introduce two new measures to judge the quality of the clusters using the existing biological knowledge about the genes from ontology databases. we also look at their overall performance by combining these measures with their statistical consistency or stability. a detailed study of ten clustering algorithms using two other biological performance measures was recently published by us  <cit> .

from a rather extensive range of existing clustering algorithms we select six representative algorithms from various groups each representing a different underlying principle. this list includes the popular hierarchical clustering where two smaller groups are joined to form a bigger cluster based on their average pairwise correlation. this is also known as upgma  and is perhaps the most commonly used clustering in the microarray context. we also include the most common partition method called the k-means algorithm  <cit> , a divisive clustering method diana, a fuzzy logic based method fanny, a very popular neural network based method som  and a statistical method known as model based clustering. most of these methods are described in  <cit> . see  <cit>  for s+ or r implementations.

RESULTS
first we consider the expression profiles of  <dig> significant genes based on their  <dig> dimensional expression profiles over four normal and seven dcis samples  <cit> . see the methods section for further description of this data set. based on the size of the data set and given that there are at least three functional classes we judge that a cluster size between four and eight might be appropriate.

next, we report the results for the yeast data  <cit> . figures  <dig> and  <dig> provide the panel plots for the six clustering algorithms under consideration with respect to the two validation measures. as seen from figure  <dig>  both upgma and fanny appear to be the best performers here as judged by each of statistical and biological components as well as the overall measure – a finding consistent with our earlier results for this data set  <cit> . model based clustering also performs fairly well – which appears to be contradictory to our earlier reports  <cit> . this is presumably due to the fact that the current version of mclust in r is different from the earlier s-plus version employed in that paper. upgma continues to be a solid performer even with respect to the second validation measure . the performances of diana and k-means also appear to be amongst the best with respect to this measure. note that the "distance" d considered here for computing this validation measure is different from our earlier study  <cit> .

discussion
we introduce a novel approach of combing both statistical consistency and biological congruence of the clusters produced by a clustering method. two validation measures are proposed that are averages of two parts measuring statistical stability and biological congruence, respectively. a training  set of genes with known biological functions are used to judge biological congruence.

our validation measures are easy to interpret and straightforward to compute. graphs of these measures over a range of k  show the relative performance of a clustering algorithm. while there may not be a clear winner in all cases, this certainly represents a systematic approach in searching for the right algorithm for a data set amongst a collection of well known clustering algorithms, all of which are generally regarded as good algorithms.

the data examples used in this paper show that a clustering algorithm should be scrutinized from various angles. certainly, the cross examinations using the two validation measures often showed different strengths and weaknesses of a clustering algorithm.

CONCLUSIONS
no single clustering algorithm may be best suited for clustering genes into functional groups via expression profiles for all data sets. the validation measures introduced in this paper can aid in the selection of an optimal algorithm, for a given data set, from a collection of clustering algorithms. whereas, the best algorithm in each case depends on which validation measure we employ, the performance of upgma appeared to be robust in both case studies undertaken in this paper.

