BACKGROUND
the physical development and phenotype of organisms can be thought of as a product of genes interacting with each other and with the environment. therefore, it is common for a scientist to ask questions like "which genes are related to breast cancer?", "which genes are involved in embryonic development?", and "which genes are functionally related to tp53?"

the current answers to these questions are primarily contained in the articles indexed in the medline database. traditionally, answering these questions requires individuals to retrieve relevant publications through the pubmed search engine and then to create gene lists by manually extracting gene-centered information from retrieved literature. this process is not only time-consuming, but also prone to errors. first, it is difficult to ascertain that all relevant literature is processed. second, it is unlikely that all relationships in a publication will be detected. third, individual researchers tend to extrapolate based on domain knowledge.

over the past decade, bioinformatics approaches have been developed to address this issue. one of the most successful projects in this area is the gene ontology  project  <cit> . go produces a structured, precisely defined, and controlled vocabulary  for describing the roles of genes and gene products in different species. genes are associated with go terms through manual curation as well as computational inference. a researcher can now go to the go website  <cit>  to get a list of genes related to a go term of interest. however, as the go vocabulary only describes gene products in terms of their associated biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions, users are limited by questions linked to this limited vocabulary. moreover, processes, functions or components that are unique to diseases, such as oncogenesis, are not included in go because causing cancer is not the normal function of any gene.

a useful resource specifically designed for disease studies is the online mendelian inheritance in man  project. omim is a comprehensive, authoritative, and timely compendium of human genes and genetic phenotypes. it contains information on all known mendelian disorders. however, information on complex diseases such as cancer and diabetes is lacking in omim.

in addition to manual curation, text mining tools have been developed to assist gene list creation  <cit> . as an example, ebimed  <cit>  combines text mining with co-occurrence-based analysis to generate a prioritized list of genes for a user-provided query. specifically, ebimed collects medline records and available full text documents for a user-provided query, identifies protein names, drugs, species, or go terms in the documents, and prioritizes genes/proteins based on the number of co-occurrences of the different pairs  in the sentences of the documents in which they appear. ebimed and similar tools, such as facta  <cit>  and sciminer  <cit> , provide more flexible ways to create gene lists that are not limited to certain aspects of biology. nevertheless, they usually require heavy computation, and the relevance of the resulted gene lists to the input queries has not been systematically evaluated.

here, we report glad4u , a new web-based gene retrieval and prioritization tool. glad4u takes advantage of existing resources at the national center for biotechnology information  to ensure computational efficiency. it provides a simple user interface that facilitates intuitive usage and interpretation of results. the quality of gene lists created by glad4u is assessed using corresponding "gold standard" lists curated in go, gad , and omim. the performance of glad4u is also compared with ebimed.

RESULTS
overall quality of the retrieved gene lists
glad4u relies on the ncbi esearch api to find publications related to a user query and on the gene-to-publication link table to identify genes from the retrieved publications. we used three go biological process terms  and three disease terms  as queries to evaluate the overall quality of the retrieved gene lists. for each query, using a corresponding gene list curated by go or gad/omim as a gold standard, we calculated the precision, recall and f-measure of the retrieved gene list. as shown in table  <dig>  gene lists retrieved for all queries showed very high recall . in contrast to the high recall, the precision was generally low , leading to low f-measures . ebimed's recall is consistently lower than glad4u . however, its precision is higher than glad4u , resulting in better f-measures .

numbers in parentheses indicate the number of genes overlapping between the glad4u or ebimed lists and the corresponding gold standard, numbers in square brackets indicate the number of publications retrieved by the query.

the low precision of glad4u may be partially attributed to the incompleteness of the annotation in go and gad/omim. however, it is likely that the original gene lists include many irrelevant genes. in this case, a prioritization step that ranks truly relevant genes at the top of a list would certainly facilitate efficient browsing.

performance of the prioritization methods
we studied the performance of two methods to prioritize the gene lists. the first, "glad4u counts", is based solely on the number of supporting publications as commonly implemented in other software  <cit> . the second, "glad4u hypergeometric", is proposed in this study, which is based on the hypergeometric test . we used the above mentioned three go terms and three disease terms as queries to evaluate the performance of our prioritization methods. we also included the prioritized gene lists returned by ebimed for comparison.

ap: average precision

the precision-recall curve and the ap score factor in precision at all recall levels. for ranked gene lists, particularly in web-based applications, this may not be of interest to users. in most scenarios, what matters may be the number of relevant genes on the first page or the first several pages. "precision at k" is usually used to measure precision at a fixed low level of retrieved results, e.g., the top k results. to this end, we calculated the precisions for the top  <dig>  and top  <dig>  genes for all three methods, for each query . glad4u counts and glad4u hypergeometric methods maintained higher precisions for the top  <dig> genes compared to ebimed , as well as for the top  <dig> genes . although the ap-based comparison may be biased against ebimed owing to its low overall recall, precision at  <dig> and  <dig> only focus on the top ranking genes and are not affected by the overall recall. these results suggest that glad4u can produce lists where relevant genes are ranked at the top.

although precision was less than perfect even for the top ranking genes, we noticed that many false-positives could be explained by the incompleteness of the gold standards. table  <dig> lists the first  <dig> genes--along with their first  <dig> supporting publications--returned by glad4u hypergeometric method that were not in the corresponding gold standards for the terms "apoptosis" and "hypertension" . taking the first and last genes in the list as examples, for each term , we found strong evidence in the most recent supporting publications for linking these non-gold standard genes to the query. mdm <dig> has antiapoptotic effects, and its direct interaction and regulation of p <dig> define it as an oncogene  <cit> . it translocates to the nucleus to interact with p <dig> and p <dig>  promotes cell growth by initiating p <dig> degradation  <cit> . its expression is directly linked to prostate cancer patient susceptibility  <cit> . inhibitor of growth family, member  <dig>  is involved in cell stress and dna damage response  <cit> . up-regulation of p33ing1b or p24ing1c, two of the three alternatively spliced transcripts of ing <dig> resulted in increased early apoptotic cells  <cit> , probably through interactions with mdm <dig>  p14arf, and lamin a  <cit> . this effect is dependent on the presence of functional p <dig>  <cit>  and the h3k3me <dig> binding domain of ign <dig>  <cit> .

* only the  <dig> most recent supporting publications are shown here. see additional files  <dig> and  <dig> for the complete list of false-positive genes and their corresponding supporting publications.

regarding hypertension, renin  is part of the renin-angiotensin system . proteins in this system are thought as important regulators of blood pressure and are involved in the onset of hypertension  <cit> . overexpression of ren leads to hypertension via chronic overproduction of angii  <cit> , and inhibiting the regulators of the ras--such as ren--is a common treatment for hypertension  <cit> . adiponectin  is an adipocytokine synthesized by the adipose tissue. it has been proposed as a biomarker for hypertension, as low plasma levels correlates with higher risk of hypertension  <cit> , and possibly with coronary artery disease, kidney disease, left ventricular hypertrophy, and even myocardial infarction  <cit> . interestingly, ren and adipoq also present polymorphisms, which seem linked to therapeutic response to hypertension  <cit> .

from these publications, we believe that mdm <dig> and ign <dig> should be part of the apoptosis list, as well as ren and adipoq should be part of the hypertension list. these results accentuate the incompleteness of the gold standards and suggest that glad4u can help in the completion of the gold standard lists.

thresholding score to enhance glad4u performance
to evaluate whether thresholding the gene score can enhance glad4u performance, we acquired a broader list of disease-associated gene lists curated by kohler et al.  <cit>  and available from the genewanderer website . we extracted  <dig> "disease-gene families" to use as standards for evaluating glad4u performance before and after thresholding. on average, glad4u performs  <dig> -time better when genes with low prioritization scores  are removed, as illustrated by comparing the f-measures . the most increased performances were achieved for terms such as "prostate cancer", "obesity", and "amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"  . the performances that least benefited from thresholding the gene list included "noonan syndrome, costello syndrome, cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome", "nonsyndromic hearing loss", and "chondrodysplasia punctata" .

user interface
glad4u uses a simple query interface for users to submit their queries. any queries that are valid in a pubmed search can be used in glad4u. in the query interface, users can also modify the default parameters of the application, including: search space , the number of genes to present per result page, the maximum number of publications supporting each gene returned in the result page and the number of pages to build for each of the algorithm runs.

the output page displays the ranked gene list and information associated with each gene . as each gene is identified by an entrez-gene id, we use esummary, another ncbi's eutility  <cit> , to fetch annotations for the gene including name, symbol and species. publications supporting the relationship between a gene and the query term are listed under the gene. the publications are ordered based on their pubmed ids so that the most recent publication is listed first . as for genes, we use esummary to fetch information for the publication such as title, author and journal name. genes and publications are hyperlinked to the corresponding ncbi pages, which will--by design--open in a new window to avoid disrupting the result page.

at the top of the output page, a summary of the run is also given: query term and options chosen, number of genes and publications processed, as well as a hyperlink to download the complete results in the comma-separated values  format. although this file may be difficult to interpret by humans, it can be used as input for other computational analysis tools. for example, we have implemented a "send data to functional enrichment analysis" link in the result page  of glad4u for submitting a gene list to the functional enrichment analysis tool webgestalt  <cit> . this function is particularly handy for the functional interpretation of a gene list, e.g., a list returned by a disease term query. it could help revealing biological processes associated with the disease. as an example, enrichment analysis on the first  <dig> genes returned by the "obesity" query linked this disease to biological processes such as "fat cell differentiation"  =  <dig> e-28), "lipid metabolic process"  and "response to insulin stimulus" . in addition, we have also implemented a "visualize genes in a protein-protein interaction network" link, which allows the visualization of interactions among the protein products of the genes based on the cytoscape web utility .

discussion
reading through all relevant literature to generate a gene list is time consuming  <cit> , a common concern that came up in all interviews of experimentalists that we performed . glad4u addresses this problem by automatically creating a ranked list of genes following a user's input query.

one important feature of glad4u is its information processing. based on our survey among experimentalists, glad4u follows the exact same steps that an experimentalist would follow: gather literature, extract gene information and create an expert list  <cit> . whether a user queries a disease, a non-disease phenotype, a biological process or a gene, glad4u will fetch corresponding biomedical publications using ncbi's eutilities api, retrieve relevant gene information, rank them and send them back to the user. glad4u ensures computational efficiency through effective use of existing ncbi resources, which also made it one of the winning applications in the national library of medicine 's  <dig> software development challenge on the innovative uses of nlm information.

another important feature of glad4u is its simplicity. researchers will be at ease using glad4u because its searching engine is powered by pubmed's api  <cit> , and behaves similarly to entrez-pubmed  <cit> . glad4u outputs a clean result page where the user can easily find genes relevant to the concept queried and supporting publications. additionally, the use of pubmed's api makes glad4u almost maintenance-free. glad4u will update itself along with the medline library update. this will ensure that glad4u's results will always be up-to-date with the current literature.

several tools rely on pubmed to build disease candidate genes lists  <cit> . ebimed  <cit>  and facta  <cit>  are concept-oriented applications for mining existing biomedical literature. they attempt to automatically establish the publication-concept  relationship through in-house text mining tools whereas glad4u relies on the manually curated publication-gene mapping provided by ncbi. according to our results, manual mapping seems to have notable impact on performance. nevertheless, automated mapping would allow flexibility in extending the services for concepts other than genes.

although using the biomedical literature as a knowledge source seems intuitive  <cit> , certain limitations exist: the literature is indexed based on titles, abstracts and keywords, not on full-text  <cit> . thus, a set of publications retrieved may be incomplete   <cit> . there is a possible bias in using the biomedical literature and ontology  <cit> , as the most studied genes  will have more weight  <cit>  at the expense of more relevant genes that might only be featured in few papers  <cit> . thus, we use the hypergeometric test to rank genes based on how likely it would be to retrieve them by chance alone, based on the number of publications retrieved for this gene among the total number of publications linked to this gene. the less likely it is--the smaller the p value--the higher the score will be for the gene. thus, even if glad4u is solely retrieving its data from the biomedical literature, it prioritizes following a statistical analysis of the retrieved data.

the most obvious usage of glad4u is to generate a gene list for an input concept, which has been demonstrated in this paper. this can be extremely useful for the design of targeted high-throughput experiments. if one needs to create a custom array or selected proteins for targeted quantitative proteomic analysis using the selected reaction monitoring  assay, one can use glad4u and review the ranked list of genes that likely should be included in the experimental design. besides generating gene lists for individual concepts, glad4u is very flexible and allows production of gene lists related to multiple concepts, which cannot be done by searching go or omim databases. for example, a query of "smoking and cancer" can generate a gene list that could potentially help exploring gene-environment interactions in cancer. glad4u also holds the potential to assist in improvement of the functional annotation of genes. although go contains more than  <dig>  terms  <cit>  and is regularly used in the bioinformatics field as a standard  <cit> , it is not complete  <cit> . through manual checking of the top genes returned by glad4u that were not part of the gold standard lists, we easily found evidence that these genes were indeed linked to the query, and probably should have been included in the gold standard.

finally, because glad4u prioritization algorithm assigns scores to genes, removing the genes with a low score consistantly improves the quality of the results. this result justifies thresholding glad4u results by default.

CONCLUSIONS
glad4u is a freely available web-application for creating expert candidate gene lists tailored to a user's query. it follows the same steps that the experimentalist would follow: gather literature, extract gene information and create an expert list. the simple interface of glad4u ensures easy usage and interpretation. because glad4u relies on existing biomedical literature, it has an immediate credibility with experimentalists, who use this resource as a primary means for enhancing their knowledge and expertise. although the gene list directly returned from a pubmed query is usually lengthy and noisy, the prioritization method implemented in glad4u successfully ranks truly relevant genes at the top of the list and facilitates efficient browsing of the list.

