BACKGROUND
volcanic island archipelagos, such as hawai'i, macaronesia, and juan fernández have long been the focus of studies investigating patterns and processes of species diversification . however, attention is increasingly being turned to the study of other small geologically older continental landmasses such as madagascar, new guinea, new caledonia, and new zealand  <cit> , which are also spectacular biodiversity hotspots  <cit> . new zealand hosts a unique flora, where over 85% of its native angiosperm species are endemic  <cit> . endemism is greatest in the high-elevation habitats of its north and south islands, where many genera have diversified following late tertiary transoceanic dispersal of a single founder species to new zealand  <cit> .

these radiations have produced ecologically and morphologically distinct taxa, many of which have highly restricted distributions. delimiting the boundaries of species within these radiations and evaluating their conservation status has been difficult  <cit> . this is because the criteria for recognizing species continue to be debated and because the phylogenetic relationships of species, as well as the genetic characteristics that distinguish them, are poorly understood  <cit> .

the operational criteria used to define species boundaries, as well as the very nature of species, have been debated for more than  <dig> years . numerous species concepts have been proposed that emphasize different features considered important for delimiting species. this has led to different conclusions regarding species limits and the number of species in many groups  <cit> . recently, a 'unified species concept' was advocated that emphasizes the common element found in many species concepts, which is that species are separately evolving lineages or metapopulations  <cit> . this unified concept also allows the use of diverse lines of evidence to test species boundaries  and is the species concept we adopt here.

new zealand species of ourisia  are typical of many new zealand alpine plant species radiations, as they are characterized by white zygomorphic to subrotate flowers, and polyploid species  that occur in a diversity of habitats. these ourisia species are found from sea level to  <dig> m, most commonly in subalpine to alpine herbfields, tussock grasslands and scrub on moist to saturated, rocky, south-facing sites in the north, south and stewart islands. some species are widespread, such as ourisia caespitosa which is found on all three islands. others are narrow endemics, such as o. vulcanica, found only on volcanic soils in the north island, and o. modesta, a threatened and poorly known forest-dwelling species.

analyses of morphological and dna sequence data have been used to revise the taxonomy and test biogeographic hypotheses for  <dig> recognized species of ourisia in the southern hemisphere  <cit> . phylogenetic analyses of nuclear and chloroplast sequences suggest that the genus arose in south america and that it subsequently dispersed to tasmania and new zealand  <cit> . because the new zealand species form a monophyletic group, one event of transoceanic dispersal to new zealand was hypothesized. in these published studies, which have been limited in the extent of their intraspecific sampling, little phylogenetic resolution was found within the new zealand lineage  <cit> . for this reason, the new zealand species have been delimited to date using traditional morphological methods only  <cit> .

here, we first use relaxed molecular clock analyses on nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer region  sequences to determine the age of new zealand ourisia radiation. we then investigate the potential of amplified fragment length polymorphism  analyses for delimiting new zealand ourisia species and reconstructing their evolutionary relationships. to do this, we use divergence plots and supernetworks to examine the tree-like properties of distances calculated from aflp profiles and the extent of phylogenetic congruence in the aflp data derived from four independent primer combinations. we then use both tree-based and non-tree-based clustering methods on the combined aflp profiles to estimate the number of distinct metapopulations. we interpret our findings within the context of previous morphological studies  <cit>  and discuss the potential and limitations of aflp data analyses for delimiting species and inferring evolutionary relationships.

RESULTS
molecular dating the new zealand ourisia radiation with previously published its data
relaxed clock analyses using beast v <dig> . <dig>  which assumed a mean substitution rate of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> substitutions/site for its sequences, suggest that the most recent common ancestor of the new zealand ourisia radiation is  <dig>  million years old , a finding consistent with a pleistocene radiation of ourisia species in new zealand.

comparison of nuclear dna sequence distances and aflp distances
aflp profiles of new zealand ourisia did not diverge as a simple function of increasing dna sequence divergence. a significant correlation was not observed between hamming, dice or jaccard aflp distances and hamming distances obtained from nuclear dna sequences . similar results were obtained irrespective of whether aflp primer combinations were analyzed jointly or separately . the formulae for the three different aflp measures are very similar, and this was seen when the three different aflp distance measures were plotted against one another . note that the normalization used in jaccard and dice distances gives them increased variance in comparison to hamming distances, but the increased variance did not significantly lower bootstrap support for clades of clustered individuals, and support for relationships among clusters was generally low for both transformed and untransformed data.

individual datasets and supernetwork analyses
tree-building analyses of aflp data from 6fam, vic, ned and pet primers resulted in similar assignment of individuals into species clusters identified by diagnostic morphological characters  trees in fig. 2a; other data not shown). however, species relationships were poorly resolved, and even the large-leaved group  was not supported by the majority of the analyses of individual primer combinations  .

a z-closure supernetwork was used to visualize the extent of incongruence between majority rule bootstrap trees built from nj analysis of hamming distances for aflp profiles derived from 6fam, vic, ned and pet primers. this supernetwork was nearly star-like, with some  incongruence concerning relationships among species . although many species relationships were not fully resolved, the large- and small-leaved groups were resolved . inclusion in the analysis of  <dig> putative first and second generation hybrids greatly reduced the tree-like nature of the supernetwork , suggesting that contemporary hybridization and gene flow is unlikely to be contributing to the lack of resolution observed with the reduced dataset. the finding of limited incongruence between the splits inferred from the individual data sets was used to justify combining the data.

phylogeny of new zealand ourisia based on combined aflp data
trees reconstructed with combined aflp data from the new zealand species of ourisia using nj , maximum parsimony , and bayesian estimation generally had very similar topologies and support values . all trees contained a highly supported split separating two main groups – roughly characterized by leaf size, inflorescence type, and corolla tube characters – but otherwise had low phylogenetic resolution. thus, a lineage comprising o. crosbyi, o. macrocarpa, o. macrophylla, and o. vulcanica – hereafter referred to as the large-leaved group – was highly supported / <dig> posterior probability ; table 1; figs. 2b and 3) and   nested within a small-leaved group comprising the remaining new zealand species .

species relationships within each of these two main groups were not well resolved or supported, with the notable exception of one highly supported alpine lineage comprising o. glandulosa + o. spathulata + o. confertifolia  in the small-leaved group. there was also high support for grouping individuals by species for  <dig> of the  <dig> species morphologically-delimited species  <cit>  , including the south island alpine species o. spathulata, o. glandulosa, o. confertifolia, o. simpsonii, o. remotifolia, and o. sessilifolia, the north island o. vulcanica, as well as o. caespitosa, o. macrophylla, o. modesta, o. crosbyi, and the tasmanian species o. integrifolia . o. macrocarpa was not monophyletic. its two subspecies were reciprocally monophyletic with high support values, but they were not each others' closest relative. the two subspecies of o. macrophylla were reciprocally monophyletic in some analyses , and o. sessilifolia subsp. sessilifolia was paraphyletic with individuals of subsp. splendida nested within it . thus, not all geographically allopatric and morphologically distinct subspecies were fully resolved by the tree-building analyses. interestingly, there was high support in tree-building analyses for some geographic lineages within o. sessilifolia  and o. caespitosa  that do not appear to correspond entirely to morphological patterns  .

comparison of species boundaries using morphology  <cit> , tree-building analysis of combined aflp data , structure analysis of combined aflp data , and pco-mc analysis of the combined aflp data , and the recommendation for species delimitation within ourisia based on all analyses. superscript numbers indicate the species and subspecies that are found in the same cluster in the tree-building, structure, or pco-mc analysis : 1ourisia crosbyi, o. macrophylla subsp. lactea, o. macrophylla subsp. macrophylla, and o. vulcanica; 2o. sessilifolia subsp. sessilifolia and subsp. splendida; 3o. glandulosa and o. spathulata; 4o. confertifolia, o. glandulosa and o. spathulata; 5o. crosbyi, o. macrocarpa subsp. calycina, o. macrophylla subsp. lactea, o. macrophylla subsp. macrophylla, and o. vulcanica.

genetic structure analyses of the combined aflp data
bayesian clustering analyses with structure identified several clusters that corresponded to morphologically-delimited species, subspecies and/or species groups for k =  <dig> to k =  <dig> . for k =  <dig> to k =  <dig>  analyses did not show increased resolution of species clusters . plots of the mean -ln likelihood vs. k  revealed that values increased from k =  <dig> to a maximum value at k =  <dig> , then decreased to a minimum value of k =  <dig> , and finally increased slightly at k =  <dig> . plots of Δk vs. k  showed the data had multiple peaks at k =  <dig> and k =  <dig> , and k =  <dig> . the structure graphical output  for these three values of k is shown in fig.  <dig> 

at k =  <dig> , the ourisia individuals grouped into a large-leaved cluster comprising o. crosbyi, o. macrocarpa, o. macrophylla, and o. vulcanica and a small-leaved cluster of the remaining species, although the admixture levels for all individuals of the two subspecies of o. macrocarpa were high . at k =  <dig>  individuals of o. caespitosa formed a separate third cluster. from k =  <dig> to k =  <dig>  there was continued subclustering within both the small-leaved and large-leaved groups . by k =  <dig> , nine of the clusters correspond to morphologically-delimited species or subspecies for o. caespitosa , o. confertifolia, o. integrifolia, o. macrocarpa subsp. calycina, o. macrocarpa subsp. macrocarpa, o. modesta, o. remotifolia, o. sessilifolia, and o. simpsonii, whereas the two remaining clusters comprised o. crosbyi + o. macrophylla + o. vulcanica, and o. glandulosa + o. spathulata . taking all the structure results into consideration  <cit> , including Δk, -ln likelihood, and individual assignment patterns, k =  <dig> appears to be the optimal number of clusters determined by structure for all the values of k tested .

most pre-defined "populations"  showed a high proportion of individuals assigned to one cluster only, generally from 73% to 95% . nevertheless, some "populations" had proportions much lower than this, and very few had proportions >95%. thus, most species and subspecies contained levels of admixture much higher than the 5% threshold which might be attributed to stochastic noise. it is notable that in cases of high levels of admixture individuals were assigned to no more than  <dig> clusters. at k =  <dig>  four species had levels of admixture >20% with one other species cluster, i.e. o. confertifolia, o. crosbyi, o. spathulata, and o. vulcanica  . o. caespitosa had similarly high levels of admixture  to a second cluster, but this cluster largely comprised o. caespitosa individuals only .

most species were clearly separated into distinct clusters in the pco analysis of the combined aflp dataset . pco-mc analysis showed that eight of these clusters  were significant: o. caespitosa, o. confertifolia + o. glandulosa + o. spathulata, o. integrifolia, o. macrocarpa subsp. macrocarpa, o. modesta, o. remotifolia, o. sessilifolia , and o. simpsonii. by contrast, individuals of the five remaining species or subspecies of the large-leaved group – o. crosbyi, o. macrocarpa subsp. calycina, o. macrophylla subsp. lactea, o. macrophylla subsp. macrophylla, and o. vulcanica – could not be assigned to a significant cluster.

discussion
aflp analyses and species delimitation of new zealand ourisia
our findings are consistent with earlier findings reporting the usefulness of aflp analyses for distinguishing distinct metapopulations of individuals and delimiting species boundaries  <cit> . of the  <dig> clusters identified by tree-building analyses of the combined aflp dataset,  <dig> are highly supported lineages  and these correspond to  <dig> of the  <dig> australasian ourisia species and  <dig> of  <dig> subspecies recently delimited by morphological analyses  <cit> . bayesian assignment  analyses  identified nine species  also identified by the tree building analyses. the remaining three clusters identified by the structure analyses  contained groups of species that were  more fully resolved in the phylogenetic analyses. thus, structure produced congruent results to the tree-building analyses, but in contrast to expectations  <cit> , provided less resolution in identifying distinct clusters. we speculate that this result might be explained by a poor fit between assumptions of the structure model  and our empirical data. the results from the pco-mc analysis  produced only eight significant clusters but were otherwise highly congruent to tree-building , supernetwork  and structure analyses , including the difficulty in distinguishing among species in the large-leaved group.

our aflp tree topologies provide support for recent divergence of individuals belonging to the two subspecies of o. macrophylla and to the two subspecies of o. sessilifolia, respectively . this is a finding consistent with the taxonomic recognition of subspecies in these groups  <cit> . subspecies status is appropriate here based on geographic and morphological distinctiveness  <cit> . for example, o. macrophylla subsp. lactea is a north-central south island subspecies with glandular trichomes on the floral bracts and calyces, whereas subsp. macrophylla is subendemic to the north island with eglandular trichomes on the floral bracts and calyces  <cit> . o. sessilifolia subsp. splendida is found in central south island mountains and has only one line of hairs inside the corolla tube, whereas subsp. sessilifolia is disjunct in northern and southern parts of the south island and has three lines of hairs inside the corolla tube). nevertheless, obtaining samples of o. sessilifolia from the northern part of the south island for inclusion in future genetic studies is key to fully understanding the overlapping patterns of morphological and genetic data reported here.

interestingly, aflp analyses suggest three distinct lineages within o. caespitosa that correspond to the following geographic areas: 1) central north island, 2) southern south island + north island, and 3) otago. there is also support for the sister relationship of the first two groups. thus, the aflp analyses provisionally support recognition of subspecific entities within o. caespitosa, including an otago variety of o. caespitosa which has been recognized in the past  <cit>  but not in the most recent treatment due to an apparent lack of morphological differences  <cit> . these intraspecific lineages require further genetic and morphological investigation across their distributional ranges to determine whether subspecific status is warranted.

in contrast to the above findings, we found no bootstrap support in tree-building analyses for a close relationship between the two recognised subspecies of o. macrocarpa. these aflp data, together with dna sequence data  <cit> , suggest that the two subspecies comprise separate lineages that are not each others' closest relative. further, the extent of divergence between these two allopatric lineages as indicated by the molecular data, coupled with the morphological differences that separate them – petiole and peduncle vestiture, leaf shape, leaf bases, calyx margins, and calyx symmetry  <cit>  – comprise multiple lines of evidence that these lineages should be recognized as distinct species rather than subspecies, i.e. o. macrocarpa hook.f. and o. calycina colenso. if this interpretation is correct, it indicates that the morphological characters traditionally used to unite o. macrocarpa and o. calycina under one species, including large leaf lamina, fruits and flowers, oblanceolate to narrowly ovate calyx lobes, largely glabrous leaf lamina, and a lack of glandular hairs anywhere on the plant, may not be not good characters for species delimitation in the large-leaved group to which these species belong.

aflp analyses and evolutionary relationships among new zealand ourisia
analyses of combined aflp data identify a large- and small-leaved group, and distinguish a lineage of three alpine species within the small-leaved group. these inferences of evolutionary relationship are also supported by morphological and geographic data. thus, the four species in the large-leaved group generally have the largest habits and biggest leaves , flowers that are always or nearly always in whorls in each inflorescence node, and corolla tubes that are yellow and hairy inside  <cit> . species in this lineage are generally found in forested to subalpine sites on the north, south and stewart islands of new zealand. the large-leaved group contains o. macrophylla subsp. macrophylla and o. vulcanica, the only subspecies and species that are endemic to the north island, which is known to have low floristic diversity and endemicity relative to the south island .

in contrast, the species in the small-leaved group have smaller habits and leaves, with flowers always or nearly always in pairs or solitary in each inflorescence node, and corolla tubes that are yellow and glabrous or purple and hairy inside  <cit> . species in the small-leaved group  are largely high elevation, subalpine to alpine species on the south and stewart islands only. within the small-leaved group, o. glandulosa, o. spathulata and o. confertifolia – which are highly supported as a monophyletic group in most aflp analyses – have yellow and glabrous corolla tubes and are all southern south island endemics. based on morphology, the northern south island endemic o. simpsonii could be included in this latter alpine group but there is no support for this in the aflp analyses. ourisia modesta, which is morphologically and ecologically distinct from all other new zealand species  <cit> , sometimes belongs to the small-leaved group, but in other analyses either pairs with the tasmanian outgroup species o. integrifolia or is sister to all other species of new zealand ourisia .

limitations of aflp analyses and inferences of phylogeny
our analyses did not resolve a bifurcating phylogeny for the new zealand species of ourisia. the divergence plots for nuclear dna sequences and aflp profiles indicate that the aflp-derived distances have limited tree-like properties. these plots show that the aflp hamming distances do not increase significantly with increasing sequence divergence . this is in contrast to observations reported for other plant groups  <cit> , and this finding contributes to the star-like features of the supernetwork and phylogenetic trees. the lack of resolution is not explained by an absence of signal in the aflp data. of the  <dig> characters in the final combined aflp dataset,  <dig>  are parsimony informative. given these features of the data, we predict that reconstructed phylogenetic trees for new zealand ourisia are unlikely to become more tree-like  through increasing the number of aflp characters. a previous study using ndna  and cpdna  sequencing markers did not resolve a bifurcating phylogeny of new zealand ourisia but had limited sampling . two additional and more variable markers  are being analyzed for a large number of individuals to further resolve the phylogeny and to compare to the aflp results reported here .

although structure did not perform as effectively as tree-building in identifying clusters, structure analyses do provide insight into the basis of the partially-resolved phylogenetic trees. in the case of a recent and rapid plant species radiation, it could be argued that the aflp data have simply not evolved fast enough to accumulate substitutions and support species relationships. however, perhaps relevant to interpretation is the observation that structure analyses indicate considerable admixture for many delimited metapopulations . stochastic noise in the aflp data does not explain this result since the admixture is often >5% and is always between relatively few species. a possible explanation is hybridization and/or incomplete lineage sorting of ancestral polymorphisms among diverging species. if hybridisation is contributing to this signal we suggest that it is more likely to be ancient events of hybridisation between early diverging ourisia lineages rather than contemporary gene flow. this follows from the observation that including putative recent hybrids with intermediate morphologies into the supernetwork analysis greatly increases the extent of incongruence in the network . thus, the inclusion of recent hybrids produces a different signature in the data analysis. further, the species most implicated in recent hybridization events  does not show high levels of admixture, and the supernetwork shows very low levels of incongruence. the effect of ancient gene flow among early diverging lineages will be to make distance measures more similar than expected, and phylogenetic trees less tree-like. this speculation leads us to be cautious in interpreting the shape of the supernetwork and bayesian tree topologies with respect to the pattern of species diversification. we believe their star-like features of the aflp supernetwork and bayesian tree reflect processes of diversification rather than the pattern of species radiation, an hypothesis that is being further investigated with ndna and cpdna sequencing markers .

CONCLUSIONS
phylogenetic, pco-mc and bayesian assignment  analyses of aflp data for new zealand ourisia identified species and subspecies boundaries inferred previously from morphological analyses. in one case a change in rank from subspecies to species was proposed. in contrast to what has been suggested elsewhere, tree building analyses were found to be more efficient and robust in cluster identification than the structure analysis  <cit> . importantly, the results from the structure analysis were informative for interpreting phylogenetic topology, and suggested that ancient gene flow among metapopulations is responsible for reducing the tree-like properties of the aflp distance measures. if so, our observations may also explain some of the difficulties others have had in attempting to reconstruct the evolutionary history of species radiations using aflp . our findings highlight the need for developing analytical methodologies that explicitly take into account the evolutionary dynamics of rapid radiations. such tools are needed for analyses of aflp data as well as the rapidly growing collections of snp data being generated by next generation sequencing technologies.

