BACKGROUND
genome wide association studies  have been widely applied in human, plant and animal studies to identify genetic variants associated with complex traits . in gwas, the association between snps and a complex trait is usually analyzed by testing each marker individually. this requires a large number of significance tests. because of this, a stringent p-value is generally used to select significant snps to reduce the number of false positive snps. at the same time, however, many real associated variants may be missed. the success of gwas relies on the underlying trait architecture  <cit> , heritability , effective population size and environmental factors  <cit> . there is a general consensus that complex traits are controlled by many quantitative trait loci  with small effects. typically, single marker gwas analyses approaches are only able to capture qtls with large effects and miss qtls with small effects  <cit> . in addition, these significantly identified snps account for only a small fraction of the variation of the complex traits. instead of gwas where the target is to identify snps associated with a complex trait, one can also use snps to predict complex traits by fitting all snps simultaneously to select individuals. prediction of a quantitative trait using all snps is referred as genomic prediction   <cit> . breeders can use predicted trait values to select candidates for their future breeding programs, termed as genomic selection   <cit> . it has been shown that gp provides a cost-effective and time-efficient tool for breeders to predict traits, which may be difficult and expensive to measure directly, are limited to sex or only observable later in life. gp has been successfully applied in selection of breeding candidates in plants  and animals . the approach has also been applied in humans to predict disease risk and many complex traits  <cit> . several studies have shown that the prediction accuracy of complex traits may be improved by using all snps simultaneously . for example, yang et al.  <cit>  have shown that fitting all snps simultaneously leads to approximately ten-fold increase in the predictive ability of human height compared to the individual snp.

the accurate prediction of a complex trait can be extremely challenging, as the trait may be affected by multiple loci that interact. another major challenge is the fact that the number of snps in gp studies greatly exceeds the number of samples leading to the so-called ‘large-p - small-n’ problem. because of this, many traditional statistical approaches are not applicable to such data. deriving an accurate prediction of complex traits by the high-density snps, while at the same time taking into account possible interactions between multiple loci, requires powerful feature reduction methods. a variety of methods such as bayesian regression , genomic best-linear unbiased prediction   <cit> , kernel regression  <cit>  and dimension reduction methods  <cit>  have been developed and applied in gp.

most of the suggested statistical models differ in their assumptions of the distribution of the snps effect. for example, the gblup model assumes that the snps effect size is drawn from a common gaussian distribution and the variances of snps effect are equal. this unrealistic assumption of gblup corresponds to use of a single random effect term in the model, which is a severe and unnecessary limitation. whereas the bayesian methods  <cit>  assume that the variance of snps effect differs among loci with most of the snps having a zero to low effect and only a few having moderate to large effect. several studies have shown that bayesian regression outperformed gblup for the prediction of traits with few qtls with large effect  <cit> .

multiple linear regression  is an often used quantitative technique for prediction from predictors  <cit> . however, mlr can be applied for prediction when the number of independent variables does not significantly exceed the number of observations and no significant collinearity between predictors exists  <cit> . considering the characteristics of genomic data, mlr is not directly applicable for gp. partial least squares   <cit>  may overcome these issues for high-dimensional and collinear data by combining the principles of principal component analysis  and mlr. it has been successfully applied in metabolomics for analysis of high-dimensional chromatography, and mass spectrometry data  <cit> . pls tries to extract latent variables  that combine snps to optimally predict a dependent variable such as a complex trait, taking into account their mutual correlation. however, pls cannot be directly used for snps, as these are generally discrete  while conventional pls has been developed for the analysis of continuous data.

therefore, we propose to use dissimilarity-based partial least squares  to predict one or multiple traits from a large set of snps. in dpls, measurements of the dissimilarity between the accessions  are used for prediction. because of this, dpls may also be used for gp, when the method is used in combination with a suitable measure of the genomic distance between genotype accessions. note that, during the dissimilarity calculation , snps information is lost, which means effect of snps on the traits cannot be directly calculated from dpls. however, there is a pseudo-sample technique proposed in literature to extract variables interaction effect from dpls model  <cit> . unlikely pls, which uses pca-like technique to extract lvs, dpls takes the advantages of multi-dimensional scaling -like technique to extract lvs to predict complex trait. both pca and mds techniques are widely used for dimension reduction purposes. mds uses a distance matrix and is often recommended to analyze distance matrices. mds minimize the dimensions, while preserving actual distance between data points. the dpls combines features of mds and pls in order to perform gp. several measures have been developed and proposed in literature to calculate dissimilarity between genomic accessions from snps  <cit> . as a case study, we have explored and compared eight of such widely used genomic distance measures  in combination with dpls to predict bacterial wilt  in tomato. in this study we have used snps as predictors to predict bw. bw is a complex trait caused by bacteria ralstonia solanacearum and is considered as one of the most destructive diseases for a wide range of crops, including tomato  <cit> . in this analysis we have not accounted for any environmental factor in the prediction model. we have focused this study on genotype effects, by comparing accessions grown in the same controlled greenhouse environment.table  <dig> the selected dissimilarity measures used to calculate genomic distance among tomato accessions from snpsa


di1i2=∑k=1kxi1k−xi2k2
di1i2=∑k=1kδi1i2k∗di1i2k∑k=1kδi1i2k for nominal or factor variables d
i1i2k =  <dig>  

d
di1i2=1k∑k=1kdi1i2k where d
i1i2
 = { <dig>  if individual i
 <dig> and i
 <dig> have two alleles in common at the k
th locus,
 <dig>  if individual i
 <dig> and i
 <dig> have only single alleles in common at the k
th locus,
 <dig>  if individual i
 <dig> and i
 <dig> have no alleles in common at the k
di1i2=∑k=1kxi1k−xi2k∑k=1kxi1k+xi2k
di1i2=2b1+b
di1i2=1− <dig> *∑k=1kminxi1k,xi2k∑k=1kxi1k+∑k=1kminxi1k,xi2k∑k=1kxi2k
g=zz'2∑pk1−pk
xi1k and xi2k = snps at locus k for accession xi <dig> and xi <dig> respectively

di1i2k = distance between i <dig> and i <dig> samples for snps at locus k


b bray- curtis dissimilarity


g genomic relationship matrix


z genotype information for all tomato accessions


p
k frequency of allele at locus k


adi1i2 = distance between tomato accession i <dig> and i2




the prediction quality  of the dpls model was measured in term of r <dig> estimated from observed and predicted trait values in a cross validation  setup. furthermore, we have compared the prediction performance of dpls with a prediction based on snps found as significant in a univariate association analysis  and gblup . we demonstrate gp with dpls on a single trait. the method can however be applied to simultaneously predict multiple, possibly correlated traits.

RESULTS
the differences in information captured by various genomic distance measures for gp have not been explored. therefore, we first explored the properties of the eight genomic distance measures of interest to this study by the mantel test, heatmap visualization, and their application in multi-dimensional scaling  before we studied their application in dpls.

comparison of genomic information captured by different distance measures
mantel correlation
the mantel test was used to compare the relation between two distance matrices in terms of correlation  statistics. the pair-wise correlation results obtained from the comparison of genomic distance measures by the mantel test are presented in table  <dig>  on the basis of the mantel correlation statistics, the eight genomic distance measures can be grouped into two categories for the data investigated in this study. any two genomic distance matrices, which show a mantel’s test correlation >  <dig> , are placed together in one group. the first group  includes euclidean, gower, nei and allele-share distance and the other four genomic distances i.e., bray, kulczynski, jaccard and genomic relationship matrix  were placed in second group .table  <dig> summarized mantel correlation statistics for analyzed genomic dissimilarity matrices*



heatmap visualization
in fig.  <dig>  the quantitative distance patterns between the  <dig> tomato accessions are visualized as a heatmap for the euclidean and bray distance. both heatmaps show many sub-clusters of closely related tomato accessions. however, in contrast to the heatmap of the euclidean distance  the heatmap of the bray distance  shows many small clusters. the heatmap plot clearly shows that tomato accessions cluster differently in euclidean and bray distance space. in fig.  <dig>  the euclidean and bray distance were selected as representative distances of groups-i and ii identified by the mantel test. similar results were observed for the other distance measures within each group.fig.  <dig> heatmap representation of dissimilarity scores between  <dig> tomato accessions for bray  and euclidean . the pixels are colored in proportion to the genotypic dissimilarity between tomato accessions. euclidean and bray heatmap represents distance group-i and ii respectively



multi-dimensional scaling  analysis
mds models based on the two selected representative distance measures  were used to visualize the relations between the tomato accessions in a scatter plot . the mds plot of the euclidean distance matrix suggests that most tomato accessions are genetically similar and form a big cluster with few smaller clusters of genetically less similar accessions. in the analogous representation of the bray distances, tomato accessions were distributed throughout the entire plot with few accessions forming small clusters in mds space.

in both plots the observed clusters do not clearly relate to the phenotype. we conclude that the two groups of distance metrics represent different structures within the genotype data, neither of which can be strongly associated to the phenotype measures by mds. however, this insight could only be obtained from the mds score plot that represents the relative differences and similarities between all accessions used in the study.

phenotype prediction with dpls
in this study, dpls was used to relate genomic information captured by the distance measures indicated in table  <dig> to the bw. for each distance measure repeated double cross validation   was used to choose the optimal number of latent variables  to fit the dpls model . as explained in the methods section  a big advantage of the dpls method is that it also returns so-called score values for each accession. these scores represent the relative position of each accession in terms of their genomic distances associate to the trait values. as shown in fig.  <dig>  these scores can be visualized in a plot similar to the mds analysis , where large distances between accessions in the plot  indicate large genomic differences. the score plots show a better arrangement of tomato accessions in the space of dpls lvs when compared to the original data structure observed in exploratory analysis by mds . the accessions are arranged according to their trait values; tomato accessions with similar trait values are close together in dpls lvs space. the dpls model is therefore better able to predict the trait values from the genotype dissimilarity scores data. although the score plots of dpls models based on different distance measures differ considerably, a direction within the space along which the trait value increases can be identified in both score plots.table  <dig> dissimilarity based partial least squares  prediction results over all dataset in a 10-fold cv setup

all the results presented in table are significant . the results are averaged over 10-fold cv scheme. the 10-fold cv procedure was repeated  <dig> times. the standard error  calculated over 10-fold cv repetition. the last row present prediction results obtained from gblup. the pq , rmse and lvs represents prediction quality, root mean square error and latent variables respectively


a
rmse stands for root mean square error


b
lvs stands for latent variables used for model building


c
pq represent prediction quality


d
r
 <dig> presented in the table are estimated for testset and not from training model. the value is calculated in a cross validation setup . this value is refer as prediction quality in this study

fig.  <dig> multi-dimensional scaling  scores representation of bray  and euclidean  distances. mds scores are visualized in first two dimension of mds space, where mds <dig> and mds <dig> represents scores in first and second dimension respectively. the size and colors of bubbles are in proportion to the actual trait values  of tomato accessions. the bigger bubble size represents higher resistance accessions

fig.  <dig> dissimilarity based partial least squares  scores representation for bray  and euclidean  distances. the dpls scores are visualized in first two latent variables  where pls <dig> and pls <dig> present scores in first and second lvs space respectively. each bubble represents a tomato accession. the size and color of the bubbles are corresponding to the actual trait values of tomato accessions where bigger size of the bubble corresponds to higher resistance accession. the pve represents phenotypic variance explained by the dpls prediction model



the dpls prediction performance with respect to each distance measure is presented in table  <dig>  the performance statistics for each distance measure consist of pq , model error measured in terms of root mean square error  and the optimal number of lvs used for building prediction models. pq range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for analyzed genomic distance measures. the resulting rmse was found to be similar for each genomic distance measure. these results  indicate that the dpls models may predict the trait similarly well between all distance measures for the studied bw-tomato data. the correlation  between measured and predicted bw values is visualized in fig.  <dig> . the prediction plot shows a linear trend for the prediction based on both the distances . however, it seems from the prediction plot  that accessions with higher bw values were predicted better than accessions with lower values. this follows from least-squares criterion used within dpls, which it shares with conventional pls, mlr and most other ‘conventional’ data analysis methods. this criterion gives more importance to the prediction of more distant accession. the heritability of the trait has also direct influence on gp. this is considered as theoretical upper limit for prediction accuracy and maximum variance explained due to genetic effects  <cit> . the estimated heritability for the bw is  <dig> . the prediction results pq  in table  <dig>  indicates that the variance explained by the dpls model for the bw is close to the upper limit set by the estimated bw heritability.fig.  <dig> dissimilarity based partial least squares  prediction plot for bray  and euclidean . the prediction for each accession obtained in repeated 10-fold-cv scheme. each point indicates mean value of accession prediction. original and predicted value of bw traits are plotted on x and y axis respectively. the r <dig> represent prediction quality and the red line indicates trend line for regression model



phenotype prediction with gblup
the performance of dpls was compared to that of gblup in a 10-fold double cross-validation setup. the bw prediction results from the gblup model are indicated in table  <dig>  the trait can be predicted similarly well by gblup and dpls. however, gblup does not provide any visual representation of the relations between individual accessions. a disadvantage of dpls compared to gblup is that it does not provide information about snps effect directly. the genotype-based distance matrix from dpls implies that information on individual snp is lost during the modeling, which is retained by gblup. however, approaches such as pseudo-sampling  <cit>  are available to interpret the effect of each individual snp in gp. from this, the snps most relevant to the dpls model can be obtained. however, pseudo-sampling has not yet been applied to high-dimensional genomic data. therefore this will be subject of a future study.

phenotype prediction based on single snp analysis
in previous studies using univariate models for analysis of the bw-tomato data,  <dig> snps were found to be significantly associated with the studied bw . the phenotypic variance predicted from each snp ranges from ~ <dig>  to ~50 %, which is lower than the variance explained by dpls . this analysis clearly shows dpls prediction has edge over single-snp regression approach. the analysis clearly indicates that bw is a complex trait, which should be analyzed by multivariate methods that observe all snps within all accessions.

advantages of dpls as genomic prediction model
the results obtained from the proposed dpls method indicate that its prediction performance is on par with that of gblup. together with that dpls provides some other beneficial characteristics. it can be applied to dataset of any dimension. dpls reduces the dimensionality drastically and can handle missing values while computing distances or dissimilarities. it can handle the multi-colinearity that is omnipresent in genomic data and can be easily implemented using widely available software and methodology for conventional pls. a major advantage of dpls over other methods is the dpls score plot, which represents arrangement of tomato accessions in dpls space. this visualization provides a tool for the breeders to select the optimal candidates for their future breeding program. for instance, breeders can select the specific tomato accessions from the right panel of the score plot presented in fig.  <dig>  as candidates to specifically breed for a bw resistant tomato variety. this score plot based on the bray distance shows that the first two lvs of dpls explain about 56 % of variation in the phenotype. additionally, the arrangement of tomato accessions with respect to the trait values in the plot shows that there seem to be at least two discrete groups of disease resistant accessions in the dataset. by inspecting this score plot, breeders can select candidates from both groups to breed for resistant varieties, to grasp more trait variability than with selection based on high resistant accessions. the score plot therefore enables, selection of multiple germplasm sources, which would be impossible if a single phenotype summary such as estimated breeding values  or other transformations of the trait. no existing method for gp provide such scores to compare individual accessions.

the other advantage of dpls is that, it is flexible to various genotype representations. for example, snps are usually encoded as discrete variables  and many models uses this encoding as standard input for gp. the dpls prediction model does not rely on such standard genotype representation since a distance matrix between accessions is used as input for the model. this makes it more flexible to data representation and may possibly be better applicable for gp in diploid or polyploid crops. the approach can also be very useful for analyzing complex phenotypes which are often collected in form of multiple traits to gather more information  <cit> . these traits are generally correlated and share a common genetic mechanism. the analysis of multiple traits together in a multivariate model may bring more power and increase chances of detecting snps, which have effect on individual or multiple traits  <cit> . however, there is limited number of methods available, which can be applicable to multivariate trait analysis  <cit> . successful prediction of multivariate responses with pls has been reported in numerous references  <cit> . we therefore expect that the dpls may efficiently exploit the information from high-dimension snps to predict multiple potentially correlated traits. assessing the dpls performance on simultaneous prediction of multiple traits is a topic for future study.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study dpls, a novel approach for genomic prediction, is proposed for dealing with genomic data. this method employs the strengths of multivariate partial least squares  based prediction with the expression of genomic distances  between individual accessions. this way, problems in the data such as the categorical nature of the variables, the large number of variables and their multi-collinearity are avoided. it was found that dpls performs on par with gblup and better than univariate prediction approach for gp. the prediction performance of the proposed method was close to the biologically imposed upper limit boundary set by the heritability of the trait. dpls allows for visualization of the accessions with respect to the trait of interest, which may be invaluable for selection of specific candidates in agricultural breeding programmes.

