BACKGROUND
expansions of trinucleotide repeat sequences over certain thresholds cause more than  <dig> human diseases including huntington's disease , a number of spinocerebellar ataxias , myotonic dystrophy  <dig> , and fragile x syndrome. interestingly, expanded trinucleotide repeat sequences undergo progressive, expansion-biased tissue-specific somatic instability  <cit> . as the severity of these disorders is highly dependent on repeat length, somatic instability in tissues that are the pathogenic targets is predicted to contribute to disease. notably, in hd, striking somatic expansion of the hd cag repeat occurs in the striatum and cortex, brain regions that are major targets of the pathogenic process. furthermore, studies both in hd patients and in a knock-in mouse model of hd provide compelling evidence indicating that somatic expansion in these brain regions accelerates the ongoing pathogenic process  <cit> . therefore, understanding the mechanisms underlying tissue-specific somatic instability in hd may provide novel routes to therapies.

somatic instability is critically dependent on dna repair genes and is also influenced by cis-factors  <cit> . however, it is unknown what determines its tissue specificity. it has been proposed that the expression levels of dna repair genes and/or the pathogenic process itself may underlie tissue patterns of instability  <cit> . given that somatic hd cag instability occurs in many tissues to varying extents  <cit> , we reasoned firstly, that tissue specificity may governed by many factors, and secondly, that studying a large cross-section of tissues with different instabilities would provide the most information concerning the major factors underlying tissue instability patterns. therefore, in order to gain insight into the factors that govern the tissue specificity cag instability in hd, we have taken quantitative, global and unbiased approaches.

using accurate genetic knock-in mouse models of hd  <cit>  that exhibit similar tissue-specific patterns of somatic instability to those seen in hd patients  <cit> , we developed a novel instability quantification method that is sensitive and applicable to high-throughput assays. we then integrated this methodology with unbiased and global bioinformatic approaches to identify a gene expression "signature" and biological pathways that correlate with tissue instability. using these methods we have, a) tested the role played by factors previously proposed to contribute to the tissue specificity of somatic instability, and b) uncovered novel pathways that may be important in determining the tissue specificity of instability in hd.

RESULTS
instability quantification
previous methods for determining instability following pcr amplification of repeats from 'bulk' genomic dna have either been qualitative, or have failed to adequately account for amplification efficiencies that differ between stable and unstable tissues. in contrast, quantitative small pool-pcr  methods  <cit>  are extremely labor-intensive and impractical for high-throughput analyses. in order to facilitate high-throughput, global analyses of somatic instability we therefore first developed a novel method for quantifying cag repeat sizes from 'bulk' genomic dna. pcr amplification of trinucleotide repeats generates multiple pcr products, viewed using genemapper software as a cluster of peaks differing by a single cag repeat unit . distinguishing signal peaks from noise peaks is critical for the accurate measurement of instability. in typical genemapper traces of pcr-amplified trinucleotide repeats, there is no clear boundary between signal and noise, making defining noise peaks  extremely difficult. to solve this problem, we developed a novel background correction method , where 20% of the height of the highest peak was set as the threshold for each analysis. for stringent analyses, peaks with heights lower than this threshold level were excluded from quantification. we used a conservative threshold factor  in this study as this detects peaks with good signal intensity , and is more resistant to amplification variation than lower thresholds . however, if peak signals are strong enough, a lower threshold  will provide more sensitive quantification.

validation of the relative peak height threshold quantification method
we first determined the reproducibility of our method by quantifying instability index in  <dig> tissues from 2- <dig> different hdhq111/+ mice at  <dig> months of age. as shown in figure  <dig>  the shift in the highest peak compared to tail  and the instability index  were highly reproducible between mice for all tissues tested. note that the instability indices of stable tissues  were negative because stable tissue genemapper traces were biased toward contraction likely due to the increased amplification efficiency of shorter cag alleles. instability indices of  <dig> tissues ranged from - <dig>   to  <dig>  .

the relative peak height threshold method can also be applied to different types of instability quantification depending on the focus of the biological question. thus, after applying the relative peak height threshold, we can determine contraction and expansion indices , the number of contracted and expanded peaks  or the relative composition  of contracted, expanded and unchanged peaks . importantly, these measurements of different aspects of instability may be useful to capture the complexity of tissue instability. in all cases, measurements were reproducible for all tissues across multiple mice. to represent the levels of instability of tissues for further analysis, we used the instability index .

next, to examine the effect of template dna amount on instability index, we calculated striatal instability indices using different amounts of template dna from striatum of an hdhq111/+ mouse at  <dig> months of age. as shown in figure 3a, instability indices calculated using the relative peak height method generated consistent instability indices  from a wide range of template dna amounts .

we then compared instability indices using our relative peak height threshold method to somatic instability quantified using sp-pcr on genomic dna of tissues from the same mouse . figure 3b shows examples of tissues exhibiting high, medium and low instability indices, and the corresponding cag repeat length frequency distributions obtained by sp-pcr. these data indicated that the instability index broadly captured the bulk of the somatic variation detected by sp-pcr, but not the rare large expansions. however, there was a highly significant correlation between the instability index obtained using the bulk dna method and an instability index quantified from the small pool data , suggesting that although instability index using bulk dna may not be sensitive enough to detect rare molecules, it can give a good estimate of overall instability.

together, our analyses suggest that the instability index, determined from genemapper traces of bulk genomic dna, is a reproducible measurement, relatively insensitive to input dna amount and well suited for high-throughput analyses where sp-pcr may be impractical.

genome-wide identification of an instability-correlated gene expression signature
with the aim of investigating the tissue specificity of somatic instability in a global and unbiased manner we then took a bioinformatics approach. using  <dig> different tissues from 5-month hdhq111/+ mice as our training set , with instability index as a quantitative phenotype, we analyzed mouse tissue gene expression data  to identify a gene expression signature that correlated with tissue repeat instability. hdhq <dig> somatic instability  increases over time  <cit> . we chose  <dig> months as this represents a time-point at which tissue differences in instability can be readily resolved. notably, the gene expression data is derived from mice that differ in age and genetic background  to the hdhq <dig> mice in this study. while age and genetic background-related gene expression changes will increase the noise in our system, this broad, tissue-based analysis allows us to pull out major tissue-specific gene expression differences that occur over and above age- and genetic background-related effects.

thus, we modeled instability index as a function of gene expression using partial least square regression   <cit> . an instability-correlated gene expression signature was identified by leave-one-out cross validation  of training samples , and the signature, comprised of the  <dig> most highly correlated probes with tissue instability , reflected the instability index with a root mean squared error of prediction of  <dig>  .

we then confirmed the predictive power of this instability-correlated gene expression signature by comparing measured instability indices with predicted instability indices from our regression model in new independent samples. for this, 1) we measured instability indices of four new independent hdhq111/+ tissues  and compared these with instability indices predicted from the regression model in the same tissues , and 2) we predicted instability indices using independent microarray data from hdhq <dig> striatum and cerebellum and compared these with measured instability indices . as shown in figure  <dig>  the predicted and measured instability indices matched closely in all cases  with a significant correlation , indicating that instability index can be relatively precisely predicted from the gene expression signature. furthermore, these data demonstrate that although the model was based on gene expression data and instability index data from mice that differed in age and genetic background, it nevertheless has significant predictive power. this indicates the presence of tissue-specific factors related to instability independent of age and genetic background.

tissue instability prediction
our sensitive quantification method and instability-correlated gene expression signature/regression model is a versatile tool. one of the advantages of our regression model is that the 'propensity' for instability can be predicted when instability can not be directly measured. for example, our approach allowed a prediction of an instability index in  <dig> different tissues and conditions in the mouse tissue gene expression data set , a far greater number than has ever been previously measured, providing a comprehensive view of tissue instability. interestingly, although most of the tissues  were predicted to be relatively stable, some degree of cag repeat instability was predicted for many tissues in the nervous system.

the plsr model built with the instability-correlated gene expression signature from  <dig> training tissues was used to predict instability index for each of the tissues analyzed in the gnf mouse gene expression atlas. data represents mean of  <dig> replicates.

pathogenesis and instability
we are interested in understanding the factors that contribute to the tissue specificity of hd cag somatic expansion, particularly, why the repeat is so unstable in the striatum. our instability quantification/bioinformatics approach provides a novel, global and unbiased means of probing these factors. one possibility that could at least in part explain the tissue specificity is that somatic instability occurs as a result of the ongoing hd pathogenic process, as previously hypothesized  <cit> . we first used our ability to predict instability from gene expression to test this hypothesis. the instability-correlated gene expression signature reflects a cell or tissue state that is associated with instability. if instability occurred as a result of ongoing pathogenesis, one would expect an altered level of instability-correlated gene expression signature in cells expressing mutant huntingtin compared to wild-type cells. therefore, we performed gene expression profiling on striata and cerebella of 10-week hdhq111/ <dig> mice that exhibit an ongoing pathogenic process and somatic instability in striatum but not in cerebellum  <cit> , and on wild-type hdh+/+ littermates, and predicted instability using the regression model above. interestingly, as shown in figure 5a, predicted instability indices were greater in striatum than in cerebellum, but did not distinguish mutant from wild-type striatum. this finding suggested that mutant and wild-type striata have an equal propensity for somatic expansion that is unrelated to the hd cag pathogenic process. although wild-type striata possesses this propensity, the normal hd cag repeat does not actually expand because it does not present a sufficiently long target to be susceptible to the processes that mediate expansion.

to test the prediction that somatic instability does not occur as a consequence of ongoing pathogenesis, we performed two genetic experiments. since the expanded hdh cag repeat is both a source of a pathogenic process and a target of instability, it is very difficult to delineate the relationship between the hd pathogenic process and somatic instability. therefore, we used genetic mouse models in which neurodegenerative processes are modulated or caused by factors independent of the hd cag repeat. we first investigated hdhq <dig> mice lacking the dopamine transporter , which show accelerated hd pathogenesis in the striatum  <cit> . as shown in figure 5b, striatal instability indices of hdhq92/+ dat-/- and hdhq92/+dat+/+ mice were not different, indicating that hd cag instability is not contributed by the disease process. we also tested whether inducing neurodegeneration in the cerebellum, a normally stable tissue, would cause instability in the cerebellum by crossing hdhq <dig> mice to harlequin  mice, a model of cerebellar granule cell degeneration  <cit> . as shown in figure 5c, hdhq111/+ hq/y mice and hdhq111/+ +/y control mice exhibited similar low cerebellar instability indices, indicating that neurodegeneration per se is insufficient to induce instability.

taken together, these results support the prediction from our mathematical model, that the hd cag disease process is not responsible for the striatal specificity of hd cag repeat instability, arguing against the sequestration of dna repair proteins or other factors, as a contributor to somatic instability as previously suggested  <cit> . our results are also in agreement with similar levels of instability seen in knock-in and fragment transgenic models of hd that exhibit different rates of inclusion formation  <cit> , and with the observation that striatal instability occurs in sca <dig> and dm <dig>  although the striatum is not the target of pathogenesis in these disorders  <cit> .

dna repair and repeat instability
dna repair genes, particularly in the mismatch repair pathway, are required for somatic expansion of trinucleotide repeats  <cit>  and have previously been suggested as trans-acting tissue-specific factors responsible for tissue-specific somatic instability  <cit> . one possibility, therefore, is that dna repair gene expression levels are correlated with the levels of instability in tissues. our instability-associated gene expression signature gave us the opportunity to examine if expression levels of dna repair genes play a role in determining the tissue specificity of instability. thus, if dna repair gene expression levels were major determinants of the tissue specificity of somatic instability the expression levels of these genes would be predicted to correlate with instability levels across tissues. initial examination of the  <dig> probes comprising our instability-correlated gene expression signature did not highlight an important role for genes involved in dna repair in general . to probe these processes further, we examined whether expression levels of specific dna repair genes , previously shown to play important roles in cag repeat instability  <cit> , correlated with instability index measured in  <dig> tissues. the expression levels of msh <dig>  ogg <dig> and cbp did not correlate with instability index and msh <dig> expression level showed a weak negative correlation with instability index . in agreement with these findings, and further validating the predictive power of our signature, protein levels of msh <dig>  and cbp  did not correlate with instability index.

selective neuronal expression of msh <dig> was recently proposed to contribute to the greater levels of instability in neurons compared to glia  <cit> , and therefore we explored this further. analyses of gene expression data revealed nearly identical msh <dig> expression levels in purified neurons and glia . together with the lack of correlation between instability index and msh <dig> expression levels across  <dig> tissues , the data argue against a major role for msh <dig> expression levels in determining tissue- or cell type-specific instability.

therefore, our results suggest that although certain dna repair genes are absolutely critical for somatic instability  <cit> , their expression levels are unlikely to be the primary determinants of tissue specificity. clearly, posttranscriptional and/or posttranslational regulation of dna repair genes could still play a tissue-specific role. it would therefore be of further interest to determine whether there is a correlation between dna repair enzyme activities and tissue instability.

genome-wide survey for pathways that correlate with tissue instability
our findings indicate that neither hd pathogenesis, nor dna repair gene expression levels is a major determinant of the tissue specificity of somatic instability. we therefore sought to gain insight into the nature of the factors that might influence the tissue specific property of somatic instability. although, as a group, the genes comprising our signature are highly predictive of instability, on an individual gene basis, they do not have sufficient power to predict instability-related biological pathways. therefore, as an alternative strategy, we carried out a sensitive, unbiased and global gene set enrichment analysis , in which gene expression data is analyzed at a the level of biological pathways rather than individual genes  <cit> . confirming the findings above, dna metabolism pathways were not significantly correlated with instability index . in contrast, pathways broadly in the cell cycle category were negatively correlated, whereas pathways related to neurotransmitter activity  and cellular metabolism  were positively correlated with tissue instability index . confirming previous predictions, the negative correlation of cell cycle pathways with instability index is consistent with the instability seen in many tissues of the nervous system , its occurrence in postmitotic neurons  <cit>  and a dissociation of instability and cell division rate  <cit> . our results also suggest novel roles for additional pathways  in determining the tissue specificity of somatic instability.

gene set enrichment analysis was performed using pearson correlation between expression level and instability index as a ranking metric. significant gene sets were identified by permutation-based nominal p value . nes, normalized enrichment score.

it is possible that as striatum is particularly unstable, the highly correlated pathways are simply those that are predominantly present or absent in this tissue, and that the correlation with instability is coincidental. however, pathways significantly up-regulated or down-regulated in striatum compared to cerebellum  showed little overlap with those that correlated with instability; for example, the dopamine pathway is strongly up-regulated in striatum, but does not correlate with instability. this suggests that the instability-correlated pathways are directly related to instability rather than simply being striatal-specific.

test of prediction from gsea
instability-correlated pathways may either directly modify instability or may represent cells' secondary responses to instability. to distinguish these alternatives, we asked whether alteration of an instability-correlated pathway would influence instability. cell cycle pathways were negatively correlated with instability index , and our instability prediction in tissues  indicated intermediate levels of instability in many areas of the nervous system. this suggested that instability might be associated with the lack of mitotic activity in these tissues due to their high proportion of non-proliferating cells. therefore, we tested directly whether cell cycle block would result in increased instability. to test this hypothesis, we took advantage of a clonal striatal cell line  derived from striatal primordia of hdhq111/+ e <dig> embryos  <cit> . these cells divide at 33°c due to immortalization by the temperature sensitive sv <dig> large t antigen, but stop proliferating at 39°c due to the degradation of sv <dig> large t. we therefore compared the instability index of cells in cycling  and non-cycling  conditions over  <dig> weeks. as shown in figure  <dig>  the instability index increased over time only when the cells stopped cycling , but not when cells continuously proliferated , consistent with the prediction from the negative correlation between cell cycle and the instability index. it is notable that the hd cag repeat in sthdhq <dig> cells is extremely stable over multiple passages and under numerous different experimental conditions . cell cycle arrest is the only condition we have identified so far that has resulted in any expansion of the repeat. these findings indicate that the negative correlation of cell cycle pathways with the instability index more likely reflects a contribution of cell proliferation to preventing instability rather than a reduction of these pathways as a consequence of instability.

contribution of multiple processes to somatic instability
although cell cycle pathways may be directly involved in modifying instability, some tissues  with a high proportion of non-proliferating cells were relatively stable. this indicated that each correlated pathway may explain a small part of the tissue instability and that the contributions of each pathway may be different for each tissue. therefore, to investigate further the contributions of the different instability-correlated pathways, we compared the expression levels across different tissues of genes in the two most strongly correlated pathways . interestingly, although 'udp-galactose beta-n-acetylglucosamine beta- <dig> -galactosyltransferase activity' was the most significantly correlated pathway , liver which had a high instability index  showed a low level of gene expression in this pathway . in addition, similar levels of gene expression in the 'adrenoceptor activity' pathway, the second most significantly correlated pathway , occurred in hippocampus, cerebral cortex and striatum, with low , intermediate  and high  instability indices, respectively . these results indicate that no single pathway can fully explain tissue-specific instability, strongly implying that somatic instability requires multiple processes that may be different in different tissues.

discussion
we have developed a novel approach for use in investigations of tissue-specific somatic hd cag repeat instability that combines a reliable, high-throughput method for quantifying somatic instability with mathematical modeling based on gene expression data. predictions based on our modeling were confirmed using genetic, biochemical and cell culture-based experiments, indicating the validity of our bioinformatics approach.

it has been proposed that somatic instability may be a consequence of disease pathogenesis  <cit> , potentially explaining the striatal specificity of somatic expansion in hd. our results directly demonstrate that hd pathogenesis does not explain the tissue specificity of hd cag instability. in addition, dna repair proteins have been found to be essential factors for somatic instability of trinucleotide repeats  <cit> . however, here we demonstrate that differences in expression levels of dna repair genes do not underlie the tissue-specific differences in hd cag instability. in addition, hdh expression levels did not correlate with instability index in tissues , confirming observations that although transcription through expanded repeats may be important in somatic instability  <cit> , tissue-specific patterns are not reflected in the steady state levels of hdh mrna. alternatively, our study suggests new pathways, notably metabolism, neurotransmitter, and cell cycle that may contribute, in combination, to the level of somatic instability in different tissues, providing a starting point to identify additional factors that contribute to somatic instability. notably, there was no predominant factor that could explain the tissue-specificity of hd cag instability, suggesting that patterns of instability are determined by the combined effects/interactions of many genes.

somatic instability of trinucleotide repeats not only requires trans-acting factors, but has also been shown to depend on cis-acting sequences  <cit> . thus, while certain tissues are more predisposed to somatic expansion, the expandability of a particular repeat in a particular tissue is further modified by its context. this could at least in part explain differences in the precise tissue patterns of somatic expansion in different diseases  <cit> . it would therefore be of interest to determine instability-correlated gene expression signatures and instability-correlated biological pathways for other trinucleotide repeat diseases. instability-correlated genes/pathways that are shared between diseases would provide further insight into fundamental aspects of tissue-specific instability.

our bioinformatics method based on gene expression data can only address aspects of tissue instability that are related to steady-state mrna levels. in principle, however, a similar bioinformatic approach could be also applied to proteomics data. irrespective of the particular method however, the strength of our approach is in its high-throughput, global and predictive nature, facilitating a number of important applications. our genemapper quantification method is readily applicable to high-throughput assays such as screening small molecules that modulate instability in cells, or screening for genetic modifiers in mice. a powerful application of our bioinformatics approach is that the instability-correlated gene expression signature can be used as a surrogate marker for instability in situations where repeat instability cannot be directly measured. for example, gene expression databases can be screened to identify cell or tissue states that have the propensity for somatic instability, even in the absence of an expanded cag repeat target as a read-out. similarly, databases can be screened for compounds that reduce the instability propensity. together, these approaches promise to accelerate the discovery of drugs that modulate instability and that are therefore candidate modifiers of disease.

CONCLUSIONS
our study demonstrates that multiple tissue factors including metabolism, neurotransmitter, and cell cycle combine to reflect the level of somatic instability in different tissues. our findings also indicate that dna repair proteins act largely in a non tissue-specific manner. in addition, the combination of our instability quantification method and mathematical modeling is a powerful strategy that has allowed us, in an unbiased manner, to gain critical new insights into the tissue specificity of trinucleotide repeat instability in hd. it opens the door to widespread downstream applications with the potential to make significant advances in novel avenues for therapeutic intervention in both huntington's disease and trinucleotide expansion disorders in general.

