BACKGROUND
gene expression profiling has resulted in paradigm shift in the way that researchers and clinical investigators view breast cancer  biology. during the last years, several groups have evaluated the potential of gene expression profiles to improve bc prognostication. this has resulted in the identification of several gene signatures, most of them outperforming current clinico-pathological parameters in predicting clinical outcome .

one example is the genomic grade index  developed by our group  <cit> . the hypothesis beyond the development of this index was to improve bc grading and its prognostic value. this index includes  <dig> genes that are consistently differentially expressed between low and high histological grade breast tumors. of interest, the majority of them are related to cell cycle and proliferation. one of the major findings of that study was that ggi could assign intermediate histological grade tumors into two distinct subgroups whose gene expression profiles and clinical outcome was similar to the ones of low and high histological grade tumors respectively. in addition, ggi could identify two clinically relevant er+ subtypes with very distinct clinical outcomes in both systemically untreated and tamoxifen only treated bc patients  <cit> .

finally, comparative studies of the ggi with other prognostic gene signatures in the context of a large meta-analysis involving ~ <dig> bc patients suggest that most of these signatures have a similar prognostic performance which is limited to the er+ disease, and that the proliferation and cell-cycle genes represent the driving force of these signatures  <cit> .

in this study we aimed to transpose the ggi onto a qrt-pcr assay based on a minimal set of genes that could recapitulate in an accurate and reproducible manner the prognostic performance of ggi using both frozen and paraffin-embedded  tumor samples, to facilitate its use in clinical practice. furthermore, we investigated the performance of this assay to predict benefit to adjuvant tamoxifen in early bc patients or to first line tamoxifen in advanced bc patients.

RESULTS
development of the reduced genomic qrt-pcr grade index 
the first step in the development of the pcr-ggi was to identify a minimum number of genes that could recapitulate the performance of the original ggi.

to this end, we first tested the correlation of the expression values of several random combinations of minimum  <dig> genes, covering all phases of the cell cycle, with the original ggi. this correlation was performed using gene expression data from two publicly available microarray data sets namely the nki  <cit>  and vdx  <cit> . we selected a set of four genes  based on their high significant correlation with the original ggi  in the nki and vdx data sets respectively). we also selected  <dig> reference genes . although all housekeeping genes gave similar results for normalizing the data, the variance of the estimation of the housekeeping ct value was reduced by using the mean of these  <dig> reference genes .

the prognostic performance of this reduced gene set  was then compared to the performance of the original ggi in the nki and vdx data sets. this comparison revealed similar prognostic performances . of interest, the correlation values with the original ggi and the prognostic performances were not improved when additional genes were taken into consideration .

the second step in developing the pcr-ggi was to convert these four genes into a qrt-pcr index. to this end, we designed primers for the four selected genes as well as for four reference genes considering the sybr-based real-time pcr assay platform. we assessed the concordance between the microarray-derived ggi and the pcr-ggi measured on frozen and ffpe tissues using a series of  <dig> primary bc from which frozen, ffpe tissues and their corresponding microarray data were available, further referred as "ijbtest". a statistically significant correlation was observed between the expression levels of the microarray-derived ggi and the pcr-ggi assay using frozen samples  as well as ffpe samples  . similarly, a statistically significant correlation was found between the expression levels of the pcr-ggi derived from frozen and ffpe samples respectively .

interestingly, the correlations between the microarray-derived ggi and the pcr-ggi assay on frozen and ffpe samples were higher when the  <dig> genes were combined together compared to the individual genes .

prognostic performance of the pcr-ggi
to evaluate the prognostic performance of the pcr-ggi, we considered an independent population of  <dig> primary bc ffpe samples originated from patients consecutively diagnosed at the jules bordet institute between  <dig> and  <dig> . the clinico-pathological characteristics are summarized in table  <dig> 

*:uk = unknown.

the prognostic performances of the individual four genes  were compared to the one of the pcr-ggi and summarized in table  <dig>  the group of patients with high pcr-ggi scores was associated with a higher risk of recurrence than the group of patients with low pcr-ggi . however, this association was not significant but showed a trend towards significance in the multivariate analysis. indeed, when selecting the age of the patient, the size of the tumor, the centrally reviewed histological grade, the nodal status and the pcr-ggi as variables for the multivariate analysis using a backward stepwise selection for the identification of the covariates to be kept in the final cox regression model for distant metastasis free survival , only the nodal status  and pcr-ggi  were still present in the last step of the analysis.

as expected, histological grade  <dig> tumors  spanned the expression levels of pcr-ggi of histological grade  <dig> and  <dig> . similarly to ggi, pcr-ggi divided histological grade  <dig> tumors into two subgroups with distinct clinical outcome although of borderline significance .

since we previously demonstrated that the ggi was particularly performant at identifying high and low risk patients within the er-positive population  <cit> , we restricted our analysis to the er+ subpopulation of the "ijb95/96" cohort. in order to identify these er-positive patients, we evaluated er by qrt-pcr and defined a cut-off for positivity based on the binomial repartition of er score . sixty-four percent  of the samples were considered as er-positive. overall concordance with ihc data assessed on  <dig> ffpe samples  for which both ihc and qrt-pcr results were available was of 75% with a correlation of  <dig>  . when pcr-ggi was applied to these er+ samples, kaplan-meier survival curves and cox analyses revealed a significant association between a high risk of recurrence and a high pcr-ggi score .

several studies have demonstrated that the widely used proliferation marker ki- <dig> evaluated by ihc predicts clinical outcome  <cit> . we therefore evaluated the prognostic value of ki- <dig> by ihc in the ijb95/ <dig> series . there was no significant association between ki- <dig> and the risk of recurrence both when considering ki- <dig> as a continuous variable  or as a binary variable using the cut-off of >15%;.

assessment of the performance of the pcr-ggi in tamoxifen-treated bc patients
in order to assess a potential predictive value of the pcr-ggi for clinical benefit to tamoxifen, we evaluated its performance in three independent er-positive bc populations treated either with adjuvant tamoxifen only or with first-line tamoxifen for advanced disease.

i) er-positive bc patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen only
the potential value of the pcr-ggi to predict dmfs in tamoxifen-treated patients was first evaluated in a patient's series on which the original ggi was previously computed  <cit>  , offering the possibility to compare the performance of ggi and pcr-ggi . of note, 62%  of the samples originated from node-negative patients.

we observed a significant association between a high pcr-ggi score and a higher risk of recurrence . this performance appeared similar to the one of the original ggi  and superior to the one of the histological grade . the kaplan-meier curves for the histological grade, the pcr-ggi and the original ggi are illustrated in figure  <dig>  when selecting the age of the patient, the size of the tumor, the histological grade, the nodal status and the pcr-ggi as variables for the multivariate analysis using a backward stepwise selection for the identification of the covariates to be kept in the final cox regression model for dmfs, only the tumor size , the age of the patient , and pcr-ggi  were still present in the last step of the analysis.

the pcr-ggi was further applied to an independent population of  <dig> er-positive bc samples originated from node positive patients that received adjuvant tamoxifen for primary disease . again, we observed a statistically significant association between a high pcr-ggi score and a higher risk of recurrence . the kaplan-meier curves are illustrated in figure  <dig>  interestingly, a 3-years delay of recurrence was observed between the patients with low and high pcr-ggi.

the pcr-ggi remained significantly associated with dmfs in the multivariate analysis  together with tumor size , but not with the age of the patient. of note, the nodal status and the histological grade were not included in the analysis due to the node-positivity of all patients and the high number of missing values for the histological grade.

ii) er+ bc patients treated with first-line tamoxifen for metastatic disease 
the pcr-ggi was applied to an independent population of  <dig> er+ bc samples originated from patients that received first-line tamoxifen for advanced disease .

a statistically significant association was observed between a high pcr-ggi score and progression-free survival  ; disease progression after start of first-line tamoxifen being observed with a delay of  <dig>  months in the patients with low pcr-ggi compared to the patients with high pcr-ggi at 50% pfs . the pcr-ggi remained significantly associated with pfs in the multivariate analysis . we also observed a significant association between the pcr-ggi and response to tamoxifen as the patients with a low pcr-ggi score had a higher probability of response to tamoxifen . the pcr-ggi correctly classified  <dig> of the  <dig> non-responders patients in the high grade subgroup of samples  and  <dig> of the  <dig> patients with objective response  or stable disease lasting over six months in the low grade subgroup of samples  with an odds ratio of  <dig>  .

discussion
in this study, we have developed a qrt-pcr grade index  composed of four genes associated with cell cycle progression and proliferation initially included in the ggi  <cit> . this gene set includes mybl <dig>  kpna <dig>  cdc <dig> and cdc <dig>  which together cover all phases of the cell cycle. indeed, mybl <dig> encodes a nuclear protein involved in cell cycle progression; kpna <dig> is involved in the import of proteins to the nuclear envelope and acts as a regulator of cell cycle checkpoint mediators; cdc <dig> encodes a catalytic subunit of the highly conserved protein kinase complex known as m-phase promoting factor  which is essential for g1/s and g2/m phase transitions; and, cdc <dig> encodes a protein acting as a regulatory protein interacting with several other proteins at multiple points in the cell cycle.

we demonstrated that a quantitative assessment of a very small number of genes is sufficient to recapitulate the performance of the original ggi, especially in er-positive breast cancer. this could be explained by the fact that the expression levels of most genes of the ggi signature are highly correlated with one another. two out of the four genes included in our pcr-ggi signature were also present in a number of previously reported prognostic signatures; mybl <dig> was part of the recurrence score developed by paik et al.  <cit>  as well as the microarray signatures defined by naderi et al.  <cit>  and miller et al.  <cit> , whereas the kpna <dig> gene was present in the 76-gene signature of wang et al.  <cit> , which has been applied successfully on a cohort of node-negative estrogen receptor positive breast cancer patients to predict benefit of tamoxifen  <cit> .

we further showed that the averaged expression of the four selected genes evaluated by qrt-pcr using ffpe samples accurately recapitulates the prognostic performance of the ggi. moreover the pcr-ggi was conducted with success from  <dig> years old ffpe samples. fourteen percent of the samples have been excluded from the study and this number is expected to be lower using recent ffpe samples.

additionally, as illustrated in this manuscript, the pcr-ggi has several advantages which highlight its clinical relevance.

first, as illustrated previously for the ggi, the pcr-ggi is able to identify high and low-risk patients within the subgroup of patients with intermediate histological grade tumors, possibly improving treatment decision making for these patients.

second, as the ggi, the pcr-ggi is able to identify a higher proportion of early breast cancer patients at low risk of recurrence than do the clinical guidelines. this means that the number of patients that would receive unnecessary treatment could be reduced by applying this molecular assay.

third, the pcr-ggi is not subject to reproducibility and inter-observer variability problems such as the histological grading. moreover, the pcr-ggi's procedure developed at jules bordet was easily transferred at the josephine nefkens institute, rotterdam following some inter-laboratory tests which gave great confidence in the reproducibility of the assessment of the pcr-ggi. also, the pcr-ggi cut-off for positivity identified at the jules bordet institute was easily applied on the josephine nefkens institute assays.

fourth, the pcr-ggi can classify er-positive bc patients treated either with adjuvant tamoxifen only or first-line tamoxifen for advanced disease into clinically relevant subgroups. we first observed a statistically significant association between a high pcr-ggi score and a higher risk of recurrence in er-positive bc samples from patients that received adjuvant tamoxifen for primary disease across two different bc populations. we also observed a statistically significant association between a high pcr-ggi score and a higher risk of progression in er+ bc samples originated from patients that received first-line tamoxifen for advanced disease. however, the determination of er positivity might also play a role in the assessment of the performance of the pcr-ggi since we report here a discordance of 25% between ihc and rt-pcr assessment of er.

finally, the pcr-ggi has two practical advantages: 1/ it requires only very small amounts of routinely available ffpe samples, whereas the original ggi requires fresh-frozen material, and 2/ it allows the use of a sybr-based technology, instead of the specific taqman probes , providing the advantages of being easy to use and cheaper than specific probes. therefore, we might envisage that this test could be carried out in local certified pathology laboratories.

additionally, several studies have demonstrated that tumors with characteristics associated with poor histological grade and high proliferating index tended to respond better to chemotherapy  <cit> . as our signature was derived from the histological grade we might then hypothesize that the pcr-ggi not only quantifies the likelihood of bc recurrence in women with node-negative er+ bc, it might also predict the magnitude of chemotherapy benefit.

CONCLUSIONS
as for the ggi, the clinical potential of the pcr-ggi is obvious since: 1/ the three category of histological grading is replaced by a two-category grading clinically more relevant, 2/ it classifies er-positive bc patients into two clinically relevant subgroups, and 3/ the genes expression score is not subject to inter-observer variability as is the histological grade. additionally, the pcr-ggi presents the advantage that it can be evaluated on ffpe samples, which are more widely available than frozen samples.

