BACKGROUND
pollutants are present in aquatic environments in the form of complex mixtures whose single compounds may be not toxic, per se, at the considered concentrations  <cit> . although scientists generally have a good understanding of the toxicity of individual chemical pollutants, there is a great need to bridge the gap between our understanding of the toxic effects of exposure to individual xenobiotics and those effects from exposure to mixtures of such chemicals  <cit> . the toxic effects of mixtures are usually predicted from reference models based on non-interaction among the single chemicals, i.e. concentration addition  <cit>  and response addition  <cit>  have been established. several studies dealing in particular with classical ecotoxicological endpoints such as mortality and reproduction, have suggested the validity of both models as a first screening to analyze the toxicity of mixtures  <cit> . however a considerable part of mixture data  is not describable by such models, indicating a significant interaction among chemicals, leading to synergistic or antagonistic outcomes  <cit> . even if limited to binary mixture assessments, recently improved mathematical models have been proposed to describe such deviations  <cit> . however, the great challenge still remains of predicting such occurrences and providing mechanistic explanations on mixture toxicity.

mussels have been extensively used in biomonitoring projects through the application of a battery of physiological and cellular biological responses able to prove the occurrence of a stress syndrome and the biological risk associated with polluted environments  <cit> . recently, furthermore, transcriptomics approaches have been successfully applied to these species to unveil the molecular mechanisms of adaptation to both natural and chemical stressors  <cit> . with the advent of the post-genomic and second generation sequencing era, ecotoxicologists have enthusiastically embraced trancriptomic profiling as a tool to assess exposure to environmental stressors  <cit> . however, gene expression may not represent a direct marker of functional responses as only gene products and metabolites do represent the final cellular effectors recently, systems biology -a combination of high-throughput molecular disciplines- was proposed to improve the landscape of protective and non-protective responses occurring in cell/tissues of a given bioindicator species. this specific application is known as systems toxicology and is defined also as the study of perturbations of biological systems by chemicals and stressors as well as monitoring changes in molecular expression and conventional toxicological parameters  <cit> . a successful example is represented by the study of the non-model organism l. rubellus, from which was obtained a strong inference about the mechanistic effects of copper on earthworms  <cit> .

a first attempt on marine bivalves was proposed by  <cit>  who showed the benefit of the integration of biomarkers with gene expression changes to interpret the physiological status of specimens collected along a copper pollution gradient. notwithstanding, that work was limited by the assessment of a few stress genes. more recently, our research group has developed a high density  cdna array and used it to assess distinct molecular fingerprints in the tissues of mussels exposed either to model contaminants in laboratory conditions or collected from field sites challenged with different pollutant levels  <cit> .

we wondered whether transcriptomics and, in particular, a systems toxicology assessment may effectively represent a valuable approach for studying the biological effects of a mixture of pollutants and specifically to predict the interactions among its members, as recently proposed  <cit> . here we present results based on transcriptomics, physiological biomarkers  and toxicokinetics measurements obtained in the digestive gland tissue of the marine bivalve mytilus galloprovincialis exposed to a binary mixture of chemicals for four days. the toxic agents were selected as dissimilarly-acting toxicants from a panel of priority environmental pollutants within the framework of the european project nomiracle  <cit> : chlorpyrifos, a broad-spectrum organophosphate insecticide and nickel , an important heavy metal for its civil and industrial applications. chlorpyrifos represents one of the most utilized phyto-pharmacological products in the world for both crop protection and pest control  <cit>  it's present in the marine environment, even including biota, of the american coast since the early 1990's  <cit> . like other organophosphorus compounds, its mode of action is mainly based on the inhibition of the acetylcholinesterase system, both in vertebrate and invertebrate models  <cit> . in addition, several studies identified putative neurodevelopmental mechanisms that are independent of cholinesterase inhibition  <cit> . chp has been shown to interfere with different components of cell signalling  <cit>  and to affect oxidative stress parameters in the developing brain, leading to shifts in expression and function of antioxidant genes  <cit> . on the other hand, nickel is considered a dangerous pollutant, in particular for the recognized carcinogenic activity probably related to the production of oxidative dna damage and the inhibition of dna repair activity. furthermore, nickel can produce oxidative stress that depletes glutathione, activates ap <dig>  nf-kb and other oxidatively sensitive transcription factors. nevertheless, exact knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of nickel toxicity and carcinogenicity is still limited  <cit> . recently, a few studies reporting the ecotoxicological effects due to the joint ni and chlorpyrifos exposure in different model species were published as results of the nomiracle project  <cit> . here we report our original findings on mixture toxicity analysis using a systems toxicology approach in the marine mussel mytilus galloprovincialis.

RESULTS
experimental design for mixture toxicity assessment
in a preliminary set of exposures, mussels were subjected to increasing concentrations of either ni  or the organophosphate pesticide clorpyrifos-ethyl   for four days in aquaria . the effects on digestive gland lysosomal membrane stability  were evaluated on frozen cryostat sections and these data were used to calculate toxicity endpoints  through a log-logistic regression . lms represents a well known biomarker of stress which is considered a good predictor of the physiological status of mollusks  <cit> . therefore, this parameter was used as the guide biomarker in the mixture toxicity assessment. to this end, we implemented a fixed experimental design encompassing three different nominal dose levels of the single chemicals - <dig> ;  <dig> ;  <dig>  toxic unit  - and two equitoxic mixtures at nominal  <dig>  tu or  <dig>  tu. according to the concentration addition  model proposed by  <cit>  these toxic levels are obtained through the combination of, respectively, niec <dig>  plus clpec <dig>  or niec <dig> plus clpec <dig> 

shown are ni and chorpyrifos effective concentrations  and equivalent toxic units  for lysosomal membrane stability  obtained from the dose finding experiment . the dimensionless toxic unit  quantifies the relative contribution to toxicity of the individual chemical i in a mixture of n chemicals. conventionally, a tu is defined as the actual exposure concentration of a chemical divided by its ec <dig> .

physiological responses in bivalves exposed to ni/chlorpyrifos mixture showed antagonistic deviations from the reference model systems
the biological effects of exposure to the single chemicals and mixtures were evaluated through a battery of biological endpoints encompassing lysosomal responses in the digestive gland  and acetylcholinesterase activity in the gills . as expected, the lms assay showed a clear dose-response trend with a decrement of the hexosaminidase activity latency along with the increase of pollutant concentrations . an increased lysosomal/cytoplasm ratio was also observed . the lipid content rose dramatically at all ni doses while the biocide elicited a significant response only at the highest tested concentration . acetylcholinesterase activity was evaluated in the gills of bivalves as a specific biomarker of exposure to the organophosphate pesticide. about 80% inhibition and a typical threshold effect was ascertained in the case of chlorpyrifos exposure. however, a significant effect and a similar trend was also observed in tissues from ni exposures . our results from mixtures indicated that n-acetyl-beta-hexosaminidase latency times in destabilized lysosome membranes were higher than the expected values calculated according to either the concentration addition or the independent action  mixture toxicity reference system models . this antagonistic outcome was also confirmed for the other lysosomal responses evaluated in the digestive tissue, viz. organelle enlargement, lipid accumulation and the inhibition of the acetylcholinesterase activity in gills .

the mixtox software  <cit>  was utilized to evaluate antagonistic interactions in binary mixtures fitting experimental data to both the ca and ia reference models and their deviation models describing antagonistic interactions, either through the whole dose range  or varying across the dose levels . r^ <dig> represents the amount of the total data variance explained by each tested model. p-value represents the significance of data regression against the "null hypothesis" of no relationship between increasing doses and effects for the whole dataset. chi-test represents the p-value of the chi-square distribution test to assess if a significantly better fit is achieved by going to the next level of the nested models . the a models always provided a better description of the data than their respective parent ca or ia models, while there were no significant improvements by using models explaining a dose level dependent antagonism .

the results obtained from the battery of physiological markers were then integrated using an expert system able to rank the physiological status of bivalves in a five-level scale ranging from un-stressed to pathological  <cit> . the output provided a clear indication that  in mussels the stress level rose along with the concentration of the two chemicals and  animals exposed to mixtures presented a better health status index than those exposed to single chemicals at the same nominal degree of toxicity . we also studied the ability of mussels to eliminate toxicants after the exposure fitting chemical data into a toxicokinetics model, thus deriving the elimination constant for each condition .

shown are: k, the elimination constant for each tested condition empirically evaluated from model fitting. r <dig>  variance explained by the model. all conditions were tested at  <dig> nominal tu .

gene expression profiling in pollutant-exposed organisms
to obtain more clues on mixture toxicity mechanisms, we carried out dual-color hybridisation microarray analysis by means of a  <dig>  k cdna array  <cit>  in the mussel digestive gland . these data were then integrated with a real-time quantitative pcr  analysis of selected genes . gene expression profiles were evaluated in the digestive tissue of bivalves exposed to  <dig> nominal tu  as single chemicals and mixture. a total of  <dig> differentially expressed genes  were identified in at least one condition by means of moderated baesyan statistics . the largest molecular response was observed in the case of ni displaying up to  <dig> degs of which 64% were down-regulated. a different trend was instead reported for chlorpyrifos, with the least amount of degs, i.e.  <dig> of which 65% up-regulated. the effects of the mixture exposure rendered  <dig> degs, almost equally represented by up and down regulated features . the largest part of them  were unique genes, not shared with neither ni nor chlorpyrifos . multivariate statistical procedures were carried out on the whole set of  <dig> genes by means of hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis. these analyses clearly rendered two different gene expression profiles in tissues of ni- or clorpyrifos-exposed animals and a higher correlation between the mixture and the pesticide .

shown are: array_id, unique identifier; embl id, embl database gene identifier; description, b2go annotation; q-pcr, log <dig> mean relative expression level,  obtained by means of q-pcr analysis; m, relative expression level obtained by means of microarray analysis; b, bayes log odd, where b >  <dig> denotes a statistically significant differentially expressed gene in microarray analysis.

match indicates the absolute and relative frequency of accordance between microarray and q-pcr analysis for each class of treatments. a match was assigned whether  a pairwise comparison showed the same statistically significant  expression trend or  independently on the expression trend, when both analysis outcomes were not statistically significant. the ay <dig> gene was not present in the microarray and therefore it was not considered for this analysis.

relative expression levels were geometrically normalized against a  <dig> rrna ribosomal target and an invariant microarray gene, alkaline phosphatase. * , threshold cycle reallocation randomization test according to  <cit> . n.a., not available

shown are raw frequencies and -on brackets- absolute gene numbers in common between each single chemical and the mixture, or unique in the mixture ; raw frequencies and absolute common gene number with "same" and "opposite" trend between each single chemical and the mixture frequencies in first column were calculated on the basis of the total gene number observed in the mixture . in the other cases, these were computed with respect to the total number of degs 

real-time quantitative pcr was carried out to confirm microarray data and refine the relative expression levels of a selection of paralogue genes such as four chitinases, two metallothionein genes  and two ganglioside gm <dig> activator proteins, the latter involved in lysosomal lipid metabolism. moreover, another two genes implicated in lipid metabolic processes were selected to confirm the relevance of this pathway in exposed bivalves: hexosaminidase and apolipophorin precursor. an actin variant and the p53-like protein gene were also included in this survey. microarray and q-pcr analysis showed consistent outcomes in  <dig> out  <dig>  comparisons made on the three classes of toxic treatments, but chitinase and gm2-ap genes, in some cases, could not be confirmed . considering the high degree of identity of such sequences , it is likely that microarray probes could not provide a reliable assessment and therefore q-pcr outcome was further considered for the discussion of data. in mixture exposed tissues, q-pcr analysis could also confirm the up-regulation of the hexosaminidase gene which from microarray showed a positive, but not statistically significant, expression level value.

functional genomics analysis
the blast2go platform, a bioinformatic tool which statistically assigns gene ontology  terms to unknown genes based on sequence information and a rule-algorithm  <cit>  was utilized for the functional annotation of the mytilus galloprovincialis transcriptome represented on the array.  <dig> non-redundant mussel sequences obtained by tissue specific unbiased cdna libraries and deposited into the embl database were considered for the analysis.  <dig> sequences showed no detectable homolog in other organisms and therefore are orphan genes. another  <dig> sequences showed at least a blast-x hit, but no go terms were then associated. finally,  <dig>  mussel sequences were putatively annotated using go terms obtained from the first  <dig> blast-x hits  <cit>  or from protein domains obtained from the interpro database  <cit> . several basic biological processes were represented on the array, such as protein modification process, lipid catabolic process, protein amino acid phosphorylation, response to unfolded protein, cellular metabolic process, transcription, growth, etc.  <dig> sequences were associated with the go terms stress response. the annotation table was further used to implement a functional genomics analysis of gene expression data based on the enrichment of go terms associated with differentially expressed genes . our results showed that go terms were specifically associated with single chemicals. moreover, the mixture showed a relevant amount of unique go terms and a larger overlap with chlorpyrifos .

discussion
the basic concept for the description of a toxicological action of components of a mixture is based on the principle of non-interaction, which means that chemicals in the mixture do not affect the toxicity potency of one another or each other's probability to exert a toxic effect  <cit> . recent works focusing on the cumulative toxicity of ni and chp reported the occurrence of interactive effects at different levels of biological organization. an antagonistic interaction between the two chemicals on the locomotor activity of the zebrafish larvae was reported  <cit> , while authors in  <cit>  suggested a synergistic effect on the survival of the ground beetle pterostichus oblongopunctatus indicating species-specific responses. in mussels, metabolomic profiling of digestive gland tissues obtained from animals exposed to ni and chp was compatible with a reduction in toxicity  <cit> , arguing, therefore, antagonistic interactions. in the current study, we present for the first time in mussels, a systems biology assessment integrating the toxicokinetics and toxicodynamics of these chemicals and their mixture, thereby obtaining clues on the molecular mechanisms as the basis of pollutants interactions in mussel tissues.

ni and chlorpyrifos elicited similar biological responses but distinct molecular fingerprints giving rise to a complex transcriptional profile in mixture
the exposure of marine bivalves to two different chemicals and their mixture determined biological responses with discrete quantitative levels through which it was possible to rank the health status of the organisms according to their stress syndrome. according to the biomarker expert system outcome, animals exposed to the mixture exhibited a better health status compared to those exposed to single chemicals at the same nominal toxic dose . a particular evidence it was the suppressive effect of chlorpyrifos over the hyperlipidosis syndrome diagnosed in digestive gland lysosomes of ni exposed mussels . however, the occurrence of deviations from the common mixture toxicity reference models based on non-interaction was confirmed for all biomarkers, testing the significance through maximum likelihood analysis .

to get clues on interactions between heavy metal and pesticide toxicity, we first looked at the toxicokinetics but it did not provide an explanation for the attenuation in toxicity observed in mixture-exposed animals. in fact, looking at the parameters obtained by fitting the data into a kinetic model, the elimination constant  of chp in the absence/presence of the heavy metal is almost identical, indicating no changes in the metabolism of the biocide. moreover, the elimination constant of ni indicated an even lower degree of detoxification when chp was jointly administered to mussels . we conclude, therefore, that the decrease in toxicity observed at a biological level could not arise from interaction at a toxicokenetic level as reported by  <cit>  for the soil-dwelling collembolum folsomia candida.

as it is well known that the mussel digestive gland is the most active metabolic organ  <cit>  suitable for ecotoxicogenomic profiling  <cit> , we, therefore, focused our attention to this tissue. starting from nominal equitoxic effects on lysosomal membrane stability , we carried out transcriptomic profiling using the  <dig>  k cdna chip  and further gene ontology-based functional genomics analysis . these analyses provided a picture of the biological processes and toxicodynamics implicated in the response to the two pollutants and their mixture. in the case of single exposures, our results pointed out two distinct gene expression profiles . divergent gene expression profiles have already been reported in another model species, i.e. differentiating pc <dig> mouse brain cells challenged with the same chemicals  <cit> . in the case of the mixture, a complex pattern was observed which accounted for some genes inherited from the single chemicals -in particular chlorpyrifos- showing the same relative expression trend; a set of unique sequences and a fraction of genes showing an opposed relative expression trend with respect to that observed in single chemical exposures .

functional genomics of single chemical exposures
ni exposure increased the expression level of the metallothionein mt <dig> gene, while negligible effects were observed for the cognate sequence mt <dig> . in addition, transcriptomic profiling, by means of microarray analysis, allowed the detection of several genes which appear to be involved in epigenetic processes, as already reported for different heavy metals and also other environmental perturbations  <cit> . in fact, among the significant molecular features observed exclusively in ni-treated organisms there are those putatively involved in spliceosome assembly and the establishment of chromatin architecture, as outlined by the blast2go analysis . ni elicited the specific down-regulation of four different, small, nuclear, ribonucleoprotein which are homologous with components of the sm core complex  <cit>  and a poly-a-binding cytoplasmic  <dig> like-protein, involved in the half-life regulation of labile mrnas  <cit> . with the same trend of down-regulation, we found also histone h <dig>  histone h2a, histone aminotransferase  <dig> and a heterochromatin protein  <dig> family member which, in different organisms, is reported to bind histone h <dig> methylated at lys  <dig>  thus leading to gene silencing through heterochromatin promotion  <cit> .

moreover, ni modulated several genes involved in the regulation of biological processes such as proliferation, growth and apoptosis . examples are given by a b-cell translocation gene  <dig> homologue  with putative anti-proliferative functions  <cit> ; prohibitin  which is an ubiquitous protein with a controversial role in cell proliferation processes  <cit>  and biogenesis of mitochondria  <cit> ; a  defender-against-cell-death -like gene, identified as a negative regulator of programmed cell death in mammalian cells <cit>  and with a role in tissue regeneration in the marine scallop argopecten irradians  <cit> . finally, ni exposure elicited the modulation of genes involved in lipid metabolism with two genes whose expression was up-regulated: an apolipophorin putatively involved in the transport of lipids to hemolymph in insects  <cit>  -whose differential expression was also confirmed by q-pcr - and a fatty acid-binding protein  with a role in the proliferation process  <cit> . still concerned with lipid metabolism are two non-allelic variants of the gm <dig> ganglioside activator protein   whose expression levels were dramatically up- and down-regulated, respectively . gm2-ap are ubiquitous lysosomal proteins  <cit>  which, in mammals, act as substrate-specific co-factors of β-hexosaminidase-a for the hydrolysis of gm <dig> ganglioside, a class of glycolipids positive to oil-red staining. defects on both lysosomal β-hexosaminidase a and gm2-ap result in a fatal syndrome characterized by a hyper-accumulation of glycolipids in neuronal cells  <cit> . these two genes could represent the candidates for the strong increase of lipid accumulation in the digestive gland cells of mussels . the presence of two differentially expressed gm2-ap variants might represent a transcriptional mechanism to regulate lysosomal hexosaminidase activity, according to the physiological requirements of the organism. to this aim, it is important to point out that different gm2-ap expression patterns corresponded to different lipid disorder levels . the huge relative expression levels revealed by q-pcr would suggest a typical switch-on/off transcriptional regulation.

mussels exposed to chlorpyrifos exhibited a marked decrease in acetylcholinesterase activity in the gills, independently of the concentration tested  and a similar effect was also previously demonstrated in the digestive gland by  <cit> . acetylcholinesterase inhibition is a well-known biomarker of exposure to organophosphate pesticides in several organisms. however, in marine invertebrates, heavy metals may affect such enzymatic activity too  <cit> , and, in fact, we herein report the suppressive effect of ni . in what concerns the transcriptomic assessment, the most relevant biological process involved in response to clorpyrifos was represented by carbohydrate catabolic process, in particular that related to chitinase activity . in fact, up to  <dig> different highly homologous chitinase genes were found hugely up-regulated from microarray analysis. taqman assays set up for four of these sequences confirmed the relative expression levels . it is difficult to speculate on the biological meaning of such findings; however, in mussels and other marine invertebrates, chitinases play a role in digestion  <cit>  and moreover, in hemocytes, they participate in the innate immune response  <cit> . finally, go enrichment analysis identified a series of statistically over-represented developmental and differentiation processes, even if these were related to the down-regulation of a single myosinase-like-gene.

functional genomics of mixture toxicity
very little is known about the relationships between mixture toxicity and gene expression changes. some studies reported that the transcriptional patterns found in mixture-exposed samples were largely inherited from the single chemicals, suggesting additive or weak interactive effects at a molecular level  <cit> . conversely, other works reported much more important interactions so that exposure to a mixture determines -along with overlapping genes- a relevant number of sequences whose expression is exclusively modulated in this condition. these findings were observed in different biological models -rat, fish and crustacean- and for different types of chemical mixtures, i.e. binary, ternary, similarly- and dissimilarly-acting chemicals  <cit> . in our study, multivariate analysis of gene expression patterns showed that the molecular signature observed in mixture exposed samples is biased towards the effects of the pesticide . a similar evidence emerged also from the comparison of functional gene annotations in which go terms such as carbohydrate catabolic process, multicellular organismal development, anatomical structure morphogenesis, signal transduction were shared with the pesticide. nevertheless, the exposure to the mixture elicited the modulation of several unique genes giving rise to a molecular fingerprint which appears to be characterized by at least two original features: catalytic and dna-binding  activity . the direct comparison of go term distributions demonstrated that these attributes were driven neither by ni nor chlorpyrifos . this kind of composite signature bearing common and unique features is consistent with that found by our research group in mussels exposed to a binary mixture of neonicotinoids insecticides  <cit> . also vandenbrouck and coworkers  <cit> , studying transcriptomic effects of binary mixtures  in the freshwater cladoceron daphnia magna, found affected genes and pathways which were exclusive of the mixture exposure. more recently, another research group investigated in the worm caenorhabditis elegans the joint effects of chlorpyrifos and another organic phosphorus compound, diazinon, by means of gene expression techniques. they still concluded their work stating that the effect of a mix of low doses of the two biocides is not a summed effect of the single components, but at the same time, the similarities in the evoked pathways indicate the regulation of similar responses  <cit> . in general, these findings are in accordance with ours and therefore the presence of common and original responses seem to represent a common rule. we, however, identified one additional feature. in the present study, the three toxic treatments modulated the expression of some genes involved in lipid metabolism. this process was even significantly over-represented in ni and mixture exposed tissues . in compliance with vinuela and coworkers  <cit> , not all transcripts of this group were identical among the three treatments , except the two gm2-ap. these two transcripts, however, showed diametrically opposed expression levels and very huge fold change which cannot be explained simply by means of an additivity model . this finding seriously poses for the implication of similar pathways but with a different biological meaning and in fact the outcome of lysosomal biomarkers was markedly different . lipid metabolism was not a single case because these two molecular signatures were also characterized by a certain number of  genes with a possible role in apoptosis and cell proliferation  ; for ni: b-cell translocation gene- <dig> homologue, prohibitin, dad-1), which considering their putative role in other model species, might be in contrast at a functional level, i.e. pro-apoptotic and pro-proliferative, respectively. however, this hypothesis remains open and requires further investigations, as we did not evaluated specific functional assays for such processes.

CONCLUSIONS
we presented an analysis and comparison of the biological responses elicited by the exposure of marine mussels to two toxicants and a combination of both using a systems toxicology approach. our results demonstrated the occurrence of interactive effects giving rise to an unpredicted response and finally to a decrease of toxicity. we identified and confirmed the core features of mixtures' gene expression profiles and highlighted novel developments. furthermore, our findings underlined the fallacy of the "non-interaction" criterion usually applied to mixture toxicity prediction. this was particularly evident at a molecular level such as gene expression, thus putting a serious concern in the adoption of conventional mixture toxicity reference models in ecotoxicological surveys and risk assessment procedures.

this work demonstrated also that an integrated approach made of of transcriptomics, functional genomics, cellular and histological biomarkers can provide clues on complex biological responses, making links between different levels of biological organization, as we obtained in the case of lipid metabolism genes and lysosomal hyperlipidosis in the digestive gland.

future implementation and development of massive sequencing applications and high density microarrays will fill the gap of genomic/transcriptomic information which is actually the major limitation in the use of mytilus galloprovincialis as a model organism, thus providing more robust assessments into an ecologically relevant species ubiquitously present along the coastal marine environments.

