BACKGROUND
speciation and the maintenance of species boundaries are a major focus in evolutionary biology. the evolution of new species is continuously counteracted by the intermixing of individuals from adjoining populations  <cit> . reproductive barriers can prevent the admixture of incipient species and are of major importance in closely related species that occur in close geographic proximity  <cit> . when species occur in sympatry, prezygotic mechanisms leading to the correct mate choice often evolve before any post-zygotic mechanisms  can be established  <cit> . differences in signalling characters often initially evolve as a by-product of divergent ecological selection in allopatry  <cit> . when incipient species experience secondary contact, prezygotic isolation mechanisms can become enhanced as a result of selection against hybridization, a process termed reproductive character displacement  <cit> . this phenomenon has been documented for a variety of signalling characters, most commonly for acoustic communication. examples come from a variety of organisms including grasshoppers,  <cit> , crickets  <cit> , amphibians  <cit> , and birds  <cit> .

the genus zosterops is among the most species-rich bird genera worldwide and known for its high rates of microendemism and rapid speciation  <cit> . geography and geological history have been identified as the main drivers of speciation in the genus  <cit> . apart from differentiation driven by geographic isolation, intrinsic factors contribute to the species richness and often lead to a high level of endemism. for example, while many species of the genus are good dispersers  <cit> , other species, especially narrow endemics, are characterized by ‘behavioural flightlessness’, the behavioural reluctance to disperse longer distances despite being able to fly, leading to differentiation  <cit> . in addition, representatives of the genus zosterops seem to be morphologically and behaviourally dynamic. rapid phenotypic change has been documented in zosterops species and has been suggested to be an important feature of its greater potential for speciation  <cit> . if such rapid changes occur in reproductive characters, reproductive isolation can evolve quickly leading to speciation  <cit> .

zosterops is represented by various species across large parts of east africa that inhabit a diverse range of habitats, from the dry lowland savannahs to high mountain cloud forests  <cit> . where species have specific environmental niches, they generally do not overlap in their distributions. for example, winter temperatures limit the ranges of two sibling chickadee species in north america creating a dynamic hybrid zone  <cit> . similar patterns have been observed in the heliconius butterfly species-complex in south america  <cit> . another example is represented by white-eye bird species. while the mountain white-eye, zosterops poliogaster requires moist and cool climatic conditions, its lowland congener, the abyssinian white-eye zosterops abyssinicus is found in the dry and warm lowland savannahs, which surround the mountains  <cit> . these opposite ecological demands cause that both species occur in allopatry. however, in some areas, these taxa occur in parapatry . in a few areas, the distributions of these species overlap such that they occur in sympatry  <cit> . however, little is known about their interactions  in such locations. this mosaic-like distribution pattern with allopatric, parapatric, and sympatric situations provides an excellent system to test for potential effects on the species’ behaviour and evolutionary processses. we hypothesize that reproductive character displacement will lead to stronger call divergence in sympatric populations compared to allopatric populations; populations with parapatric occurrences are assumed to represent some call similarities in the wake of intermixing along the contact zone. in detail we explore the following questions:

 do the two bird species have distinct contact calls?

 are the two contrasting distribution patterns  reflected in divergence patterns of contact calls?

 does parapatry with the congeneric species have an effect on call characteristics?

 does sympatry with the congener lead to enhanced differences of call characteristics?

RESULTS
differentiation between taxa
contact calls of the two species were significantly differentiated from each other on the first two pc axes . the first two principle components explained  <dig> % of the total variance of the data . the highest and first peaks of calls had the highest loadings for pc <dig>  whereas the starting frequency had the highest loading for pc <dig>  . species differentiation was corroborated by discriminant function analysis ; out of the  <dig> z. abyssinicus calls,  <dig> were identified correctly ; for z. poliogaster  <dig> out of  <dig> calls were identified correctly . interspecific comparisons of call similarity of populations of both species from parapatric sites showed that their contact calls were more similar to each other than the calls of both species from the allopatric and sympatric populations .

shown are the loadings of the first three principle components explaining  <dig> % of the total variance.

call patterns within species – differentiation
in both species two pc axes were identified explaining the major part of the variance . the lowest frequency and the starting frequency had the highest loadings in z. abyssinicus, whereas the first and highest peaks had the highest loadings in z. poliogaster . anova on the first two pc axes indicated that populations of both species are differentiated from each other . tukey tests showed that the population differentiation in z. abyssinicus was strongly driven by the allopatric population at hunters’ lodge . in z. poliogaster, all populations were significantly differentiated for pc <dig> and pc <dig> . the highest intrapopulation variability was observed in the parapatric populations of mt. kasigau and mt. kulal.
z. abyssinicus 
 and 
z. poliogaster 
populations  within two dimensional acoustic pca space , convex hulls for both species exclude the respective sympatric populations.

for both species we found marked longitudinal  and latitudinal  trends in contact call patterns, while there was no clear distance decay in call pattern with geographic distance for either species  or for the whole dataset .

call patterns within species - acoustic space
the lowland and highland species significantly differed in acoustic space, i.e. in the variance of contact calls among individuals and among distinct populations . while parapatric and allopatric populations of z abyssinicus did not differ in contact calls, we found significant differences in z. poliogaster . the eigenvector ellipse space of the highland z. poliogaster is significantly larger  than that of the lowland z. abyssinicus, indicating the higher contact call variability among highland populations of z. poliogaster. this difference is linked to greater variability of the starting and the lowest frequencies and the frequency range in the highland z. poliogaster .

differentiation in sympatry
nairobi is one location where both species can be found sympatrically. the acoustic spaces of the sympatric nairobi populations of both species were outside the respective range of the conspecific populations as indicated by the convex hulls in figure  <dig> and the eigenvector ellipse areas in figure  <dig>  highest frequency and frequency range of the sympatric z. poliogaster population of nairobi differed significantly  from all other populations . frequency range and total call length differentiated the sympatric nairobi population of z. abyssinicus from the other conspecific populations . both results show a shift of the sympatric nairobi populations away from the typical call pattern of either species.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
acoustic signal evolution is influenced by features of the physical habitat, community composition, ambient noise, phylogenetic history, morphological and physical constraints inherent to the species  <cit> . our data suggest that several of these factors may be involved in the evolution of acoustic signalling in zosterops. the two zosterops species we studied have clearly distinct contact calls, mainly differing in the frequency range and the starting frequency of calls. further, most populations within the two species are differentiated from each other in features of their contact calls. differentiation was stronger in the isolated mountain populations of z. poliogaster than in the panmictic lowland z. abyssinicus. call patterns in both species show a geographic cline suggesting similar effects of environmental selection. when considering the absence or presence of the congener, parapatric populations have relatively similar contact calls. in contrast, the sympatric populations of z. poliogaster in the highland of nairobi shows the strongest differentiation in contact calls from the lowland z. abyssinicus suggesting reproductive character displacement. the sympatric z. abyssinicus population also differed from all conspecific populations and shows a distinct shift away from z. poliogaster with respect to total call length . in conclusion, it appears that both differences in local environmental conditions as well as selection due to co-existence with congenerics play an important role in the evolution of acoustic signalling in the genus. in the following we discuss these findings in detail.

species divergence
the two investigated species of zosterops are clearly differentiated in their contact calls . contact calls are considered an important, species-specific, social trait, as shown in previous studies for the genus zosterops, suggesting a function for the maintenance of flock structure as well as for mate recognition  <cit> . interestingly, the call patterns of some populations of z. poliogaster strongly overlapped with z. abyssinicus, but never in sympatry, indicating that divergent selection may be relaxed in non-overlapping populations.

population divergence
in addition to species differentiation, local populations of both species significantly differed in their calls, but the degree to which populations have diverged was different between the two species. in the lowland z. abyssinicus, most populations showed little or no divergence in acoustic parameters . in contras, local populations of the highland z. poliogaster were much stronger differentiated . these different intraspecific patterns could be explained by the contrasting distributions of the two species: zosterops abyssinicus is widely distributed in the lowland savannahs of east africa with strong gene flow between local populations and very limited genetic differentiation  <cit>  whereas z. poliogaster populations are geographically isolated with little gene flow leading to strong genetic and morphologic differentiation  <cit> . the strong acoustic differentiation is also in line with the findings of baker  <cit> , who studied the bioacoustics in two isolated zosterops populations and concluded that song patterns can evolve rapidly in this genus even across limited geographical space. however, whether the observed strong differentiation is the result of slight differences in local selective regimes or simply the product of drift cannot be inferred at this point.

in both species acoustic divergence follows geographic clines , but not geographical distance between sites . a correlation of longitude or latitude and acoustic parameters is a common finding in a variety of organisms . in katydids such clinal variation in song patterns has been interpreted to be the result of hybridization and selection along the geographical gradient  <cit> . while we found clinal variation in both species, the differences among local populations in relation to longitude and latitude are more pronounced in the mountain species. this is likely due to lower connectivity and therefore less individual exchange among mountain populations as compared with the interconnected populations of the lowland taxon. interestingly the clinal change is directed similarly in both species suggesting that similar environmental forces might be responsible. several studies have focused on the traits influencing the rates of the evolution of syllable frequencies in different latitudes, altitudes and environments  <cit> . analyses show that song frequency differences have evolved more rapidly at high latitudes, which may indicate an increased intensity of sexual selection  <cit> .

differentiation in geographic proximity and sympatry
besides the geographically isolated  populations of both species, we recorded and analysed contact calls from three locations where the two species occur in parapatry . our analyses indicate that calls of both species  are less different from each other than the average divergence found between both species. the call similarity in these parapatric populations might be the result of several processes: 1) if contact calls are a cultural trait and the species specific call patterns are learned rather than inherited, close proximity to a congener  might lead to the accidental admixture of acoustic signals among taxa during the imprinting phase, which has been shown for brood parasites  <cit> . mixed singing due to heterospecific copying rather than introgression has also been shown in flycatchers  <cit> . 2) alternatively, intermediate call patterns can be the result of occasional hybridization of two closely related species, if calls are genetically determined  <cit> . 3) a more recent study has suggested that interactions may occur more frequently between evolutionarily ‘old’ species; in such cases species interactions can drive phenotypic convergence across entire radiations  <cit> . in our case it is unknown whether contact calls are genetically fixed or learned. furthermore, the evolutionary age of the species cannot be determined with certainty, therefore, it is difficult to distinguish between these alternatives. phylogenetic analyses on the group are currently being undertaken and will allow testing of the latter hypothesis.

our analyses suggest that when both species occur in sympatry , the calls of each species show different deviations from the average call parameters. while for z. abyssinicus, coexistence has relatively little effect on its contact call, z. poliogaster exhibits a strong shift in call characteristics when compared to allo- and parapatric populations. the song pattern of the sympatric population does not overlap with the congener, and, represents the acoustically most distinct  population. in addition, the acoustic space of the sympatric population is smaller when compared to all other z. poliogaster highland populations or any population of z. abyssinicus. the picture changes when populations are found in sympatry. generally, sympatric species are rare in the genus zosterops, which has led to the suggestion that species diversity is limited by competition with congeners  <cit> . in systems with multiple closely related species, interspecific competition for signal space  <cit>  and selection against incorrect mate choice and hybridization  <cit>  can lead to reproductive character displacement. hence, if contact calls play a role in reproductive isolation in the system, it is expected that these species will have distinct calls when they occur sympatrically. this suggests that the coexistence with the congener leads to reproductive character displacement.

character displacement is a common mechanism to reduce the risk of hybridization when closely related species occur in sympatry with examples from crickets  <cit> , frogs  <cit>  and birds  <cit> . reproductive character displacement can either be symmetrical  or it can be asymmetrical   <cit> . a study of sympatric populations of tinkerbirds for example showed a displacement of song patterns in both sympatric species  <cit> . in contrast, reproductive character displacement in sympatric populations of chorus frog species was asymmetrical  <cit> . in this example the rarer species displaced their calls, whereas the more common species at the location remained stable  <cit> . in our study, only z. poliogaster, which likely has the smaller effective population size, showed character displacement, congruent with the previously described pattern of asymmetrical character displacement  <cit> . our observation of reproductive character displacement suggests that contact calls might be under sexual selection in the genus zosterops and could represent a prezygotic isolation barrier  <cit> . in addition, natural selection might further act to prevent hybridization because hybrids might be at a disadvantage as both species have different habitat preferences  <cit> . therefore, there might also be ecological selection against hybrids.

our study indicates distinct calls for the two white-eye species, with different intraspecific variances among local populations. these differences in their call variability reflect their contrasting spatial distribution, with strong disjunction in the highland z. poliogaster populations and large and interconnected populations in z. abyssinicus. contact calls of heterospecific populations in parapatry are more similar to each other if compared with both, allopatric and sympatric populations. in contrast, when the species occur in sympatry, reproductive character displacement appears to occur leading to strongly divergent call patterns compared to divergence in calls of allopatric or parapatric populations.

