BACKGROUND
restriction-modification  systems appear to play key roles in modulating gene flow among bacteria and archaea. this includes not only defense against bacteriophages
 <cit> , but also negative and positive modulation of interspecies gene transfers
 <cit> . because the restriction endonuclease  is potentially lethal to unmethylated new host cells
 <cit> , regulation to ensure pre-expression of the protective dna methyltransferase  is essential to the spread of rm genes. this is particularly true for type iip rm systems, in which the rease and mtase are separate, independently-active proteins
 <cit> . a substantial subset of type iip rm systems are controlled by an activator-repressor called c protein
 <cit> . in these systems, c controls the promoter for its own gene, and for the downstream rease gene that lacks its own promoter
 <cit>  . in tested c-protein-dependent rm systems, including pvuii, the c protein both activates and represses this promoter
 <cit> . in some cases, this process has been studied structurally
 <cit>  and by mathematical modelling
 <cit> . the c protein operators, called c boxes, have recognizable sequences with symmetrical elements upstream of the c orfs
 <cit> . thus mtase is expressed immediately after the rm genes enter a new cell, while expression of rease is delayed until sufficient c protein accumulates
 <cit> .

to study the variation in and evolution of this regulatory mechanism, we searched for rm systems closely related to the well-studied c protein-dependent pvuii rm system. the pvuii system was discovered and cloned nearly three decades ago
 <cit> , yielded the discovery of c proteins
 <cit> , and has been subject to structural
 <cit> , evolutionary
 <cit> , and detailed regulatory studies
 <cit> . pvuii thus represented a good starting point for studies on the evolution of the c protein-dependent regulatory mechanism.

unexpectedly, among the pvuii-orthologous rm systems that we found were several in which the c protein and rease genes were translationally fused. one of these, selected for further study, was the nsojs138i rm system from the bacterium niabella soli. we report here that the nsojs138i fused protein is produced, and is functional for both c protein and rease activities.

RESULTS
identification of rm systems containing genes orthologous to pvuiir
we began our studies on evolution and variation of rm regulation by identifying rm systems that contained genes orthologous to the pvuii rease gene, pvuiir. we have identified such rm systems in the past
 <cit> , and the use of the rease gene for such searches yielded the best results, in terms of returning the most clearly orthologous systems. this is because the c proteins have substantial sequence identities even when coming from unrelated rm systems
 <cit> , and the mtases similarly have well-conserved sequence motifs
 <cit> . however, sequence and structural similarities among reases are quite limited
 <cit> .

we used the amino acid sequence of r.pvuii  as the search seed , and examined all available bacterial and archaeal genome sequences  using the program tblastn
 <cit> . the aligned rease sequences are shown in figure s <dig> , and an unrooted tree indicates their relatedness in additional file
1: figure s <dig>  the regulatory regions from these systems are shown in figure 
1b. of ten rm systems identified , nine were like pvuii in that they also contained a c protein gene and had the mtase gene divergently oriented from that of c and the rease .

interestingly, we found a pvuii-orthologous system that lacked the c protein gene altogether, in the gram-positive clostridium-related family lachnospiraceae. in this rm system, the mtase and rease genes are convergent rather than divergent, though there are numerous examples of c-regulated rm systems with convergent orientations
 <cit> . not surprisingly, there is no significant sign of c-protein binding sites  in the lachnospira sequence . using this rease aa sequence as a search seed revealed a closely-related rm system lacking a c gene in the gram-positive genus streptococcus . this is also shown in figure 
1b, and also lacks obvious c boxes. its regulatory region exhibits no significant similarity to the one upstream of the lachnospira rease gene , even though the lachnospira and streptococcus rease amino acid sequences are closely related . it could be informative, with respect to our understanding of how the regulation of these rm systems evolves, to know how these two systems are controlled and whether they use the same mechanisms.

to our surprise we also found that, in two of the other pvuii-orthologous rm systems, the c protein and rease genes are translationally fused . furthermore, using these fused genes as search seeds, we identified three additional rm systems. the set of five r.pvuii-orthologous fused genes, along with the two unfused pvuii proteins for comparison, is shown in figure 
 <dig>  the c-orthologous portions of these five proteins range from 35-54% identity to c.pvuii . the rease portions of c-rease fusions range from 50-69% identity to r.pvuii, and are not all phylogenetically clustered, suggesting that fusion may have occurred more than once . specifically, the three cyanobacterial rease fusions very probably occurred separately from the mru and nso fusions, which in turn may or may not have been independent from one another.
 <dig> legend. at the lower right, the numbers indicate % amino acid identity  or similarity  for each rm system c or rease  portion to the corresponding pvuii polypeptide.

these fused systems come from diverse bacteria: three are from genera in the phylum cyanobacteria , one is from the phylum deinococcus-thermus , and one from the phylum bacteroidetes . the three cyanobacterial fusion proteins have a ~ <dig> aa linker region between the c protein and rease regions, that is not present in the meiothermus or niabella fusions; among the conserved positions present in all three of the cyanobacterial linker regions are two glu, three thr, and three pro. the three cyanobacterial fused systems also share features in their regulatory regions, including a putative c box well upstream of the usual position . it is possible that this increased c box spacing is needed to accommodate dna complexes with the fused proteins.

the rm database rebase
 <cit>  includes regularly-updated automated searches for reases among dna sequences. one of the fusions we found was originally noted in rebase , and the rest were detected while this work was in progress but not notated as involving c-rease fusions . we have uniformly adopted the rebase nomenclature for these rm systems.

isolation of genes for fused rm systems and their rease activity
the central question regarding these c-rease fusions is whether or not they are active. there are numerous examples of rm systems, identified through sequence comparisons, that do not produce catalytically active proteins
 <cit> . we focused on two of the fused rm systems, isolating the meiothermus ruber mru1279i genes by amplification from genomic dna , and having the niabella soli nsojs138i genes synthesized. we were unable to detect rease or mtase activity from the sequence-confirmed m. ruber clones , possibly due to poor expression in e. coli and/or improper folding of the protein at the lower e. coli growth temperature , though cell extracts were tested at the optimum for m. ruber growth 
 <cit> .

in contrast, extracts from e. coli cultures carrying the n. soli genes gave obvious rease activity that indicated a specificity indistinguishable from that of pvuii rease. this was expected, given the sequence similarity . however, the nsojs138i c-rease fusion exhibited much more stringent activity requirements than r.pvuii when they were tested at four temperatures in each of four buffers . specifically, r.pvuii was active in 15/ <dig> tested conditions, while the fusion was active in 5/ <dig>  in particular, nsojs138i was inactive at  <dig> and 42°c in all tested buffers, while pvuii was active in all buffers at those two temperatures. nsojs138i was active in three buffers at 32° and two buffers at 37°c , and serial dilution indicated that, at 32°c, nsojs138i was most active in nebuffer  <dig> . these experiments used  <dig> u of pvuii from a commercial supplier; this is equivalent to ~ <dig> ng of pvuii rease protein
 <cit> . in comparison,  <dig>  μg of nsojs138icr protein was used . differences from r.pvuii could be due to the presence of the fused c portion at the amino ends of each subunit, to the sequence differences between the pvuii and nsojs138i rease portions , or a combination of the two factors. the c-terminal his tag might also play a role, though it has little effect on r.pvuii.

production of cr.nsoj138i as a fusion protein
the sequence of the nsoj138i c-rease clearly indicates that a single fused polypeptide should be produced. however, it is possible that translational frameshifting
 <cit>  could result in the production of free c protein , or that proteolytic processing could result in both free c protein and free rease. in particular, the translational frameshifting is suggested by two features of the dna sequence in the junction region : one is a short sequence that has been associated with − <dig> translational frameshifts
 <cit> , and the other is a nearby stop codon in the − <dig> reading frame.

to test for these possibilities, we added a his <dig> tag to the amino or carboxyl end of the fusion protein, expressed the tagged proteins from a strong inducible promoter, partially purified cell extracts on affinity columns, and resolved the column eluates on sds-polyacrylamide gels. figure 
4b shows the coomassie stained gels next to western blots probed with anti-his <dig> antiserum, while additional file
1: figure s <dig> shows the amino-tagged protein isolated in the presence of protease inhibitor pmsf. translational frameshifting would result in a ~ <dig> kda polypeptide in the extracts with amino-tagged fusion , and we see no evidence for that product. we cannot rule out the possibility that frameshifting occurs in the native host , or in e. coli under different growth conditions. nevertheless, the protein preparation used for the assays shown in figure 
 <dig> was partially purified via a his <dig> affinity tag at the carboxyl end, and together with the results shown in the lower right panel of figure 
4b strongly suggest that the intact fusion protein is catalytically active.

in vivo test of cr.nsoj138i for c protein activity
based on comparison to pvuii and other previously-studied c-dependent rm systems, we identified candidate c boxes upstream of the c-rease fusions, including nsoj138i . we also examined this region of the nsoj138i sequence for putative bacterial promoters
 <cit> , with a candidate  selected based on both its sequence and its position relative to the putative c boxes. a  <dig> bp sequence, including the putative c boxes and promoter , was cloned upstream of a reporterless lacz gene, in an e. coli strain that also carried Δlacz and the nsoj138icr gene under control of t <dig> rna polymerase . in this strain, iptg induction leads to production of t <dig> rna polymerase, which results in production of cr.nsoj138i . if cr.nsoj138i activates the putative promoter region, β-galactosidase  activity will be increased. we carried out two independent experiments to test this. first, iptg was added to growing cultures with or without the promoter-lacz fusion plasmid, and samples taken over time showed a clear induction . we also grew cultures under conditions approximating steady-state, where the iptg  was in the culture medium for at least  <dig> generations, and the slope of the activity vs. culture od plot is a sensitive measure of expression. as shown in figure 
5d, we observed a 23-fold increase in lacz activity in response to production of cr.nsoj138i. this presumably under-represents the actual extent of activation due to combined activation and repression; in the pvuii system, altering the repression-associated c box leads to a huge increase in expression
 <cit> . these results indicate that the fusion is active as a c protein.

discussion
three classes of rm systems that include r.pvuii orthologs
in attempting to understand the evolution of regulation in c-dependent rm systems, using pvuii as a model, we searched for genes specifying proteins related to r.pvuii. we and others have used this approach to assess the genetic mobility of rm systems
 <cit> , but our purpose here was to examine variation in regulatory mechanisms. searching for c protein orthologs of unusual size might reveal more fusion proteins, but for our purposes suffers from two problems. first, as reases are highly varied in sequence and structure
 <cit> , it would be difficult to be certain that the larger c-related proteins were in fact c-rease fusions. second, as we are interested in regulatory variation, requiring the presence of a c protein would bias the search. in fact, we found three classes of rm systems containing r.pvuii orthologs : classic pvuii-like systems with independent c and rease proteins, c-rease fused systems such as nsoj138i, and systems lacking c proteins altogether. we also demonstrated that the c-rease fusion of nsoj138i was active as both a rease and as a c protein.

formation of c-rease fusions
the occurrence of active translational fusions between reases and regulatory proteins has not previously been reported, though automated annotations have indicated the possibility. the standard genetic relationship between c and rease genes should facilitate fusion. specifically, in the great majority of c protein-dependent rm systems, the c gene is upstream of and in the same orientation as the rease gene; they often overlap . in the case of the pvuii-orthologous systems, we expected the c-rease fusions to exhibit rease activity, because r.pvuii tolerates synthetic fusions to yield an active single-chain pseudo-homodimer
 <cit> , in which one of the pseudo-monomers has the other fused to its amino end; in addition, r.pvuii with an amino-terminal fusion to maltose-binding protein is active
 <cit> . with respect to carboxyl-terminal fusions to c proteins, it is noteworthy that a structural subclass of these proteins has two additional helices  at its carboxyl end
 <cit> . we cannot rule out the possibility that, in the native host , some independent expression of the two proteins occurs; however the important point here is that such separate expression is not essential as the fusion protein exhibits both activities.

while c-rease fusions have not previously been characterized, other types of rease fusions have. one class, for example, involves natural and synthetic fusions of the rease and mtase polypeptides
 <cit> . this ability to form a variety of active fusions illustrates the remarkable flexibility and modularity of rm systems.

implications of c-rease fusions
the fact that active c-rease fusions can and have formed is intrinsically interesting for what it indicates about the proteins involved. however an equally important question is what  advantage might be conferred by this arrangement. a key difference between c-rease and mtase-rease fusions is that, in the case of c and type iip reases, both proteins function as dimers . thus mtase-rease fusions are expected to dimerize via the rease portions to yield a dually-active protein, but the c-rease fusions shown in figure 
 <dig> presumably have to dimerize both the c and rease portions to exhibit both activities. this could occur in three ways.

first, the c-associated and rease-associated dimerization interfaces on one fusion polypeptide could both interact at the same time with those on a second fusion molecule . symmetry rules would make this dependent on a linker region of sufficient length and flexibility. looking at the c-rease junction regions in figure 
 <dig>  it seems quite unlikely that two molecules of mru  or nso  could dimerize both c and rease portions at the same time; for the cyanobacterial fusions this seems less unlikely due to the ~ <dig> additional aa between the two portions.

second, the two interfaces could dimerize with two different polypeptides, resulting in a concatameric chain . this second model is not mutually exclusive with the first or third models. it is not clear what benefit chain formation would have, but it is at least theoretically possible at higher protein concentrations, or if the two interfaces have similar kd values. for comparison, however, the dimerization interface for r.pvuii is ~ <dig> Å <dig> <cit> , while that for a c protein  is ~ <dig> Å <dig> <cit> .

third, and perhaps most interesting, is that the two portions dimerize competitively . that is, a pair of fusion polypeptides can form either active rease or active c protein at a given moment, but not both simultaneously. if this competitive dimerization model is true, the results would depend on the relative affinities of the c and rease dimerization interfaces, and would have implications for the relative timing of mtase and rease appearance after the rm system genes enter a new host cell. if the c interface were stronger, this would minimize formation of substantial amounts of active rease early, when low amounts of cr gene transcription were occurring, but increase the sharpness of the induction threshold. on the other hand, if the rease interface were stronger than the c interface , there would be early appearance of small amounts of rease activity, but it would take longer for the positive feedback loop to cross the threshold for high expression of the fusion gene, giving more time for protective methylation to occur. either way, this competitive dimerization model seems to provide the most obvious  hypotheses of the three interaction modes for possible selective advantages of forming c-rease fusions.

CONCLUSIONS
rm systems closely related to pvuii  have diverse regulatory mechanisms. most resemble pvuii in having a separate regulatory  protein, but we found two that lack c proteins and five in which the c and rease proteins are fused. one of these fusion proteins, from the bacterium niabella soli, is active both as a rease and as a c protein. fusions between c proteins and reases have not previously been characterized. these results reinforce the evidence for modularity among rm system proteins, and raise important questions about the possible selective advantages of c-rease fusion, including implications of these fusions on rm system expression kinetics.

