BACKGROUND
the use of microarrays to determine global transcriptional profiles is a valuable and widely-used tool for understanding the regulation of biological systems  <cit> . several microarray platforms are used for these studies, including spotted arrays  and in situ synthesised arrays including agilent sureprint and affymetrix genechip arrays. genechip arrays have a number of advantages over other arrays. for example, the uniformity and reproducibility of data from genechip arrays facilitates the curation of large data sets and subsequent inter-experimental comparisons  <cit> . each gene depicted on a genechip array is represented by up to  <dig> probe-pairs, with each probe-pair consisting of a  <dig> base oligo perfect-match  probe, designed to bind perfectly to the gene sequence, and a  <dig> base oligo mis-match  probe, which contains a mis-match base at the 13th base position, designed to measure non-specific binding  <cit> . this contrasts with the single cdna or oligo probe used to assay a gene on most other arrays. however, since several signal values are generated for each gene, it is more complex to produce a single expression value for each gene, as probes within a probe-set may not have similar signal intensity due in part to the different physical hybridisation characteristics of individual probes  <cit> . several normalisation algorithms are used to amalgamate probe signal values and generate a single expression value for each gene  <cit> . the affymetrix system typically uses the microarray suite  or its successor genechip operating system  to generate the gene signal values. the expression value is calculated using the "one-step tukey's biweight algorithm", which weights the signal intensities from individual probes based on their distance from the median signal intensity of the probe-set  <cit> . other normalisation algorithms have been developed that use the signal intensities from all the arrays in an experiment to determine gene expression values. these include "model-based expression indexes"  <cit>  and the "robust multiarray average"  algorithms  <cit> . with these methods, the probe response pattern across all genes is fitted across all the arrays used in an experiment and a robust estimate of the background signal is modelled and the data adjusted accordingly. these models have been developed further to account for the physical binding properties of the probes. examples of these models are "positional-dependent-nearest-neighbour model"  <cit>  and gc-rma  <cit> .

the design of affymetrix genechip arrays also enables the transcriptional profiling of species for which the arrays were not designed  <cit> . for example, hammond et al.  <cit>  used a mixed physical and bioinformatic method, which involved hybridising genomic dna  from a species onto a genechip array of a heterologous species. a parser script, written in perl, was developed to generate probe-masking files by removing probe-pairs whose pm probe signal intensity value was below a user-defined gdna hybridisation intensity threshold. these probe-masking files, containing the retained probe-pairs, were then used for analysis of transcriptional data. using this technique increased the sensitivity of using an arabidopsis ath <dig> array to study transcriptional responses of brassica oleracea to phosphorus stress  <cit> . this technique also allowed the shoot transcriptional profiles of two closely related brassicaceae species, thlaspi caerulescens and t. arvense to be compared more satisfactorily  <cit> . the technique has also been used with human chips to analyse several heterologous animal species such as horse, sheep and guinea pig .

the aim of this study was to determine if gdna-based probe selection can improve estimates of gene expression in homologous species transcriptome analyses. we hybridised gdna from arabidopsis thaliana and rice  to the affymetrix arabidopsis ath <dig> and rice genome genechip arrays respectively. only those probe-pairs whose pm probe hybridised to gdna above defined signal intensity thresholds were retained and these were used to reanalyse previously published transcriptome data sets. two published studies of arabidopsis shoot development from the atgenexpress project  <cit> , and six technical replicates of pooled rice rna spiked with two different concentrations of bacterial control genes  were reanalysed using this approach. probe selection based on gdna hybridisation was also compared to the random removal of probe-pairs. probe selection increased the number, and altered the identity of genes identified as significantly differentially expressed in the arabidopsis study and optimised the analysis of pooled rice rna.

this mixed physical and bioinformatics approach can be applied post-experiment and is applicable to all species for which affymetrix genechip arrays have been developed including human chips.

RESULTS
genomic dna hybridisations and probe selection
the aim of the study was to investigate the effects of using a mixed physical and bioinformatics probe-masking approach on the study of the transcriptomes of two species. arabidopsis thaliana and rice gdna was hybridised to the affymetrix arabidopsis ath <dig> and rice genome genechip arrays respectively. a probe-pair was selected if its perfect-match  gdna hybridisation signal intensity was greater than a series of defined thresholds , using a .cel file parser script written in perl  <cit> . the probe-pairs retained in the .cdf files had good homology to the gdna as defined by their gdna signal intensities, and were used to analyse published transcriptome data at the defined thresholds.

the arabidopsis ath <dig> genechip array contains  <dig>  probe-sets, representing approximately  <dig>  genes. as expected, arabidopsis gdna hybridised well to the ath <dig> genechip array. the retention of probe-pairs in the probe-mask files declined at higher gdna hybridisation intensity thresholds . as expected, the number of probe-sets retained in the probe-mask files declined at a slower rate than the number of probe-pairs retained at higher gdna hybridisation intensity thresholds . these results are consistent with those obtained by hybridising gdna from b. oleracea,t. caerulescens or t. arvense to the arabidopsis ath <dig> array  <cit> . the retention of probe-pairs at higher gdna hybridisation intensity thresholds was lower in one of the three arabidopsis replicates. this may be due to technical rather than biological variation since gdna should be consistent when isolated from the same plant genotype. notably, the three arabidopsis replicates had a spearman's similarity measure of  <dig>  as calculated by the condition tree function in genespring gx . whilst it may be feasible to use model-based normalisation strategies to adjust for probe-level differences in gdna hybridisation intensities between biological replicates, we have adopted a more conservative probe-masking strategy. this strategy was based on retaining only those probe-pairs whose pm gdna hybridisation intensity was sufficiently high in all three biological replicates.

the affymetrix rice genome array is designed to analyse  <dig>  oryza sativa cv. japonica and  <dig>  o. sativa cv. indica transcripts  <cit> . genomic dna was extracted from one japonica  and two indica varieties . as with arabidopsis, the rice gdna hybridised well to the array. the retention of probe-pairs and probe-sets decline at higher gdna hybridisation intensity thresholds . the three replicate rice gdna hybridisations produced similar results across the range of gdna hybridisation intensity thresholds.

these data show that in both arabidopsis and rice, hybridisation efficiencies between individual pm probes and their target transcript vary within and between probe-sets. variation in hybridisation efficiencies could be due to the physical binding properties of probes and the number of targets within the genome. for example, hybridisation efficiency is reduced when probes and their targets form secondary structures, when probes have unresponsive binding affinities, when interactions with fluorescent labels are unfavourable, and when non-specific binding occurs  <cit> .

analysis of data sets from the atgenexpress project
the atgenexpress project has produced a large quantity of high-quality gene expression data for the model plant arabidopsis  <cit> . it includes genechip array data from developmental time-course experiments and experiments in which plants were subjected to hormones, abiotic or biotic stresses. two shoot developmental time-course experiments from the atgenexpress project were reanalysed here using a gdna based probe selection: data set a, in which different aged rosette leaves  were taken from  <dig> day old plants, and data set b, in which pooled rosette leaves were taken from  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> day old plants. all conditions comprised three biological replicates. data sets a and b were filtered for genes that were differentially expressed between one or more conditions within each experiment using probe-mask files generated at different gdna hybridisation intensity thresholds.

for data set a, the number of genes identified as significantly differentially expressed increased slightly, and then decreased, as a function of the gdna hybridisation intensity threshold used in the probe-mask file . this observation is consistent with transcriptome analysis of other brassicaceae species using the ath <dig> genechip array, when probe-mask files based on the hybridisation of heterologous species gdna to the ath <dig> genechip array were used  <cit> . a similar pattern was observed when data set b was analysed .

in addition to affecting the number of genes identified as significantly differentially expressed, gdna-based probe-masks also affected the identity of genes significantly differentially expressed between treatment conditions in the arabidopsis data sets a and b . thus, the number of genes identified as differentially expressed  in the absence of a probe-mask were expressed as a proportion of the sum of all genes differentially expressed  both with and without probe-masks. at low gdna hybridisation intensity thresholds, and for both data sets a and b, genes significantly  differentially expressed in the absence of a probe-mask declined markedly as a proportion of the sum of all genes significantly differentially expressed  both with and without probe-masks, before returning to unity at gdna hybridisation intensity thresholds > <dig> . this decline in the proportion of genes represented in the analysis of data without probe-masking corresponds to slight increases in the total number of genes differentially expressed when probe-masking was used . therefore, gdna based probe selection affects both the number and the identity of genes which are identified as significantly differentially expressed in these two arabidopsis experiments.

the effects of gdna-based probe removal on estimates of gene expression differences was compared to the effects of random removal of probe-pairs using arabidopsis data set b. software to simulate random probe-pair removal  has been developed and is freely available  <cit> . random probe-pair removal of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 90% of probe-pairs was repeated three times on one of the arabidopsis gdna .cel files. thus, the random removal of, for example, 50% of the probe-pairs  from arabidopsis ath <dig> genechip should remove an average of  <dig> probe-sets . here, in three random simulations of 50% probe-pair removal,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  probe-pairs were removed  and the corresponding probe-set removal was  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 

unsurprisingly, random probe-pair removal also affected probe-set expression estimates. random probe-pair removal increased the number of genes identified as significantly differentially expressed  compared to corresponding gdna-based probe-masks, especially when a large proportion of the probe-pairs were removed from the analysis . however, based on the assumption that gdna hybridisation will tend to remove less-informative probe-pairs compared to a random probe selection strategy, due to differences in probe-level hybridisation efficiencies, we can hypothesise that gdna based probe-masking is a more appropriate analysis step. consistent with this hypothesis, random probe-removal of <40% of all probe-pairs decreased the number of genes identified as significantly differentially expressed  by > ± 2-fold between the  <dig> and 14-d old rosette leaves in data set b compared to corresponding gdna-based probe-masks . furthermore, probe-sets identified as significantly differentially expressed using a gdna-based probe-mask were more similar to the identity of probe-sets significantly differentially expressed in the absence of a probe-mask, than were those probe-sets identified using a corresponding random probe-removal mask . the hypothesis that targeted gdna-based probe-masking is an appropriate analysis procedure should now be tested for further ecotypes and for other species using the software developed in this study  <cit> .

an alternative to gdna based probe selection is to filter out probes based on poor rna hybridisation intensities  <cit> . thus, when data from the human hg-u133a genechip array was analysed using a probe-mask file based on rna hybridisation intensity, the number of probe-sets called 'present' by the mas  <dig>  algorithm increased  <dig> -fold  <cit> . however, in contrast to gdna-based probe selection strategies, selection of probes based on the rna hybridisation signal will bias the anlaysis towards those transcripts which are most abundant in the sample used.

analysis of arabidopsis thaliana reference genes from atgenexpress project
a set of references genes whose expression varied little between tissue types and during development has been reported for the atgenexpress data  <cit> . these genes were identified by calculating the percentage coefficient of variation  of all genes across all samples; genes with the lowest % cv and with low expression values were selected and confirmed by real-time pcr  <cit> . the % cv of five of these reference genes , whose %cv were the lowest across the atgenexpress developmental series  <cit> , were calculated across the range of gdna hybridisation intensity thresholds for data sets a and b. in general, the % cv was lowest when a gdna hybridisation intensity threshold of  <dig> to  <dig> was used . the expression values for the five genes also varied when the gdna probe-selection method was applied. for example, with data set a , at1g <dig> expression value decreases from  <dig>   to  <dig>   before increasing again to  <dig>  . the expression values of this gene in all the leaf samples of this data set follow the same pattern, with the value first decreasing then increasing. in contrast a different pattern is seen with data set b. the expression value  increases as the gdna hybridisation intensity threshold increases, from  <dig>   to  <dig> . these results demonstrate that the probe-selection method can have a profound effect on the expression value obtained for individual genes and illustrates how the identity of genes identified as significantly differentially expressed will differ when a probe-selection method is applied.

analysis of a rice data set
to further investigate whether transcriptome analysis can be optimised by selecting probe-pairs on a genechip array that hybridise well to gdna from a homologous species, a rice genome genechip array data set was reanalysed. the data set was obtained from the plexdb database   <cit> . this data set consists of six hybridisations of the same pooled rna sample, with three of the samples spiked with bacterial control transcripts at a concentration of  <dig>  pm and three samples spiked with bacterial control transcripts at a concentration of  <dig>  pm. in total, four bacterial transcripts, represented by nine probe-sets, were present in the spike mixture. since there are three generations of the probe-sets  present on the array, a total of  <dig> probe-sets were used in the analysis. the data was analysed by calculating the ratio of the bacterial control genes between genechip arrays spiked with  <dig>  pm bacterial control transcripts and genechip arrays spiked with  <dig>  pm bacterial control transcripts at a range of gdna hybridisation intensity thresholds. as the gdna hybridisation intensity threshold increased, the ratio of the control genes from the two pools of differentially-spiked samples increased to the expected value of  <dig> at a gdna hybridisation threshold of  <dig>  before declining again as the gdna hybridisation intensity threshold was increased still further . similarly, the intercept of the linear regression increased towards the expected value of  <dig>  before decreasing again as the gdna hybridisation intensity threshold increased .

CONCLUSIONS
the results presented here demonstrate that a probe-selection method can be used to optimise transcriptome analyses. genomic dna from a homologous species can be hybridised to its respective genechip array, and a subset of probe-pairs can be selected based on the hybridisation efficiency between the pm probe and its target sequence. this subset of probe-pairs can then be used in the subsequent transcriptome analysis. the change in apparent expression levels can lead to differences in the number and identity of genes identified as significantly differentially expressed between experimental conditions. the method can alter the apparent expression level of individual genes although the effect is not consistent across all genes. the approach can be applied post-experiment and is applicable to all species for which affymetrix genechip arrays have been developed.

