BACKGROUND
iron  is the micronutrient required in the largest amount by plants and plays a role in key metabolic processes such as respiration, chlorophyll biosynthesis and photosynthesis. this element is a component of the heme group and fe-sulphur clusters and other binding sites; for its chemical proprieties it is involved in many redox reactions but it can also favour the generation of reactive oxygen species , which implies a precise control of its uptake, utilization and storage  <cit> .

to counteract the low availability of fe in soils, higher plants have developed two different strategies for its acquisition from the rhizosphere. the strategy i  relies on the improvement of fe solubility through the release of root exudates like protons  and organic acids and phenolic compounds followed by a reduction of fe to the more soluble fe by a fe-chelate reductase   <cit> . this reductive step is essential for the acquisition of micronutrient, since fe is taken up via the activity of a divalent cation transporter, iron-regulated transporter   <cit> . strategy ii is specific for grasses and is based on the biosynthesis and release of phytosiderophores , which have a strong affinity for fe, and on the uptake of the fe-ps complexes by a specific transporter, yellow-stripe   <cit> .

physiological and molecular responses to fe deficiency in strategy i species have been extensively studied in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . in this model plant, a set of  <dig> transcripts responsive to fe deficiency was identified  <cit> . in tomato roots, a similar number of transcripts  was modulated in response to fe deficiency  <cit> . more recently, through a co-expression analysis, a group of  <dig> genes potentially involved in the regulation of arabidopsis responses to fe shortage was detected  <cit> . several works describing plant transcriptional responses to fe-stress as a comparison between fe sufficient and fe deficient condition are present in literature . however, no data are available on the modulations taking place during supply after a period of deficiency that is a condition reasonably occurring at the rhizosphere. in the recent years, this matter has been investigated at proteomic level in roots of beta vulgaris  <cit>  and in a prunus hybrid  <cit> , at metabolomic level in roots of beta vulgaris  <cit> , in the xylem sap and leaf extract of strategy i plants  <cit> .

in the rhizosphere the concentration of available fe depends on the soil ph and on the presence of different types of natural ligands , such as organic acids  <cit> , flavonoids  <cit> , ps  <cit> , microbial siderophores  <cit>  and fractions of the humified organic matter  <cit> . the acquisition mechanisms of fe-chelates by strategy i plants is considered to be based on the obligatory step of reduction  <cit> ,  even if recently their possibility to directly absorb fe-ps has been envisaged  <cit> . information about possible differences in the use efficiency of fe-complexed to natural occurring chelates is still very scarce. it has been reported that fractions of low-molecular-weight water-extractable humic substances  complexed with fe enhanced fe deficiency responses when compared with natural  or synthetic  chelates  <cit> . furthermore, a higher amount of 59fe was accumulated in tomato plants treated with fe-wehs after 24 h in comparison to other fe sources  <cit> . the higher acquisition of fe from fe-wehs was related to a more efficient reduction, rhizosphere acidification and translocation  <cit> .

here we describe the transcriptional responses of fe-deficient tomato roots after 1 h of supply with 1 μm fe chelated to citrate, ps or wehs. results showed that the root transcriptional profile of plants supplied with fe-wehs is very similar to that of fe-deficient plants being only two transcripts differentially expressed. the other two natural sources of fe caused on the other hand a similar modulation of a common set of  <dig> transcripts. in addition, the fe-citrate and fe-ps complexes showed some specific responses as suggested by the modulation of  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts after supplying fe-citrate or fe-ps alone, respectively.

RESULTS
iron- accumulation from natural fe-sources by tomato roots
the capability of fe-deficient tomato plants to utilize different natural fe-sources was evaluated after  <dig>   <dig>  or 24 h of treatment performing fe-uptake experiments and using 59fe complexed with wehs, citrate or ps. in order to reproduce conditions closer to those where fe-deficiency symptoms in crops usually appear  <cit> , the uptake medium was buffered at ph  <dig>  and each fe source was used at 1 μm final fe concentration.

fig. 1a shows that after 1 h of supply, the concentration of 59fe accumulated in tomato plants was comparable among all the three fe treatments exhibiting values around 100 nmol 59fe g- <dig> dw root. iron content markedly increased up to four folds after 4 h and from six to  <dig> folds after 24 h. in fe-wehs treated plants, the concentration of 59fe taken up was significantly greater than the one measured in plants treated with 59fe-citrate or 59fe-ps at  <dig> and 24 h. within each time point, there were no significant differences in fe content in plants exposed to fe-citrate and fe-ps. fe-sufficient plants  showed approximately one order of magnitude lower 59fe accumulation levels than fe-deficient plants  suggesting that responses to fe shortage are switched off. also in this case fe-wehs treated plants accumulated the highest concentration of 59fe both at  <dig> and 24 h.fig.  <dig> 
59fe concentration of fe-deficient and fe-sufficient tomato plants in response to fe supply. fe-deficient  and fe-sufficient  plants were transferred up to 24 h into a solution  containing 59fe-citrate, 59fe-ps or 59fe-wehs at final fe concentration 1 μm. data are means ± sd of three independent experiments. capital letters  refer to statistically significant differences 



in order to get information on the functionality of fe-acquisition mechanisms working at the root level of plants supplied with different fe-complexes, root fereduction activity was measured after 1 h of treatment. fig.  <dig> reports that the different type of fe supply did not significantly modify the root fe-reduction activity.fig.  <dig> fe-reduction activity of tomato roots. fe-reduction activity of intact fe-deficient tomato plants supplied for 1 h with 1 μm fe as fe-citrate, fe-ps or fe-wehs; as control, fe-deficient plants not treated with any fe sources  or plants treated with 100 μm fe , were also utilized. data are means ± sd of three independent experiments. capital letters  refer to statistically significant differences 



changes in tomato root transcriptome in response to the supply with different natural fe sources
root transcriptional profiles of tomato plants in response to 1 h supply with the three different fe sources were characterized by a genome-wide microarray analysis.

table  <dig> reports the numbers of upregulated and downregulated transcripts identified by linear models for microarray | ≥ 1)  <cit>  for each comparison of root transcriptional profiles. to have a further confirmation, the expression level of some differentially expressed transcripts was also tested by real-time rt-pcr . the number of transcripts differentially expressed in response to fe-citrate and fe-ps supply was  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. surprisingly, roots of tomato plants treated with fe-wehs showed only two differentially expressed transcripts  in comparison to the fe-deficiency condition  indicating an elevated similarity between these two transcriptional profiles . this behaviour might explain the higher 59fe content in fe-wehs-supplied tomato plants in comparison to fe-citrate- and fe-ps-supplied plants after  <dig> and 24 h .table  <dig> number of differentially expressed transcripts resulted by transcriptional profile comparisons of fe-deficient plants supplied with the three natural sources of fe and fe-deficient plants

differentially expressed transcripts were identified by each transcriptional profile comparison through limma analysis | ≥ 1); -fe: fe-deficient; -fe/fe-citrate, -fe/fe-ps or -fe/fe-wehs: fe-deficient plants supplied for 1 h with fe citrate, fe-ps or fe-wehs, respectively

transcript specifically affected by fe-ps supply
probe id, description, adjusted p-value and log <dig> were reported for each comparison



the upregulated transcript in response to fe-wehs-supplied plants had the same behaviour in the plant subjected to the other two treatments . it encodes a r2r <dig> myb transcription factor . the protein encoded by this tomato gene shows highest homology with arabidopsis thaliana myb <dig>  that is not reported to be involved in responses to fe-deficiency in that plant species. until now, in strategy i plants, the regulation of fe-deficiency responses has been described to be controlled by bhlh transcription factors  <cit> . data here presented suggest that responses to fe supply after a period of shortage could be driven by other transcription factors such as this myb. the sole fe-wehs-specific transcript repressed encodes a putative amino acid transporter  of unknown function. however, both transcriptional modulations seem unlikely to be responsible for the different efficient use of fe as fe-wehs source.fig.  <dig> shared transcripts modulated in response to supply with the three natural fe sources relative to fe-deficient plants. fe-deficient plants were supplied for 1 h with fe-wehs  or with fe-ps  or with fe-citrate . as control, fe-deficient plants were used 



the root transcriptional profiles of fe-deficient plants supplied with the three natural sources compared to that of fe-sufficient plants | ≥ 1) showed that  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> transcripts were after 1 h modulated in response to supply with fe-wehs, fe-citrate and fe-ps supplies respectively . the number of differentially expressed transcripts between the fe-wesh supplied plants and fe-sufficient ones is similar  to that identified in the previous transcriptional analysis comparing the transcriptome of fe-sufficient and fe-deficient roots  <cit> . it is therefore confirmed that the root transcriptional profile of fe-deficient plants is very similar to that of plants supplied for 1 h with fe-wehs.

responses to fe-citrate and fe-ps treatments
differently from the transcriptional behaviour of fe-wehs, fe-citrate and fe-ps treatments vs fe-deficient determined a modulation of a wider set of transcripts:  <dig> of them were in common, while  <dig>  and  <dig>  transcripts were fe-citrate- and fe-ps-specific, respectively . these transcripts are related to specific responses that could be caused by the effect of different chelating agents on root plant metabolism. this hypothesis could be supported by the results obtained comparing the transcriptional profiles of fe-deficient plant roots supplied for 1 h with fe  with fe-sufficient plants . this analysis revealed that about 52 % and 30 % of differentially expressed transcripts were specific for the -fe/fe-citrate vs fe-sufficient and -fe/fe-ps vs fe-sufficient comparisons, respectively .

differentially expressed transcripts in the comparisons -fe/fe-citrate vs fe-deficient and -fe/fe-ps vs fe-deficient , were manually annotated using terms of the biological process of the gene ontology   <cit>  on the basis of blastp analysis from uniprot database  <cit>  . eighty-five  and  <dig>  differentially expressed transcripts in response to fe-citrate and fe-ps treatment, respectively, encode proteins without homology with known proteins . table  <dig> shows that “biological process” , “cellular process” and “metabolic process” are the more represented functional categories with similar percentage both for responses to fe-citrate and fe-ps supply. the other go term categories showed similar percentages between the two treatments with the exceptions of “cellular component organization and biogenesis” that is more represented in the response to fe-citrate relative to fe-ps  while “lipid metabolic process” in the response to fe-ps relative to fe-citrate .table  <dig> distribution in main functional categories of transcripts differentially expressed in response to fe-citrate and fe-ps supply respectively

the distribution in main functional categories on the basis of “biological process” terms was performed using categorizer  <cit>  setting plant go slim method and consolidated single occurrences. the analysis was performed using the go terms of the  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts differentially expressed in response to fe-citrate and fe-ps respectively and showing homology to “known protein”



transcripts commonly modulated by fe-citrate and fe-ps supply
the  <dig> transcripts commonly modulated after fe-citrate and fe-ps supply showed the same trend . excluding the peculiar behaviour of transcriptome in the presence of fe-wehs, this set of transcripts seems to represent the part of transcriptome responsive to the fe-supply. twenty upregulated transcripts and thirteen downregulated transcripts did not show any sequence homology with known proteins . the distribution analysis of the main functional categories of transcripts with homology to known proteins showed that the more abundant terms “biological process”, “cellular process”, “metabolic process” and “biosynthetic process” were similarly represented in both downregulated and upregulated set of transcripts . differences were observed for “transport” with a higher fraction of a downregulated transcript dataset relative to the upregulated one  while other categories such as “carbohydrate metabolic process”, “catabolic process”, “cellular component organization and biogenesis” and “photosynthesis” were less represented in the downregulated transcript dataset .table  <dig> distribution in main functional categories of transcripts modulated both during the fe-citrate and fe-ps supply

the distribution in main functional categories on the basis of “biological process” terms was performed using categorizer  <cit>  setting plant go slim method and consolidated single occurrences. the analysis was performed using the go terms of the  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts positively and negatively affected respectively in response to both fe-citrate and fe-ps and showing homology to “known protein”



the downregulation of a plasma membrane h+-atpase transcript  suggested that the acidification of the rhizosphere  is more quickly modulated than the expression of transcripts encoding fro and irt.

comparing the modulation of these common supply-specific transcripts with the results of the previous findings in tomato roots  <cit> , we could observe that with the exception of transcripts related to fe homeostasis  most of the molecular mechanisms involved in the response to the fe shortage  were modulated suggesting the restoration of sufficient nutrient condition. specifically, we detected a negative modulation of transcripts encoding a phosphofructokinase , a fructose-bisphosphate aldolase  for glycolysis and a succinate dehydrogenase  and a 2′-oxaglutarate dehydrogenase  for tri-carboxylic acid  cycle . as far as methionine metabolism and cycle is concerned a methionine synthase  and two s-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferase  transcripts  were repressed . furthermore, transcripts involved in protein turnover such as proteases and peptidases  were mainly negatively affected suggesting the readjusting of the protein metabolism related to the anaplerotic functions. the synthesis and transport of phenolic secondary metabolites appear to be negatively affected as highlighted by the downregulation of transcripts encoding a phenylalanine ammonia-lyase  and an atp-binding cassette  transporter  <cit>  . a similar behaviour was observed for transcripts involved in the synthesis of cell wall components  while cell wall loosening and modification appeared to be positively influenced by the presence of the micronutrient as highlighted by the upregulation of transcripts encoding an expansin  and a glucan endo- <dig> -beta-glucosidase  . concerning the role of ca2+ as secondary messenger during fe shortage, the negative modulation of signal transduction machinery genes -interacting protein kinase  <dig>  #21; protein iq-domain  <dig>  #22; ras-related gtp binding protein, # <dig> and #24) is in agreement with the adjustment due to the restored nutrient conditions .

together with the general behaviour described above suggesting the readjustment of metabolic pathways linked to fe shortage to an adequate nutritional condition, our analysis revealed that other mechanisms are involved in this response.

it is known that the alternative pathway of pyruvate synthesis independent of pyruvate kinase , which is involved in the supply of low-molecular weight organic acid to tca cycle, is induced under fe-deficiency  <cit> ; this behaviour would allow to supply reducing power in plants where the functionality of the mitochondrial respiratory chain is limited  <cit> . a malic enzyme  transcript  was repressed in response to fe supply, hence decreasing the substrate provision to the alternative metabolic cycle. furthermore, the overexpression of the subunit i of the nadh:ubiquinone oxidoreductase transcript  suggests that fe supply could restore the respiration chain activity. the repression of a transcript encoding a glutamate dehydrogenase  related to anaplerotic reaction of tca  <cit>  reinforces the hypothesis of a possible back regulation of tca cycle during the supply.

focusing on the transcript involved in molecular processes leading to protein synthesis , protein folding  and protein modification  we observed a downregulation rather than an upregulation . this suggests that the new protein synthesis and/or protein modification  <cit>  necessary to respond to the micronutrient depletion are not required in the new restored nutrient condition. we also recorded a downregulation of transcripts involved in dna and rna metabolic processes  that could be in line with the decrease in protein synthesis. despite that, other transcripts encoding transcription factors  were upregulated by the treatment with fe-citrate and fe-ps . among these transcripts, one encodes for a bhlh  and the other one for a r2r3-myb transcript . interestingly this latter transcript is induced by all three fe-sources .

transcript specifically affected by fe-citrate supply
among the  <dig> transcripts modulated exclusively by the fe-citrate treatment,  <dig> were downregulated and  <dig> upregulated. twenty-four downregulated and  <dig> upregulated transcripts did not show any sequence homology with known proteins . the distribution analysis of the main functional categories of transcripts with homology to known proteins showed that the more abundant “biological process”, “cellular process” and “metabolic process” were similarly represented both for downregulated and upregulated set of transcripts . “cellular component organization biogenesis”, “biosynthetic process” and “nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolic process” functional categories were more represented in the downregulated transcript dataset while “signal transduction” in the upregulated transcript dataset .table  <dig> distribution in main functional categories of transcripts specifically affected by fe-citrate supply

the distribution in main functional categories on the basis of “biological process” terms was performed using categorizer  <cit>  setting plant go slim method and consolidated single occurrences. the analysis was performed using the go terms of the  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts positively and negatively affected respectively in response to fe citrate and showing homology to “known protein”



the analysis of downregulated transcripts showed that in addition to those involved in carbohydrate metabolism and tca cycle above discussed, other genes related to glycolysis  and pentose phosphate pathway  were negatively affected . a similar behaviour was observed for transcripts of the tca cycles  and of the alternative pathway via pepc  . two nadh dehydrogenase  transcripts  and another one showing homology to the tobacco prohibitin  <dig> , which is involved in stress tolerance stabilizing the mitochondrial function  <cit> , were found to be repressed by fe-citrate treatment. this might be explained as a specific regulation of tca cycle and mitochondrial activity when fe is supplied as fe-citrate, bearing in mind that this organic acid might be absorbed by roots  <cit> .

other processes related to protein synthesis  and protein catabolism were mainly repressed  in response to fe-citrate treatment. on the other hand, in the same treatment the functional categories of protein modification processes  were similarly represented both for downregulated and upregulated sets of transcripts .

the supply with fe-citrate caused the upregulation of a transcript encoding the fe-containing enzyme nitrite reductase . this evidence might indicate the restoration of nitrate assimilation, which is known to be altered in fe-deficient conditions  <cit> . besides those involved in protein turnover , other genes putatively related to n recycling were found to be downregulated, such as plastid gs  and ferredoxin-dependent glutamate synthase  <dig> .

in addition, fe-citrate caused the modulation in either directions of transcripts involved in the cell wall metabolism , in oxidative stress  and encoding heat-shock proteins  . these results suggest that the modulation of these processes might be related on one side to the changing of fe nutritional status, and on the other side to the presence of citrate.

interestingly, many transcripts involved in the regulation of plant defence response such as avr/cf- <dig> rapidly elicited  genes  and those encoding wrkys  were induced by the fe-citrate supply . the activity of these transcripts could be related to the avoidance of fe toxicity. the involvement of acre genes in the response to al-toxicity in rice roots  <cit>  and the role of a wrky rice protein in response to excess of fe  <cit>  has been reported. a similar role in response to fe toxicity could be ascribed to the upregulation of transcripts belonging to gai, rga, rcs  gene family . gras proteins play a role in the regulation of root growth, nodulation signalling and response to environmental stresses  <cit> ; furthermore, members of this gene family are involved in disease resistance and mechanical stress response in tomato  <cit> .

transcript specifically affected by fe-ps supply
one hundred and nineteen transcripts were specifically modulated in tomato roots by fe-ps treatment ,  <dig> and  <dig> in a negative and in a positive way, respectively. twenty-one downregulated and ten upregulated transcripts did not show any homology to known proteins . the distribution in main functional categories highlighted that for the fe-ps specific transcripts the most abundant categories are “biological process”, “cellular process”, “metabolic process”, “protein metabolic process” and “nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolic process” . transcripts related to “lipid metabolic process” are mainly negatively affected  such as those encoding a 3-hydroxyacyl-coa dehydrogenase , a fatty acid desaturase , an acyl-coa synthetase  and a phospholipase c  while only a lipid metabolism-related transcripts, encoding a delta-sterol reductase  was upregulated. in addition to the phospholipase c  transcript, the treatment with fe-ps repressed the expression of another transcript encoding a phosphatidic-acid phosphatase  suggesting that this fe source can specifically affect the phospholipid-based signal, which is involved in plant environmental responses  <cit> . it has been shown that the repression of plant plcs is related to the response to toxic metals, such as al3+ and cd2+, that implies limiting ros generation and lipid peroxidation  <cit> . iron-ps might negatively affect the phospholipid-based signal that controls responses to fe, possibly through the reduction of ros as suggested by the downregulation of an ascorbate oxidase  transcript . this ao gene is involved in ascorbic acid biosynthesis in tomato  <cit>  playing an important role as an antioxidant and protecting plant cells during oxidative damage by scavenging free radicals and ros. on the basis of these results, it might be speculated that fe is present within the root cells as fe-ps complex and that this fe-form could limit fe-induced ros production. indeed there is some evidence that strategy i plants can directly take up fe-ps complexes  <cit> . the idea that tomato roots could at least in part adsorb the fe-ps complexes is supported by the observation that a transcript encoding an oligopeptide transporter “yellow stripe-like protein”  was repressed after 1 h of fe-ps treatment. the rapid back-regulation of this putative fe-ps transporter would indicate a secondary role in fe nutrition of tomato plants, while possibly having a role in preventing oxidative damages in the early stages of fe supply.table  <dig> distribution in main functional categories of transcripts specifically affected by fe-ps supply

the distribution in main functional categories on the basis of “biological process” terms was performed using categorizer  <cit>  setting plant go slim method and consolidated single occurrences. the analysis was performed using the go terms of the  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts positively and negatively affected respectively in response to fe-ps and showing homology to “known protein”



a gene encoding the gibberellin  <dig> oxidase , previously hypothesized acting in tomato root morphological changes in response to fe deficiency  <cit> , was one of those specifically downregulated by fe-ps supply.

furthermore, the fe-ps treatment specifically modulated transcripts encoding transcription factors in a negative  and in a positive way  . gras transcripts were positively modulated in response to fe-citrate treatment while, in the case of fe-ps, one gras transcript was downregulated. our results suggest that some transcription factors could play a role in the response to fe supply common to different fe sources, such as the r2r <dig> myb transcription factor , while others could be specific for the control of genes and pathways selectively modulated in response to each fe-source.

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that the root transcriptional response to fe supply depends on the nature of the ligand . the supply with fe-wehs, which has been demonstrated to be able to enhance fe acquisition responses in strategy i plants  <cit> , did not cause relevant changes in the root transcriptome with respect to the fe-deficient plants, indicating that roots did not sense the restored cellular fe accumulation. this result could explain the higher fe concentration observed after  <dig> and 24 h in tomato plant tissues supplied with fe-wehs as compared to the other fe-sources. this behaviour is confirmed by a faster and more efficient fe allocation in the leaf tissue  <cit> . as a result, fe-wehs supply would favour a better distribution of fe within the plant.

the transcriptional behaviour of tomato roots with the other two natural fe-sources, fe-citrate and fe-ps, underlined that the supply responses are fast and based on a back regulation of molecular mechanisms modulated under fe deficiency. we also observed some responses specific for each of the two natural fe sources suggesting a transcriptional response in roots to the molecule used to chelate the micronutrient. considering transcripts specifically regulated by fe-citrate, we could hypothesize that citrate is also absorbed by roots causing a further negative regulation of the tca cycle and influencing mainly cell wall metabolism and the response regulation to stress. iron-ps specific responses seem to be mainly based on a negative regulation of lipid metabolism and phospholipid-based signal that control ros responses in the presence of heavy metals.

