BACKGROUND
high-throughput sequencing  technologies have found widespread use in genomics, transcriptomics and epigenomics. pcr amplification is an important step in virtually all library preparation protocols for high-throughput sequencing technologies  <cit> . in the standard illumina library preparation protocol, after universal adapters are ligated to the pool of dna fragments, pcr amplification is done in order to enrich for fragments that have adapters ligated on both ends and can be sequenced successfully  <cit> . hybridization-based target enrichment protocols used for whole exome sequencing as well as experiments that start from low quantities of input material also require pcr amplification.

if the number of unique dna template molecules in the initial library is small or if there are steps in the library preparation that reduce the number of distinct dna fragments, some fragments can end up being sequenced multiple times. these so called “pcr duplicates” correspond to redundant information, i.e. copies of the same dna fragment. a high frequency of pcr duplicates is undesirable since it reduces the effective sequencing coverage of the experiment. a high pcr duplication rate cannot be overcome simply by sequencing to higher coverage. rather, it indicates the need to modify the library preparation to improve the complexity of the sequencing library. for large-scale sequencing projects involving multiple samples, it is important to identify outlier samples with a high pcr duplication rate that can bias the joint analysis of the sequence data. therefore, for many reasons, it is of great interest to estimate the pcr duplication rate of high-throughput sequence datasets.

read duplicates can be identified after sequencing using alignment of reads to a reference genome. groups of reads that map to the same genomic coordinates  on the reference sequence and are also identical in sequence  represent clusters of read duplicates  <cit> . read duplicates can correspond to technical duplicates such as those due to pcr amplification  or natural read duplicates. ‘natural’ read duplicates  arise due to the saturation of the space of possible start and end positions for dna fragments. for whole genome and exome sequencing experiments using paired-end reads, almost all read duplicates correspond to technical duplicates. however, in many applications, natural read duplicates can represent a significant fraction of the read duplicates  <cit> . for example, in rna-seq experiments, some regions of the genome  have much higher coverage than others and as a result a large fraction of the duplicate reads represent independent fragments sampled from such regions. sequencing experiments that utilize single end sequencing also show a high frequency of natural read duplicates since reads with identical 5’ mapping coordinates cannot be distinguished from pcr duplicates  <cit> . in such scenarios, it is important to determine the fraction of read duplicates that are due to pcr amplification since removing all read duplicates can bias downstream analysis such as estimation of gene expression values.

natural read duplicates can be distinguished from pcr duplicates using molecular methods . these methods add a unique molecular identifier  or a random barcode to each dna fragment prior to pcr amplification and sequencing. post sequencing, natural read duplicates are unlikely to share the umi while pcr duplicates will have identical alignment coordinates and umi. although, these methods have been shown to improve the accuracy of variant calling in dna-seq experiments  <cit>  and expression quantification in mrna-seq experiments  <cit> , they require specialized modifications to the library preparation protocols and are not routinely used. recognizing the high frequency of natural read duplicates in some sequencing experiments, computational methods to model the probability of natural read duplicates in dna and rna sequencing experiments have also been developed  <cit> . however, these methods do not provide an explicit estimate of the pcr duplication rate.

in this paper, we describe a novel computational method to estimate the pcr duplication rate of a high-throughput sequence dataset that accounts for natural read duplicates. our method utilizes reads that overlap heterozygous variants sites to estimate the relative proportion of pcr duplicates and natural read duplicates. we present a mathematical model for modeling read duplicates that is used to estimate the relative proportion of pcr and natureal read duplicates in sequence data. using simulated data as well as exome datasets from the  <dig> genomes project  <cit> , we demonstrate the accuracy of our method in estimating the pcr duplication rate from datasets even with a high frequency of natural duplicates. further, we analyze rna-seq data on samples from the  <dig> genomes project  <cit>  to demonstrate that only a small fraction  of read duplicates observed in rna-seq data are due to pcr amplification.

RESULTS
overview of method
the first step in the analysis is to identify all groups or clusters of read duplicates such that all reads in each cluster have identical outer mapping coordinates. each cluster of read duplicates is a combination of natural read duplicates  and pcr duplicates. a cluster of two read duplicates can correspond to either  one independent dna fragment  or  two independent dna fragments. we observe that pcr duplicates represent copies of a single dna molecule and are expected to have identical alleles at a heterozygous variant site . in contrast, a pair of natural read duplicates will have the same allele if they are sampled from the same chromosome and show opposite alleles at a heterozygous site if they are sampled from the opposite homologous chromosomes . therefore, analysis of the counts of clusters with matching or opposite alleles at heterozygous sites can be used to estimate the proportion of natural duplicates among duplicate clusters of size  <dig> 
fig.  <dig> illustration of paired-end reads covering a heterozygous snv  in a diploid genome. the reads can be grouped into clusters of different sizes based on their alignment coordinates. two reads that start and end at the same position but carry different alleles  at the heterozygous site  are highly likely to correspond to natural duplicates, i.e. independent dna fragments. in contrast, a pair of read duplicates that have identical alleles at the heterozygous site  could correspond to pcr duplicates or natural duplicates




assuming equal likelihood of sampling a read from one of the two chromosomes, half of the natural read duplicates are expected to have opposite alleles at a heterozygous site. therefore, if c
 <dig> is the total number of clusters of size  <dig> that overlap heterozygous variant sites and c
 <dig> be the subset of clusters with opposite alleles, the expected number of clusters of size  <dig> that correspond to natural read duplicates and pcr duplicates are 2·c
 <dig> and c
2−2·c
 <dig> respectively. these estimates can be used to estimate the average number of unique dna fragments for clusters of size  <dig> as: 
  <dig> u2=1·+2·2c21c <dig> 


while u
 <dig> gives a good indication of the relative frequency of pcr duplicates and natural duplicates in a sequence dataset, in order to estimate of the pcr duplication rate, we need to calculate u
i for larger cluster sizes . to analyse clusters of size greater than two, we utilize a mathematical model that uses basic probability and counting arguments to estimate the fraction of duplicate clusters with different number of unique dna fragments .
fig.  <dig> overview of computational method for estimating the pcr duplication rate using clusters of duplicate reads that overlap heterozygous variant sites. c
i corresponds to the clusters of read duplicates with i reads and u
i is the average number of unique dna fragments for clusters of size i





accuracy of the method on simulated data
to assess the accuracy of the method for estimating pcr duplication rate, we used simulated data that was generated using paired-end exome data from a single sample  sequenced in the  <dig> genomes project. our goal was to assess the accuracy of our method for estimating the pcr duplication rate in the presence of natural read duplicates. therefore, we simulated datasets with both pcr duplicates and natural read duplicates .

the estimated pcr duplication rate using our method was highly accurate . the error in the estimation of the pcr duplication rate increased as the pcr duplication rate increased from  <dig> to  <dig>   and was greater for higher values of the sampling duplication rate . we also observed that our method tended to slightly underestimate the pcr duplication rate as the pcr duplication rate increased . overall, our method was able to estimate the pcr duplication rate even in the presence of a high frequency of natural read duplicates with a low mean absolute percentage error .
fig.  <dig> box-plot showing the error in the estimation of the pcr duplication rate using our method on simulated data with varying levels of pcr duplicates . data was simulated with a fixed sampling read duplication rate . for each combination of values,  <dig> simulated datasets were used to assess the error of the estimated pcr duplication rate




pcr amplification is non-uniform and dna fragments with a high or low gc content are less likely to be amplified  <cit> . to assess the impact of non-uniform pcr duplication rate on the accuracy of our method, we simulated data with a pcr amplification rate that varied as a function of the gc content of each dna fragment . we simulated  <dig> datasets with a natural read duplicate rate of  <dig>  and a randomly selected pcr duplication rate . comparison of the simulated and estimated pcr duplication rates showed that our method was able to accurately estimate the pcr duplication rate .

accuracy of the method on real exome data
to assess the ability of our method to estimate the pcr duplication rate on dna sequence datasets, we utilized a sample set of  <dig> illumina exome datasets from the  <dig> genomes project  <cit> . for each individual, a set of heterozygous snvs identified using the gatk unifiedgenotyper  <cit>  tool was used for estimating the pcr duplication rate. for each individual dataset, the pcr duplication rate was estimated in paired-end mode and single-end mode, ie. by ignoring the insert length information. single end sequence data shows a much higher frequency of natural duplicate reads since reads that start at the same genomic position after alignment cannot be distinguished further in the absence of fragment length information. indeed, the read duplication rate of the se reads for each sample  was on average  <dig>  times greater than the read duplication rate for the pe reads . however, pcr duplication rate of the dataset should be independent of whether we utilize pe reads or only se read information.

we found that the estimated pcr duplication rate from the data treated as se reads  was highly concordant  with the pcr duplication rate estimated from the data analyzed as pe reads . in contrast, the correlation between the se read duplication rate and the pe read duplication rate was much lower . further, both the se and pe pcr duplication rate estimates were slightly lower  than the pe read duplication rate which is an upper bound for the pcr duplication rate. these results demonstrated that our method can accurately estimate the pcr duplication rate on real sequence datasets even in the presence of a high proportion of natural read duplicates.
fig.  <dig> comparison of the estimated pcr duplication rate on  <dig> exome datasets from the  <dig> genomes project analyzed as paired-end  reads and single-end  reads. the two plots correspond to the analysis using exome variant calls and omni genotype calls. for visual clarity, two outlier samples with a high pcr duplication rate  are not shown




to compare the performance of our method with existing computational methods for analyzing the complexity of sequencing libraries, we analyzed the pe and se read data for one exome dataset  using the preseq method  <cit> . this method was developed to estimate the complexity of sequencing libraries with the goal of predicting the benefit of increasing the sequencing depth for a library. the fraction of duplicate reads estimated using this method for the pe  and se  datasets was identical to that based on the analysis of read duplicates and not informative about the pcr duplication rate. this was not surprising since this method needs umis to distinguish between pcr duplicates and natural read duplicates.

we also analyzed an illumina exome dataset for a hapmap individual from bainbridge and colleagues  <cit> . the authors had compared the read duplication rate for this exome capture dataset using pe and se reads. they found that the read duplication rate for the pe dataset was  <dig> %. in comparison, the read duplication rate for single reads was observed to be almost four times greater . using our method, the estimated pcr duplication rate on the se reads  was  <dig> %, very similar to the pcr duplication rate estimated from the pe reads .

robustness of the pcr duplication rate estimate to variant calls
our method only requires a subset of the heterozygous variants in an individual genome to estimate the pcr duplication rate. in the previous section, the pcr duplication rate for the exome datasets was estimated using heterozygous variants identified from the exome data itself. to assess the robustness of the estimate of the pcr duplication rate to the choice of the variants used, we estimated the pcr duplication rate using illumina omni array genotype calls  for these samples. for each sample, we estimated the pcr duplication rate on the exome reads treated as pe and se reads respectively using the set of heterozygous genotypes from the omni genotype data. the mean number of heterozygous variant sites  from the omni genotype data was  <dig>  across the  <dig> samples.

the estimates of the pe-pcr duplication rate using the omni genotypes were tightly correlated with the estimates obtained from the exome variant calls . the estimates of the se-pcr duplication rate using the exome variant calls and the omni genotypes were also strongly correlated . these results indicate that the estimate of the pcr duplication rate is consistent between the two sets of heterozygous variants. further, the concordance between the estimates of the pe-pcr duplication rate and the se-pcr duplication rate on the  <dig> exome datasets  was marginally better than the concordance between the estimates using exome variant calls .

next, to assess the robustness of the pcr duplication rate estimate to the size of the variant set, we analyzed exome data for one sample  using subsets of the heterozygous variant calls generated from exome data. the full set of heterozygous variants included  <dig>  snvs and the estimated pcr duplication rate was  <dig> . the mean of the estimated pcr duplication rate using 50% of the variants was  <dig> ± <dig>  . the mean estimate decreased slightly to  <dig> ± <dig>  when using 20% of the variants. although, the pcr duplication rate was underestimated for smaller sets of variants due to lack of sufficient clusters counts for large clusters , the decrease in the estimate was small . this demonstrated that our method can estimate the pcr duplicate rate on dna sequence data using a small number of variants.

frequency of natural read duplicates across exome capture protocols
a number of different methods have been developed for performing human whole-exome capture experiments  <cit> . these include the agilent sureselect, nimblegen seqcap, illumina truseq and illumina nextera. among these, the nextera library preparation method fragments dna and adds the adapters to the dna fragments in a single step using a transposase  <cit> . all other exome capture protocols fragment dna by sonication. the  <dig> exome datasets in the  <dig> genomes project were obtained using the agilent sureselect and the nimblegen seqcap capture methods. the pcr duplication rate of these datasets was 1–9% lower than the read duplication rate across the  <dig> exome datasets . this indicated that only a small fraction of the read duplicates correspond to natural read duplicates. the low frequency of natural read duplicates was not surprising since in paired-end  sequencing libraries prepared with random dna fragmentation, the probability that two independent dna fragments have identical starting position and fragment length is low.

the transposase-mediated fragmentation in the the nextera library preparation method can introduce sequence dependent biases in the data compared to standard methods of fragmentation  <cit> . although the impact of non-uniform fragmentation on the uniformity of sequence coverage is negligible, it has the potential to increase the frequency of natural read duplicates. to assess this, we analyzed  <dig> nextera exome capture datasets  from the the illumina basespace repository. the read duplication rate for the  <dig> datasets was low  . however, the estimates of the pcr duplication rate using our method were even lower  and indicated that 55–70% of the read duplicates correspond to natural read duplicates. this was significantly higher than than the proportion of natural read duplicates  in exome datasets from the  <dig> genomes project and likely reflects fragmentation bias in the nextera library preparation method. although the nextera library preparation approach has several advantages compared to standard methods including speed and low input requirements, our results demonstrate that it results in a high proportion of natural read duplicates compared to other exome enrichment protocols.

analysis of pcr duplication rates for rna-seq data
sequencing of complementary dna  by high-throughput sequencing technologies provides quantitative information about the abundance  of mrna transcripts and is becoming the method of choice for analyzing gene expression and rna splicing  <cit> . compared to dna sequence datasets, a high rate of read duplicates are typically observed in rna-seq datasets. however, unlike dna sequence datasets, a significant fraction of these read duplicates likely represent independent fragments that originate from transcripts with high expression levels rather than pcr duplicates. the frequency of such natural duplicates is further increased due to fragmentation bias in rna-seq library preparation resulting in a non-uniform distribution of fragments across each transcript  <cit> . unlike for dna sequencing studies where read duplicates are removed prior to variant calling, there is no clear consensus on how to deal with duplicate reads in rna-seq data. on one hand, removal of all read duplicates prior to expression quantification can result in underestimation of expression levels for highly expressed genes. on the other hand, not accounting for pcr duplicates can inflate read counts and potentially affect the accuracy of differential gene expression analysis.

while it is generally accepted that a significant proportion of read duplicates in rna-seq datasets are not due to pcr amplification, there is little quantitative analysis of the pcr duplication rate in rna-seq datasets. to assess the ability of our method to estimate the pcr duplication rate on rna-seq data, we utilized rna-seq data from lymphoblastoid cell lines of individuals from the  <dig> genomes project that was generated by the geuvadis project  <cit> . we estimated the pcr duplicate rate on rna-seq data for the same set of  <dig> samples for which we analyzed exome data previously. variant calls for estimating the pcr duplication rate were derived from the exome data. we found that the pcr duplication rate for these rna-seq datasets was quite low  in comparison to the observed read duplication rate which varied between  <dig> and 26% . this indicated that the vast majority  of read duplicates in the rna-seq datasets are not due to pcr amplification. next, to assess the robustness of the pcr duplication rate estimates to variant calls, we utilized heterozygous variant sets for each individual obtained from the omni genotype data. we found that the two sets of pcr duplication rate estimates  were highly concordant with correlation coefficient r
2= <dig>  and mean absolute difference = <dig>  .
fig.  <dig> comparison of the read duplication rate and the estimated pcr duplication rate for  <dig> rna-seq samples from the geuvadis project. three samples with much higher pcr duplication rates than the remaining samples are highlighted




for rna-seq experiments, the frequency of natural read duplicates is expected to increase with increasing sequence coverage. on the other hand, the pcr duplication rate depends on the complexity of the sequencing library and should be more or less independent of the number of reads. indeed, while the read duplication rate due to sampling  was strongly correlated with the total number of reads per sample , there was no correlation between the estimated pcr duplication rate and number of reads per sample . in the geuvadis project  <cit> , the authors analyzed  <dig> rna-seq datasets and used a number of metrics including the read duplication rate to identify outlier samples. of the  <dig> samples analyzed, the pcr duplication rate for three samples  was more than 2-fold higher than the average pcr duplication rate for the remaining samples . it is noteworthy that the read duplication rate for these outlier samples was not higher than the remaining samples. such ‘outlier’ samples with a high pcr duplication rate should be excluded from the joint analysis of multiple rna-seq datasets to avoid biasing downstream results. in addition, some pairs of samples had identical read duplication rates  but very different pcr duplication rates . these results illustrate the utility of the pcr duplication rate estimate provided by our method as an independent metric to assess the quality of rna-seq datasets.

CONCLUSIONS
pcr amplification is a necessary step in the preparation of dna sequencing libraries for most high-throughput sequencing instruments. however, pcr amplification is inherently biased and introduces artifacts into the sequence data including duplicate reads. estimating the pcr duplication rate after sequencing can provide important information about the quality of the sequence dataset and the complexity of the library. while estimating the read duplication rate from aligned sequence reads is straightforward, accurate estimation of the pcr duplication rate requires estimating the fraction of read duplicates that represent natural read duplicates. previous computational methods have attempted to model the probability of natural read duplicates  <cit>  in dna and rna sequencing experiments. in this paper, we have presented a novel approach for estimating the pcr duplication rate that utilizes heterozygous variants in a diploid genome to estimate the fraction of natural read duplicates. to the best of our knowledge, the method presented in this paper is the first computational method that aims to estimate the average pcr duplication rate of high-throughput dna sequence datasets while accounting for natural read duplicates. we have demonstrated its accuracy using both simulated data and exome data from the  <dig> genomes project. we have shown that it can even estimate the pcr duplication rate with high accuracy from datasets with a high frequency of natural read duplicates.

we also analyzed rna-seq data from a population study of human transcriptomes to demonstrate that the vast majority of read duplicates  in rna-seq data are not due to pcr amplification. our results are consistent with the observation of  <cit>  that “majority of duplicate reads in a high-quality mrna experiment are due to saturation of the read mapping space driven by real biology of high expression levels”. if the pcr duplication rate is low, not removing read duplicates prior to estimating transcript expression levels is unlikely to bias the results. however, not all rna-seq datasets may have a low level of pcr duplicates. therefore, a computational estimate of the pcr duplication rate provided by our method can be utilized to determine whether pcr duplicates should be ignored or not. it can also be used to identify outlier samples with a high pcr duplication rate relative to other samples in large-scale human transcriptome studies. we note that the estimation of the pcr duplication rate from rna-seq data is more challenging compared to that from dna-seq data due to the high frequency of read duplicates, strong allele bias due to alignment of spliced reads and the need for an independent set of heterozygous variants.

the mathematical model underlying our method makes very few assumptions about the pcr amplification process or how natural duplicates are generated. it is agnostic to the distribution of insert lengths and start sites for dna fragments in the sequencing library. however, it is designed to estimate the average pcr duplication rate and cannot be applied to datasets derived from haploid genomes or datasets with a small number of heterozygous variants. the model can potentially be extended to incorporate sequencing error rates and allele bias to further improve the accuracy of the estimates. the computational method that utilizes this model to estimate the pcr duplication rate can be applied to analyze both dna and rna-seq datasets. it is computationally efficient  and accepts input files in standard bam and vcf formats. it requires no additional sequencing or modifications to the library preparation protocol and gives useful information about the pcr duplication rate that is not provided by existing methods.

