BACKGROUND
technological advances in polymorphism detection and genotyping have made the single nucleotide polymorphisms  the marker of choice for many high density genotyping studies  <cit> . high-throughput microarrays containing assays for thousands of snps are becoming available for a number of non-model organisms  <cit> , and being used more frequently in ecological and evolutionary studies, including population genetics studies e.g.  <cit> , qtl identification e.g.  <cit> , parentage determination e.g.  <cit> , and mixed stock analysis e.g.  <cit> .

despite the recent technical advances, genotyping large numbers of individuals with thousands of snps remains prohibitively expensive for many research groups. furthermore, many population genetic studies are based on population allele frequency rather than individual genotype data. therefore, determination of allele frequencies from pooled dna samples, i.e. ‘allelotyping’, has been suggested more than  <dig> years ago as a cost-effective alternative to individual genotyping . several studies have successfully used this approach in genome-wide association studies that compare the allele frequencies between cases and controls e.g.  <cit> . these studies have demonstrated satisfactory accuracy and repeatability, and the dna pooling approach can reduce costs by as much as 100-fold depending on the number of samples  <cit> .

while the allelotyping of dna pools can substantially reduce the costs compared to individual sample by sample genotyping, this approach is not without disadvantages. first, various sources of error occur during the allele frequency estimation from dna pools. according to earp et al.  <cit> , variation introduced to allele frequency estimates can be divided into four categories:  within array;  between arrays;  between independently constructed identical pools, and  between pools constructed from different individuals of the same population . therefore, in order to obtain reliable allele frequency estimates using dna pooling it is important to evaluate the magnitude and relative importance of different sources of error  <cit> . in addition, dna pooling generally does not provide information about haplotype frequency and despite recent computational improvements  <cit>  resolving the phase ambiguity remains a challenge for large number of loci  <cit> . however, despite the popularity of dna pooling in genetic association studies, only few studies to date have utilized allelotyping approach to characterize inter-population variation e.g.  <cit> .

here, we tested the usefulness of dna pooling for a first time using an atlantic salmon  illumina snp-chip to obtain accurate allele frequency estimates for multiple atlantic salmon populations and evaluated the importance of different sources of errors arising from allelotyping. first, we assessed the effect of dna pool construction and between-array variations on allele frequency estimates. subsequently, the effect of cluster separation scores , two alternative sources of theta  and dna pool size on allele frequency estimation were evaluated. finally, two alternative quality control  filters were tested to select optimal sets of snp loci for subsequent population genetic analysis.

RESULTS
in total,  <dig> atlantic salmon dna pools from  <dig> populations were analyzed using an atlantic salmon snp-chip  <cit>  carrying probes for  <dig> snp markers  <dig> of which were bi-allelic. after excluding  <dig> non bi-allelic markers and  <dig> bi-allelic loci due to low call rate   the repeatability of allelotyping from dna pools was tested for  <dig> loci.

array- vs. pool-construction variation
the experimental design described in table  <dig> provided  <dig> estimates of array-variation and  <dig> of pool-construction variation in the theta value. the mean array-variation per snp varied from theta  <dig>  to  <dig> , whereas the mean pool-construction variation of theta ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . the estimated variation of theta between different arrays  was 20% higher compared to variation arising from dna pool construction  . these results suggest that it is more important to consider variation arising from different arrays than variation associated with pool construction  <cit> . this is in line with the earlier studies suggesting that running the same dna pool in multiple arrays should be preferred over construction and analysis of multiple dna pools within the same array  <cit> . however, considering the relatively similar levels of variation associated with the array and pool replicates, future studies should incorporate both sources of variation in the experimental design for reliable estimation of allele frequencies from dna pools.

estimation of allele frequencies from dna pools
the allele frequencies for  <dig> snps that passed the quality control  were estimated from dna pools using reference values of theta provided by cigene and reference values of theta derived from the genotyping of  <dig> individuals used in pool construction. comparison of the two sets of theta values revealed a small, but significant, difference in allele frequency estimates. using individual genotypes from this study to derive reference values of theta provided slightly higher accuracy in allele frequency estimates compared to the larger  but unrelated dataset provided by cigene . errors associated with allele frequency estimations using reference values of theta from two different sources were significantly correlated  suggesting that small number of snps suffer from larger error irrespective of the source of reference values of theta while the majority of loci have relatively low error rates. taken together, these results suggest that even relatively small number of individuals  is sufficient to generate reliable reference values of theta. however, because all three genotype classes are needed for accurate estimation of allele frequencies, using relatively small number of individuals resulted in loss of snps as not all genotypes were observed in the reference datasets .

we observed very high concordance between allele frequency estimates derived from dna pools and from individual genotyping . this demonstrates the accuracy of the dna pooling approach in atlantic salmon and is consistent with earlier studies in other species using illumina bead-array platform. for example, high correlation between allele frequency estimates derived from individual genotyping and dna pools have been observed in humans  and cattle   <cit> . the number of individuals in the dna pool had only a minor effect on the allele frequency estimation  as the error between true and estimated allele frequencies was small and similar for all three pool sizes . therefore, our results suggest that it is possible to obtain accurate allele frequency estimates using dna pools consisting of relatively small number of individuals . however, larger pool sizes should be always preferred over small ones as small number of individuals may not be representative of the whole population.

quality control
one of the important parameters for accurate determination of genotypes and subsequent allelotyping is cluster separation score that quantifies the discrimination between genotype clusters for particular snp . since the heterozygous cluster can be indistinguishable from one or both homozygous clusters for snp with low cluster separation score, exclusion of loci demonstrating low cluster separation scores has been often applied  <cit> . to date, most of the studies have used a cluster separation score cut-off < <dig>  to exclude low quality snps e.g.  <cit> . based on visual inspection of snp clusters in atlantic salmon, however, cut-off value of  <dig>  was chosen to efficiently exclude snps showing ambiguous genotype classes. this resulted in selection of  <dig> out of  <dig> markers for subsequent analysis. as expected, the error in allele frequency estimates of snps having cluster separation score <  <dig>  was higher compared to snps with cluster separation score >  <dig>   . moreover, the correlation between allele frequency estimates derived from three dna pools and from individual genotyping for snps demonstrating low cluster separation scores  was lower than for markers with cluster separation scores >  <dig>  . in addition, the estimated variation of theta was negatively correlated with the cluster separation score both for array  and pool construction  replicates .

while application of qc filter based on cluster separation excludes snps having low quality genotypes, it is not able to remove all loci showing relatively high variation in allele frequency estimates . therefore, application of additional qc filters, e.g. based on comparisons between ‘true’ and estimated allele frequencies or based on combination of variation in allele frequency estimates and heterozygosity have been suggested e.g.  <cit> .

here, we tested two alternative qc filters  that use heterozygosity and variation in allele frequency estimates . this resulted selection of  <dig> vs.  <dig> loci for uniform and spherical cut-off, respectively . majority of loci  that passed both filters were the same . however, spherical filtering is expected to be more useful than uniform cut-off as it retains larger proportion of polymorphic loci with mean allele frequency  <dig>  –  <dig>  across populations, while uniform filter increases the proportion of less variable loci . therefore, for identification of reliable and informative snps, application of spherical filter is preferable over uniform since it effectively excludes loci with relatively high error rate compared to the information content.

CONCLUSIONS
this study tested the effectiveness of dna pooling to obtain accurate allele frequency estimates for large number of atlantic salmon populations using an illumina snp-chip. we demonstrated that pooled dna approach provides a reliable, accurate and cost-effective means for obtaining genome-wide allele frequency estimates for multiple populations. we proposed a novel quality control filter based on spherical cut-off which enables efficient exclusion of loci showing high error rate and minor allele frequency close to zero. our results indicate that even relatively small dna pools  provide accurate allele frequency estimates for a given sample. despite of higher levels of variation associated with array replicates compared to pool construction we suggest that both sources of variation should be taken into account. taken together, this study demonstrates that dna pooling allows fast and high-throughput determination of allele frequencies in atlantic salmon enabling cost-efficient identification of informative markers for discrimination of salmon populations at various geographical scales, as well as identification of loci controlling ecologically and economically important traits. moreover, the main findings of our study based on atlantic salmon snp-chip were in line with those observed for human snp-chips, and thus the technical approaches described herein are encouraging for employing allelotyping approach in other species using illumina snp-chips or other snp genotyping systems and arrays.

