BACKGROUND
organ formation is not limited to embryonic development, but can occur throughout the lifetime of a plant. the potential to develop new organs post-embryonically is attributed to meristems located at the growing tips of the plants, with the root apical meristem generating the underground part of the plant and the shoot apical meristem  giving rise to the entire shoot system after seed germination.

like its root counterpart, the sam contains a pool of pluripotent stem cells that can self-maintain as well as produce the cells that can differentiate into multiple cell and tissue types . while lateral organs such as the leaves are initiated from the peripheral regions of the sam, the basal regions of the sam contribute to the formation of the stem. the stem cells of the sam must thus replenish areas where cells have been recruited and at the same time maintain the population of stem cells. this is generally attributed to an active process of communication among neighbouring sam cells in the microenvironment of the stem cells  <cit> .

elegant genetic work carried out in the model plant, arabidopsis thaliana, has enhanced our understanding of this vital developmental process . this is exemplified by the identification in arabidopsis of wuschel , a homeodomain transcription factor essential for maintaining the pools of stem cells in an undifferentiated state  <cit> , and the clavata group of genes that act together to restrict the proliferation of stem cells  <cit> . while the arabidopsis genus provides invaluable model plants for enhancing our understanding of plant biology, it does not represent all the diverse developmental, environmental and physiological processes operating in the plant kingdom. there thus remains a need to extend the knowledge gained to other plant species especially crop plants.

applying modern genomics research techniques to improving crops requires new knowledge and the development of new genomics resources. legume species belonging to the family fabaceae are cultivated for seeds rich in proteins, and represent important components of the diet in many parts of the world, especially pea, lentil and soybean. legumes have attracted the attention of biologists because of their unique characteristics such as nitrogen fixation, secondary metabolism and pod development, and these are among the various processes that cannot be studied in arabidopsis species. on the other hand, garden pea  has been a classic model species used in genetics  <cit>  and plant-development studies. its extensive use in studies of flowering initiation and development has provided important insights into this transition process  <cit> . in addition, the availability of various developmental and flowering pea mutants  <cit>  makes this tractable for genomics studies.

in this study, we applied a transcriptomics approach to investigate the gene expression profiles associated with the sam of the garden pea, an agriculturally and commercially important model legume. we also investigated the use of micro-dissected sams in unravelling the transcriptome profile of the sam. by identifying genes that exhibit differential expression between sams and non-meristematic tissues , we aimed to elucidate the transcriptional signature of the sam and thereby identify genes that might play important roles in regulating sam activity.

to this end, three directional cdna libraries were constructed using sams that were carefully micro-dissected from garden peas. these libraries comprised the standard cdna library plus a normalized library and a subtracted library, in order to increase the likelihood of recovering rare cdnas, allowing the sampling of the wide diversity of genes expressed in the pea sam. the est sequences derived from these libraries were used in the subsequent design of a combimatrix customarray™  <dig> ×  <dig> k oligonucleotide array that was representative of the gene content of the sam.

in this paper, we present the est and transcriptional profiling data from this genomics project. the transcriptional profiling experiment represents the first analysis of genes that exhibit differential expression between the pea sam and nm. the data reveal that transcripts putatively annotated as being associated with cell division and proliferation, epigenetic regulation, auxin-mediated responses and microrna  regulation are more abundant in the sam than in the nm. in contrast, sequences related to photosynthesis, abiotic or biotic stress responses, reactive oxygen species  homeostasis and general cell-wall maintenance are down-regulated in the sam.

RESULTS
features of generated ests
a total of  <dig> clones from three cdna libraries were single-pass sequenced from their 5' ends. sequence cleaning processes as outlined in the materials and methods yielded  <dig> ests. these sequences had an average trimmed length of  <dig> base pairs and were assembled into  <dig> clusters and  <dig> singlets, resulting in the final annotation of  <dig> unigenes. clusters ranged in membership from  <dig> ests  to two ests . the redundancy levels were  <dig> %,  <dig> % and  <dig> % within the normalized, standard and subtracted libraries, respectively. a high redundancy level of cdna libraries constructed using a similar subtraction method from thellungiella plants under abiotic stress conditions has also been observed previously  <cit> .

the translated products of the  <dig> unigenes were searched against the non-redundant protein database provided by genbank  <cit>  to putatively assign their functions. at the time of writing,  <dig>  unigenes showed significant similarity  to genes of known or putative function, whereas  <dig>  ests were assigned to transcripts with unknown function, which includes hypothetical genes predicted in genomes of model organisms . the remaining  <dig> ests  had no homologues in the public protein sequence database. a further blastn search against genbank est collections revealed that  <dig> of the  <dig> ests were likely to be novel sequences.

overview of putative genes represented in sam-derived cdna libraries
more than 50% of the sam unigenes could be assigned as genes with a known or putative function based on sequence similarity. however, the lack of information on the encoded products meant that many of these transcripts could not be functionally categorized according to the gene ontology consortium . using blast2go  <cit> , we successfully classified  <dig> and  <dig> unigenes in terms of go molecular functions  and biological processes , respectively. a single gene product might be assigned to more than one go term, and hence the total number of go mappings in each of the ontologies exceeded the number of ests.

the successfully classified unigenes cover a broad range of go functional categories . under a molecular-function classification, most of the genes  were assigned to the "binding" class . this class includes sequences with putative involvement in mainly nucleic acid binding, a substantial number of which are predicted to encode transcription factors that are known to be essential to the regulation of plant development. unigenes predicted to encode histone subunits and histone-modification proteins, chromatin remodelling factors and dna methyltransferases represent another group of sequences linked to nucleic acid binding.

to investigate the different types of transcription-factor families represented by our est libraries, a search using the best-matching arabidopsis locus for sam unigenes  was performed at the arabidopsis gene regulatory information server  <cit> . there are  <dig> families of transcription factors currently listed in the database,  <dig> of these are represented by the sam unigenes . six members of the family of homeobox transcription factors that play key roles in the regulation of development may represent interesting candidate genes for further studies.

arabidopsis transcription factor family represented by the shoot apical meristem  unigenes. the matching arabidopsis locus for each clone is indicated.

a. annotation is based on the best blastx match against tair arabidopsis protein database 

in the biological-processes category, 40% and 35% of the unigenes were involved with cellular physiological processes and metabolism, respectively . the former contains gene products that play an important role in cell organization and biogenesis, while the latter has sequences related mainly to protein metabolism. the sequences relevant to protein metabolism ranged from those associated with protein biosynthesis, such as different ribosomal subunits, to those that modify and degrade proteins, including various sequences involved in the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

detection of differentially expressed transcripts in the sam using the pea  <dig> k array
an oligonucleotide microarray has been developed using our est resource and about  <dig> pea sequences randomly retrieved from the genbank pea protein database, which contains approximately  <dig> entries . we utilized this array to compare the transcriptional profiles of the sam and nm. four independent replications of balanced-block-design dual-label experiments were performed  and the resulting data were depicted in figure  <dig> 

differentially expressed genes that were detected using limmagui  <cit>   were subjected to further selection based on the relative change, with up- and down-regulated transcripts defined using cut-offs of greater than  <dig> -fold or less than  <dig> -fold, respectively. based on these criteria, we identified  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts that were significantly up- or down-regulated in the pea sam relative to the nm. these transcripts were annotated based on the best blastx match, and exhibited changes relative to the nm of  <dig> - to  <dig> -fold . the change of  <dig> -fold was for a gene encoding a type  <dig> metallothionein , while that of  <dig> -fold was for a sequence annotated as vegetative lectin . a study of similar genes encoding type  <dig> metallothionein in cotton revealed their abundant  expression in the root  <cit> . meanwhile, the high expression of a sequence encoding vegetative lectin in the pea apex has been observed  <cit> . these and other studies listed in table  <dig> provide independent verification of our microarray data. we also performed rt-pcr analysis on five selected transcripts and as shown in figure  <dig>  the outcome is generally in good agreement with the microarray data.

the data reported is in good agreement with the transcript profiling data.

a. genbank accession number that begins with ex is derived from this study.

further comparison of the functional categories identified to be differentially regulated in maize data  <cit>  and this study  revealed that transcripts associated with the categories of transcription, chromatin and cell division are highly represented in the list of up-regulated genes, while sequences categorized as being related to metabolism, stress and photosynthesis are down-regulated in the sam. however, our data also highlight differences between the transcriptional repertoires of the monocot sam  and the dicot sam . in particular, the high retrotransposon-related transcriptional activity reported in maize  <cit>  does not appear to be a conserved feature of the sam, since it was not present in the pea sam ests.

since the sam we investigated consists of distinct functional zones, the averaging of signals across the whole sam probably attenuated signals associated with any given stem-cell region. however, our experiment showed that a sequence annotated as encoding protodermal factor  <dig> was up-regulated  <dig> -fold in the sam relative to the nm . an arabidopsis counterpart gene has been found to be exclusively expressed in the outermost  layer of the sam  <cit> . this indicates the ability to identify transcripts that are specifically expressed in certain domains of the sam, though the magnitude of the relative change might have been reduced and low abundance transcript could have been missed detection.

a closer inspection of the differentially expressed transcripts revealed that about 60% of the identified down-regulated sequences were derived from genbank . in contrast, only 12% of the genes with higher expression in sams were retrieved from genbank, while the other up-regulated ests were from clones derived from our library collection. this is not surprising since the sequences from genbank were generated primarily from tissues other than the sam, whereas our est collection was derived from dissected sams. this indicates the significance of constructing a library from specialized tissues and further suggests the utility of our est collection as a valuable resource in studying the molecular processes underlying the functions of the plant meristem. meanwhile, 30% of the differentially expressed genes detected were not identified, consisting of genes annotated as hypothetical or expressed protein as well as sequences that have no blastx matches in the public database. this list of unknowns could represent intriguing candidate genes for functional analysis.

a, probe with genbank accession number that begins with ex is derived from this study.

b. annotation is based on the expect value of blastx hit that is set at 1e-5

cell division and proliferation in the sam
putative functions could be assigned to  <dig> of the up-regulated transcripts based on protein sequence similarity. manual inspection of the corresponding transcripts revealed a high representation of ests predicted to encode proteins associated with cell division and proliferation .

in the same category, there is a transcript predicted to encode high mobility group  protein. hmg are proteins that are known to play an architecture role in modifying dna conformation to facilitate the assembly of multiprotein-dna complexes. they may serve only to maintain physical orders but the involvement of these proteins in the network regulating sam activity seems plausible. this is in view of recent studies that demonstrate the binding of hmg proteins to functionally important regions of plant gene promoter and stimulate transcriptions  <cit> .

other up-regulated sequences included transcripts predicted to encode cyclin d  and cyclin b , which are involved in the progression of the cell cycle. d-cyclins are one of the main rate-limiting factors for cell proliferation, and several of them may play key roles in the association between the cell cycle and meristem function, in particular primordia formation .

epigenetic regulation of the sam activity
increases in transcript abundance were also found for genes predicted to encode histone-modification protein , chromatin remodelling factors  and dna methyltransferases . these proteins are known to play a role in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression by participating in mechanisms that alter chromatin structure so as to activate or repress particular sets of genes .

there is an emerging recognition of the significance of the chromatin remodelling process in regulating the activity of plant stem cells . for instance, mutation of the arabidopsis fasciata <dig>  and fasciata <dig>  genes that encode subunits of the chromatin assembly factor leads to dysfunction of the sam  <cit> . this was associated with the down-regulation of wus gene expression in both mutants, suggesting that regulation of meristem function and organogenesis by chromatin remodelling factors is primarily achieved through regulation of the expression of the homeobox transcription factor  <cit> . however, direct links between chromatin remodelling factors and the regulation of the expression of key meristem genes remain to be established. nonetheless, the up-regulation of the expression of these sequences in the sam suggests that the mechanism of epigenetic regulation is important to maintaining the identity of stem cells in plants, as has been reported in animals  <cit> .

transcription factors and hormonal regulation of sam activity
we also identified a few putative transcription factors among the genes whose expression was higher in the sam than in the nm. these included an est  annotated as a putative plant-specific transcription factor from a yabby-family protein – members of this family are reportedly involved in the abaxial cell-fate specification in lateral organs of arabidopsis  <cit> . also on the list was a sequence predicted to encode auxin response factor  <dig> . similar members of the auxin response factor group of proteins are known to regulate auxin-mediated transcript activation or repression. for example, the expression of several genes, such as those encoding members of lateral organ boundaries domain proteins and auxin-regulated gene involved in organ size, are disrupted in the double mutant of arf <dig> and arf <dig>  implicating their roles in auxin-mediated plant development  <cit> .

other gene products that might be related to auxin include a putative auxin-efflux carrier , auxin-conjugating protein  and a ribosomal protein l24b . similar genes in arabidopsis have been implicated in auxin-mediated developmental regulation  <cit> . for example, dwarf in light <dig> is involved in auxin signal transduction, and inhibits shoot and hypocotyl-cell elongation  <cit> . the presence of several auxin-related transcripts on our list reflects the well-established roles of auxin in organ initiation and positioning at the meristem  <cit> .

intriguingly, mirnas that are endogenous 21-nucleotide riboregulators have been shown to target several mrnas implicated in auxin responses, including dwarf in light <dig>  <cit> . there is increasing amount of evidence indicating that mirna-mediated repression plays an important role in the spatial expression of plant cell-fate regulatory genes . a protein called argonaute is known to function as a catalytic component of the rna-induced silencing complex, which targets mrna for degradation using mirna as a guide  <cit> . nevertheless, the precise role for the up-regulation of a transcript annotated as encoding a similar argonaute in our dataset  awaits further study.

stress responses in the sam
many of the down-regulated transcripts were potentially associated with biotic and abiotic stress responses , including transcripts predicted to encode dehydrin-related protein , pathogenesis-related protein , disease-resistance-response protein , antimicrobial defensin  and chitinase . this might be attributable to the stems, leaves and roots generally being exposed to greater biotic or abiotic stress than the well-shielded sam, with the former therefore requiring the constitutive presence of these gene products at a higher level than in the sam in order to maintain successful defence responses. however, we found at least one other sequence  potentially related to stress responses whose expression was higher in the sam . although the molecular basis for this is unknown, it is possible that the corresponding encoded product plays dual roles in both stress responses and development. this is supported by a recent study finding a network of rice genes associated with stress responses and seed development  <cit> .

a, probe with genbank accession number that begins with ex is derived from this study.

b. annotation is based on the expect value of blastx hit that is set at 1e-5

ros homeostasis in the sam
surprisingly, the down-regulated transcripts included various sequences encoding proteins that scavenge or generate ros, such as thioredoxin , catalase , cu-zn superoxide dismutase , copper amine oxidase  and peroxidase . this implies that the level of ros is lower in the sam than in the nm, and hence the expression of genes encoding ros scavengers is lower in the former. the absence of photosynthesis  in the sam might explain the lower ros level therein. however, there is increasing evidence that plants use ros as signalling molecules for regulating development and various physiological responses, and for mediating abscisic-acid-induced stomatal closure, as well as in auxin signalling and gravitropism in roots  <cit> . whether this indicates that the regulatory role of ros is less prominent in the sam than in the nm awaits further investigation.

photosynthesis- and cell-wall-related transcripts
several of the genes more abundant in the nm than in the sam were predicted to be related to photosynthesis, including subunits of photosystem i and ii and chlorophyll-a/b-binding protein. it is well known that meristematic cells do not contain differentiated plastids, which may explain the lower expression level of genes associated with photosynthesis in the sam.

some of the sequences predicted to encode products that play roles in cellulose synthesis, such as cellulose synthase , pectin methylesterase , xyloglucan endotransglycosylase , were found to be down-regulated in the sam. this probably reflects the cell-wall structure in the stem and leaf being more complex that the thin primary cell wall in meristematic cells  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the development of our est collection from the pea sam represents an important advance towards understanding sam function and maintenance, especially due to the under-representation of sam-related transcripts in the public database as demonstrated in this study. subsequent transcriptional profiling experiments using the microarray constructed from ests yielded the transcriptional signatures of the pea sam, and we have reported a repertoire of transcripts with putative or unknown functions that are differentially regulated in the sam. in silico analysis of the predicted gene products has implicated several processes in the complex molecular network that regulates this developmental process. future studies of these genes should attempt to reveal how they interact in the complex molecular network that maintains and regulates the dynamics of the sam.

