BACKGROUND
a protein binding hot spot is a small cluster of residues  <cit>  tightly packed at the center of the interface between two interacting proteins. though a hot spot constitutes a small fraction of the interface, it contributes most to the binding stability and free energy. a hot spot of binding energy was initially conceptualized by clackson and wells , supported by an important finding that a 'functional epitope'  between human growth hormone and its receptor accounts for more than three-quarters of the binding free energy  <cit> . this hot spot was also found to be geometrically surrounded by less important contact residues that are generally hydrophilic and partially hydrated  <cit> . on the basis of these pioneering observations and studies, bogan and thorn  formalized more intuitively a hypothesis named o-ring theory to characterize the topological shape of the surrounding residues  <cit> . the o-ring theory points out that the residues of the o-ring likely function a role to occlude bulk water molecules from the hot spots. thus, the o-ring theory is also known as 'water exclusion' hypothesis  <cit> . this theory is profound and influential. however, the organizational topology of the ring-inside, energetically more important hot spot residues is not specified by the o-ring theory. recently, we investigated the spatial adjacency and vicinity of these hot spot residues and proposed a hypothesis called 'double water exclusion'   <cit>  to refine the o-ring theory. at one hand, the dwe hypothesis agrees with the o-ring principle that there should exist a ring of residues surrounding the hot spot for avoiding the invasion of water molecules after the complex formation; on the other hand, the dwe hypothesis affirms that the hot spot itself is water-free, having a zero-tolerance to water molecules. in fact, the dwe hypothesis shares a light with the 'coupling' proposition  <cit>  which is another insightful theory about hot spot residues, and it also theoretically strengthens the influential 'hot region' principle  <cit> . the requirements for a cluster of residues to form a hot spot under the dwe hypothesis can be mathematically satisfied by a biclique subgraph  <cit>  if a vertex is used to represent a residue, an edge to indicate a close distance between two residues, and a bipartite graph to represent a pair of interacting proteins. we term these hot spots as dwe bicliques, and note that in a dwe biclique, residues from one chain all have full connection with the residues from the other chain. in our latest evaluation  <cit>  by applying to the asedb repository  <cit>  and the hotsprint database  <cit> , we found that these dwe bicliques are rich of true hot spot residues.

with the perspective change from the o-ring theory to the dwe hypothesis, it is interesting to study the physicochemical properties of dwe biclique hot spots, and to compare with those  <cit>  under the o-ring theory. specifically in this paper, we examine those dwe bicliques that are unique to crystal packing contacts, or unique to biological interactions including obligate and non-obligate interactions. crystal packing are enforced by crystallographic packing environments and formed during the crystallization process, but they do not occur in solution or in their physiological states  <cit> . on contrast, obligate interactions are stable, but their protein chains have no stable tertiary structures in vivo and they function only in the complex form  <cit> . however, the protomers in non-obligate interactions may disassociate after the accomplishment of a particular function  <cit> . clearly, obligate and non-obligate interactions depend on various factors for promoting complex formation although some factors are common, while the non-specific crystal packing should have different properties from these two kinds of biological interactions. so at the residue level, it is of our primary interests to see which dwe bicliques are signature binding hot spots of the different types of protein interactions, and which are common for demonstrating their such difference. given two types of interactions , a unique dwe biclique is defined as a dwe biclique that frequently occurs in one type of interaction  but is absent in the other type . we also examine the residue composition of dwe bicliques, and the distribution of residue pairs and their pairing preference within dwe bicliques.

residue composition and residue pairing preference are two fundamental physicochemical properties for protein folding  <cit>  and protein interactions  <cit> . both of them have been broadly used in comparative analyses based on protein structure data. one aspect of this comparative analyses is on different segments within protein complex structures, such as comparison between intraproteins and protein interfaces  <cit> , or interdomain comparison  <cit> ; another angle is on different types of protein interactions  <cit> . de et al.  <cit>  and lukman et al.  <cit>  analyzed residue contacts of obligate complexes and non-obligatory/transient protein complexes, and reported that the interaction patterns of these two types of complexes were different. ofran and rost  <cit>  studied the preferences of residue contacts in a more complicate way for six types of protein interfaces. one finding is that the preferences differed remarkably between the six types of interfaces. however, in almost all previous works, the individual residues and the residue pairs were dissected based on the whole interfaces. in this work, we analyze the composition of residues and residue pairs in dwe bicliques, the energetically important part of each interface.

we propose to use interaction-preferred residues  and interaction-preferred residue pairs  to describe the binding specificity for different types of interactions. our important findings include:  in the obligate interactions, hydrophobic iprs and iprp contacts involving only hydrophobic residues are widely conserved, no anti-iprs are hydrophobic, and the contacts involving only hydrophilic residues are depleted in iprps;  aromatic iprs and their iprps much prefer to the biological interactions, especially to the non-obligate interactions;  hydrophilic iprs and iprps involving only hydrophilic residues seem to be rich in crystal packing contacts; the anti-iprs of crystal packing, such as met, trp and cys, are just the iprs of the obligate or non-obligate interactions. so, these iprs and iprps in dwe bicliques provide a clear distinction for the specific binding behaviors of biological interactions as well as crystal packing contacts.

RESULTS
the data used for our evaluation is a nonredundant data set consisting of  <dig> crystal packing contacts,  <dig> non-obligate interactions and  <dig> obligate interactions. this data set is combined from  <dig> previously compiled datasets  <cit>  after a redundancy-removal process shown in methods.

we identified  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> dwe bicliques from these obligate, non-obligate and crystal packing contacts, respectively. all of these dwe bicliques have at least two residues in the smaller side and at least three residues in the bigger side, and occur in at least two interactions. the detailed computational steps are presented in the methods section for how to detect dwe bicliques from a pair of interaction chains. there are  <dig> obligate interactions,  <dig> non-obligate interactions and  <dig> crystal packing that do not contain any dwe bicliques. please note that by 'containing no dwe bicliques', we mean that these interactions do not contain any dwe bicliques of high frequency or of big size; they may contain some bicliques with low support  or with a small size .

the remaining results are organized into four parts in this section. firstly, we show that a binding hot spot is usually a very small area in comparison to its binding interface. then, we present the distribution of dwe bicliques among the three types of protein interactions to provide an intuitive way for understanding the protein interfaces. after that, we conduct statistical analysis on the composition of the residues and on the pairing preference of residue pairs in our dwe bicliques.

a. binding hot spots are small in binding interfaces
we calculated the fractions of residues in dwe bicliques over interface residues. as expected, we found that binding hot spots are small in binding interfaces as shown in table  <dig>  in this table, all the dwe bicliques are from the biological interactions; in the first column, the numbers split by '-' mean that the residue number of the smaller partite in dwe bicliques must be not less than the left number, and that the residue number of the larger partite must be not less than the right number; in the following two columns, c means that the fraction is over the whole contact residues, and i means that the fraction is over the whole interface residues. here, interface residues comprise contact residues and their nearby residues  <cit> . a pair of contact residues are two residues each from one chain that have at least two atoms contacting to each other.  the nearby residues refer to those residues that are from the same chain as the contact residues, and their ca atoms also contact with the ca atoms of contact residues. here, two ca atoms are considered to contact if their distance is less than  <dig> Å  <cit> .

b. common and unique dwe bicliques in different types of interactions
in this work, unique dwe bicliques are defined based on bicliques' support information. given a set of interactions containing one or more types of interactions, a dwe biclique may have multiple occurrence in these interactions. we call the number of occurrence the support level of this biclique. we also use support ratio r to help the comparisons of dwe bicliques in different types of interactions. suppose that a biclique has a higher support sh in one type ch and a lower support sl in the contrasting type cl, r = sh/sl indicates the preference of this biclique between these two types. in the extreme cases when the support ratio r is infinite , this biclique is more interesting and it is defined as a unique biclique. in other words, this kind of unique bicliques have zero occurrence in one entire type of protein interactions but have multiple, perhaps very high, occurrence in the other type. to avoid some possible noise patterns, we require that sh + sl should be not less than  <dig> which is consistent with the biclique filtering constraint presented in methods. thus for unique bicliques, sh is always equal to or greater than  <dig> since sl =  <dig>  obligate and non-obligate interactions are two types of distinct biological interactions, each possessing their specific binding behaviors. however, crystal packing contacts are randomly formed by chance. we present dwe bicliques that are unique to biological interactions  when compared to crystal packing contacts , and those unique to crystal packing when compared to biological interactions. meanwhile, the common bicliques, those with support ratio around  <dig> , between biological interactions and crystal packing are also presented. then we report common and unique dwe bicliques between obligate  and non-obligate interactions  to demonstrate their distinct binding specificity. after that, a case study is followed to examine deep structural details of unique dwe bicliques. here, the symbol cp+ stands for a 'positive' set, while the symbol cn- stands for a 'negative' set. if the higher support sh of a biclique is in the positive set, then we denote the support ratio r as sh/sl; otherwise if the higher support sh is in the negative set, we denote r as -sh/sl.

common and unique dwe bicliques: biological interactions vs crystal packing contacts
the distribution of dwe bicliques on the range of their support ratios from -inf to +inf is shown in table  <dig>  it can be noted that the type of crystal packing contacts contains much fewer favorite dwe bicliques than the type of biological interactions . in particular, there are only  <dig> dwe bicliques unique to crystal packing, counting to only  <dig> % of the total dwe bicliques occurring in the biological and crystal packing interactions. in contrast, the type of biological interactions is rich of dwe bicliques, including unique bicliques. table  <dig> shows that about  <dig> % bicliques are unique bicliques to biological interactions. few dwe bicliques contained by crystal packing but abundant dwe bicliques in biological interactions are interpretable with the following reasons:  crystal packing are constructed randomly based on protein surfaces during the crystallization process, and their artifact interfaces cannot form much repeatable dwe bicliques;  residues in biological interfaces are found to be more conserved than crystal packing and than the rest of protein surfaces  <cit> , and thus biological interactions can easily form stable and repeatable biclique structures.

common and unique dwe bicliques: obligate vs non-obligate interactions
related evidence for unique bicliques
the existence of unique bicliques in the three types of interactions is in agreement with the observations in our another work  <cit>  for classifying three types of interactions . in that work, we compared classification performance between our propensity vectors, binary vectors and frequency vectors on three literature datasets under three evaluation frameworks. in  <cit> , all of the propensity vectors, binary vectors and frequency vectors contain 3-dimensional summary information of protein interactions and another  <dig> dimensions for residue pairs. the difference was that the values of 210-dimensional residue pairs in binary vectors indicated whether a certain residue pair occurs or not in a certain corresponding protein interaction, and those in frequency vectors were the frequency of corresponding residue pairs in protein interactions, while those in propensity vectors were the propensity value of corresponding residue pairs in protein interactions.

our comparison results of these three vectors in  <cit>  suggested following two evidences to support our concept of unique bicliques.  in almost all cases, the performances under the dwe hypothesis are better than those on all interface residues. that is, the whole interfaces may cover more noise features among different types of interactions, while dwe bicliques can remove some noise patterns and pinpoint distinct features.  binary vectors had a similar high classification performance to, sometimes a bit higher than, the frequency vectors. that similar performance maybe implied that certain combination patterns of residue pairs rather than their frequency are signature features for different types of protein interactions. when dwe bicliques are detected from dwe bipartites of protein interactions, these dwe bicliques are likely to be this kind of the combination patterns. in fact, the union of bicliques, possibly not maximal bicliques, might also be one kind of the combination patterns.

unique bicliques: a case study
we present four unique dwe bicliques and study their structural properties. they are:  a unique biclique  = ⟨{gly, gly, lys}, {gln, thr}⟩, which occurs only in two crystal packing contacts ;  a unique biclique  = ⟨{leu, thr, val}, {leu, val}⟩, which occurs only in five obligate interactions as shown in table 5; a dwe biclique  = ⟨{ala, leu, val}, {leu, tyr}⟩ which is a unique biclique to the type of biological interactions occurring in two obligate and three non-obligate interactions , and  a unique biclique  = ⟨{gln, gly, ser, ser, typ}, {cys, lys}⟩ contained in only  <dig> non-obligate interactions . at the first column of these four tables, the first four letters represent pdb entry identifiers, if necessary, followed by '-' and two interaction protein chains which are separated by ':'. at the columns  <dig> and  <dig> of these four tables, the strings split by '-' are residue types followed by their corresponding positions in the amino acid sequences, representing specific residues from the two interacting protein chains.

we take these examples to highlight that the uniqueness of dwe bicliques matches to different interfacial properties of the three types of protein interactions in terms of polarity, hydrophobicity, the composition of residues and residue pairs in protein interfaces. as mentioned, the unique biclique   has a support of only  <dig>  in fact, the maximum support of the unique bicliques that occur in the type of crystal packing contacts is  <dig>  while the maximum support of the unique bicliques in the biological interactions is larger,  <dig> for the obligate bicliques and  <dig> for the non-obligate bicliques. thus, the biclique structures in the biological interactions are more stable and repeatable than those in the crystal packing contacts. the four examples of unique bicliques also give a glance at residue composition in the three types of interactions. as shown in table  <dig>  the unique biclique  of crystal packing consists of more polar and hydrophilic residues, such as gly/lys and gln/thr, while the unique biclique  to the biological interactions comprises more hydrophobic residues, such as leu and val as shown in table  <dig>  table  <dig> also indicates that the contacts of identical residues easily occur in obligate interactions. however, this is found less in non-obligate interactions as shown in table  <dig> and table  <dig> 

we would also like to present the conservation scores and the residues' asa  of unique bicliques in specific pdb entries. we take  in the crystal packing 2acy in table  <dig> and  in the transient interaction 2ptc in table  <dig> as example. in these two tables, the conservation score is taken from the website of rate4site  <cit> , while asa is calculated by naccess  <cit> . the location of these two bicliques at the protein interfaces are displayed in figure  <dig> 

it can be seen from table  <dig> that the biclique residues in  have relatively small asa in the 2ptc complex and larger asa change upon complex formation. this can be easily understood from figure 1: figure  <dig> and  <dig> clearly show that the biclique residues in the biological interface 2ptc are buried. the asa of lys <dig> in chain i decreases from  <dig>  Å to  <dig>  Å, indicating that this biclique is closer to the interface center than to the rim of interface in figure  <dig>  however in the crystal packing 2acy, both partites of  have residues with relatively larger asa, more than  <dig> Å. so, the biclique residues in chain b in figure  <dig> are a little away from the interface center.

as shown in table  <dig> and table  <dig>  both bicliques contain residues with high conservation scores. however, three of the seven residues in  have a conservation score less than  <dig>  for example, the conservation score of lys <dig> in chain i of 2ptc is  <dig>  but this residue contributes greatly to the formation of the complex 2ptc - its mutation results in a big binding free energy change  according to asedb   <cit> . this observation might give a hint that although residue conservation is one of major factors contributing to frequent bicliques, frequent unique bicliques to biological interactions can capture more specific evidence for understanding complex formation than the conservation alone, such as asa, residue physicochemical properties, and tightly packing residue contact. next, we present our sequence and structural analysis results on the unique biclique . as shown in table  <dig>   occurs only in six non-obligate interactions in six different pdb protein complexes. these six interactions are all about trypsins/trypsinogen interacting with different types of inhibitors in different organisms. for example, 1tgs is about 'three-dimensional structure of the complex between pancreatic secretory inhibitor  and trypsinogen', and 2btc is about 'bovine trypsin in complex with squash seed inhibitor '. the sequence similarities of the six interacting chain pairs are as follows. chain e of 1tab, chain z of 1tgs, chain e of 2btc and chain e of 2ptc are identical chains. in comparison to this identical chain, chain a of 1eja has only 83% sequence similarity and chain h of 1bth possesses only about 36% sequence similarity. the sequence similarity among the other chains of these interactions is very low except two identical chains p in 1bth and i in 2ptc.

overall, there are no two pairs of interactions whose sequence similarity is larger than 40%. that is, there is no pair sequence redundancy in these six non-obligate interactions. we also note that although the two chain es in 2btc and in 2ptc are identical chains, the specific residues involved in  are not the same due to the low similarity between their partner chains. residue ser in 2btc is in the position  <dig>  while it is in the position  <dig> in 2ptc. so, both bicliques are interesting to show. the details of these sequence similarities are provided in table  <dig>  the computational steps for determining the sequence similarity between two sequence pairs can be found in methods.

the italic half is for the sequence similarity among these inhibitors, while the bold-face half is for the sequence similarity among trypsins/trypsinogen; '-' means no significant sequence alignment.

the 3d structures of this dwe biclique in the six different pdb protein complexes are displayed and compared in figure  <dig>  the 3d shape of these structures looks highly similar to each other with a common lock-and-key topology  <cit> . since this stable topology is repetitive in six non-obligate interactions, it is worthy of further investigation to see whether this group of residues in this biclique is closely related to or involved in the above mentioned protein functions.

another interesting question is: which residues in this dwe biclique are energetically outstanding. as mentioned, lys in the sequence position  <dig> of chain i in 2ptc is a wet-lab confirmed hot spot residue with an extremely high energy  according to asedb  <cit> . this may suggest that the lys residue is also a hot spot residue in the other  <dig> interacting chain pairs.

c. residue composition of the dwe bicliques for the three types of protein interfaces
the residue composition of protein binding interfaces or binding sites has been intensively studied previously  <cit> . the composition of residues and residue pairs in dwe bicliques are studied by the current work in order to understand whether protein binding hot spots change their residue composition under the constraint of 'double water exclusion' hypothesis. we focus on the preference and tendency of residues to the specific types of interactions, as well as the preference and tendency of residue pairs. we would like to note that the composition of residues and their pairs in unique bicliques may be more interesting than those in dwe bicliques. but our investigation shows that there is no significant change for the composition of residues and their pairs in going from dwe bicliques to unique bicliques. this situation may be due to  that unique bicliques dominate dwe bicliques, and/or  that common bicliques among the different types of interactions, especially those with larger support ratios, may also cover useful patterns for understanding protein binding behaviors. therefore in the following two subsections, our analysis on the residues and their pairs in dwe bicliques is not on unique bicliques alone. we begin our analysis on the interaction-dominated residues  and interaction-preferred residues . a residue is an idr in a type of interactions if its percent frequency in a set of dwe bicliques for this type of interactions is high; while a residue is an ipr in a type of interactions if its frequency ratio over the background is high. see methods for the detailed definitions of idrs, iprs and anti-iprs. figure  <dig> shows the frequency information of the twenty amino acids in our dwe bicliques for the three types of interactions, and figure  <dig> displays the frequency ratio information of the twenty amino acids with reference to their background frequencies.

from figure  <dig>  we can see that the idrs for the obligate interactions are leu , ala , val , gly , ile , arg  and phe  ordered by their frequencies. five of these residues are hydrophobic except gly and arg. however, arg is broadly considered to be the richest in hot spots  <cit> . gly's frequency ratio over its background percentage is  <dig> , near to  <dig>  that is, the abundance of gly in nature makes gly become an idr. thus, we can make a conjecture that the binding hot spots of obligate interactions are dominated by hydrophobic residues. this point agrees to the frequency ratio trend of the iprs of the obligate interactions as shown in figure  <dig>  the iprs in these obligate interactions are tyr , phe, leu, met, arg, trp, ile, val and thr according to the ranking of their frequency ratios. six of these iprs are hydrophobic except tyr, arg and thr. however, tyr is an aromatic residue which can form π-π/cation-π interactions to stabilize protein binding. this is also why all aromatic residues, tyr, phe and trp, are iprs of obligate interactions. another interesting observation from figure  <dig> is that the anti-iprs are cys, gln, ser, glu, asp and lys-none of them is hydrophobic. therefore, all these observations are consistent, and indicate that the binding hot spots of obligate interactions are hydrophobic and stable.

different from the obligate interactions, the binding hot spots of the non-obligate interactions contain only three hydrophobic idrs , in addition to three hydrophilic idrs  and one basic idr . it seems that non-obligate interactions are generally less hydrophobic than obligate interactions. the iprs of these non-obligate interactions have a similar composition to their idrs, including three hydrophilic residues , three hydrophobic residues , and two basic residues . three aromatic residues, especially trp and tyr, seem to have a higher propensity to non-obligate interactions.

the idrs of crystal packing are leu , gly , arg , glu , ala , ile  and tyr . but the anti-iprs of crystal packing, such as met, trp and cys, become ipr residues of obligate or non-obligate interactions. as expected, biological interactions have different residue preference from crystal packing in their dwe bicliques.

quantifying the difference of residue composition for the three types of protein interactions
we take two ways to quantify the residue composition difference between different interaction types. one is a euclidean distance Δf  <cit>  as described by equation  <dig> in methods to measure the difference of residue percent composition in the three types of protein interactions; the other is a correlation coefficient cc  <cit>  as described by equation  <dig> in methods mainly to compare different residue ratio composition. the comparison result is presented in table  <dig> 

the italic numbers are for correlation coefficient, and others for euclidean distance.

it is not surprised to see that the residue composition of all the three types is highly correlated to the background residue composition in the swiss-prot database with cc >  <dig>   <dig>  <cit> ; however, biological interactions have larger euclidean distance from the background residue composition with Δf =  <dig> % for the obligate interactions and Δf =  <dig> % for the non-obligate interactions. the euclidean distance of residue percent composition in the three types of interactions is also large. for example, this euclidean distance between the obligate and non-obligate interactions is  <dig> %, while that between the cores of protein-protein complexes and homodimers is  <dig> %  <cit> .

we can understand from table  <dig> that frequency ratio of residue composition in the three types of protein interactions has very low correlation coefficient, especially between non-obligate interactions and crystal packing with cc =  <dig> . the exceptionally larger correlation coefficient but larger euclidean distance  between crystal packing and obligate interactions is partly, if not mainly, due to that most of crystal packing in the analyzed dataset are based on identical chains while most of obligate interactions are homodimers.

comparison on residue composition between the o-ring and dwe hypothesis
our analysis result on the residue composition of our dwe bicliques is in agreement with the influential study by bogan and thorn  <cit>  who investigated the binding hot spots of protein interfaces under the o-ring hypothesis. bogan and thorn  <cit>  found that hot spots are abundant with trp, tyr and arg. we also found that these three residues are actually iprs for both obligate and non-obligate interactions. similar to bogan and thorn's method, janin and her colleagues had a study for identifying the core and rim from a protein interface. they found that aromatic residues have high propensity values in the core of protein-protein recognition sites  <cit> . for homodimeric proteins, their another work  <cit>  pointed out that aliphatic and aromatic residues are very rich in the binding hot spots. all these results are consistent with ours.

therefore, we can see that when protein binding hot spots are refined from the o-ring theory to the double water exclusion hypothesis, the composition properties are inherited and some properties are more enlightened and sharpened.

d. residue pairing preference in dwe bicliques for the three types of protein interfaces
a dwe biclique can contain many residue pairs. we are interested in those residue pairs that dominate, with high frequency, the binding hot spots of a type of protein interactions. we term this kind of residue pairs as interaction-dominated residue pairs . meanwhile, we also examine interaction-preferred residue pairs . 

the composition information of all possible  <dig> residue pairs in our dwe bicliques is displayed in figure  <dig>  it can be seen that the obligate interactions are dominated by the contacts of hydrophobic residues. taking the idrp group of i-v-l-f as example, the total frequencies of ten idrp contacts within this group are  <dig> %,  <dig> % and  <dig> % for the obligate interactions, non-obligate interactions and crystal packing, respectively. the contact frequency of this most hydrophobic group in the obligate interactions is much higher than those in the other two types of interactions.

the iprps sharpen the difference of residue pairs in the three types of interactions. in the obligate interactions, most iprps are from four groups:  the contacts of identical residues, especially the residues with hydrophobicity not less than tyr -this observation agrees with the discussion in  <cit>  where identical residues more likely contact themselves in obligate interactions;  the interacting pairs between aliphatic residues, ile , val  and leu -all these residues are most hydrophobic;  the contacts between aromatic residues, tyr , trp  and phe ; and  the contact pairs between aromatic residues and arg/aliphatic residues. aromatic residues are much involved in iprps due to that they easily form π-π/cation-π contacts which are vital to the stability of biological interactions. besides the above iprps, another three iprps of obligate interactions are residue pairs met-leu, ala-leu and met-phe.

all these iprps shape an interesting distribution as outlined in figure  <dig>  most of the iprps are located at the top-left corner of figure  <dig>  an area on the top of and at the left of tyr  included. we call this area iprp area. there are fewer iprps outside this area, while those iprp exceptions outside the iprp area are the identical contacts of asn  and arg , and the interactions between arg  and aromatic residues. that is, when taking the aromatic residue tyr  as the dividing line for the columns and also for the rows in figure  <dig>  iprps are depleted in the top-right corner ). the bottom-right corner also has rare iprps where the least hydrophilic residues are solely involved in the contacts. such an iprp distribution suggests that it is the very hydrophobic contacts that much prefer to the obligate interactions.

similarly, in the non-obligate interactions, there are also very fewer iprps in the bottom-right corner of figure  <dig> except the contact between arg  and asp . in the non-obligate interactions, the iprps are mainly from the contacts involving trp , tyr , phe , cys , his  and leu , specially the contacts involving w and y. of these contact residues, three are aromatic residues , and two are nonpolar . cys-involved iprps are expected due to that cys contains a sulfate atom and can form disulfate bridges to stabilize the protein interactions. the reason why h is also involved in the iprps may be that h is sometimes categorized into aromatic residues  <cit>  and likely possesses some properties of aromatic residues in certain environments. in conclusion, residue pairs involved by hydrophobic and aromatic residues are abundant in the two types of biological interactions, indicating the importance of these iprps in specific binding behaviors.

in contrast to biological interactions, the iprp distribution for the crystal packing contacts is completely opposite. crystal packing contacts have more iprps of hydrophilic contacts ) and fewer iprps at the top-left corner. the top-right corner  of figure  <dig> has more iprps than the top-left corner does.

CONCLUSIONS
with the integration of the influential o-ring theory and the insightful 'coupling proposition', dwe  is a more comprehensive hypothesis for modeling protein binding hot spots. in this work, we constructed dwe bipartites from interacting protein chains under the constraints of both residue contacts and residue accessibility. biclique patterns were then detected for each type of protein interactions. our comparative analysis on dwe bicliques suggested that there do exist unique bicliques in the three types of interactions. compared to crystal packing, those unique bicliques only occurring to biological interactions made it much clear that the biological binding behaviors have strong specificity. the unique bicliques in the obligate and non-obligate interactions also confirmed the different binding behaviors in these two types of biological interactions. therefore, the idea of dwe bicliques provides a new way to the study on protein interfaces.

the composition of residues and the composition of residue pairs, in particular iprs and iprps, did reveal the deep characteristics of these types of interactions. the protomers of obligate interactions fold and bind at the same time. obligate interfaces need hydrophobic residues to form their interior cores, similar to the cores of protein tertiary structures in the same folding-binding process. therefore in the obligate interactions, hydrophobic residues were greatly involved in iprs and iprps, while none of the anti-iprs of the obligate interactions was hydrophobic. also in this process of protein folding and binding in a solvent environment, hydrophilic and polar residues prefer protein solvent surface than hydrophobic core, and the contacts involved by hydrophilic residues of obligate interactions were thus depleted in iprps.

on the other hand, two protomers in non-obligate interactions fold separately. they then come together to bind upon a specific molecular stimulus, and may dissociate after that. in a unbound form of non-obligate protomers, their interface surfaces have to contact with the solvent, and less hydrophobic residues are necessary  <cit>  to keep the stability of unbound non-obligate protomers. so, the hydrophobic iprps in non-obligate interactions are much less than in obligate interactions. to compensate for the decrease of hydrophobic iprps in non-obligate interactions, aromatic residues are rich in non-obligate interfaces. aromatic residues, such as trp, tyr and his sometimes, can contribute protein binding through the hydrophobic effect. meanwhile, aromatic residues do not result in a large entropic penalty because they have few rotatable bonds  <cit> . this is why aromatic iprs and their iprps were observed to be abundant in biological interactions, especially in non-obligate interfaces.

in contrast, hydrophilic iprs and iprps were affluent in crystal packing to stabilize monomers in crystal packing without interactions. the anti-iprs of crystal packing, such as met, trp and cys, were just the iprs of the biological interactions, indicating they can form significant atom contacts to greatly increase the probability of biological interactions, such as π involving contacts and disulphide bridges.

in summary, these iprs and iprps in dwe bicliques are excellent indicators for the specificity analysis of biological binding behaviors. they can be used to identify biological interactions from crystal packing and classify different types of biological interactions, such as obligate and non-obligate interactions  <cit> . the identification of obligate or non-obligate interactions can help docking algorithm to remove the noise of produced crystal packing.

