BACKGROUND
in recent years, the prospect for the cardiovascular disease  pharmacotherapy seems to have ‘hit the wall’, with multiple high-profile trial failures and declining industrial interest. reasons for such predicament might include an intensive regulatory environment, a competitive market, the elevated bar of existing medicines for further innovation and the increasing cost of mega-trials. however, the most important and intrinsic reason comes up to the lack of mechanistic understanding of drug action and the complicated etiologies  <cit> .

over the past 50 years, sorts of blockbusters for the therapy of cvd have been sprung up, such as statins, angiotensin-converting enzyme  inhibitors, anti-platelet agents and beta-blockers. however, many of these drugs play functional roles in biological processes outside the scope of the drug’s intended effects  <cit> . this often leads to unexpected situations at various stages during the drug discovery process. for example, torcetrapib , an inhibitor of cholesteryl ester transfer protein , failed in the investigation of lipid level management to understand its impact in atherosclerotic events  trial for the increased risk of mortality and morbidity  <cit> , due to the off-target effects of torcetrapib on hypertension  <cit> . on the contrary, the unpredictable off-target interaction may also give rise to safety effects on patients. for example, statins, originally designed to target elevated lipids for the treatment of atherosclerosis, might also confer cardiovascular benefit with their anti-inflammatory effects, independent of ldl-lowering effects  <cit> .

indeed, a growing body of post-genomic biology  has been revealing a far more complex portrait of drug actions. it is appreciated that many drugs with a specific efficacy actually act on multiple protein targets  <cit> . this so-called polypharmacology is an undesirable property in the conventional reductionist paradigm and might be more suitable to view through the lens of systems-based approaches  <cit> .

the complexity of cvd also resists traditional efforts which have been applied to identify a single gene or pathway to treat the disease  <cit> . common forms of cvd are caused by multiple genetic factors, each of which contributes modestly to the disease risk, and also environmental factors. genetically, it has become evident that many human diseases cannot be attributed to the malfunction of a single gene but to complex interactions among multiple genetic variants. perturbations in several genes might only make subtle contributions to the susceptibility of a particular individual  <cit> . therefore, the disease causations should be studied on the basis of the entire body of knowledge including all genes that are associated with the clinical traits. epidemiologically, cardiovascular events are not only related to environmental factors such as smoking, diet and physical activity but also linked to other systemic disorders such as hypertension, diabetes, obesity, or thyroid disease  <cit> . traditional research efforts normally address these individual risk factors in isolation, even though they are believed to concomitantly contribute to the disease pathogenesis   <cit> . accordingly, a systems-based approach integrating all the potential related factors involved in the pathologies and disease treatment is required to address these complex issues.

to quantitatively characterize the complex relationships between cardiovascular drugs, targets, disease genes and disorders, we construct a series of networked relationships including cardiovascular drug-target, gene-disease, drug-disease, and protein-protein interaction networks by integrating publicly available drug data . we believe that within- and between-studies of these networks will provide a more comprehensive and profound understanding of the cardiovascular disease pathogenesis and drug action. herein, we apply integrated network analysis and mainly focus on three areas that are critical to cardiovascular systems biology and pharmacology: 1) the extent of polypharmacological effects of cardiovascular agents, 2) the relationships between drug targets and disease genes in biological networks, and 3) the genetic and molecular connections between different cardiovascular diseases. in addition, all these cvd-associated factors and their multi-layer interactions are integrated and provided in a comprehensive database cvdsp for readers to explore information interactively .figure  <dig> 
network analysis serves an integral role in cardiovascular systems pharmacology. the drug–target network is built by connecting the cardiovascular drugs with their corresponding cardiovascular targets. starting from this graph, it generates two biologically relevant network projections: the target–target network and the drug-drug network. in the target–target network, nodes represent targets, and two protein targets are connected to each other if they share at least one drug. in the drug–drug network, nodes represent drugs, and two drugs are connected if they are associated with the same protein target. a bipartite graph of gene-disease associations is constructed in which a gene and a disorder are connected if mutations in that gene are implicated in that disorder. from the gene-disease network, two biologically relevant network projections were generated. in the human disease gene-gene network, every two genes are applied to connect with a common disease based on the global gene-disease associations. the gene disease-disease network is transformed by connecting two disorders if they are associated with the same gene based on the gene-disorder associations. the drug-disease network is constructed by mapped the approved cardiovascular drugs to their corresponding indications. physical interactions between proteins can also be used to produce the human protein-protein interaction  network. for cardiovascular pharmacology, these interaction networks will provide a global template for computational and mathematical systems modeling, simulation, and prediction.



methods
compiling cardiovascular drug and their therapeutic targets
the complete cardiovascular drug-target information was downloaded from the drugbank database  <cit> , therapeutic target database   <cit>  and fda orange book  <cit>  as of november  <dig>  the resulting list of drug targets was manually inspected one by one by literature curation to assure the quality of the data. we classified drugs and target proteins according to therapeutic areas and functional family, respectively. the reproducible set of interactions, pharmacological activities of drugs and function annotations of targets were provided in supplementary information as a resource for researchers who are interested in the cardiovascular pharmacology . the curation of the drug-target data set involved the identification of  <dig> approved cardiovascular drugs with  <dig> successful cardiovascular protein targets. this data set was used to build the drug-target network.

compiling genetic phenotypes and phenotype-associated genes
the most complete and best-curated list of known phenotype-gene associations is maintained in the morbid map  of the online mendelian inheritance in man   <cit> . each entry of the mm is composed of four fields, the name of the disorder, the associated gene symbols, its corresponding omim id, and the chromosomal location. we analyzed the complete data set and performed a manual curation following procedure of the visionary study by goh et al.  <cit> . we downloaded the mm file on january  <dig>  out of  <dig>  mm entries, we selected  <dig>  entries with the “” tag, for which there is strong evidence that at least one mutation in the particular gene is causative to the phenotype. we then parsed these  <dig>  phenotype terms into  <dig>  distinct phenotypes by merging phenotype subtypes of a single phenotype, based on their given names and corresponding medical subject headings   <cit>  vocabulary on january,  <dig>  the merging was done first automatically and then each entry was verified manually. each disease was then assigned a unique disease id.

the curated data set contained  <dig>  phenotypes and  <dig>  associated genes , of which  <dig> are cardiovascular disorders associated with  <dig> genes . in addition,  <dig> disease genes encode the cardiovascular target proteins, of which  <dig> overlaps the cardiovascular genes associated with  <dig> cardiovascular disorders .

we constructed disease gene-gene network  and gene disease-disease network  which were derivative from the gene-disease associations . in the gg network, every two genes are applied to connect with a common disease based on the global gene-disease associations. similarly, the gdd network is transformed by connecting two disorders if they are associated with the same gene in the gene-disorder associations.

generating a disease modular network
a network was generated by determining the first-order interactions of cardiovascular gene products associated with a given phenotypic subgroup in the ppi network. interactions of the cardiovascular gene products were integrated into a network by always including direct interactions between cardiovascular gene products, and only including interactions with other proteins above a network score threshold. the network score for a protein is the amount of interactions to cardiovascular gene products out of all interaction partners of the protein, making networks consisting of proteins with many interactions less important and reducing noise from highly interacting proteins for non-cardiovascular proteins. the median of all scores for all non-cardiovascular proteins is  <dig>  and is used as the threshold-score  <cit> . detailed views of the networks can be seen in additional file  <dig> 

compiling a high-quality, comprehensive list of binary protein-protein interactions
human protein-protein interaction  set were assembled from hint   <cit>  updated june  <dig>   <dig>  hint is a database of high-quality ppis integrated from various sources and filtered to remove low-quality/erroneous interactions. the resulting set of ppis contained  <dig>  non-self-interacting, non-redundant interactions between  <dig>  proteins, of which  <dig> were cardiovascular targets and  <dig> were cardiovascular gene products mapped by gene names. the list of ppis used is available at the online database cvdsp .

assessing molecular connections between disorders
to quantify the cellular network-level relationship between pair of phenotypes, we assessed the molecular associations for each pair of phenotype modules by their shared protein-protein interactions in the disease modular network. number of shared protein-protein interactions is the number of protein-protein interactions that link genes between the two modules. the significance of shared protein-protein interactions was measured by randomization tests of the resulting network. for two phenotype modules, we firstly randomly generated two modules with the same number of disease genes. we then calculated the numbers of shared protein-protein interactions between the two random modules. this procedure was performed for  <dig>   <dig> times to obtain significant statistics and p values for the two disorders. all pairs of disorders involving shared protein-protein interactions and p values are listed in additional file  <dig> 

topological features of a network
the degree of a node is the number of edges connecting to the node. the shortest path between two nodes is the path with the smallest number of links between the selected nodes. the betweenness  denotes the proportion of all shortest paths between node pairs in a network passing through the measured node, indicating the relative importance of the particular node in network global connectivity. closeness  is defined as the inverse sum of shortest distances to all other nodes from a focal node, indicating the expected time from a focal node to reach others. the clustering coefficient is defined as ci = 2n/ki , where n is the number of direct links connecting the ki nearest neighbors of node i. the average of ci over all nodes of a network assesses network modularity.

calculating the functional similarity between cardiovascular targets and genes
to validate the intimate relationship between cardiovascular targets and genes derived from the network properties, we calculated the go-based semantic similarity between cardiovascular targets and genes. we firstly downloaded biological process , cellular component , or molecular function  branches of the gene ontology  from the go database  <cit> . go-based semantic similarity scores  between cardiovascular targets and genes were calculated according to resnik  <cit> , using the csbl.go r package  <cit>  selecting the option to use all three ontologies. we calculated the average gss of all pairs of cardiovascular target and gene. random controls were obtained by selecting the same number of genes  <dig>   <dig> times randomly to control for cardiovascular genes. all statistics are shown in additional file  <dig> 

database development
to accompany the findings from this study, an online database cvdsp  was developed to allow researchers to access the underlying information in a user-friendly manner. we have included all of our data sets in this database. the drug-target interactions, gen-phenotype associations, drug-indication associations and target-gene relationships as well as their derivate networks such as drug-drug and gene-gene networks can be explored interactively. we will regularly update our data sets and the website to keep up with the growth of the databases used.

statistical analysis
all the t-tests and z-tests were done in mathematica  using the hypothesistests package. kolmogorov-smirnov and wilcoxon rank sum tests were done in matlab  using the “kstest2” and “ranksum” commands, respectively. all the error terms in the text and the figures are the standard errors.

RESULTS
classification of cardiovascular drugs and their therapeutic targets
the careful curation of the drug-target data set involves the identification of approved cardiovascular drugs with successful cardiovascular protein targets. this results in a list of  <dig> drugs that act on  <dig> protein targets . eleven drug classes are identified according to the anatomical therapeutic chemical  rule. the biggest atc class in the data set is for cardiac therapy , followed by antithrombotic agents , antihypertensives , agents acting on the renin-angiotensin system , diuretics , beta blockers , lipid modifying agents , vasoprotectives , calcium channel blockers , peripheral vasodilators  and etc. . the drug-target association data show that  <dig> receptors are the main targets for the cardiovascular agents, weighing ~ <dig> % of all cardiovascular targets . g protein-coupled receptors  are the most common class of the receptor targets, comprising ~ <dig> % of all cardiovascular receptors. ~ <dig> % of the drugs target gpcrs and are mainly involved in cardiac and anti-hypertension therapies. this is consistent with the central role of gpcrs in cardiovascular biology  <cit> . the other common receptors are nuclear receptors, comprising ~ <dig> % of all cardiovascular receptor targets, and these receptors are mainly targeted by vasoprotectives.table  <dig> 
classification of cardiovascular drugs



drug class
numbers



target class
numbers
target child class
numbers


transporters make up the second largest group of drug targets:  <dig> proteins  are transporters, and ~ <dig> % of them are ion channels targeted by  <dig> drugs . ion channels have been commonly targeted by calcium channel blockers. solute carriers, the second largest transporter target class, are mostly targeted by diuretics.

enzymes are the third key class of cardiovascular targets, with  <dig> proteins in the class, comprising ~ <dig> % of all cardiovascular targets. among the enzyme target list, hydrolases  are dominant, comprising more than half of all cardiovascular enzyme targets. they are followed by oxidoreductases , which comprises ~22% of all cardiovascular enzyme targets. antithrombotic agents and the agents acting on the renin-angiotensin system  normally hit the enzyme targets. other common enzyme targets include  <dig> transferases ,  <dig> lyases  and  <dig> isomerase .

quantify the polypharmacology for cardiovascular drugs and targets
massive studies have revealed that the drug promiscuity is a phenomenon much more common than previously thought and is critically important for drug discovery, especially for the complex diseases such as cvd, which is usually multiple genes involved diseases  <cit> . for example, amiodarone exerts its antiarrhythmic effect by acting on adrenergic receptors and potassium and calcium channels, simultaneously . however, there is still lack of quantification of the degree of polypharmacological effects of cardiovascular drugs. the drug-target network offers a panoramic view for the drug-target interaction landscape, permitting to explore comprehensive information on cardiovascular pharmacology from molecules to systems, including the overall degree of polypharmacological effects of cardiovascular agents on various targets  <cit> . here, the cardiovascular drug–target network was built by connecting the  <dig> approved cardiovascular drugs with their corresponding  <dig> cardiovascular targets . the overall network contains  <dig> drug-target connections, in which  <dig> drugs  and  <dig> targets  compose the largest connected component of the network , reflecting high interconnectedness between the drugs and their targets. to quantify the polypharmacological effect, we counted the number of cardiovascular targets for each drug, that is, the degree for each drug node in the drug-target network . the degree distribution of drug nodes indicates that most drugs acting on more than one target, and the average number of target proteins per drug is  <dig> . interestingly, some drugs even have dozens of targets, such as verapamil  and dronedarone  . these properties suggest the promiscuity of cardiovascular drugs.figure  <dig> 
the drug–target network.  the drug-target network was generated from the known associations between fda-approved cardiovascular drugs and their target proteins. nodes represent drugs  and targets . a link is placed between a drug and a target node if the protein is a known target of the drug. the size of the drug  node is proportional to the number of the relevant targets . drugs are colored according to their anatomical therapeutic chemical  classification, and targets are colored according to protein family obtained from the uniprot database.  distribution of target proteins for drugs  in the drug-target network. this distribution shows most cardiovascular drugs target a small number of targets, but some of them have many targets.  distribution of drugs for their targets  in the drug-target network. most targets have a few drugs, but some targets have many drugs.



however, the above measurement neglects the fact that some drugs target homologous proteins, which can inflate the polypharmacological effects of these drugs. as we know, drugs that target homologous proteins should be less promiscuous than those have demonstrable activity across different protein families  <cit> . for example, the activity of cryptenamine, an antihypertensive drug, mainly depends on muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, including chrm <dig>  chrm <dig>  chrm <dig>  chrm <dig> and chrm <dig> . in contrast, dronedarone, an antiarrhythmic agent, acts on multiple targets including sodium, potassium and calcium channels and various adrenergic receptors for management of atrial fibrillation . obviously, the degree of polypharmacology for cyptenamine is correspondingly weaker than that of dronedarone. indeed, of all  <dig> promiscuous drugs in our dataset, more than 65% have been found to display activities against some proteins from the similar family . this is also reflected by the target-target network, in which nodes represent targets, and two protein targets are connected to each other if they share at least one drug . in this network,  <dig> out of  <dig> targets are connected to other proteins. drugs with multiple targets are responsible for this high interconnectedness. it is evident that some specific target classes, such as voltage-dependent calcium channel protein family, tend to cluster together with common drugs . moreover, it is also found that these targets mostly belong to the same functional family.

to eliminate this bias effect caused by homologous proteins in the polypharmacology analysis, we have conflated the homology target proteins into their specific families according to rule of sequence similarity ≥ 30% to build a modified drug-target network. after removing the paralogous genes, the degree distributions of the drugs between the modified and original drug-target network only show a slight variation . for example, the number of drugs with one target increases from  <dig> to  <dig>  however, although the degrees of some drugs are reduced, we still observe a significant proportion  of drugs target more than one protein, indicating the promiscuous nature of cardiovascular drugs is not significantly changed. such polypharmacological information enables a rational approach to selecting multiple candidates for cvd treatment. it should be noted that, most of these known promiscuous drugs are discovered based on the traditional phenotypic-screening assays  <cit> , which normally did not distinguish the explicit therapeutic targets and their underlying molecular interactions  <cit> . therefore, follow-up studies concerning polypharmacological mechanisms of cardiovascular targets are very important to rationally design polypharmacological drugs.

explore the interactions between cardiovascular targets and genes
to investigate the genetic feature of cardiovascular targets and detect the potential of cardiovascular genes to be therapeutic targets, it is necessary to analyze the relationships between cardiovascular targets and genes form a network perspective. we firstly compared the pleiotropy between them, which can be quantified by the number of disorders  corresponding to their mutants in the gene-disease network  <cit>  . the curated dataset contain  <dig>  phenotypes and  <dig>  associated genes , of which  <dig> are cardiovascular phenotypes associated with  <dig> genes . in addition,  <dig> disease genes encode the cardiovascular target proteins, of which  <dig> overlap the cardiovascular genes associated with  <dig> cardiovascular phenotypes . as shown in figure 3a, cardiovascular genes are on average involved in  <dig>  ±  <dig>  disorders, which is not significant different from that of cardiovascular targets . both of them are significantly more than the average of all genes . this indicates that cardiovascular targets and genes have similar degree of pleiotropy.figure  <dig> 
relationships between cardiovascular targets and genes.  the average number of diseases associated with different gene classes from the gene-gene network : all genes, cardiovascular genes and genes that encode cardiovascular targets.  average degree of different gene classes in the gg network.  the network only includes cardiovascular genes and genes that encode cardiovascular targets extracted from the overall gg network, in which two genes are connected if they are involved in the same disorder. this subnetwork shows that most genes that encode cardiovascular targets and cardiovascular genes gather into a complete network. red, pink and green represent cardiovascular genes, genes that encode cardiovascular targets and overlapped genes, respectively.  distribution of the shortest distances  between drug targets and disease genes in the gg network compared with that  between random groups of genes. there is an enhancement at the distances  <dig> and  <dig>   distribution of the shortest distances  between drug targets and disease genes in the gg network compared with that  between random groups of genes.



data also show that these two groups stay close to each other in the disease gene-gene network , where two genes connect with common diseases based on the global gene-disease associations . in the dgg network,  <dig>  of  <dig>  disease genes are connected to other disease genes, and  <dig>  genes belong to a “giant component”. ninety two genes that encode the cardiovascular targets and  <dig> cardiovascular genes are included in this network . by measuring the minimum shortest distances between the targets and genes  <cit> , the two groups are shown more intimate compared with those of the randomized expectations . nearly 75% cardiovascular targets overlap with the cardiovascular genes or are in the first neighbors of them. consistently, we also find that cardiovascular targets and genes have similar degree distributions  in the dgg network. as links in the dgg network represent the related phenotypic associations between two genes, the intimate relationships suggest that most of these targets are etiologically related factors, which provide further clues for disease understanding and treatment.

previous work has shown that distinct genes that are related to same disorders tend to interact in a particular functional module  <cit> . therefore, we believe that the genetic closeness between the cardiovascular targets and genes might have tendencies to gather together in the real cellular network. to test this, we quantify the relationships between the cardiovascular targets and genes in the human protein-protein interaction  networks by similar approach used in the dgg network . it is found there are  <dig> target proteins and  <dig> cardiovascular gene products in the ppi network. as expected, we observe a clear enrichment for cardiovascular targets to genes in the region of lower shortest distances compared with the randomized target groups of similar size . this is supported by the similar topological features between the targets and gene products in the ppi network . this suggests that although many cardiovascular targets are not encoded by cardiovascular disease genes, they might also participate in the same physiological and pathological processes.

finally, to validate this intimate relationship between cardiovascular targets and genes derived from the network properties, we also calculated their functional similarity distributions based on the go-based semantic similarity , and find significant similarity of go terms between the two groups with respect to random controls, confirming their close relationships .

these results indicate that most cardiovascular drugs are etiology-specific agents that target the actual cause of the disease or etiologically related factors, which is a little unexpected as many types of cvds are strongly influenced by non-genetic factors. more importantly, the intimate relationships between cardiovascular targets and genes could help understand the mechanism of action of cardiovascular targets and provide a direct evidence for target identification from the cardiovascular genes  <cit> .

explore the relationships between cardiovascular disorders
during these years, huge efforts have been devoted to the use of networks  to integrate different genetic, proteomic, metabolic and phenotypic datasets to elucidate the entangled origins of many diseases  <cit> . here, to examine the relationship between cardiovascular disorders, we generated a gene disease-disease network , which is transformed by connecting two disorders if they are associated with the same gene based on the gene-disorder associations, the gdd network consists of  <dig> disorder nodes connected by  <dig> links, where the largest component comprises  <dig> nodes and  <dig> links. of  <dig> cardiovascular disorders in the omim,  <dig> have at least one link to other disorders and are included in this network. the number of genes involved in cardiovascular phenotypes decreases rapidly : most diseases are related to few genes, whereas some related to dozens of genes, such as cardiomyopathy , coronary artery disease  and myocardial infarction . the gene distribution may correlate with the complexity of each disorder in some extent. generally, mendelian disorders such as marfan syndrome are mostly derived from mutations in one or several genes, whereas complex disorders such as myocardial infarction are related to multiple genetic determinants. in addition, the number of degree of the cardiovascular disorders in the gdd network display a broad distribution  and most of them are connected to more than one disease, especially a few disorders such as cardiomyopathy , noonan syndrome  and myocardial infarction  are connected to a large number of distinct disorders. on average, the degree of cardiovascular disorders  is significantly bigger than that of the network average . this prominence of the highly connected disorders should mainly arise from the mutations that are involved in multiple disorders.

most cardiovascular disorders are visibly clustered in the network . to quantify this, we measured the fraction of cardiovascular disorders with the reference to the distance from an origin disease node in the network. if these disorders are not clustered in certain regions, starting from one cardiovascular disorder would not be different from a random node. instead, we observed a surprising enrichment in the first and the second neighbors for an origin node of cvd , indicating a strong trend of concentrating cardiovascular disorders in the gdd network. this means that most cardiovascular disorders share genetic origins with each other.figure  <dig> 
relationships between different cardiovascular disorders.  selected networks from the gene disease-disease network . this network is composed by cardiovascular disorders separated from the gdd network, where each node corresponds to a disorder and two disorders are linked if there is a gene involved in both. the size of each node corresponds to the number of genes that are implicated in this disease. this network shows many cardiovascular disorders tend to related to other cardiovascular disorders.  fraction of cardiovascular disorders starting from either a cardiovascular disorder or a random disorder in the gdd network with respect to distance. this figure quantitatively validates the bias of cardiovascular disorders toward clustering in the gdd network. two examples of cardiovascular disease pairs with significant protein-protein interactions:  ischemic stroke and myocardial infarction , and  long qt syndrome and carney complex . the blue-filled rectangles are cardiovascular disease genes. the rectangles with red border are cardiovascular targets. the blue-filled rectangles with red border are both cardiovascular targets and genes. other proteins are the neighbors of cardiovascular genes. see additional file 1for the global cardiovascular disease modular network.



we further examined the extent to which cardiovascular disorders aggregate in the gdd network. firstly,we attempted to extract all types of these disorders by disconnecting them from the whole network, and found that they form many isolated sub-networks . the largest sub-network contains  <dig> disorders, most of which are cardiogenic traits, such as cardiomyopathy, long qt syndrome and atrial fibrillation. the second largest cluster includes the major vascular diseases, such as stroke, myocardial infarction and atherosclerosis. following on are mendelian disorders that form small isolated networks consisting of 1 ~  <dig> nodes. these results indicate that the isolated networks may represent relatively independent pathological mechanisms of cardiovascular disorders. this reminds us that drugs used for one disease might also affect other disorders of the sub-network. for example, an anticoagulant, acenocoumarol, can be used to treat various vascular diseases including deep vein thrombosis, ischemic attack, myocardial infarction and thromboembolism. the above analysis further suggests that some other anticoagulants, such as defibrotide, prasugrel and sulodexide, might also have potentials to treat blood coagulation-caused cvds.

we then reconnected these cardiovascular disorders to their direct neighbors  in the gdd network. surprisingly, nearly 90%  of these disorders are re-accumulated into a complete network , confirming the close associations between different cvd-associated sub-networks. in addition, there are  <dig> non-cardiovascular disorders  in this reconnected network, most of which are enriched by some common cardiovascular disorders such as cardiomyopathy and myocardial infarction. this prominence of non-cardiovascular disorders can be partly attributed to the involvement of the cardiovascular factor in various disease conditions  <cit> , such as diabetic nephropathy, pheochromocytoma and diabetes mellitus. this also prompts us to seek drugs for cvd treatment from those drugs that are applied for treating other diseases. for example, the antidepressant agent, paroxetine, has been under evaluation in clinical trials for its potential value in preventing heart attacks .

identify the molecular connections between cardiovascular disorders
gdd network that covers the discrete genetic information might not be sufficient to explain the molecular processes for disease associations. here, we further try to explore the molecular connections between different cardiovascular disorders based on their cellular modules encoded by ppi network. firstly, we created the disease modules for each disorder using the interaction patterns of their associated gene products in the ppi network  <cit>  . this results in a highly interconnected disease modular network, which includes  <dig> disease modules . the figure shows that genes in each disorder have a strong tendency to interact with each other at the protein level. for each pair of diseases, we assessed their molecular connections by measuring the significance of their shared ppis by randomization tests of the resulting network  <cit>  . the full sets of assessments include  <dig>  disease pairs, of which  <dig>  share significantly more protein-protein interactions compared with that of a random control . this information can assist us in identifying new molecular connections between disorders alongside their common genetic origins. for example, except for the common disease gene jag <dig> between tetralogy of fallot and alagille syndrome, the two diseases interact through  <dig> ppis with a p value < <  <dig>  in the network, including jag <dig> – notch <dig>  jag <dig> – notch <dig>  jag <dig> – notch <dig>  dll <dig> - notch <dig> and dll <dig> – notch <dig>  all these five ppis are all involved in the medication of notch signaling pathway that functions in cell-fate decisions during hematopoiesis and early and late stages of mammalian cardiovascular development. indeed, abnormalities of this pathway has been proved to be implicated in both tetralogy of fallot and alagille syndrome and the comorbidity of the two diseases has been well known to medical community  <cit> . more interestingly, we find several disease pairs can be linked by only the cellular-level interactions. for example, ischemic stroke and myocardial infarction share  <dig> ppis  in the network, although there are no common disease genes between them. specifically, some shared ppis such as app - exoc <dig> functions in the amyloid formation, which has been known to be involved in both stroke and myocardial infarction  <cit> . these connections are also supported by the well-known relevance of the two diseases in clinic  <cit> . similarly, we also observed significant interactions between long qt syndrome and carney complex . as shown in figure 4d, the common three ppis and their associated genes between the two disease modules are all involved in the protein kinase a  signaling pathway. as we know, this pathway is the major route for channeling the second messenger camp signal  <cit>  and has been proved to be implicated in both long qt syndrome  <cit>  and carney complex  <cit> . finally, many unknown diseases pairs are observed based on the molecular connections, such as noonan syndrome and carney complex , leopard syndrome and brugada syndrome , cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome and aortic aneurysm . these results could potentially provide insights into the disease pathogenesis and the design of novel therapies for cvd. a more detailed description of these disease pairs are provided in the additional file  <dig> 

discussion
cvd, as a complex disease, is the consequence of a collection of deleterious effects from interactions involved multiple genetic and environmental origins. in recent years, systems-based approaches have nearly become a consensus for explore cardiovascular problems from disease pathogenesis to therapy  <cit> . however, the corresponding studies, especially from quantitative perspective, are still insufficient. here, we use the concepts of systems pharmacology to integrate publicly available cvd-associated data and provide a complete framework to quantify the underlying relationships between cardiovascular drugs, targets, genes, and diseases. an online database cvdsp  is developed to allow researchers to access the underlying information of cvd systems biology and pharmacology in a user-friendly manner . cvdsp is a comprehensive annotated resource that combines all available information of cardiovascular drugs with therapeutic protein targets, cardiovascular disorder-to-gene associations, as well as the corresponding networks. studies based on this database would help deepen our understanding of the mechanisms of cardiovascular drug actions and disease complexity and to facilitate target discovery and drug design.

in the context, we mainly focus on three areas that are critical to cardiovascular pharmacology derived from the emerging properties of these networks.  the cardiovascular drug-target interaction. we examine the drug-target network and the derivative drug-drug and target-target network and generate a rich network of polypharmacological interactions between the cardiovascular drugs and their targets. these results indicate the promiscuous nature of cardiovascular drugs and prompt the exploration of drugs that target multiple proteins and combination therapies for cvd  <cit> , however, the impact of the nonselectivity-caused side effects should not be under estimated. the promiscuous drug information  will provide important clues concerning targets for drug discovery. those known multitarget drugs can be used as lead or reference compounds to design new drugs with a specific multi-target profile to achieve a desired polypharmacology  <cit> .

 the drug-target interactions are also visualized beyond the incorporation of the approved drugs and primary therapeutic targets. for example, an extended drug-target network including the experimental medicines  for cvd therapy and their therapeutic targets are used to quantify trends in exploitation of novel drugs and targets . in addition, the extended drug-target network that expands those drugs and targets irrelevant with cvd will further prioritize connections between the non-cardiovascular drugs and either therapeutic or unwanted cardiovascular effects, resulting in identification of novel potential drug-target interactions  <cit>  .

  the relationships between cardiovascular targets and genes. the cardiovascular protein targets and genes tend to intimately interact with each other in the gene and interactome networks with similar topological properties. this close relationship is also confirmed by their functional similarity distributions . this will facilitate our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of cvd treatment and firm our beliefs to identify the druggable target genes. for example, we can rank all these genes using the enrichment of known cardiovascular targets in their first-order interaction network, to identify potential target candidates  <cit> , such as f <dig>  f <dig> and proc, which have been demonstrated involved in thromboembolism disease.

  the associations between cardiovascular disorders. gdd network share more etiological commonalities with each other rooted in the global disease-disease networks. cardiovascular disease module analyses indicate that most cardiovascular disorders have significant molecular connections among them . previous studies have shown that distinct disease phenotypes with complex interdependencies among cellular components usually have many functional and causal relationships  <cit> . therefore, the systematic identification of such network-based dependencies among cardiovascular disorders offers a sufficient resolution and specificity for etiologic heterogeneity and clinical treatment of cvd. indeed, huge efforts have been devoted to the use of disease networks  to integrate different genetic, proteomic, metabolic and phenotypic datasets to elucidate the entangled links of diseases  <cit> . uncovering such links between diseases could help understand how and why different disorders are linked at the molecular level. the relevance of conditions that is culled from the diseasome offer insights into disease classification, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment. diseasome-based approaches could also aid drug discovery, in particular when it comes to the use of approved drugs to treat molecularly linked diseases. for the common genes or proteins shared by diseases shown in the disease-module network, drugs designed for one of the disorders may also be used for the other. for example, ramipril that initially developed for hypertension also treat myocardial infarction and stroke. similarly, phenindione can be used for atrial fibrillation and cardiomyopathy, and triflusal for thromboembolism and stroke . in addition, we generated a drug disease-disease network  by connecting any two diseases which can be treated with the same drug. similar to the drug-target analysis , we can also suggest novel drug uses  according to these close disease pairs in the drug disease-disease network which was built by connecting any two diseases treated with the same drug. given the shared medications between disease pairs in this network, especially a high number of drugs against both disease classes, drugs used for only one of the two may also be used for the other .



CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our paradigm mainly involves the key factors including drug, target, gene and disease underlying cardiovascular systems biology and pharmacology. indeed, many other factors such as environmental stress, epigenetic modifications and invasion of pathogens also contribute to diseases. incorporating these factors will further improve the coverage and significance of the networks  <cit> . however, presently, it is still difficult to combine all these together for deep analysis due to the lack of sufficient and high-quality data. in addition to the static network analysis, we hope the dynamic networks such as metabolic and transcriptional network, which are also important, should be integrated in the follow-up studies  <cit> . as methodologies evolve, the systems pharmacology is believed to provide a complete picture that allows us to appreciate the networked nature of human diseases, to design new pharmacological models and then to guide the experiments to new drug discovery and disease treatment.

additional file
additional file 1: 
insights from systems pharmacology into cardiovascular drug discovery and therapy. additional files are available online. especially, supplementary datasets are available at http://sm.nwsuaf.edu.cn/lsp/load_intro.php?site=cvdsp&id= <dig> 



abbreviations
cvdcardiovascular disease

gpcrsg protein-coupled receptors

atcanatomical therapeutic chemical

dgg networkdisease gene-gene network

ppiprotein-protein interaction

gdd networkgene disease-disease network

peng li and yingxue fu contributed equally to this work.

competing interests

the authors declare they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions

pl, yf, yw, al and ly conceived the study. pl, yf, ch and xc collected and analyzed the data. jr, pl and ch constructed the database. pl, yf, jd, cz and yw drafted the manuscript. al and ly helped to draft the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

this work is supported by grants from northwest a & f university, national natural science foundation of china . it was partially supported by china academy of chinese medical sciences , and national ‘973’ program of china .
