BACKGROUND
validation of immunological assays can take a number of forms, and is required for compliance with good laboratory practice , or for submission of data to licensing agencies. two basic components of assay validation are the demonstration that an assay performs with adequate reproducibility for the intended purpose, and that the assay readout is linear over a useful range of data  <cit> .

specific guidelines exist for validation of traditional immunoassays such as elisa, and the expected levels of precision and linearity of these assays are well-known  <cit> . less well-characterized are cellular immunity assays, of which the single-cell assays like tetramer staining  <cit> , cytokine flow cytometry   <cit> , and elispot  <cit>  are among the most popular. some data has been published regarding the precision of individual assays  <cit> , and there is very limited data on the linearity of cfc  <cit> . however, precision and linearity have not been compared across assays, and expected levels of precision and linearity of these assays have not been determined in a side-by-side fashion.

precision and linearity are important aspects of cellular immunity assays, since  cellular assays are inherently more complex, and thus less reproducible, than traditional immunoassays; and  cellular immunity assays are frequently used to detect rare antigen-specific t cell populations, which may be present at or near the assay detection limit. it is thus crucial to demonstrate that an assay is reproducible enough to generate reliable data in the response range expected for, say, a vaccine clinical trial, and that linearity is adequate to quantitatively compare results between treatment groups or between trials.

fortunately, we now know that at least some vaccines to hiv and cancer, for example, can generate readily detectable t cell responses by assays such as tetramer, cfc, and elispot  <cit> . still, there is wide variability in the performance of such assays between labs  <cit> . compliance with glp thus requires that a given lab demonstrate its proficiency for a given assay, preferably with reference to an accepted standard.

here we compare results from optimized protocols for tetramer staining, cfc, and elispot, performed on shared cryopreserved pbmc specimens, with expert laboratories performing the individual assays. from this data, we derive target values for those who wish to determine precision and linearity of these assays in their own laboratory, and we also facilitate comparison of the three assays with regard to their relative precision and linearity.

RESULTS
study design and response levels of donors
in order to allow meaningful comparisons between assays, this study was performed using a format previously published  <cit> , in which three laboratories, each expert at an individual assay, performed their assay of expertise in parallel on the same cryopreserved pbmc. pbmc from healthy cmv seropositive donors were chosen to represent a high, medium, and low responder to cmv pp65495– <dig> peptide  <cit>  and/or a cmv pp <dig> peptide mix  <cit> . actual mean responses across all the assays as obtained in this study are shown in table  <dig>  assays were performed with six replicates in order to determine intra-assay precision. they were repeated on eight different days in order to determine inter-assay precision. three operators performed assays in parallel on a single day in order to determine inter-operator precision. and triplicate samples from the high responder were serially diluted into non-responsive pbmc in order to determine linearity. results were then collated across the three laboratories.

 <dig> elispot results reported as sfc per  <dig>  ×  <dig> pbmc. numbers in brackets indicate the values when re-calculated as % of cd8+ t cells. note that elispot responses with peptide mix did not match the other assays in terms of low, medium, and high responders.

 <dig> cfc and tetramer results reported as % of cd8+ t cells. nd = cfc was not done on this donor due to predicted very low response  seen in pre-screening.

precision of individual assays
when the coefficient of variation  of six parallel replicates was plotted against the mean response level, a characteristic non-linear relationship was observed for all three assays , whereby the cv rose dramatically as the mean approached zero. since the six replicates were performed on eight separate days, a standard deviation  could be determined for the intra-assay cv. taking the mean+sd of the intra-assay cv at any given response level allows one to determine an "acceptable zone" wherein a laboratory validating these assays might expect their data to lie . for example, at a response level of  <dig> %, one would expect a cv no higher than about  <dig>   for either tetramer or cfc, based on these data. similarly, for a response level of about  <dig> sfc in elispot, one would expect a cv no higher than about  <dig>  .

because antigen-specific assays are often used to analyze data in a range where cv is non-linear with the mean, we chose to use sd as a measure of variability in further analyses. as shown in figure  <dig>  the sd was relatively linear with mean for all three assays, when comparing six parallel replicates , or eight separate experiments , or three different operators . for elispot, the sd was significantly lower for intra-assay precision compared to inter-assay  and inter-operator  precision. there was a similar trend for cfc, though the comparisons did not reach statistical significance . tetramer assays had low sd in all three situations, with no significant differences among intra-assay, inter-assay, and inter-operator precision .

comparative precision of the three assays
in figure  <dig>  it is difficult to compare the precision across all three assays, because the readout for elispot  is different than the readout for cfc and tetramer staining . in order to compare all three assays on the same scale, the elispot values were converted to a percent scale . the result  allows visual comparison of the precision between assays. for all three conditions , elispot tended to have higher sd than cfc or tetramer. this trend was greatest for inter-assay and inter-operator studies.

linearity
discussion
a number of studies have been published comparing elispot, cfc, and tetramer staining  <cit> . however, while these studies have addressed issues such as relative sensitivity of the assays, direct comparisons of precision and linearity have not been done. the best previous assessments of inter-laboratory precision came from standardization studies carried out for elispot  <cit>  or cfc  <cit> . the present study was designed to compare these assays with regard to precision and linearity, and in so doing, to provide target values for laboratories wishing to validate their own protocols for any of these assays. it should be noted that these targets may be specific to ifnγ and to the antigen systems used , and can not necessarily be generalized to other cytokines and antigens.

in comparing assays, the choice of protocol is crucial; one wishes to compare fully-optimized versions of each assay. as such, we chose individual labs recognized as experts in each type of assay  and allowed them each to use their own optimized protocol. in the case of elispot, this protocol did not use costimulatory antibodies, while in cfc it did. validation data in the lab doing elispot showed that inclusion of costimulatory antibodies was not warranted based on increased backgrounds ; while similar data in the cfc lab supported the use of costimulation. the net result, that the assays might not give quantitatively equivalent results, was accepted in favour of the idea that each assay was optimally configured for its own best performance.

often, cv has been used as a measure of precision that is independent of the units in which data is expressed   <cit> . however, the stability of the cv deteriorates at very low means , so it is difficult to use it as a robust measurement of precision for low-level responses. since antigen-specific assays are often used to assess very low response values, we chose instead to focus on sd, which we found to be highly linear with the response mean .

in general, there was a trend toward higher precision in intra-assay measurements compared to inter-assay or inter-operator measurements, in agreement with a previous study on cfc  <cit> . since the inter-assay and inter-operator precision studies were not repeated multiple times, we could not derive statistical tolerances around the sd values in figure  <dig>  however, a laboratory wishing to validate these assays could use this figure as a guide, comparing their own internal validation data to the figure for any given response level.

in order to compare precision across all three assays, elispot values were converted to the same scale as cfc and tetramer staining , and the sd was plotted versus mean. deriving a regression line through this data for each assay, we observed that elispot sd tended to be higher, for any given response level, than cfc or tetramer sd. while we did not validate this trend statistically, it is concordant with previous studies that reported relatively low inter-laboratory precision for elispot  <cit>  and relatively high inter-laboratory precision for cfc  <cit> , at least when data were analyzed centrally.

why would elispot assays have poorer precision in this study? one relevant factor could be the number of cells collected per data point, since assay precision is dependent upon counting statistics. the elispot assay was optimized such that  <dig> ×  <dig> pbmc per well gave the highest counting efficiency. cfc assays collected  <dig>  cd3+cd8+ cells per sample, and tetramer assays collected  <dig>  cd8+ t cells. assuming cd3+cd8+ cells to be about 15% of pbmc, this means that roughly  <dig>  cd3+cd8+ cells were present in each elispot well. while the difference relative to cfc  could explain some difference in precision, it is unlikely to be a major factor, at least at the higher response levels tested.

another factor in elispot assays is the fact that precision is dependent upon cell counting and pipetting. all calculation is based upon the assumption that  <dig> ×  <dig> pbmc were in fact plated in every well. if the original pbmc count were in error, this would introduce a systematic bias in that assay's results that would potentially affect inter-assay or inter-operator reproducibility. and if pipetting were not precise, intra-assay reproducibility would be affected as well. in contrast, tetramer and cfc assays have a percentage readout that is less dependent upon the true number of cells plated per sample.

the elispot assay is also unique in that it is a monolayer assay, and cell stimulation could be limited by the ability of t cells and apc to interact when they are spread out over a filter-bottom well. this could affect the reproducibility of stimulation, and could also explain undercounting of responsive t cells in elispot relative to cfc. lack of costimulatory antibodies in the elispot assay, which were used in cfc, could also cause undercounting. fnally, undercounting could result from coincident spots or other imprecisions in the computer-aided elispot counting system. we saw such undercounting to a variable degree in this study, when elispot results were converted to the same scale as cfc and tetramer results . elispot has been shown in other studies to undercount positive events by 4- to 10-fold relative to cfc or tetramer staining  <cit> , even in the same cmv system used for the current study  <cit> . thus, the elispot regression line for sd versus mean  could be expected to shift leftward relative to cfc and tetramer, if sd for a given sample were actually equal between the three assays.

for all the above reasons, it is not surprising that elispot precision was not as high as cfc and tetramer. in fact, common practice in the field takes this into account, in that elispot assays are typically done with 3– <dig> replicates per sample, while this is rarely done in cfc and tetramer assays. it was only for purposes of fair comparison that a single well was considered as one data point in this study.

with regard to linearity, we used a dilution methodology in which responder pbmc were diluted into non-responder pbmc. there was the potential for confounding artifacts with this method, including the possibility of loss of relevant antigen-presenting cells with serial dilution, and the possibility of allogeneic responses. fortunately, these were not observed as significant factors. linearity of cfc and elispot were similar to tetramer, except in the instance where elispot response was disproportionately low compared to the cfc or tetramer response. this suggests that antigen-presenting cell frequency was not a major limiting factor. in terms of allogeneic responses, unstimulated cfc background at each dilution was 0– <dig> % of cd8+ t cells, which was not different from background in the assays that did not contain allogeneic cells. for elispot, the average background in the linearity studies was  <dig>  sfc per  <dig>  ×  <dig> pbmc, compared to  <dig>  sfc when donor  <dig>  pbmc were tested alone.

in terms of assay comparison, it is worth noting that the elispot assay does not easily allow for phenotyping of responsive cells as cd4+ or cd8+, etc. in our study, we fortuitously chose donors whose pp <dig> peptide mix responses were almost entirely cd8-restricted . we thus focused on cd8+ t cell responses for all cfc assays. however, when using either cmv pp65495– <dig> or peptide mix stimulation, we observed that the rank order of donors was different for elispot compared to the other two assays. cd <dig> responses in cfc were  <dig> – <dig> % for all donors , so this was not sufficient to account for the difference. one outcome of this anomaly is that the pp65495– <dig> linearity data for elispot was generated with a donor whose elispot response was many fold lower than that donor's cfc or tetramer response. we thus focused more attention on the pp <dig> peptide mix elispot response, which was at least somewhat higher, and which showed comparable linearity to cfc and tetramer.

tetramer staining is by far the simplest of the three assays, requiring only phenotypic staining of pbmc. it is therefore not unexpected that it would have the highest precision, as the complexity of activation and sample processing should negatively impact precision of cfc and elispot. however, it is interesting that cfc precision and linearity were not much different from that of tetramer staining. this is consistent with the notion that precision of cfc assays is largely related to gating and analysis, rather than activation or processing variables  <cit> .

although our focus in this paper is on precision and linearity, a limit of detection for each assay can also be determined from our data. this limit could be defined, for example, as  <dig> sd above the mean of replicate negative control samples. such a limit is of course dependent upon the number of events collected, as previously described for cfc  <cit> , as well as the negative control background, which varies between donors. in our study, we calculated an average lower limit of detection of  <dig> % for cd8+ t cell ifnγ production in cfc, and  <dig> sfc per  <dig>  ×  <dig> pbmc in ifnγ elispot. note that these detection limits were the average across three donors, and were lower for those donors with low background. a similar calculation could not be done for tetramer staining, because a negative control  was not used.

CONCLUSIONS
from this comparison study, we provide target values for precision and linearity of tetramer, cfc, and elispot assays, using cryopreserved pbmc. we conclude that all three assays can be performed with reasonable precision and linearity. intra-assay precision was generally lower than inter-assay or inter-operator precision. tetramer staining tended to have the highest precision and linearity, followed closely by cfc and then elispot.

