BACKGROUND
plasmodium vivax is the most widely distributed human malaria parasite, with an at-risk population of  <dig>  billion people  <cit> . the widely held misperception of p. vivax as being relatively infrequent, benign, and easily treated explains its nearly complete neglect across the range of biological and clinical research. however, recent reports provide abundant evidence challenging this paradigm .

antigenic variation is a regular feature of all plasmodium species, enabling parasites to evade the immune system  <cit> . genes putatively responsible for antigenic variation in p. vivax, termed vir , were initially identified by analyzing a chromosome end from a p. vivax wild isolate  <cit> . later, the publication of the p. vivax salvador i strain genome sequence allowed the redefinition of the vir gene repertoire revealing a total of  <dig> vir genes, including  <dig> fragments and/or pseudogenes,  <dig> different subfamilies  and  <dig> “unclustered genes” which were not associated to any subfamily  <cit> . in addition, their gene structure revealed a complex organization including genes with different numbers of exons  and different sizes . of interest, this multigene family shares sequence homology with other plasmodium species and is included within the variant gene superfamily  together with kir in p. knowlesi, and the cir/yir/bir family in p. chabaudi, p. yoelii and p. berghei <cit> .

the function of the vir multigene family remains largely unknown. analysis of the expressed vir repertoire in natural infections from individual parasites demonstrated that there is no allelic exclusion of vir genes and no clonal expression of vir proteins at the surface of individually infected reticulocytes  <cit> . in addition, first-time infected p. vivax patients had naturally acquired antibodies capable of cross-reacting against different vir proteins  <cit> . moreover, only  <dig> deduced vir proteins possess the pexel-like motif needed for exporting malarial proteins to the host cell surface  <cit> . furthermore, subfamilies a and d share structural similarities, respectively, with the p. falciparum surfin and pfmc-2tm multi-gene families  <cit> . this fact, together with the lack of pexel motifs in many of the vir proteins, indicate that these proteins might have subcellular localizations other than the surface membrane of infected reticulocytes and different functions. this possibility, has been recently reported  <cit> . we thus reasoned that the original clustering of these  <dig> into a single superfamily might not be accurate and that some of these genes might belong to different multigene families.

in this work, a novel clustering procedure was applied to vir genes to re-analyze this subtelomeric multigene superfamily. results presented here show that genes belonging to subfamilies a, d and h cannot longer be considered vir genes and that this computational approach facilitates grouping of unclustered genes, annotations of hypothetical proteins and studies of other multigene families. procedures were implemented and integrated in web applications .

RESULTS
contextual definitions
to facilitate the understanding of the developed method, we first introduce the definitions of several concepts: e-value threshold: the e-value parameter stands for the expect-value threshold of the blast algorithm, which is used to calculate a similarity value for each two proteins  <cit> .

the inflation value is an input parameter of the markov clustering algorithm  <cit> . it takes values in  and determines the cluster granularity .

homology block concept is a key term regarding the search of conserved motifs. an homology block can be defined as a sequence profile determined from a multiple sequence alignment and modelled by a hidden markov model .

finally, note that we will name unclustered vir proteins to those vir proteins which were not previously associated to any subfamily, following the nomenclature by carlton et al.  <cit> , and unclassified vir proteins to those predicted in this work that could not be associated to any multigene family.

novel computational methods show vir subfamilies cluster as independent graph components
the original annotation of vir genes was based on jigsaw predictions, protein domains and sequence alignments  <cit> . here, a new algorithm consisting of a pipeline having two recently reported pre-processing techniques  <cit>  and the application of the markov clustering algorithm  <cit>  was implemented . in order to validate this clustering approach, we tested this algorithm using protein sequences from the rifin/stevor, pfmc-2tm, femp <dig> and surfin subtelomeric multigene families of p. falciparum <cit> . these multigene families have been demonstrated to have different sub-cellular localizations and functions  <cit> . we tested the clustering methodology by using distinct experimental set ups. as a starting point, we first determined the combination of e-value and inflation  that allowed this methodology to correctly classify these different subtelomeric multigene families of p. falciparum. results showed that with the e-value threshold set at 10- <dig> and inflation value equal to  <dig>  excepting for a single rifin gene  which clustered with stevor genes, the procedure correctly clustered the different families . using these same values, all previously annotated vir subfamilies excepting subfamilies d and h constitute a group of strongly related proteins .

the e-value was next progressively restricted until each p. falciparum subtelomeric multigene family formed an independent graph component, e-value threshold set at 10- <dig> and inflation value equal to  <dig>  . of note, pfc0045w is still included within the stevor group and a single link remains between pfi0070w  and mal13p <dig>  . using these conditions, five independent graph components were observed for vir proteins . one of them represents the vir core, containing most of the vir proteins, another one is exclusively formed by proteins which are not associated to any subfamily , and the three remaining components represent subfamilies a, d, and h . these results suggest that genes from subfamilies a, d, h and the group of “unclassified proteins” do not belong to vir genes but rather represent novel p. vivax multigene families.

the vir super-family and the new multigene families
to obtain a classification, as accurate as possible, of vir proteins using this methodology, the combination of e-value and inflation was optimized for the vir set . using these values, a large cluster corresponding to the previously defined subfamilies b, c, e, g, i, j, k, remained inter-connected . moreover, proteins of subfamily l appeared strongly related with proteins of subfamily e and were thus clustered all together as subfamily e. also, all but  <dig> of the previous  <dig> unclustered vir genes appear now integrated within these subfamilies. it is unlikely that the remaining  <dig> singletons form a new subfamily since they are too divergent to group together and  <dig> are annotated as pseudogenes or truncated proteins. yet,  <dig> new unclustered vir proteins were observed . in total,  <dig> vir proteins belonging to ten subfamilies and  <dig> unclustered vir genes are included into this new classification . as expected, independent graph components corresponding to subfamilies a, d and h were also observed under these e-value and inflation parameters . to further support predictions from the graph components, we used heterologous transfections of p. falciparum to express three individual genes encoding vir-c , family d  and family a  proteins. as shown in figure  <dig> and as recently published  <cit> , members of these multigene families have different sub-cellular localizations suggesting different functions.

proteome-wide analysis predicts  <dig> hypothetical proteins as belonging to variant proteins
to determine if this method could predict new vir proteins, the algorithm was applied to the entire p. vivax proteome.  <dig> additional proteins appeared within the graph components of vir core proteins, three with subfamily h and six with the independent graph component of “unclassified” proteins. strikingly, all but one , are annotated as “hypothetical proteins” . in order to get additional information of the  <dig> hypothetical proteins , the genomic location of the genes was investigated :   <dig> are located in subtelomeric regions. out of the  <dig>   <dig> co-localize with members of their subfamilies in assembled chromosomes. seven are subtelomeric but did not cluster with members of their own subfamilies due to the fact that most members of those subfamilies were not assembled.   <dig> genes are internally located, the three of them contained in the independent graph component of “unclassified” proteins . of note, no hits were found between genes and pfl0030c  using plasmodb  <dig>  sequences, ncbi blast  <dig> . <dig> and e-value threshold =  <dig> . . the remaining  <dig> genes could not be assigned to any particular chromosomes since most chromosome ends from the genome of the p. vivax sali strain remain unassembled  <cit> .

comparisons of conserved motifs among the newly defined vir and non-vir proteins reinforce this new classification
the homology block  concept  <cit>  was used to further validate this clustering algorithm based on comparisons of conserved motifs . the prediction being that hbs from subfamilies a, d and h should have little or no intersections with the remaining subfamilies clustering as vir proteins. first, we demonstrated that hbs capture previously defined vir conserved motifs  <cit>  . next, we aimed to determine whether there were cluster-specific hbs. hence, for each cluster, we counted the number of hbs which were unique to that particular cluster and the number of those shared with one each other . noticeably, the proportion of specific/shared is either well-balanced or a considerably greater number of shared hbs appear in the vir subfamilies. in contrast, an outstanding proportion of specific hbs were observed for families d and h . note that subfamily a also formed an independent graph component when setting the blast e-value threshold at 10- <dig> . however, unlike subfamilies d and h, subfamily a shares 41% of hbs with the rest of vir proteins. as expected, the analysis of the hb composition of proteins belonging to the same cluster revealed that the hb architecture is quite well conserved between members of the same subfamily. moreover, this hb structure is also conserved in many of the hypothetical proteins predicted to be vir members. finally, interproscan predictions were also obtained in order to provide a more general view of putative domains. it is worth noting that no matches were obtained by interproscan for members of the newly defined subfamily h. .

all together, these results validate the new classification of vir genes and exclude members from subfamilies a, d and h as vir proteins. to avoid confoundings with their previous nomenclature as well as with the gene families  identified in the genome issue  <cit> , we propose to term them pvpira, pvpird, and pvpirh as they clearly fall into the pir proteins super-family  <cit> .

high expression levels of a subset of vir genes and most pvpirh genes in patients with symptomatic p. vivax infections
to illustrate the value of this new classification, we determined the expression pattern of vir genes and the newly defined pvpira, pvpird and pvpirh genes in parasites obtained from p. vivax patients  <cit> . this dataset contains the expression level of  <dig> p. vivax genes in  <dig> blood samples of patients with typical symptoms of malaria. interestingly, unlike members of the newly defined pvpira and pvpird genes, a subset of vir genes  and most genes  of the pvpirh family present high expression values in samples from all patients . analysis of the set of vir genes expressed in all the samples , showed no correlation with any one particular subfamily. these results thus illustrate the value of this new classification as they identified a subset of vir genes and pvpirh genes likely associated with clinical symptoms.

discussion
the current definition and classification of vir genes was based on jigsaw predictions, protein domains and sequence alignments  <cit> . our approach also used homology-based blast analysis to build a protein graph; yet, the graph pre-processing strategies ensure that the weight of an edge is not exclusively based on the sequence similarity between the two proteins, but strongly dependant on the relations of their neighbours. in other words, the appearance of a protein within a group of nodes is a reliable indicator that there exists more than a simple sequence similarity relation between them. we found the application of the two pre-processing strategies to be essential for a good performance of the mcl algorithm over the vir set. using this methodology, our results corroborated the original classification of vir genes into different subfamilies. moreover, results correlate well with orthomcl groups which also supports the good functioning of the procedure, but presents some significant differences mainly for subfamilies c, k, g and some of the groups of previously unclustered genes . in addition, the whole clustering pipeline and results visualization allowed us to assess the strength and evolution of sequence similarities. thus three of the subfamilies  formed independent graph components at an e-value and inflation value where different multigene families of p. falciparum were observed as independent graph components. hence, subfamilies a, d and h could be considered members of different families belonging to the pir super-family and different data from subcellular and chromosomal locations and homology blocks fully supported this consideration. accordingly, we propose to term these families pvpira, pvpird and pvpirh to avoid confoundings with vir proteins and with members of the pv-fam-a-e and pv-fam-g-i families described in the genome issue  <cit> .

the homology blocks concept reinforces the new classification of vir genes
to support this clustering approach, we applied the homology block  concept originally coined by smith and co-workers  <cit> , and used to analyze the p. falciparum erythrocyte member protein  <dig>  as an iterative procedure for mining hbs from a set of pfemp <dig> protein sequences  <cit> . the use of hbs facilitated a better classification and structural framing of var genes allowing recently the discovery of unique domain cassette-encoding var genes associated with severe disease in children  <cit> . our results revealed that all of the hbs found in proteins of the pvpird proteins were family-specific. likewise, all but two of the conserved motifs found in pvpirh proteins were also family-specific. in contrast, motif-specific enrichment was not observed in proteins from the pvpira family which presented a balanced proportion of specific/shared hbs with vir proteins. pvpira family still remains connected with vir proteins at less stringent e-value and inflation parameters partly explaining this result. yet, it forms a completely independent graph component at e-value and inflation parameters where all known p. falciparum multigene families are independent. in addition, a member of this family has a different sub-cellular location as that of another member from the vir family. we thereby consider pvpira an independent new subtelomeric family of p. vivax.

the clustering procedure facilitates the annotation of hypothetical proteins and evolutionary relatedness of malaria multigene families
current annotation of the p. vivax proteome represents a great challenge as close to 60% of it remains annotated as hypothetical proteins. remarkably, our approach predicted  <dig> hypothetical proteins as vir proteins . moreover, data on location for those that could be assigned to assembled chromosomes revealed that they are located within subtelomeric regions. in addition, there were many occurrences of hbs related to vir proteins reinforcing the predictions that these hypothetical proteins indeed represent vir proteins . three of these proteins were associated with the “unclassified” group and are located in internal regions. var2csa is an internal var gene directly involved in pregnancy-associated pathology in p. falciparum <cit> . whether any of these putative internal variant genes are related to pregnancy-associated pathology in p. vivax is presently unknown.

to determine if this clustering algorithm can facilitate annotation of proteins other than vir and further our understanding of other malaria subtelomeric families, we ran the pipeline over the entire proteomes of p. falciparum, p. knowlesi, and the rodent malarias p. yoelii, p. chabaudi and p. berghei . several inter-connected graph components belonging to different families of different species could be readily observed . for instance, the surfin family of p. falciparum shares relations with different families from all species suggesting a common origin. these results, however, need to be taken with caution as excepting for p. falciparum, remaining genomes are highly unassembled at chromosome ends where most of these families reside. yet, as better coverage and assembling of these regions is achieved, this tool should facilitate the design of experiments to better understand the evolution and function of malaria subtelomeric families.

vir proteins and pathology
the function of vir proteins and other multigene families of this species remain largely unknown. yet, recent evidences have demonstrated that a vir protein belonging to subfamily c was exported and exposed at the surface of infected erythrocytes and that it mediated specific binding to the icam- <dig> endothelial receptor under flow physiological conditions  <cit> . this result, together with other evidence of in vitro cytoadherence of p. vivax-infected reticulocytes  <cit> , indicates that this species, similar to p. falciparum, can cytoadhere. we thus computationally searched for other putative adhesins within members of vir, pira, pird, and pirh proteins using the maap predictor  <cit>  . interestingly, only members representing subfamilies c and e as well as h proteins presented positive predictions. thus, 39%  of h proteins present positive predictions, while only 7%  and 6%  of c and e vir proteins, respectively, yielded a positive score. it is worth noting here that maap was trained with p. falciparum data, which implies that its performance may not be optimal when applied over p. vivax proteins. yet, these data reinforce the view that variant proteins of p. vivax are involved in cytoadherence and pathology. in the absence of further experimental evidence this remains to be fully demonstrated.

CONCLUSIONS
a new computational approach was applied to revisit the original classification of vir genes, the largest subtelomeric multigene superfamily of human malaria parasites. applying this pipeline, the vir gene super-family was redefined by excluding members of subfamilies a, d and h, by including unclusterd genes, and by facilitating the genome-wide annotation of  <dig> hypothetical proteins as new vir proteins. in addition, analysis of gene expression data from febrile p. vivax patients illustrated the value of this new classification as it showed high expression levels of most genes belonging to the pvpirh multigene family. last, the clustering approach was extended to other subtelomeric multigene families of malaria parasites. it will thus improve the design of experiments to determine the role of subtelomeric multigene families in pathology, which in turn may help furthering vaccine development against malaria.

