BACKGROUND
mammalian embryonic development at pre-implantation stages involves rapid cell proliferation and the earliest phases of cell differentiation. fertilization triggers the completion of meiotic division in the oocyte, induces embryonic processes such as the degradation of maternal rnas and proteins, and activates the embryonic genome for the maternal-zygotic transition . it has been proposed that the activation of the embryonic genome begins at the 2-cell stage in mouse embryos, the 4- to 8-cell stage in human embryos, and the 8- to 16-cell stage in rabbit and sheep embryos  <cit> . early genes such as zar <dig>  <cit> , ezrin  <cit> , hsp <dig>   <cit> , and u2afbp-rs  <cit>  may play important roles in embryonic genome activation. previous work has suggested that the acquisition of a transcriptionally repressive environment and changes in the chromatin structure caused by alterations in histone deacetylase activity can block or stimulate the repression of markers of genome activation  <cit> . however, the transition of the control from the maternal to the embryonic genome in early mammalian embryos is still not fully understood.

as a first step towards the elucidation of factors important for the proper functioning of early mouse embryonic development, we used the differential display reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  method  <cit>  to compare two or more mrna samples prepared from small amounts of tissue. this method is particularly suitable for developmental studies that involve temporal changes in gene expression in pre-implantation embryos. genes that are temporally and differentially expressed in mouse embryos have been identified using this technique  <cit> . in the current study, tweenty-three mrna molecules that are differentially expressed in unfertilized eggs, 2-cell, or 4-cell embryos were detected. one of these clones, expressed in 2-cell stage embryos at  <dig> hr post-hcg injection, has perfect sequence homology with the gene encoding granzyme g.

the expression of members of the granzyme gene family of proteins , which encode serine proteases, has been documented in the secretory granules of cytolytic t lymphocyte lines  <cit> . granzymes d, e, f, and g have also been shown to be expressed at gestation in the mouse uterus during the process of decidualization, in which rapid uterine cell growth and differentiation occurs  <cit> . the decidual reaction is primarily characterized by the differentiation of stromal fibroblasts into decidual cells and by the proliferation and differentiation of the granulated metrial gland  cells  <cit> . murine gmg cells belong to the natural killer  cell lineage  <cit> , and an analogous cell type, the endometrial granulocyte, has been identified in humans  <cit> . in the mouse, gmg cell differentiation begins at about day  <dig> of gestation and manifests via the accumulation of cytolytic mediators, including perforin and granzymes a-h, within cytoplasmic granules. gmg cells have been proposed to regulate trophoblast invasion into maternal deciduas. indeed, trophoblast killing by murine and human uterine nk cells has been reported  <cit> . nevertheless, the expression of granzyme g and its function in early embryos are entirely unknown.

in this study, the function of granzyme g during early embryonic development was elucidated using morpholino oligonucleotides to knock-down granzyme g-specific mrna translation and granzyme-specific serine protease inhibitors to inhibit protein activity in an in vitro culture system. the embryo survival rate, cleavage rate, 2-cell developmental block effect, and inner cell mass  morphology were evaluated extensively.

RESULTS
identification of differentially expressed genes in mouse embryos during early developmental stages
for ddrt-pcr, ten different random primers and four anchor primers were used in  <dig> unique combinations. for templates, total rna was prepared from various stages of developing embryos post-hcg injection. thirty-one of the forty random-anchor primer combinations produced ddrt-pcr patterns that were identical, irrespective of the developmental stage of the mouse embryos . only nine random-anchor primer combinations detected transcripts that were clearly differentially expressed. representative ddrt-pcr patterns are shown in figure  <dig>  transcripts that were clearly differentially expressed at a particular egg cleavage stage were identified for further analysis. a total of tweenty-three such bands were isolated, including six cdna clones in unfertilized eggs, twelve cdna clones in 2-cell embryos, and five cdna clones in 4-cell embryos . the size of these bands ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> bp.

† all of the new identified mouse embryonic cdna sequences were deposited in genbank.

purification and sequencing of cdnas from differential display amplicons
to further characterize the differentially expressed embryonic transcripts, the bands were excised from the gel for pcr re-amplification using the same primer combinations that had led to their initial identification. in all cases, pcr re-amplification was successful, and the size of the subsequent pcr products matched those of the original ddrt-pcr products. the pcr amplicons were cloned and subjected to sequence analysis. in a comprehensive search of the genbank database, the sequences of eight of the cdna clones matched perfectly with known mouse genes: granzyme g, methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase , taf9b rna polymerase ii, lsm <dig> homlog a , n-deacetylase/n-sulfotransferase  <dig> , the atp-dependent chromatin remodeling protein snf2h, high-mobility group box  <dig> , and the tata-box binding protein-associated factor  . another group of  <dig> cdna clones showed high sequence homology  with existing mouse genes, and may represent novel members of these gene families. as the granzyme g gene is known to encode a serine protease that is present in the secretory granules of cytolytic t lymphocyte lines and granzymes d-g are also expressed during late gestation in the mouse uterus, we thought it would be worthwhile to investigate whether granzyme g had a novel, specific function in early embryonic development.

granzyme g gene expression profiling at different mouse developmental stages
to verify the authenticity of the ddrt-pcr-derived cdna sequences, gene-specific primers were designed based on published and experimentally derived sequences of the granzyme g gene for direct rt-pcr detection. transcripts of the granzyme g gene were detected at the 2-cell stage, but were absent at the oocyte, 1-cell,  <dig> hr, and later stages . the direct rt-pcr results were therefore consistent with the ddrt-pcr data. the spatial expression of granzyme g during developmental stages was subsequently examined and was determined to be confined to the extra-embryonic trophoblasts during the middle implantation stage  of the mouse placenta . the temporally constrained expression of granzyme g was further confirmed by whole-mount embryo in situ hybridization using a cloned granzyme g gene-specific fragment as a probe. the results consistently showed a high expression level at the 2-cell stage, which quickly diminished through the 4-cell stage . furthermore, the granzyme g protein localized in the cytoplasm of 2-cell stage  and 4-cell stage  embryos, as demonstrated by whole-mount immunofluorescence. the protein completely disappeared by the 16-cell stage .

antisense morpholino knock-down of granzyme g expression blocks embryos at the two-cell stage
to understand the function and importance of the granzyme g gene product during early embryonic stages, we introduced an antisense morpholino oligonucleotide  against granzyme g into mouse embryos at the pronuclear stage. as a control, nonsense morpholino was conjugated to a fitc fluorophore and microinjected into 1-cell stage embryos. preliminary tests showed that the control fitc-conjugated morpholino molecules distributed equally into dividing cells and were stably maintained until the blastocyst stage. embryonic development was not affected after treatment with the control morpholino at doses between  <dig> and  <dig> mm . when  <dig> mm granzyme g antisense morpholino was microinjected into the cytoplasm of 1-cell embryos, early development arrested at the 2- to 4-cell stages. only  <dig> % of treated embryos overcame 2-cell arrest and developed into 4-cell stage embryos. in contrast, the survival rate of embryos treated with  <dig> mm control morpholino, m <dig> buffer-injected embryos, and control in vitro cultured embryos was  <dig> %, 85%, and  <dig> %, respectively .

control embryo
† six experiments were carried out in each group, and 10- <dig> embryos were used in each experiment.

abc different superscripts within a column indicate a statistically significant difference .

developmental potential changes in response to granzyme g morpholino antisense treatment in a dose-dependent manner
microinjection of serially diluted granzyme g morpholinos  into the cytoplasm of pronuclear mouse embryos resulted in survival rates to the blastocyst stage of 0%,  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> %, respectively . the dose-response effect of the anti-granzyme g morpholino clearly correlated with the embryonic development potential.

† six experiments were carried out in each group, and 10- <dig> embryos were used in each experiment.

abc different superscripts within a column indicate a statistically significant difference .

to determine the efficacy of the morpholino knock-down, the amount of granzyme g mrna remaining after treatment was quantified. total rna isolated from different mo-treated 2-cell stage embryos was first digested with rnase iii, followed by first-strand cdna synthesis and semi-quantitative rt-pcr. for the pronuclear stage embryos injected with the intermediate dose  of anti-granzyme g morpholino, the amount of intact granzyme g mrna at the late 2-cell stage was reduced to 23% of the amount observed in normal untreated embryos,  <dig> mm control mo-treated embryos, and m <dig> buffer-injected embryos. for embryos treated with the high dose of granzyme g morpholino , no granzyme g mrna could be detected, presumably as a consequence of mo blocking and rnase iii digestion . we expect that this effect reflects the developmental arrest in 2-cell stage embryos.

interestingly, the number of blastomere cells were significantly decreased in blastocysts treated with a low-dose of granzyme g morpholino  when compared to normally developed blastocysts . the inner cell mass  of treated blastocysts also exhibited a dispersed distribution compared to the localized icm cluster of control blastocysts . finally, the icm of the  <dig>  mm granzyme g mo-treated embryos also showed a dramatic decrease in differential staining compared to normally developed blastocysts .

maternal-zygotic transition inhibited by granzyme g knock-down
bromouridine, which substitutes bromine to uridine, was used to trace zygotic gene expression during the maternal-zygotic transition . after its incorporation into cells, bromouridine is converted to br-utp. during transcription, converted br-utp is recognized as the same substrate as utp and is incorporated into nascent rnas. confocal images of embryos were observed in bright field  and under fluorescence . quantitative data showed that embryos microinjected with  <dig> mm granzyme g morpholino  exhibited decreased zygotic gene transcription. specifically, the newly synthesized zygotic rna was less than 50% of the normal control embryos . moreover, the treatment of embryos with the control morpholino at the same concentration  did not affect zygotic rna synthesis compared to normal control embryos.

the effect of serine protease inhibitors on embryo survival rate
serine protease-specific inhibitors were used in the in vitro culture system to evaluate the effect of granzyme g activity suppression on embryonic development. the embryonic survival rate was dramatically reduced at the late 2-cell stage  in the presence of  <dig>  mm  <dig> -dichloro-isocoumarin  and  <dig> mm phenyl methanesulphonyl fluoride , respectively. due to the short life of pmsf activity, three different stages  of mouse embryos were supplemented one time with  <dig> mm pmsf in the culture medium. pmsf inhibits survival only at the 2-cell stage, when granzyme g exhibits serine protease activity in the embryos. however, the addition of other kinds of metalloproteinase inhibitors, such as  <dig>  mm edta, had no obvious consequence, as survival rates of > 90% to the late 2-cell stage and 60% to the blastocyst stage were observed . the addition of 1% dmso solvent, as a vehicle control, did not interfere wuth mouse embryo survival, especially in the maternal-to-zygotic transition at the 2-cell stage .

discussion
normal embryonic development, as well as many genetic disorders and cancers, involves a delicate balance between the processes of cellular differentiation and proliferation. many developmental genes have been identified as candidate genes for cancers or other forms of human disorders, and may be developed into novel diagnostic markers or new therapeutic targets. early-expressed genes like those encoding the homeobox and zinc-finger proteins play central roles in the regulation of gene cascades and signal transduction pathways, and thus the downstream effects of these pathways  <cit> . thus, the primary goal of this study was to identify genes that are differentially expressed at the pre-implantation stages of embryonic development to establish novel candidates for use in these broader applications. we then assembled a comprehensive spatial and temporal expression profile of the most promising genes using ddrt-pcr . ddrt-pcr allows the systematic comparison of the expression of all mrnas among several cell populations. it has been used to address biological questions in mammalian systems, including cell differentiation, cell activation, cell stress, and identification of drug targets  <cit> . the advantages of ddrt-pcr over the traditional subtractive hybridization and other comparative rna techniques include  rapidity and simplicity of assays,  small quantities of rna,  increased sensitivity,  reproducibility,  ability to identify differentially expressed genes in more than one population, and  ability to compare several cell populations or variables simultaneously. however, the assay does have its limitations, including false-positive results, the inability to confirm differential expression, and a reduced output compared to cdna microarrays.

it is an interesting possibility that differential display genes in pre-implantation embryos may help to "pull the trigger" and initiate embryonic development and differentiation. at the pre-implantation stages of embryogenesis, mammalian embryos undergo a so-called "zygotic gene activation" or "embryonic gene activation". during this period, the activity of the embryonic genome changes significantly, and the nuclei begin to produce many new species of mrna. several important genes listed in table  <dig> are targets for functional studies in early embryonic development. for example, the snf <dig> h gene, which is expressed in 4-cell stage embryos, encodes a protein with iswi atpase activity. a previous report has demonstrated that null snf2h-/- embryos died during the preimplantation stage  <cit> . blastocyst outgrowth experiments indicated that the loss of snf <dig> h results in growth arrest and cell death of both the trophectoderm and inner cell mass. in the present study, we successfully identified tweenty-three differentially expressed genes in early mouse embryos . among them, the granzyme g transcript encoding a serine protease was expressed at the 2-cell stage . it was previously reported that the differentiation of mouse gmg cells, which begins at day  <dig> of gestation, involves the accumulation of cytolytic mediators, including perforin and the serine protease granzymes a-h, within cytoplasmic granules  <cit> . gmg cells have been proposed to regulate trophoblast invasion into maternal deciduas. indeed, trophoblast killing by murine and human uterine nk cells has been reported  <cit> . other previously proposed functions of granzyme g include  the lysis of virus-infected cells present in the uterus and placenta,  the initiation of abortion,  the destruction of the extracellular matrix and cells at the placenta/uterine interface to promote parturition,  nutritive functions, and  cytokine production  <cit> . however, there have been no reports of the expression of granzyme g in 2-cell mouse embryos or any conclusive data supporting a particular biological function.

to determine the function of specific genes in the field of developmental biology, many effective procedures have been advanced to regulate or disrupt gene expression. in early mouse embryos, researchers have used a variety of methods, including antisense rna, double-stranded rna interference, and gene knock-out approaches  <cit>  to block target gene expression and assess the phenotype resulting from the deficiency. antisense rna is one of most common methods used to down-regulate mrna translation, especially in culture systems. however, the potential of this technique was unfulfilled until recently because the field was dominated by the use of phosphorothioates, which are plagued by unpredictable targeting, sensitivity to nucleases, poor sequence specificity, and a host of non-antisense effects  <cit> . the use of morpholino oligonucleotides  to suppress the translation of targeted genes is proving to be a valuable tool for investigations of gene function in zebrafish  <cit> , xenopus  <cit> , and sea urchins  <cit> . in mice, mos have been applied to pre-implantation mouse embryos using the ethoxylated polyethylenimine  method  <cit>  and in the germinal vesicle stage of mouse oocytes by microinjection  <cit> . both methods successfully suppressed target gene expression. we used this well-defined procedure to investigate the function of granzyme g during pre-implantation development in mouse embryos. in our preliminary test, control fitc-conjugated morpholino molecules that were microinjected into 1-cell stage embryos were equally distributed into dividing cells and stably retained until the blastocyst stage .

in the non-specific mo toxicity test, the results showed that embryonic development was not affected by the introduction of a wide range of doses  of control morpholinos. using the mo technique, we further found that  <dig> mm granzyme g-specific mo inhibited blastocyst formation in 100% of the treated embryos . the knock-down efficiency of the mo treatment was measured using the rnase iii protection assay  <cit> . rnase iii is a rna endonuclease that specifically cleaves double-stranded rnas, including the complex formed by the antisense morpholino and the endogenous sense mrna, into small fragments. semi-quantitative rt-pcr analysis revealed that the degradation rates of granzyme g mrna were 100%, 77%, and 0% after microinjection of pronuclear stage embryos with  <dig> mm,  <dig>  mm, and  <dig> mm of anti-granzyme g morpholino, respectively . in addition, the microinjection of a serial dilution of granzyme g morpholino into the cytoplasm of pronuclear mouse embryos showed a dose-dependent inhibition of blastocyst development rates .

other kinds of serine proteases have been shown to be expressed in pre-implantation embryos, such as the seven-member family of subtilisin-like, calcium-dependent serine proteases known as proprotein convertases   <cit> . in early embryos, pcs cleave a wide variety of precursors into secreted peptides and proteins, including hormones, neuropeptides, growth factors, enzymes, membrane receptors, and extracellular matrix proteins  <cit> . they have been implicated in most biological processes affecting growth, development, and physiology  <cit> . indeed, several pc substrates are expressed in pre-implantation embryos, such as precursors to gonadotropin-releasing hormone , transforming-growth factors  β- <dig> and β- <dig>  platelet-derived growth factor , and insulin-like growth factor  <dig> receptor   <cit> . among these, gnrh has been shown to be critical for normal pre-implantation embryonic growth. prognrh mrna and the gnrh peptide are detectable in pre-implantation embryos from the morula to the blastocyst stage  <cit> . antisense inhibition of gnrh mrna translation has been shown to block the development of these embryos in vitro  <cit> . as proprotein convertase  <dig>  is the most likely prognrh convertase, it too may be important for pre-implantation development at the morula stage, whereas granzyme g appears to act in the maternal-zygotic transition at the 2-cell stage. as shown in the brutp incorporation experiment , treatment of embryos with granzyme g-specific mo, as well as the transcription inhibitor α-amanitin, inhibited rna synthesis during the maternal-to-zygotic transition.

to determine the effects of blocking granzyme g activity in pre-implantation mouse embryos, we exposed the developing embryos to three known protease inhibitors: two serine protease-specific inhibitors and one non-serine protease inhibitor  <cit> . only the serine protease-specific inhibitors,  <dig> -dci and pmsf, phenocopied the mo-induced effect, blocking the maternal-zygotic transition and dramatically decreasing the embryo survival rate at the late 2-cell stage. however, the metalloproteinase inhibitor, edta, had no such effect . the effect of pmsf on different stages of development was further evaluated in this study. due to the short life of pmsf activity, three different stages of mouse embryos were separated and supplemented one time with  <dig> mm pmsf in the culture medium. the inhibition time window is only at the 2-cell stage, which is the stage at which granzyme g functions as an active serine protease in the embryos.

oocytes, the female germ cells, contain all of the messenger rnas necessary to start a new life, but typically wait until fertilization to begin development. the transition from oocyte to zygote involves many changes, including protein synthesis, protein and rna degradation, organelle remodeling, and even the onset of sexual differentiation  <cit> . fifteen to thirty percent of mrna transcripts are degraded during zygote gene activation  <cit> . proteins are also targeted for degradation during the oocyte-to-zygote transition  <cit> . protein degradation often serves to inactivate proteins that are needed early in the transition but that would be harmful later  <cit> . previous reports have demonstrated that two serine protease inhibitors, serpini  <dig> and serpine  <dig>  are temporally expressed in the unfertilized egg and 1-cell stage embryo, respectively  <cit> . these inhibitors may prevent granzyme g function until the 2-cell stage, where it regulates the maternal-zygotic transition. a possible role for granzyme g in the maternal-zygotic transition process is to participate in maternal protein degradation and the subsequent initiation of zygotic gene expression, as proposed in figure  <dig>  dependence on granzyme g activity was first observed at the early 2-cell stage and persisted until the late 2-cell stage. this responsiveness of the mouse zygote appears to require new transcription from the zygotic genome  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study has clearly demonstrated the feasibility of the application of ddrt-pcr for the identification of transcripts that are differentially expressed in mouse embryos at various pre-implantation developmental stages. numerous novel transcripts have been identified at the unfertilized egg, 2-cell, and 4-cell embryonic stages. we characterized for the first time the expression of granzyme g during early stage embryogenesis. overall, our results suggest that granzyme g is an important factor in early mouse development and may play a novel role in the elimination of maternal proteins and the triggering of zygotic gene expression during the maternal-zygotic transition. future studies will attempt to determine the specific function and regulation of these genes to enhance our understanding of normal developmental events in very early embryos.

