BACKGROUND
in contemporary biology, it becomes more widespread to study complex biological processes by collecting and analyzing measurements on the same entities from different sources, such as transcriptomics, metabolomics, chip-chip, or proteomics. the data originating from such measurements can often be organized in matrices pertaining to experimental units  and variables  that were measured on these experimental units. the experimental units, also referred to as objects, constitute the experimental mode of the data, and the measured biochemical compounds the variable mode. we will denote such matrices consisting of measurements originating from different sources by data blocks.

data blocks with information on the same entities stemming from different sources share one of the data modes; as such we will further denote them by the term 'coupled data'. for instance, ishii and coworkers  <cit>  simultaneously collected metabolomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics measurements from escherichia coli chemostat cultures with different mutants and environmental conditions. this yields measurements coupled via the experimental mode. other examples of publications involving this type of data are  <cit> . as an alternative, data blocks can be coupled via the variable mode. this occurs, for instance, in experiments in which transcriptomics measurements are coupled with chip-chip measurements  <cit> , or even with chip-chip and motif data  <cit> .

often, the purpose of collecting coupled data will be to discover biological mechanisms that underlie the behavior of the variables in the different data blocks. for example, when the measurements originate from experiments in which metabolomics and transcriptomics analyses were conducted, the researcher could be interested in identifying regulatory mechanisms that coordinate a joint response on metabolome and transcriptome level.

to arrive at a comprehensive synthesis of the information on biological mechanisms underlying coupled data blocks, the data blocks have to be analyzed simultaneously. for such a synthesis, the family of simultaneous component analysis  methods is a natural choice. sca methods search for important patterns in the data blocks and reveal the contributions of the variables and the experimental units to these patterns, similar to principal component analysis . the identified patterns can subsequently aid the discovery of the regulatory mechanisms underlying the data.

however, a simultaneous analysis of multiple data blocks may be hampered by the data blocks being heterogeneous in a number of respects. for instance, measurements originating from different functional genomics platforms can be subject to different amounts measurement error, or noise related to the accuracy of the platforms in question.

the noise present in the different data blocks can obscure the data patterns. therefore, it can become more difficult to extract information regarding these patterns. for this reason, it could be fruitful to take data block noise into consideration in the data analysis. in particular, when data blocks are subject to different amounts of noise, it seems desirable to treat the data block with more noise with more caution.

yet, the different noise levels should be known to be able to take these into consideration. often however, it is unknown how much noise is present in each data block. if this were the case, a method is needed that also estimates the noise in each data block. such a method was proposed recently in the psychometrics field: mxlsca-p, a maximum likelihood based sca method . mxlsca-p explicitly estimates the noise levels per data block and integrates these estimations in the overall analysis. in a simulation study, mxlsca-p outperformed standard sca-p  <cit>  when recovering the underlying structure of simulated data blocks that were subject to different noise levels.

one may wish to translate the results of the simulation study mentioned above to the analysis of coupled functional genomics data. there are, however, two obstacles that prevent a direct translation. first, the data blocks simulated in the previous study were coupled via the variable mode, while functional genomics measurements often pertain to measurements coupled via the experimental mode  <cit> . different coupling leads to a rather different kind of analysis, in particular with regard to the type of preprocessing that is linked to different sca methods  <cit> . it is therefore not self-evident that the previous results hold for data blocks coupled via the experimental mode. second, the simulation study did not consider data aspects that are typical for functional genomics, such as, having more variables than objects, and moderate to high correlations between variables  as the simulation was based on randomly generated components.

in this paper we will present a new simulation study to overcome these obstacles and to ascertain the relevance of mxlsca-p for the analysis of functional genomics data coupled via the experimental mode. for this purpose we will determine the performance of mxlsca-p in a context in which  the experimental mode is shared; and  the correlations between variables are realistic in that they mimic the correlations observed in a real life microbial metabolomics data set consisting of two coupled gc/ms  and lc/ms  data blocks. in addition, we will also apply standard sca-p and mxlsca-p to the real life metabolomics data set itself. before presenting the results of the analysis of simulated and real-life data sets, we will now first explain sca-p and mxlsca-p. subsequently, we will outline the problem and setup of our new simulation study.

simultaneous component analysis
notation
in this paper matrices and vectors will be indicated by bold uppercase and lowercase characters as in kiers  <cit> . elements will further be denoted by lowercase running indices that range from  <dig> to the corresponding uppercase characters. for instance, the number of objects in a data block will be indexed by i, running from  <dig> to i.

general sca decomposition
the family of sca methods  <cit>  comprises a wide range of component methods that share two characteristics. first, they reduce the dimensionality of the data blocks by decomposing the data blocks in components, and second they do so while minimizing the loss of information. the sca methods distinguish themselves from other components methods  <cit>  by  simultaneously decomposing coupled data blocks with the different data blocks taking exchangeable roles, and  allowing for block-specific weighting of data blocks to capture particular aspects of the data blocks more adequately.

in general, given a set of k data blocks xk that share an object mode with i objects and jk variables, and a set of prespecified block-specific weights wk, a sca decomposition reads as follows:

   

with t denoting a score matrix for r components shared by all k data blocks, pk the accompanying block-specific loadings, and ek a residual matrix.

this decomposition of data blocks that share the object mode will be the reference decomposition in this paper. for other situations in which the data blocks share a variable mode, the sca decomposition is given by:

   

with tk denoting a block-specific score matrix for r components, p the loadings shared by all data blocks, and ek a residual matrix.

model estimation
for the estimation of t and pk the following objective function is minimized:

   

the optimal matrices t and pk that minimize  can be estimated on the basis of the following identity:

   

where xc =  with size  is the concatenation of all wkxk, and  with size  is the concatenation of all pk; the estimates then can be obtained by means of a singular value decomposition   <cit> . for identification purposes, the components can be constrained to have a principal axis orientation and t or pc to be orthonormal.

the svd of xc reads as follows:

   

if t is chosen to be columnwise orthonormal, t can be obtained by choosing the r left singular vectors associated with the r largest singular values in s. the loadings pc are then obtained by multiplication of the r right singular vectors with the r associated largest singular values:

   

where the subscript 'r' indicates the r largest singular values and accompanying singular vectors. in case pc is chosen to be orthonormal, pc is put equal to vr and t to ursr.

sca with equal block weights
sca with equal block weights  was proposed in the psychometrics literature as sca-p  <cit>  and in the chemometrics literature as sum-pca  <cit> . both methods fit the general sca decomposition as methods in which equal weights are applied to the different data blocks. in the remainder of this paper we will refer to this method as sca-p.

choosing equal block weights implies that all the data entries in the different data blocks are considered equally important and that no further block-specific adjustments are made to increase or decrease their relative influence. this approach was coined a 'one entry, one vote' approach  <cit> . the objective function of this method is:

   

mxlsca-p
mxlsca-p  is a stochastic extension of the generic sca method . unlike sca-p, it assumes that the residuals in ek follow a normal distribution with a mean of zero and an unknown block-specific variance:

   

the minus loglikelihood function for the mxlsca-p method is :

   

in which c denotes a constant term that does not influence the minimization of the minus loglikelihood function.  that pertained to the two block case. we minimize the minus loglikelihood in line with the optimizations discussed previously.) the improved performance of mxlsca-p in the previous simulation study  can be understood from the different model assumptions made. sca-p implicitly assumes that noise across the different data blocks is identically distributed, i.e., it maximizes the likelihood function based on the assumption that the noise is distributed identically in the different data blocks. when this assumption is violated and the noise is distributed differently, the sca-p model becomes misspecified, unlike mxlsca-p that specifically allows for those differences.

the objective function of mxlsca-p  differs from the general objective function for sca methods  by the introduction of block-specific noise parameters σk. these noise parameters act as a weight to the data blocks and in a new term 'ijk log σk'. unlike in the general sca decomposition, in mxlsca-p the block weights are to be estimated as an integrated part of the analysis.

the parameters of mxlsca-p  cannot be estimated directly via an svd. therefore an alternating least squares  algorithm  <cit>  was developed .

in an als algorithm, the parameters to be estimated are split into subsets that are alternatingly re-estimated conditionally on each other. in particular, the following procedure is followed:

 <dig>  the algorithm is initiated by choosing values for σk. these starting values for σk can be determined randomly or rationally . it is advised to use multiple different starting values to avoid getting stuck in local minima.

 <dig>  the scores t and loadings pk are estimated conditional on the values of σk via an svd. this svd optimizes the following part of the objective function: .

 <dig>  new estimations  of σk are calculated conditional on the previous estimations of  and :

   

 <dig>  the current value of the objective function  is calculated.

the second, third, and fourth step are repeated until a convergence criterion is met .

problem and setup of the simulation study
a simulation study was set up to assess the performance of the sca-p and mxlsca-p methods for the analysis of functional genomics data blocks coupled via the experimental mode. the performance of the methods was evaluated in terms of their ability to recover the true structures  underlying two simulated data blocks subject to different simulation settings. to improve the realism of the simulations, the data blocks were simulated using the correlation structure of the variables as observed in a real life gc/ms and lc/ms microbial metabolomics data set .

furthermore, different data characteristics that could influence the analysis of coupled functional genomics data blocks were varied. in particular, the following characteristics were included as design factors :

• noise level of the data blocks. noise can hamper the recovery of the true data structures, especially if the noise levels of different coupled functional genomics data blocks would differ. in the simulation study noise was manipulated via two factors:  the noise ratio between the two data blocks , and  the total amount of noise on the data blocks .

• different numbers of variables per data block. in functional genomics research, different data blocks can considerably differ in the number of variables . moreover, the number of variables is generally larger than the number of objects which induces collinearity in the data  <cit> . a sca can be influenced by these factors in two ways. first, when the difference between the number of variables in different data blocks is large, the larger data block could dominate the analysis. second, induced collinearity may hamper a correct estimation of the loadings.

in this simulation study a small and a large data block were simulated with different numbers of variables per data block . the total number of variables was always larger than the number of objects such that collinearity was always present. the large data block used the correlation structure observed in the gc/ms data set and the small data block the correlation structure of the lc/ms data set.

• relative importance of the data blocks. the variation present in one data block, and thus its importance, can differ from other data blocks. this could influence the recovery of the data structures, as data blocks with high variation can dominate other data blocks. the variation present in the data blocks is in an svd expressed by the singular values. here, the relative importance of a data block was manipulated by these singular values .

in addition to these factors, a factor methods was included in the experimental design, with sca and mxlsca-p as its two different levels. recovery performance and the impact on it of the factors manipulated in the simulation study were analyzed by means of an analysis of variance .

RESULTS
performance of the sca methods on simulated data
the recovery by the two sca methods of the true data structures as measured by a fisher-z transformed modified rv coefficient  <cit>   was generally good. recovery performance appeared to depend both on the specific structural aspect looked at, and on data characteristics as manipulated in the simulation study . below we will discuss the different data characteristics and their influence on the recovery of the true structural aspects.

f denotes the value of the f statistic, df the degrees of freedom, and ω <dig> the effect size. only the most important factors in terms of ω <dig>  are reported .

most importantly for the purpose of this research, the main effect of factor 'method' and its interaction with 'noise ratio' appeared to be sizeable on the level of the recovery of the true scores  as well as of the true data block entries . in particular, mxlsca-p performed on average significantly better than sca-p . moreover, as appears from figure  <dig>  in the case of the recovery of tm,  and , mxlsca-p especially outperforms sca-p when the noise levels for the data blocks differ. for the recovery of tm , recovery was best when the largest data block, , was the least noisy. the recovery of a particular data block was further best  when that data block was subject to the least amount of noise . furthermore, the interaction between 'method' and 'noise total' was also sizable or the recovery tm. this interaction showed that the benefit of mxlsca-p is largest when the total noise level is low and the benefit becomes smaller for higher total noise levels. the advantage of mxlsca-p over sca-p for recovering the true underlying structures in the presence of different noise levels did not carry over to the recovery of the block-specific loadings  . one might conjecture that this result is due to differences in the number of implicit constraints on the different constituents of the mxlsca-p decomposition. the scores of the sca decomposition are constrained to be identical for all data blocks; as a result, these scores may be prevented to be misguided by the data. the loadings, however, are not subject to such restriction, and, as a result have more freedom to deviate from the true model structure.


se denotes the standard error. rv-z values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  correspond to modified rv coefficients of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the differences between sca-p and mxlsca-p are significant for tm, , and  .

a sizeable main effect of 'noise total' was found for the recovery of all true structural aspects. this effect is obvious with more noise leading to a poorer recovery. furthermore, for the recovery of all block-specific structural aspects , the main effect of 'noise ratio' was important as well, with the true structures being recovered better when the corresponding data block was less noisy. furthermore, the interaction between 'noise total' and 'noise ratio' was substantial for the recovery of all data structures. this interaction was plotted in figure  <dig> for the cases of the recovery  and  . from figure  <dig> it becomes clear that the effect of 'noise ratio'  shows up only in case of low to medium noise levels. in addition, a very good recovery is observed in case of the combination of a low total noise level and a noise ratio of 1; the latter is due to the fact that this particular combination implies a very low total noise level for the whole of the two data blocks . for the recovery of the common scores, the interaction between 'noise total' and 'noise ratio' took a slightly different shape: now the two conditions of 'noise ratio' that implied different noise levels for the two data blocks resulted in a better recovery in case of low and medium 'total noise' levels.

analysis of real life microbial metabolomics data
to obtain an as complete as possible overview of the changes of the concentrations of metabolites in microbial metabolomics, multiple analytical platforms are required  <cit> . in this paper, e. coli metabolomics data consisting of metabolite concentrations that were obtained using gc/ms and lc/ms  <cit>  were used. the data set consisted of  <dig> samples of batch fermentations with varying experimental conditions  taken at different time points. in general, different analytical platforms can perform differently with regard to reproducibility. therefore, the analysis could potentially benefit from an mxlsca-p approach that takes noise heterogeneity into account.

we subjected the data under study to mxlsca-p and sca-p analyses with three components. the three components were selected based on the scree plots of component analyses of the individual data blocks. subsequently, the mxlsca-p and sca-p score plots were compared. the first two components appeared to be very similar: on the first component the samples obtained from succinate grown cells differed strongly from the other samples; the second component showed a separation between samples obtained under low oxygen conditions and samples obtained at late time points of both succinate grown cells and wild type cells. however, differences between the two methods became apparent for the third component. in particular, the scores on the third mxlsca-p component for those conditions for which multiple time points were sampled as a function of time were plotted. for all these plots, profiles resembling typical batch fermentation growth curves were found. in such a growth curve, the cells first grow fast as a sufficient amount of nutrients is available; next, when nutrients become depleted, growth is halted and the curve starts to decline. a typical example of such a profile in the mxlsca-p scores is plotted in the upper left corner of figure  <dig>  for sca-p, such typical profiles were also found for five experimental conditions , but for two experimental conditions the patterns differed . 

the pattern of the block-specific loadings further nicely complemented the pattern of the scores. in particular, inspection of the loadings on the third component for the lc/ms data block revealed high contributions for cell wall precursors for peptidoglycan biosynthesis  <cit>   and nucleotides  that are involved in a wide range of cellular processes, among which cell wall biosynthesis  <cit> . cell wall biosynthesis can be linked to the growth phases in a batch fermentation, as metabolites involved in it are likely to fluctuate depending on these growth phases. for instance, during exponential growth, cell wall intermediates are required for growth and cell division, whereas during the stationary growth phase the demand for these intermediates is expected to drop.

the mxlsca-p block-specific loadings for the third component pertaining to the gc/ms data block revealed consistently large contributions for uncharacterized disaccharides; for the corresponding sca-p loadings this was less clearly the case. within the context of this study, there are two likely roles for disaccharides in e. coli, which both could relate to variation in metabolite concentrations during the different phases of a batch fermentation:  in cell wall biosynthesis, the different parts of the cell wall have polysaccharides as a major constituent, for instance, in peptidoglycan  <cit>  and in lipopolysaccharides  <cit> .  disaccharides could play a role in the internal storage of excess carbon source, during conditions under which another nutrient excluding carbon source is limiting.

summarizing, in this case study mxlsca-p seemed better able to extract biologically relevant information. mxlsca-p provided a more consistent link to the growth phases of the batch fermentations, both through the common scores and through the lc/mc data block loadings. also, the disaccharides involved in the mxlsca-p loadings for the gc/ms block are likely to link up with cellular processes related to the different batch fermentation growth phases.

discussion
mxlsca-p was proposed to model coupled data blocks with heterogeneous noise levels. in a previous simulation study, mxlsca-p was shown to outperform sca-p in recovering the true structure underlying the data that did not consider typical problems encountered in functional genomics studies. in the study presented in this manuscript the previous study was extended to address these problems typical for functional genomics:  the data were coupled via the experimental mode,  the simulations were based on correlation structures observed in real life data sets,  collinearity was induced by ensuring the data had more variables than objects. our results showed that mxlsca-p also outperforms sca-p in simulated data that mimic functional genomics data more closely. in particular, mxlsca-p was better able to recover the true scores  and true data blocks  especially when the relative noise levels differed across data blocks. furthermore, mxlsca-p provided a more consistent and biologically more meaningful interpretation of the analysis of the e. coli metabolomics case study. therefore mxlsca-p seems to be the preferred choice over sca-p for the kind of data we have studied, but probably for other kinds of data as well.

in sca-p, the data blocks are given equal a priori block weights as there is no a priori reason to treat the data blocks differently. mxlsca-p is an extension of sca-p in which, as an integrated part of the analysis, the equal a priori block weights are combined with data-driven a posteriori weights that reflect the noise levels of the different data blocks such as to de-emphasize the most noisy data blocks. within the family of sca methods, other methods exist that a priori weigh the data blocks differently to ensure that each block makes a "fair" contribution to the analysis. such a weighting can be based on different conceptions of fairness  <cit> , for instance, to ensure that each data block has the same amount of variation  <cit> , or that data blocks with more redundant information are downweighted  <cit> . . those a priori weights to ensure a fair block weighting, however, do not take into account differences in measurement error, or noise levels. indeed, analogous to sca-p, in other sca methods it is implicitly assumed that the data blocks have equally and independently normal distributed noise levels. therefore, these other sca methods, too, could potentially benefit from block-specific noise estimations on the basis of maximum likelihood extensions as discussed in the present paper. following such an approach, the a priori fairness correction could be blended with block-specific noise estimations.

sca-p assumes that the noise levels are equal for all data blocks. often, this assumption does not match with situations encountered in practice. mxlsca-p addresses this problem by allowing for different noise levels per data block, and by only requiring that the noise levels within each data block are equally and independently normal distributed. yet, it is possible that noise levels also vary within a data block. for example, in addition to the fact that different measurement platforms can have different levels of reproducibility on average, within a measurement platform some variables could be measured more or less reliably than others . this example illustrates that mxlsca-p could benefit from allowing more complex 'within data block' error variance structures. such complex variance structures could be incorporated following, for instance, a generalized least squares approach  <cit> .

research within the functional genomics field is not only limited to static experiments, experiments in which samples are obtained in time are also often conducted . to discover time-related effects in the data, mxlsca-p could be extended using functional data analysis approaches  <cit> .

sometimes, the data sets collected in functional genomics studies are incomplete and contain missing data entries, for instance, due to experimental complications. the mxlsca-p method could be extended to handle data sets containing missing values. for this, strategies like criss-cross regression  <cit>  could be adapted.

CONCLUSIONS
mxlsca-p is a promising addition to the sca family. its ability to take different noise levels per data block into consideration and improve the recovery of the true patterns underlying the data could be beneficial for the analysis of coupled data blocks originating from different functional genomics sources. moreover, the maximum likelihood based approach to sca offers room for further extensions to allow for custom-made solutions to specific problems encountered in functional genomics research.

