BACKGROUND
the detection of functional sequence patterns  in a yet uncharacterized protein is one of the most widely used and powerful methods for assigning a function to proteins in newly sequenced proteomes. sequence patterns associated to functional motifs are usually generated manually in an attempt to maximize the number of sequences that clearly belong to the set functionally characterized by the motif , while minimizing the number of unrelated sequences   <cit> . the possibility of estimating the number of false predictions is critical in evaluating the significance of finding a pattern in a protein sequence. the false positive rate of a pattern on a large protein database can be estimated from the number of matches expected to occur by chance  <cit> . in the following we will refer to this thesis as the 'classical hypothesis'. both these authors measured the expectation of occurrence of prosite  <cit>  functional patterns in a sequence database of size n, simply as the product of n and the amino acid probabilities in each position of the pattern. the individual amino acid probability values were calculated from the frequencies of residues in swiss-prot  <cit> . sternberg  <cit>  assumed the calculated expectations as a benchmark for evaluating motif matches on the swiss-prot database as annotated in prosite; nevill-manning and co-workers  <cit>  used such expectations for assessing the specificity of motifs exhaustively generated from a multiple sequence alignment of related proteins. from this perspective, the number of occurrences of a motif in a set of proteins can be regarded as the sum of the functional occurrences plus the random occurrences, i.e. motif matches explained by the sequence composition alone  <cit> .

the statistics of the number of occurrences of regular expression motifs in a random text, has been studied by several authors . nicodème and co-workers  <cit>  in particular, computed the theoretical expectation λ of the number of matches of prosite patterns on the prodom multi-alignment consensus sequences  <cit> ; this analytical method uses computer science algorithms and combinatorial mathematics to give a constructive method for approximating  the distribution of number of matches of a given regular expression in a random text, the random text being modelled as either a bernoulli sequence  or a markov sequence with given transition matrix. the matches can be defined as either  overlapping or as non-overlapping. for large texts, it is shown that the number of occurrences of the expression in the text will approximately follow a normal distribution with mean and variance that can be calculated. in the application example, matching prosite motifs in a prodom based set of sequences, the whole database is treated as one large text and the letter frequencies used are thus computed as averages over all target sequences. the quantity λ was compared to the corresponding total number of observed matches o, with the finding that λ systematically underestimates o, a result that can be expected from the functional significance of prosite patterns.

whereas events of over-representation of a motif are usually related to its biological significance, the analysis of the relationship between the expected number of random matches of a motif  and its number of false predictions on a biological database , might provide insight into the evolutionary nature of protein sequences. indeed a chance match of a functional motif is unlikely to be functional wherever it is found in a protein: a motif will be recognized as functional only when occurring in the right conformation, location and cellular context. it is possible, however, that, at least in some cases, a match occurring for the "mere" sequence composition, fulfils physical conditions similar enough to those of the corresponding functional occurrence, thus giving rise to an "unwished" functionality. these cases would be, as a rule, disadvantageous for the cell and could be the object of a counter-selection process. on the other hand, a functional motif may involve such a high stringency of boundary conditions  that its appearance  in more than one unrelated protein family would be extremely unlikely to result in function interference.

the relationship between λ  and fp  has not been yet thoroughly investigated. in particular, a quantitative relationship, valuable for inferring the expected number of false positive matches for an uncharacterized pattern in a sequence database, is yet to be established. neither has a qualitative analysis of the biological features of false occurrences, especially if such occurrences are associated to significantly higher or lower values of the corresponding theoretical expectations, been reported in the literature.

here we propose a statistical analysis of the relationship between the theoretical expectation of the number of pattern matches in a database of random sequences and the number of false occurrences in a biological database. the study has been carried out for prosite patterns in the form of regular expression, but it is general enough to be applied to any motif of the same form.

our approach is based on several concepts. first, we computed the expectation λ of a pattern p, as the mean number of hits in n database randomizations, instead of deriving it from some a priori statistical model for the occurrences of regular expressions  in random texts. second, a regression analysis on the set of m points , where m is the number of patterns under consideration, was used to determine an analytical relationship, which generalizes the  relationship to any motif and which can be, therefore, used for predictive purposes. third, a study of statistical and biological features of the fp matches was performed for patterns displaying a number of false predictions in a biological database remarkably greater or lower than the expected number of hits in the corresponding randomized database. our findings suggest diverse fascinating mechanisms and constraints occurring during evolution perhaps affecting the random appearance of functional motifs in protein sequences.

RESULTS
in the study of the relationship between the expected number of matches λ of a functional motif in a random dataset and the observed number of its false occurrences in the corresponding biological dataset, three important issues must be considered and discussed beforehand: the set of functional motifs used to carry out the experiments, the biological sequence dataset in which the functional motifs are searched, and the statistical model adopted for establishing the theoretical expected number of random matches.

the dataset of motifs
the set of functional motifs in the form of regular expressions was derived from the prosite database of patterns and generalized profiles, as described in methods.

among other useful features, the prosite database provides, for each entry, complete lists of swiss-prot proteins manually verified for true positive , false positive , and false negative  assignments  <cit> .

our work is dependent on the accuracy of prosite annotations of true and false positive matches. random errors in the prosite annotation, however, should not affect the statistics of motif matches for two reasons: firstly, they are rare. in fact, true and false positives of prosite patterns are manually verified by expert curators through both the literature and the information retrieved from other databases such as swiss-prot or pfam  <cit> . secondly, random errors, by definition, do not have a preference for specific groups of patterns, and hence do not cause a systematic bias in our analysis. as it will be discussed, the presence of systematical errors, which may partly influence some results, has been evaluated and rejected.

the sequence datasets
the complete swiss-prot sequence database is a general reference for motif statistics. however, it is redundant and its composition in protein families and organisms is still biased by the trends of the scientific community. the analysis carried out on human <dig>  must take into account that it is considerably smaller than the complete human proteome. the yeast proteome is only partially represented in the swiss-prot database. the two further proteomes analysed, e. coli and m. jannaschii, which instead are almost entirely represented in the swiss-prot database, belong to small organisms, and unfortunately the number of prosite patterns' fps is too small for a solid statistical analysis .

the statistical model
the procedure adopted to estimate the expected number of random matches of a sequence motif does not rely on a priori assumptions about the statistical distribution of such matches . moreover, it allowed us to overcome the obstacle of estimating the number of chance occurrences for those patterns characterized by variable spacers between more conserved positions. in fact, the problem of analytically calculating the probability of occurrence of this type of patterns in a random text has not yet been faced  <cit> .

as a control, the analytical calculation of λ has also been performed by using the nicodème and co-workers approach  <cit>  for the subset of patterns with spacers of fixed length. the two approaches provide similar results, even if the pearson correlation between λ, as calculated with our procedure, and fps is always higher than the one between λ, as determined by nicodème and co-workers, and fps .

: pearson correlation based on  <cit>  : pearson correlation based on randomized datasets.

the nicodème and co-workers approach is slightly different from the approach used in this work, since our method of randomizing by permutation within each sequence and of defining matches as simply absence or presence of the motif in the target sequences leads to a closer link between the actual sequence database and the randomized sequences and also to simpler statistical properties for the number of matches. the major consequence concerns patterns abundant in cysteines. since proteins are particularly heterogeneous regarding the density of the cysteines, the value of λ of some cysteine-rich patterns turned out to be underestimated by nicodème and co-workers and overestimated by our procedure. such patterns were discarded from the regression analysis.

fig.  <dig> shows the plot , where λ is the mean number of matches of a pattern in n  outcomes of a biological sequence dataset randomization, and fp is the number of false positive matches in the original dataset. the plot displays a linear behaviour, and the pearson correlation between the x-axis and y-axis values is >  <dig>  for all the sequence datasets considered . a regression line was then fitted to the data. the values of the slope are reported in table  <dig> for each sequence dataset. it is worth noting that the slope is lower than one for both sprot <dig> and human <dig>  whereas it is one for yeast <dig>  within the evaluated error.

prosite and reversed patterns statistical analysis
the lines defining the 95% confidence interval divide the -plane into three regions . patterns belonging to the first region  are such that fp > λr . patterns with λl < fp < λr are in the central region , and those belonging to the third region  are such that fp < λl .

the number and features of patterns from regions i, ii and iii were analysed separately and then compared. the majority of the patterns belong to the central region , while few patterns have a number of fps significantly greater than expected by chance  in every dataset considered. sprot <dig> and human <dig> also display a subset of outliers which have a number of fps significantly lower than expected by chance .

on a biological dataset, matches of random patterns, i.e. derived from differently ordered positions of functional motifs, probably occur by chance. we obtained randomized prosite patterns by reversing their regular expressions . this procedure should generate patterns with no functional significance. being made up of the same composition of residues as the original prosite patterns, these random patterns display the same statistical properties, including the information content  <cit> , as the original ones. the statistical analysis of the reversed patterns revealed a high correlation between matches in the random datasets and matches in the biological datasets and a regression slope that is always equal to one .

the comparison between the slope values of prosite and reversed patterns shows that, whereas reversed patterns have slope ≈  <dig> on every datasets considered , prosite patterns display a slope value lower than one, namely, on average, a higher number of matches in the random datasets as opposed to the biological datasets in the cases of sprot <dig> and human <dig> 

prosite patterns
in the following, the detailed analysis performed on the sprot <dig> dataset is reported.

patterns in region ii
 <dig> prosite patterns lay in region ii . patterns where fp =  <dig> are predominant in this region. the fact that the majority of patterns fall in this region shows that our model confirms the "classical hypothesis"  <cit> , although the slope <  <dig>  indicates a general tendency of having fp < λ.

region ii* is the region ii without patterns for which λ = fp = 0; q <dig> is the 25th percentile and q <dig> is the 75th percentile; n is the number of patterns in the corresponding region.

even though the majority of patterns has a number of fps similar to the number of matches expected by chance, we need to take into account that the cell machinery is constantly subject to mutational events and, consequently, to the force of natural selection. it is therefore reasonable that, on average, regarding the accidental occurrence of functional motifs, protein sequences do not behave as mere aggregations of letters. thus, we hypothesize that, albeit if as a very small effect, the tendency of having fp < λ might reflect the evolutionary pressure  against the random appearance of functional motif matches. this hypothesis of "mild counter-selection" cannot be proved. it is, however, strengthened by the fact that, for non-functional patterns, we found fp ~λ .

outliers of region i
sixty-three prosite patterns lay in region i . in a poisson distribution  the number of patterns expected to fall by chance in this region is  <dig> . to investigate possible reasons why these motifs display a much higher number of false positives than expected by chance, we analyzed those patterns in some detail and identified two groups:

n is the number of patterns. the number of patterns in region iii and region ii* differs from the number of patterns in the corresponding regions of table  <dig> because only for patterns with fp >  <dig> the op value can be calculated.

p-value is the p-value assigned to the number of outliers observed  versus the number expected  from the poisson distribution and n.s. stands for p-value >  <dig> .

1) patterns that are mis-annotated in prosite ;

2) true outliers.

1) mis-annotated patterns are examples of patterns whose occurrences, annotated as fps for a specific prosite pattern, are able to identify functionally or structurally relevant regions in protein families different from the true positives protein family but anyway functionally related to it. two of them are ps <dig> and ps <dig> 

the majority of ps <dig> true positives are ribose-phosphate pyrophosphokinases, which contain the pribosyltran pfam  <cit>  domain. the ps <dig> motif is well conserved in this domain. nearly all the false positives are adenine phosphoribosyltransferase , which also have a pribosyltran pfam domain. it would be, therefore, more appropriate to use this motif to describe the wider family of pribosyltran domain containing proteins.

ps <dig> is the prosite motif built around the serine active site of lipases. many false positives are found among esterases. this pattern is very conserved  in the pfam alpha/beta hydrolase fold domain, which is found in several protein families including lipases and esterases.

another interesting example of mis-annotated pattern is ps <dig> which is an atypical atp-binding motif a  characteristic of bacterial regulatory proteins involved in the atp-dependent interaction with sigma- <dig>  <cit> , such as algb, dcdt, flbd, hoxa, hupr <dig>  hydg, ntrc, pgta or pilr. the majority of false positives of this motif belong to the eukaryotic rab-like ypt <dig> family of gtp-binding proteins. thus, ps <dig> might be either an ancestral motif originally duplicated by mechanisms such as exon shuffling, or a case of convergent evolution. in both cases, at present, it co-exists in bacterial and eukaryotic proteins with no functional interference.

2) the number of true outliers is in agreement to what expected by chance from the poisson distribution. one interesting example of a true outlier among many others is represented by ps <dig>  which is annotated in the elm database   <cit>  as trg_er_kdel. this is a short c-terminal signal motif which is strictly conserved in the major endoplasmic reticulum  proteins, and which allows proteins that permanently reside in the er lumen to be distinguished from newly synthesized secretory proteins. in sprot <dig>  this motif is also detected in  <dig> non-related proteins, which are clearly not located in the er .

a further analysis was performed on the ps <dig> false positive sequences annotated in the swiss-prot release  <dig> . the subcellular location of each protein was retrieved by means of the swiss-prot annotation. out of the  <dig> fps, only two reside in the er: one is annotated in the manually curated elm database as true positive and the other could potentially belong to the set of true positives.

we hypothesize that a "proliferation"  of fps might have occurred, in some cases, in organisms or cellular compartments where their occurrence does not interfere with the function associated to the motif. in fact, it is unlikely that negative selection will act on accidental duplication events if these do not perturb the cell functionality.

outliers of region iii
thirty-six patterns lay in region iii . following the poisson distribution, the number of patterns expected to fall in this region by mere chance is  <dig> . these patterns have a number of fps which is lower than λ. it should be also noticed that they display low information content and their fps occur in more disordered  regions of proteins . our findings suggest that they are likely to result in "unwished" functionalities and, therefore, are good candidates for negative selection.

there are two possible arguments that might be at variance with the negative selection hypothesis: the number of fps is underestimated because of

1) a systematic underestimate in the prosite annotation for true positives

2) a non-complete coverage of the sequence datasets

here we discuss both arguments and explain why neither of them hold.

1) some proteins might have been erroneously identified as true positives by similarity alone, indeed. if this were the case, we would expect the real number of false positives to be higher and these patterns to belong to region ii. in other words, for these patterns, the number of true positives as assigned in prosite  would consist of a number of experimental true positives plus a number of mis-annotated true positives. in such a case we would expect to find that the difference between the number of matches expected by chance and the number of prosite false positives is correlated to tp. we found that this correlation is <  <dig> , and rejected the hypothesis of a systematic error in the annotation of patterns in region iii.

2) it could be proposed that, by increasing the number of sequences in the datasets, the number of fps might grow more rapidly than the number of random matches, resulting in a shift of patterns from region iii to region ii.

in order to verify this possibility, we started from non-redundant versions of the datasets under study and increased progressively their redundancy . then we studied the relationship between fp and λ and found that the number of fps increases more slowly than the number of random matches in the dataset . this result implies that the addition of sequences to a dataset would either relocate some patterns of region ii in region iii or leave the situation unaffected.

information content and disorder propensity
the patterns' mean information content  was calculated as explained in methods  <cit> . the ic of a pattern is directly proportional to the length of the pattern and inversely proportional to its degeneracy. patterns with high ic are in general longer and display lower degeneracy than patterns with low ic. this implies that a high ic is advantageous for the selectivity of a motif. we found that the highest ic value is attained by patterns for which λ = fp =  <dig> .

interestingly, for each sequence dataset considered the mean ic decreases from patterns belonging to region i to those of region iii. in particular, a single pattern analysis showed that the vast majority of patterns in region iii are short  and non-degenerate . this means that these patterns are less subject to conformational constraints.

patterns were compared also for the propensity of their false positive matches to occur in ordered/disordered protein regions . ordered regions typically contain regular secondary structures packed into a compact globule  <cit> . ordered regions, therefore, tend to be more buried, and therefore more hidden, than disordered ones. on average, false positive matches of patterns belonging to region iii have a higher propensity of occurrence in protein disordered segments than those belonging to region i and ii have . these findings suggest that the patterns of group iii tend to occur in more exposed and less structurally constrained regions of proteins, as compared to patterns of groups i and ii and especially to those for which λ = fp =  <dig>  the evolutionary implications of these results will be further addressed in the 'discussion' section.

reversed patterns
the most interesting result is that these patterns display a regression slope which is always equal to one . a detailed analysis was performed in order to establish if all the reversed patterns are non-functional.  <dig> reversed patterns matching prosite patterns were removed . the great majority of the remaining patterns lies in the 95% confidence interval. few of them fall in region i . these are predominantly patterns highly conserved in some pfam  <cit>  family or domain . for example, the reversed of ps <dig> is found almost solely in regulator of ribonuclease activity a proteins and, moreover, it is conserved in the demethylmenaquinone methyltransferase pfam domain present in these proteins. hence, these are clearly non-random patterns that cannot be considered as non-functional and are, therefore, excluded from the regression analysis.

finally, in region i, only fourteen patterns for sprot <dig>  four for human <dig> and two for yeast <dig> are apparently non-functional. these numbers are in agreement with what it is expected by chance in this region .

there is also a subset of reversed patterns falling in region iii . these patterns are less frequent  in the biological database than in the random database. this observation together with an ad hoc analysis of the patterns, suggests that some of them share a particular amino acid compositions whose random appearance in a protein would have a high probability of interfering with the normal cell functionality. in this case it is possible that they are functional and conceivable that could be subjected to events of negative selection.

discussion
the first telling conclusion is that the great majority of functional motifs have a number of false occurrences comparable to the number of matches on a random database -plane).

this result is in agreement with works such as  <cit>  and  <cit> . thus, it seems that, in most cases, proteins are not affected if a stretch of amino acids, selected during evolution and carrying a structural or functional ability, appears in a proteome only by chance. in other words false occurrences of a functional motif do not generally compete with true positive ones. indeed, there are several boundary conditions a motif has to fulfil in order to be functional in a protein or to be recognized by interactors. in the majority of cases, interactors are specific enough to discriminate between an exceedingly high number of similar sites and avoid mis-functionalities. on the other hand, sites that are similar to target motifs with limited specificities can be found not to interfere since they are hidden or appear in other cellular contexts, different cell types or tissues or even different organisms.

this possibility is in agreement with the order/disorder propensity data for false positive matches of patterns belonging to region i and ii, i.e. patterns for which the number of false positives is higher or similar to the expected number of random hits . in fact, we observed that false positive matches of patterns in region i and ii are, on average, in more ordered areas than those of patterns in region iii, suggesting how proteins may avoid cases of mis-recognition by interactors with little specificity.

a careful analysis of patterns for which the number of fp is notably greater than the number of matches expected by chance revealed several interesting features. first, some cases of mis-annotation have been identified. besides these cases, which are only relevant for the quality of a pattern database, we observed several patterns whose false positive matches are functionally important in proteins non-related to and not co-localizing with proteins matching the true positives. in some other cases it seems that false positive matches proliferate, even with no functional relevance, in proteins spatially segregated from true positives. in both situations, evolution has been apparently more permissive or even rewarding towards compositions of amino acids belonging to non-interfering proteins.

another solution to the problem of functional pattern specificity might be that, during evolution, longer and not too variable functional modules have been rewarded  <cit> . in this case, not only could the true positive site be unique, but there might not be any sites with one mismatch. in this regard, it is worth noting that between 72%  and 89%  of patterns are such that λ = fp =  <dig> and that the mean information content  of these patterns is much higher than the mean ic of any other group considered.

what can be said in terms of evolution about patterns of group iii? these are patterns whose number of false positives is lower than expected by chance. they may belong to group iii for three principal reasons.

the first one might be a systematic error in the prosite annotation for true positives, something which has been excluded by our analysis.

the second reason concerns the randomization model. we have seen that, at least in some cases, the expected number of chance matches of patterns rich in cysteines, depends on the statistical model adopted to evaluate it. thus, one can imagine that patterns belonging to group iii have some particular features, thus making their rate of occurrence in a random dataset dependent on the procedure adopted to randomize the dataset. an accurate analysis of the patterns, however, did not reveal any distinctive features supporting this hypothesis.

the third reason has evolutionary implications. the patterns of group iii are characterized by a preponderance of residues predisposed to be present in more disordered, i.e. more exposed, regions of proteins. moreover, short patterns, with little ic, undergo less conformational constraints than long patterns, with high ic. thus, at least two important conditions of functionality are more easily fulfilled by this group of patterns.

if a false occurrence of a functional motif results in an "unwished" functionality, the protein carrying it would be rejected during evolution. cases of evolutionary negative selection have been recognized in immunology  <cit>  and are likely to have an important role in many biological systems  <cit> . zarrinpar and co-workers  <cit>  hypothesized negative selection against non-specific interactions as a mechanism for specificity enhancement of a particular sh3-ligand pair in yeast. discrimination against proteins holding sequence consensi that are, for example, possible competitors in recognition or interaction processes, might account for the observed non-random distribution of false positive matches of some patterns. for example, a false positive match of a sh <dig> ligand consensus might result in promiscuous sh <dig> binding in the case of subcellular co-localization and temporal overlapping with a true occurrence of the ligand peptide.

the lower ic and the observed disorder tendency of the false positives of patterns of group iii, compared to patterns of groups i and ii, support the hypothesis of their counter-selection.

evolutionary negative selection, however, is difficult to prove because so few biological cases have been clearly identified and there is only indirect information on the "products" of such a mechanism. furthermore, organisms have developed several strategies for avoiding protein mis-functionalities, which may or may not operate through the mechanism of negative selection. finally, counter-selection is more likely to occur in complex organisms, where evolution deals with duplication and mutation of a greater number of genes or portions of them. these organisms, however, are still insufficiently represented in the swiss-prot databank. more data will be available to support or disprove our hypotheses as soon as large and fully-annotated proteomes become available.

CONCLUSIONS
we presented a general numerical analysis exploring the different mechanisms used by nature in order to prevent random occurrences of a functional motif interfering with the proper functioning of a living cell.

we used quantitative parameters  to analyse prosite patterns sharing a common behaviour in terms of their appearance in random sequences. this analysis, together with a further literature study of the single motifs, led to the conclusion that, in the majority of the cases , fps of functional motifs are not counter-selected during evolution: apparently, the probability that a false positive occurs in the same organism, tissue, cell compartment, and protein region of a true positive, is low enough to prevent the risk of functional interference.

our results therefore show that, for the majority of proteins, the mere presence of a motif is not enough to entail a particular function and therefore additional constraints must be satisfied. furthermore, we identified a subgroup of motifs whose false positives have been subjected to events of counter-selection.

