BACKGROUND
microarray technology is becoming an important tool for biological research and clinical diagnostics  <cit> , but it has the reputation of being noisy: studies addressing the reproducibility and reliability of microarray data across different laboratories and platforms have resulted in inconsistent results. some have found agreement between experiments  <cit>  while others have not  <cit> . a study by irizarry et al.  <cit>  on microarray data reproducibility has demonstrated that disagreement observed in some of the studies may be also due to questionable statistical analysis. there is general agreement that the variability inherent to dna microarray technology is due to the following factors. there are a number of microarray platforms independently developed by industry and academia. different protocols are used by different laboratories for rna preparation and labeling. different statistical and computational tools are used in the analysis of the microarray results. due to these differences it is challenging to extract reproducible, biologically meaningful information from different dna microarray experiments that address the same, or very similar biological questions. one possible solution to extract this information is to use meta-analysis methods that integrate the results of separate studies in a statistically meaningful manner. there are two main types of meta-analysis that are commonly used for microarray data integration. the first consists of integrating summary measures of gene expression measurements across studies. the advantage of this type of approach is that it avoids the need for estimating the inter-study variability and the issue of cross-platform normalization. rhodes et al.  <cit>  were the first to implement this type of approach. this group implemented a statistical model based on integrating p-values from individual studies to estimate the overall p-value for each gene across studies. the authors integrated four published prostate cancer gene array studies. many of the genes identified were confirmed to be components of biologically relevant pathways, implying that the method extracted biologically useful information. subsequently parmigiani et al.  <cit>  proposed a different model that uses a correlation-based method to search for consistent gene expression patterns across multiple studies. they demonstrated that their method can improve correlation of gene expressions across studies. rather than combining p-values or correlations the second type of meta-analysis consists of integrating gene expression measures across studies. choi et al.  <cit>  were the first to propose this type of approach using an effect size measure  <cit>  with a method that explicitly models the inter-study variability. using the same datasets as those used in  <cit> , they demonstrated that their method led to increased sensitivity and reliability. subsequently hu et al.  <cit>  extended this model by incorporating a quality measure for each gene in each study into the effect size estimates. using their model the authors combined two lung cancer affymetrix datasets generated from two different laboratories and found that their method identifies more differentially expressed genes than previous methods. taken together these studies suggest that a subset of biologically plausible and statistically significant genes can be determined from the integration of different array technologies. with an ever-increasing amount of microarray data being produced it is critical to develop statistically sound methods that will efficiently integrate, evaluate and cross-validate as many array experiments addressing the same biological question as possible. even though progress has been made in integrating various array datasets, challenges still remain, one of which is that all the existing methods require experiments with two separate groups of data.

a two channel microarray technology continues to be used as one of the most common platforms for gene expression profiling  <cit> . one experimental approach using two channel arrays is to directly compare levels of mrna expression between treatment and control samples . such experiments lead to datasets with only one group of gene expression ratios. the method proposed in  <cit>  can not be applied to such datasets since it requires two groups of data. in order to allow the integration of as many datasets as possible, including experiments with one group of data, we extend the model proposed in  <cit>  and propose a new mathematical framework for integrating microarray experiments with one group, two groups of data or mixed groups.

the model proposed in our study is more general than the model proposed in  <cit> , and allows the integration of microarray data of any type generated across different laboratories, platforms and experimental designs. as such, it provides more flexibility for microarray data integration than the previously published effect size based model. the model provides also a new mathematical framework for addressing the inter-study variation for microarray data of different types.

RESULTS
in order to assess the usefulness of our model to integrate real data we applied our method to three different expression datasets generated from two different laboratories using three different 2-channel array platforms and two different experimental designs. all three datasets compared normal liver tissue to liver tissue chronically infected with hepatitis c virus .

exploratory data analysis
before data integration was carried out, an exploratory data analysis as proposed in  <cit>  was conducted to determine if there were any fundamental differences between experiments that would preclude data integration. as shown in figure  <dig>  low correlation coefficients were observed between estimated effect sizes of the three studies: r= <dig> , r= <dig>  and r= <dig> . these low correlation coefficients highlight differences between the three experiments. in high-throughput microarray experiments, a common expectation is that the majority of genes in each study will show little or no difference between conditions. figure  <dig> shows the distributions of z scores  in the three experiments, all of which are centered around zero. this finding indicates that most of the genes in each experiment show little or no differences between treatment and control samples. a significant deviation from zero in any of the three datasets, due to some large systematic effect, would be indicative of fundamental differences between experiments that could not be solved by statistical means. thus even when low correlations between experiments are observed  this does not automatically imply that small sets of genes with significant effects across experiments would not be observed and that data integration should not be considered.

by adopting a similar approach to kim et al.  <cit>  we present a cluster plot in figure  <dig> that shows a relationship between the three datasets before data integration. we find that if clustering of individual samples is done using relative gene expressions , the samples cluster according to each individual platform, indicating the presence of intra-study variability due to lab/platform effects.

in order to test for homogeneity between datasets, we used the cochran q statistics given in eq. <dig> . the results of the test are shown in figure  <dig>  the observed q values from the three experiments deviate significantly from the expected quantiles of the χ <dig> distribution, suggesting that the three datasets are heterogeneous. heterogeneity indicates significant variability between studies that requires a random effect model  to be fitted. when applied to our pre-processed datasets, the rem model found a set of  <dig> significant genes with fdr ≤  <dig> . in order to asses the advantage of integrating these three datasets together, we first determined the number of genes that had an fdr ≤  <dig>  in the meta-analysis study but for which the fdr in all three studies was higher than the fdr in the meta-analysis study. of the total of  <dig> genes in the meta-analysis study, we found  <dig> to satisfy this criterion. we designated these genes as integration-driven discovery  genes as first introduced in  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows a plot of the gene number versus fdr  for each independent dataset and demonstrates that the largest number of significant genes is observed in the meta-analysis. this increase in the number of significant genes is an indication of the potential benefit in integrating these three datasets using our model.

genes determined to be significant in the meta-analysis model
in order to further assess the advantage of data integration, we decided to examine whether genes found in our analysis had direct biological relevance. genes that are determined to have statistically significant expression level changes may still have low fold increases  that might not be biologically relevant. although there is no consensus in fold increase/decrease associated with 'biological relevance', we chose a fold change of at least  <dig>   between hcv and normal in at least one of the three integrated studies based on the estimate of the median standard deviation  of fold gene expression measurements in the three experiments , and thus is less likely to be confounded with non-expressed genes). we found a total of  <dig> genes to satisfy those criteria. of the  <dig> genes,  <dig> genes were integration-driven discovery  genes as defined in  <cit> . we have used a  <dig>  fold cutoff in our previous array studies using clinical samples and have determined a number of biologically-relevant effects , and were able to validate  <dig> % of genes expressed at the  <dig>  fold level, using quantitative real time – pcr .

biological pathway analysis
in order to determine the biological themes overrepresented in our gene list, we used the r package gostats  <cit> . gostats searches for overrepresented go biological themes by determining if a given go category contains more genes determined to be significant in a given experimental condition than one might expect by chance. taking p-values < <dig>  for significant overrepresentation we found a number of enriched go biological processes to be associated with hcv infection including: immune response, defense response and response to virus. many of the genes in each of the enriched go categories ) have been found to play key roles in host antiviral response to hcv infection  <cit> , a number of which are interferon stimulated genes .

shows the top ten over-represented go biological process categories obtained from the list of genes determined to be significant using maid . the over-represented go categories are ordered according their statistical significance in decreasing order .

in order to determine if particular biochemical pathways were enriched in genes from our list of  <dig> genes, we performed a kegg pathway database  <cit>  query using the r package gostats  <cit> . we identified five significantly enriched kegg pathways termed; "antigen processing and presentation" , "type i diabetes mellitus" , "ribosome" , "toll-like receptor signaling pathway"  and "linoleic acid metabolism"  using the hypergeometric test of gostats package . three of the five enriched pathways found in our analysis have been directly associated in previous studies with hcv. genes from kegg's "antigen processing and presentation" pathway were associated with hcv persistence in infected individuals  <cit> , genes from the "ribosomal" pathway were shown to interact with the virus rna internal ribosomal entry site  <cit> , while genes from "toll-like receptor signaling pathway" have been shown to be modulated by hcv proteins in liver cells  <cit> . these findings indicate that our model is selecting genes that are enriching pathways relevant to hcv infection. more importantly two of the five enriched kegg pathways  obtained through data integration were found not to be enriched in any of the three individual studies, in other words these pathways were identified purely by means of meta-analysis. they are an example of how weak but consistent signals across the three studies are brought together in order to achieve more reliable results, highlighting the effectiveness of our integrative approach. because many of the genes found in this study are of direct relevance to the hepatitis c disease, a more detailed study of biological implications of our findings will appear in a separate paper.

shows over-represented kegg pathways obtained from the list of genes determined to be significant using maid .

comparison of maid with other integration methods
in this section we compare results from data integrated with maid to results integrated with the other methods mentioned in the background section. among four proposed methods for microarray data integration  <cit> , only two methods based on combining summary measures  can be applied to datasets with both one and two groups of data . the second index introduced in our model allows the general framework proposed in  <cit>  to be extended and applied to datatypes that previously could not be integrated with this method.

in order to compare results obtained from these three different models we compared gene lists selected as significant by each individual method. in order to make a valid comparison the selected gene sets were required to have the same expected number of false positives e, in this way the comparison between results obtained with maid and results obtained with other models is ensured to be done at the same statistical significance level . for the purpose of comparison we chose a reasonably conservative value for e of  <dig> . the biological relevance of gene sets selected by each individual model is then evaluated by comparing the significance, the biological relevance and the content  of enriched go biological process categories.

the number of significant genes selected by each model. the first row designates the number of genes selected by each model with the expected rate of false positives e =  <dig>  the second row designates the number of genes from the first row that are either up  regulated in hcv samples compared to normal with |fold| ≥  <dig> 

top five enriched go categories obtained with, maid, rhodes et al., and, parmigiani et al. in each case genes had to be up  regulated |fold| ≥  <dig>  in hcv samples compared to normal with an expected number of false positives e =  <dig> for each gene list.

in figure  <dig> we show the plot of the number of genes selected by each individual model versus the expected number of false positives. we found that the maid model selects more genes when compared to the other two models for the same expected rate of false positives  =  <dig>  see also figure 6b). for the purpose of clarity figure 6b shows the same plot as figure 6a but limited to gene lists with the expected number of false positives e ≤  <dig>  the number of significant genes selected by each model is given in table  <dig> 

in order to asses whether the larger gene set selected by the maid model  = 10) enriches relevant biological categories we compared the enriched go biological process  categories obtained from gene lists selected by each individual model. we also imposed a threshold on selected genes' fold changes by requiring genes to be up  regulated by |fold| ≥  <dig>   in hcv samples when compared to normals . in table  <dig> we give the top  <dig> enriched go categories from each model.

as shown in table  <dig> enriched go  categories obtained with a correlation-based method proposed by parmigiani et al.  <cit>  are less significant than categories obtained from either maid or the model proposed by rhodes et al.  <cit> , and contain many fewer genes  that show no clear relevance to the hcv disease.

of the top five significantly enriched go  categories obtained with gene sets selected by the model proposed by rhodes et al.  <cit>  and maid, two can clearly be associated with hcv disease; these are "immune response" and "defense response" . table  <dig> shows that the enrichment in genes selected by the maid model is higher for both of these categories "immune response" p-value =  <dig> e- <dig>  vs p-value =  <dig> e- <dig>  and "defense response" p-value =  <dig> e- <dig>  vs p-value =  <dig> e- <dig> . these results indicate that when gene sets selected by the model from rhodes et al.  <cit>  are compared by those selected by maid, the larger maid gene set improves the enrichment significance of the two of the most significant and hcv relevant go categories and points to an increase in statistical power when compared to the model proposed by rhodes et al.  <cit> .

as shown in figure  <dig> the highest overlap in genes selected by each individual model was observed between the maid model and the model proposed by rhodes et al.  <cit>   while the lowest overlap and highest discrepancy in genes and go enriched categories was observed when comparing results obtained with either the maid model or the model of rhodes et al.  <cit>  with the correlation-based method proposed by parmigiani et al.  <cit> . the overlap in genes between the model proposed by rhodes et al.  <cit>  and the model proposed by parmigiani et al.  <cit>  and the overlap between maid and the model proposed by parmigiani et al.  <cit>  are both very low .

discussion
in this study we introduce a new effect size based model for microarray data integration. we demonstrate that our model, together with appropriate data pre-processing methods, can be used to integrate expression data across different laboratories, array platforms and experimental designs that results in an increase in statistical power for identifying differentially expressed genes when integrating data across experiments. moreover, we show that genes selected as significant by our model enrich relevant biological pathways and processes.

in order to obtain the best possible results with our model, a number of important problems relating to each individual data set had to be addressed. first, it is only reasonable to integrate experiments that aim to address the same or similar biological questions. in order to address the problem of matching of samples and experiments, we integrated only experiments that compared samples of same biological type. second, because most of the disagreement between individual array experiments was found to be due to platform-dependent probe effects  <cit> , we decided to use only relative gene expression ratios instead of absolute measurements. third, in order to ensure better agreement between gene annotations across platforms, we focused only on genes that had identical annotation entries in the ncbi entrez gene database.

after addressing the problem of matching of probes, samples and experimental conditions we used exploratory analysis methods proposed in  <cit>  to determine if data from the three experiments presented any important systematic bias that would preclude their integration. we found all three datasets to show low correlation coefficients between their effect sizes – though a slightly higher correlation coefficient was found for datasets from the washington group . however, inspection of individual effect size distributions showed no fundamental differences between the three datasets . low correlations of effect sizes could result from a small group of genes showing similar effects across the three experiments. when expression measurements were integrated using the above methodology, we found  <dig> genes to be significantly expressed across all three studies with a false discovery rate  ≤  <dig> . of these  <dig> had higher statistical significance in the integrated study than in any individual study. of  <dig> integration driven discovery genes found with absolute fold expression greater than  <dig> ,  <dig> were shown to be up-regulated  by at least  <dig>  fold in only one of the three studies. this result suggests that the magnitude of fold increase  in each individual experiment is a poor indicator of the overall gene activity when comparing across experiments and that a more suitable metric such as effect size needs to be used. furthermore, of the  <dig> genes that were found to be significant  in our analysis,  <dig> were found not to be significant in any of the individual studies. the potential involvement in hcv disease of these genes identified through meta-analysis alone will require further biological study. of four previously published methods proposed for microarray data integration  <cit> , two methods  <cit> , based on combining summary measures, can be applied to datasets generated with mixed groups . comparing results obtained with maid to results obtained with the models proposed by rhodes et al.  <cit>  and parmigiani et al.  <cit> , we found that maid selects more genes than any of the summary statistics based methods, and that additional genes selected by maid are relevant to the hcv disease. genes selected by maid produce an increase in enrichment of relevant hcv go categories when compared to results obtained with the two summary statistics methods . these findings argue that maid produces less conservative results that are also biologically more relevant, indicating an increase in statistical power.

the overlap in results of the top genes selected by each method  indicates that models based on integrating p-values  <cit>  and effect sizes , across experiments, give more similar results than the model based on integrating gene correlations  <cit> .

models based on summary statistics that integrate p values  <cit>  or expression correlations  <cit>  across studies can be used to obtain more precise estimates of significance of gene expressions than those obtained from the individual array studies . however such approaches do not take into account the inter-study variability and can produce results that are significant even for genes that have significant fold changes but that are observed to be expressed in opposite directions  across studies. models that do take the inter-study variability into account, such as choi et al.  <cit>  and maid, would not consider such changes as significant . in addition to ignoring the direction of change in gene expressions across studies, summary-statistics based models do not take the magnitude of observed effects  into account either. in this way significant statistical changes  might not necessarily correspond to important biological effect  and could inflate the number of false positives. effect size based models instead, integrate data directly by taking into account the magnitude of the effect and its consistency both within and across studies. moreover it has been shown that models based on integrating summary statics are less sensitive to small but consistent expression changes than an effect size based model .

though we agree in principle with the approach proposed in choi et al.  <cit> , we note that the model assumes that a fixed or random effect model should be fitted for all the genes. however, this approach might not always be appropriate. as pointed out in  <cit> , it is more likely that for some genes there would be no effect observed, while for others a fixed or random effect model would be more appropriate. a more flexible approach should improve the sensitivity and reliability of this model. furthermore, as noted in  <cit> , for microarray data and biological systems in general, genes can not always be assumed to act independently, but often show dependency through interactions and correlations. without a better understanding of gene-gene interaction structures, it is difficult to realize how such improvements could be included in the model. we also note that particular care needs to be taken when integrating many small-sized microarray studies with this model as the estimated between study variability τ <dig> will be biased and would influence overall results  <cit> .

the approach proposed in our study differs from that of  <cit>  and the genemeta algorithm  <cit>  in several important aspects. the set of methods proposed in  <cit> , as implemented in the genemeta  <cit>  algorithm, can only be applied to experiments with two separate groups of data and thus can not be applied to two-channel microarray experiments measuring differences in gene expression values between treatment and control groups using a direct experimental design. in order to integrate as many microarray datasets from the public domain as possible we proposed a new integration method which we implemented in form of the r package maid .

in maid the type of analysis applied depends on the type of data analyzed. thus for microarray experiments with two groups of data we use the standard effect size model proposed in  <cit> . for microarray experiments with one group of data we propose a second standardized index based on the paired t-statistic  which follows a student's t-distribution times 1n, with  degrees of freedom .

in addition to eq. <dig>  we also propose new estimators for both the pooled standard deviation  and the estimated variance .

although we adapt the same general hierarchical model framework as described in choi et al.  <cit> , a major difference is that for direct design experiments the inter-study variability given in eq. <dig>  is calculated using new expressions for the pooled standard deviation and the estimated variance given in eq. <dig> and eq. <dig>  instead of the expression given by choi et al. in eq. <dig> and eq. <dig> .

the same changes occur in eqs.9– <dig> with new estimators replacing those described in choi et al  <cit> . depending on the type of datasets integrated the homogeneity test is calculated using either one or both types of standardized indices and their respective variances. maid implements a permutation method that is specific for each data type, experiments with two groups of data are considered as a two class label case, while experiments with one group of data are considered as a one class label case. in addition to the permutation method for a two class label case, maid implements a second permutation method  for a single class label case necessary in the calculation of false discovery rate  . without the proposed new estimators given in eqs.6– <dig>  and their implementation through eqs.10– <dig>  it would not have been possible to integrate array experiments with both direct and indirect designs using a more sophisticated model, such as the one proposed in this study that takes both the intra and inter-study variability into account.

CONCLUSIONS
traditional effect size models  <cit>  are limited to integration of array datasets with two groups of data. here we extend the traditional effect size model in order to increase the sample size by allowing the integration of array experiments of any type. using our model we have shown that it is possible to detect small but consistent changes in gene expression across these three biologically similar but independent studies. genes with weak signals in each individual experiment can be seen as potential false negatives. we have shown that the number of false negatives can be decreased effectively by using our model. we have also demonstrated that a sizable number of genes could be cross-validated through inter-study comparison indicating that these studies show a certain degree of reproducibility. our results also indicate that technical and biological variability present in datasets obtained from different laboratories, different platforms and designs can be overcome by appropriate data pre-processing and meta-analysis methods. by comparing our model to other integration methods available, we show that our model selects more genes  that are of direct biological relevance to the experiments under consideration.

finally we have shown that most of the genes found to improve in significance after data integration with our model are of direct biological relevance to the three experiments. high-throughput proteomics and genomics data provide a rich and complex source of information which may help to decipher the complex molecular networks behind disease. beyond the analysis of the gene expression data presented in this study, our model provides a way of integrating multiple microarray datasets across a broad range of cross-platform studies, and allows a more general and flexible framework for microarray data integration.

