BACKGROUND
genomic copy number alterations  and allelic imbalances are common events in the development of cancer and certain genetic disorders  <cit> . the introduction of whole genome genotyping  arrays based on single nucleotide polymorphism  genotyping  <cit>  allows for combined dna copy number  and loss-of-heterozygosity  analysis at high resolution  <cit> . currently, two major snp array platforms are in use, affymetrix genechip arrays  <cit>  and illumina beadchips  <cit> . the infinium assay for illumina beadchips is based on allele-specific hybridization coupled with primer extension of genomic dna using primers directly surrounding the snp on randomly ordered bead arrays  <cit> . the infinium assay has been further developed into allele-specific single base extension using two color labeling with the cy <dig> and cy <dig> fluorescent dyes   <cit> . current generations of infinium ii arrays are able to interrogate more than  <dig> million snps simultaneously.

infinium ii is a two-channel assay and data consist of two intensity values  for each snp, with one intensity channel for each of the fluorescent dyes associated with the two alleles of the snp. snp markers are present at a high redundancy on infinium ii assays and the allele specific intensities  are summarized estimates from replicate markers. the alleles measured by the x channel  are arbitrarily, with respect to haplotypes, called the a alleles, whereas the alleles measured by the y channel  are called the b alleles. the allele specific intensities are normalized using a proprietary algorithm in the illumina beadstudio software. the normalization algorithm is applied on a sub-bead pool level and is designed to adjust for channel-dependent background and global intensity differences, and to scale the data. a sub-bead pool is a set of beads that were manufactured together and are located in roughly the same analytical location  on a beadchip. the algorithm uses a 6-degree of freedom affine transformation with  <dig> main steps: outlier removal, background estimation, rotational estimation, shears estimation, and scaling estimation  <cit> . after normalization, data should be as canonical as possible with homozygous snps positioned along the transformed x and y intensity axes. normalized allele intensities are transformed to a combined snp intensity, r , and an allelic intensity ratio, theta ).

r values are calibrated to generate copy number estimates  by comparison to either a matched reference sample analyzed simultaneously or to canonical genotype clusters  <cit> . canonical genotype clusters are generated from a large panel of normal samples and the clusters for a snp indicate the r and theta values expected for each genotype . theta values are calibrated to generate b allele frequencies  using canonical genotype clusters. baf is a value between  <dig> and  <dig> and represents the proportion contributed by one snp allele  to the total copy number: baf is an estimate of nb/, where na and nb are the number of a and b alleles, respectively. when canonical genotype clusters are used for calibration, copy number estimates are calculated per snp by taking the log <dig> of the snp intensity  divided by the snp intensity expected from the canonical genotype clusters. thus, copy number estimates may be regarded as a combination of two individual one-channel measurements of the amount of genetic material for a given snp. normalization of one-channel array data has been extensively explored, incorporating various algorithms, among which quantile normalization  has been reported to perform consistently well  <cit>  and has been widely used to normalize between arrays  <cit> . recently, qn was applied, as one of several analysis steps, to illumina sentrix snp beadarrays to correct for an observed dye bias in copy number analysis  <cit> .

allelic imbalances in samples can be conveniently visualized in baf plots  <cit> . a baf value of  <dig>  indicates a heterozygous genotype , whereas  <dig> and  <dig> indicate homozygous genotypes . the allelic intensity ratio may, in the infinium ii assay, be regarded as a comparative dual channel measurement of the allelic proportion for a given snp, similar to, e.g., two-channel gene expression data. several reports have underlined the importance of intensity-based normalization, e.g., lowess  <cit> , to correct for dye specific differences both for gene expression profiling  <cit>  and array comparative genomic hybridization   <cit>  in two-channel microarray data. since alleles for snps are arbitrarily called a or b, a set of genomically consecutive snps will appear in baf plots as horizontal bands that are expected to be symmetrically positioned around  <dig> . for example, a region of single copy number gain in all cells will, in addition to the two bands of homozygous snps at baf =  <dig> and baf =  <dig>  result in two bands: one at baf =  <dig>  with snps having genotype aab and one at baf =  <dig>  with snps having genotype abb.

here we demonstrate that baf plots for tumor samples analyzed on infinium ii beadchips often display bands that are not symmetrically positioned around  <dig> . we show that these asymmetrical allelic ratios are caused by a bias between the two dyes used in the infinium ii assay, and that this dye intensity bias also hampers copy number estimates. dye-bias can potentially be both global and snp-specific. we propose using a quantile normalization based strategy applied to summarized bead type data within arrays for global correction of this dye intensity bias. the strategy corrects asymmetries that remain between intensity channels after the conventionally used beadstudio normalization for both allelic intensity ratios and copy number estimates in normal as well as in tumor samples. note that whereas quantile normalization is widely applied to single channel arrays to normalize between arrays, we instead apply it to normalize between channels within infinium ii arrays. of key importance for the success of the strategy is the generation of new normalized reference data sets for the calibration of theta and r into b allele frequency and log r ratio – the data set analyzed and the data set used for calibration should both be normalized in the same way. we investigated the performance of the normalization strategy using  <dig> individual hybridizations from  <dig> different data sets generated on four different infinium ii platforms. the investigated data sets contain normal blood samples as well as breast tumor, colon tumor, urothelial tumor and chronic lymphocytic leukemia  samples. the included tumors display a large number of different copy number imbalances, but also variation in tumor heterogeneity and normal cell contamination. we conclude that the normalization strategy improves infinium ii data for samples of many different types.

RESULTS
occurrence of asymmetrical b allele frequencies and copy number estimates in tumor specimens
allelic imbalances in tumor samples may conveniently be displayed using b allele frequency plots, which illustrate the presence and location of genomic regions of apparently the same allelic proportion . in contrast to the expected symmetrical behavior of the b allele frequency, snps in regions of allelic imbalance appear to have bands of baf values that are asymmetrically positioned around  <dig>  for the analyzed urothelial tumor . the asymmetry becomes even more apparent when a mirror transformation along the  <dig>  axes of baf to mbaf is performed . importantly, the asymmetry also affects genotyping, indicated by the higher number of failed genotype calls for lower baf values  compared to higher baf values  for the region 1q <dig>  to qter . in this region there are a total of  <dig> snps evenly distributed between the upper baf >  <dig>   and the lower baf <  <dig>   parts. of these  <dig> snps,  <dig> snps have not been assigned a genotype by beadstudio.  <dig> of these  <dig> failed calls have a baf value below  <dig> , showing that the cause of the observed asymmetry in baf also affects genotyping. the baf asymmetry also influences analysis methods for detecting allelic imbalance. recently, the somatics algorithm was proposed as a solution for detecting allelic imbalances in heterogeneous tumor samples using infinium ii data  <cit> . the algorithm divides the baf profile into three bands  based on fixed baf cut-offs. asymmetry in baf estimates causes regions of apparent identical allelic imbalance close to the fixed cut-offs to be identified in different bands . for copy number estimates asymmetry also exists for regions of cn loss and cn gain . the asymmetry appears to be caused by an uncorrected curvature between the x and y intensities for the two alleles , and an unequal distribution of x and y values . we conclude that there seems to be a dye intensity bias between the two channels used in the infinium ii assay and that the bias remains after using the normalization in beadstudio.

correction of dye intensity bias in hapmap samples using quantile normalization
since the two alleles for each snp are, with respect to haplotypes, arbitrarily associated with the x and y intensities, normalized x and y intensities should, in contrast to figure 1f, be expected to have essentially equal intensity distributions. quantile normalization can be used to generate identical distributions from a set of distributions  <cit> . to investigate the effect of within sample qn of x and y intensities from normal samples, we performed qn on x and y intensities from hapmap samples used to generate the reference data sets for the illumina  <dig> k version  <dig> ,  <dig> k version  <dig> ,  <dig> k  and  <dig> k  beadchips. for each sample and snp we calculated new normalized theta and r values thereby generating qn reference data sets. qn has been extensively used to normalize one-channel microarray expression data such that identical intensity distributions are generated for a set of arrays   <cit> . here we instead propose to use qn between channels within two-channel snp arrays.

for each reference data set we computed new baf and cn estimates and compared these estimates to beadstudio data. using qn we obtained cn estimates with significantly lower standard deviations  for three of four reference data sets . the mean decrease in sd for cn estimates was  <dig> – 26% for the  <dig> k v <dig>   <dig> k and  <dig> k data sets. for the illumina  <dig> k v <dig> set, qn did not show any effect. intriguingly, the single sample  <dig> k v <dig> beadchips has a significantly lower variation of cn estimates than the illumina version  <dig> duo  <dig> k beadchips .

*: the sd of log r ratio was calculated for each sample. the mean sd for all samples is shown.

**: paired two-sided t-test. h0: Δ = mean log r ratio sdqn – mean log r ratio sdbeadstudio =0

***: /)*100

qn also showed a positive effect on allelic intensity ratios, generating lower standard deviations and more centralized theta positions for heterozygous snps . interestingly, it can be observed in table  <dig> that the average theta value for heterozygous snps differs from the expected  <dig>  for all uncorrected and qn reference data sets. qn shows the least deviation from the expected value for all data sets, and also a clearly significant decrease in theta sd for samples across all data sets compared to beadstudio data .

*: the mean and sd of theta was calculated for each sample. the mean of these values for all samples are shown.

**: paired two-sided t-test. h0: Δ = sdqn - sdbeadstudio =0

the intensity transformation introduced by qn can negatively affect allelic intensity ratio estimates
the deviation from theta =  <dig>  for heterozygous snps in hapmap samples indicates that an imbalance in the x and y intensity distributions remains after qn . the imbalance in theta affects baf estimates through the calibration of theta into baf using the hapmap reference genotype clusters. part of the imbalance can be explained by an uncorrected curvature between x and y intensities that prior to qn is present for both tumor samples  and hapmap samples . to investigate the relationship between allelic intensity ratios and overall intensity we created mr plots where m = log <dig> and r = log <dig> similar to conventional ma plots  <cit> . consequently, in mr plots heterozygote snps should have an m value of  <dig>  as expected from figure 2a, curvature is present prior to qn in the mr plot of hapmap sample na <dig> for the ab, bb and aa snp populations . the curvature is highlighted by the superimposed lowess curve for each genotype population and the slope of a fitted linear regression line through each population. after qn there is less curvature, although not fully removed .

to address how to improve qn, we investigated how qn transforms the x and y intensities for hapmap sample na <dig> . low values of x are increased with relatively large factors in intensity, while y values are generally decreased and scaled with smaller factors. snps with a low value of x are predominantly genotyped as bb, and the number of snps affected by the increase in x is large as seen by comparing the transformation  with an x intensity histogram . the same pattern is not observed for the y intensity, for which the large majority of snps are transformed to a lower intensity . thus, qn introduces a transformation that results in a large increase for low x values, which affects a large number of snps.

the transformation imbalance does not appear to affect hapmap cn estimates for which the standard deviation is decreased in three of four reference data sets . for cn estimates an increase of a low x value is not critical since the corresponding y intensity is large and dominate the additive r value. however, an increase of low x values will cause more variation of the allelic ratios for snps with high values of y . an increase in the variation of allelic ratios for snps with low values of x will have the largest effect on regions with loss of allele a . the impact of the transformation imbalance is further increased if the copy number loss is present in the absolute majority of investigated cells and not dampened by contaminating normal cells. to exemplify the effect of the transformation imbalance, the hemizygous loss of chromosome  <dig> in the urothelial carcinoma uc456_r is shown for both beadstudio data  and qn data . while qn results in a reduced variation for snps with baf values close to  <dig> , this improvement is counteracted with a large increase in the variation for snps with baf values close to  <dig> . furthermore, the transformation imbalance also appears to affect the correction of baf asymmetry negatively.

incorporation of an intensity transformation threshold for qn improves allelic intensity ratio estimates
the negative effect of qn on allelic intensity ratios could potentially be circumvented by limiting the factor with which x intensity values are increased. hence, we introduced a threshold for the qn intensity transformations to limit the increase of x and y values before calculation of the allelic intensity ratio. in all our analyses, we used a threshold of  <dig>  for the factor with which x and y values could maximally be increased. while the threshold is applied identically to both x and y transformations, it essentially only influences x values. a value of  <dig>  appears reasonable as it incorporates the majority of snps with low x values  without affecting the corresponding y values, but the threshold may potentially be further improved by tuning. using this qn modified with a threshold, tqn, we generated new tqn reference data sets. the application of the threshold markedly improved quantile normalized tumor baf data by removing asymmetry and reducing variation . additionally, the removed asymmetry for allelic intensity ratios may provide a higher probability for snps to be genotyped, e.g., as aa for chromosome  <dig> of urothelial carcinoma uc456_r  or as aa on 1q <dig>  to qter for urothelial carcinoma uc152_i . consequently, tqn of infinium ii data could increase the genotype call rate, a variable commonly used to assess sample quality. an increased call rate for tumor specimens may also be beneficial for downstream loh analysis software relying on genotype calls such as dchipsnp  <cit> .

systematic investigation of baf asymmetry in tumor samples before and after tqn
to more comprehensively investigate baf asymmetry before and after tqn, we divided  <dig> whole-genome tumor baf profiles into an upper and lower part along the  <dig>  axes. baf values for each part were converted to mbaf, similar to figure 1b. next, each part was separately segmented to find regions of consistent allelic proportion  <cit> . if no asymmetry is present for a defined genomic region the difference between segmented mbaf values for the upper and lower part of the baf profile should be zero. we found that tqn results in significantly lower asymmetry for regions of apparent allelic imbalance in both paired and unpaired tumor samples across different infinium ii platforms . essentially identical results were obtained irrespectively of which part of the baf profile that was used to define the investigated regions. as expected from the upward shift of heterozygous theta positions , the beadstudio asymmetry is predominantly the result of higher mbaf values for the upper part of the baf profile than for the lower part. this asymmetry is consistent with an upward shift of the entire baf plot, as also observed in figures 1a and 3a. tqn showed the same positive effect on allelic intensity ratios for hapmap samples as shown for qn in table  <dig>  for heterozygous snps, standard deviations were essentially identical for tqn and qn, whereas theta positions were marginally more centralized for tqn .

effects of tqn on copy number estimates for tumor and normal samples
having established that tqn corrects for asymmetry in allelic intensity ratio estimates, we investigated the effects of tqn on cn estimates compared to beadstudio. to this aim, we applied tqn to infinium ii data sets containing both blood and tumor samples and performed three comparisons. first, we investigated whether tqn increase or decrease the response in log r ratio to cnas. second, we investigated if tqn decrease variation in cn estimates. finally, we applied a cnv calling algorithm to tqn normalized hapmap data to investigate the overlap of identified regions compared to beadstudio data.

to investigate whether tqn increase or decrease the response in log r ratios to cnas compared to beadstudio we applied segmentation to both tqn and beadstudio tumor data. for each sample we calculated the difference in segmented log r ratios between beadstudio data and tqn data. for genomic regions with log r ratio >  <dig> and <  <dig>  respectively, the differences were calculated separately such that a positive difference for both types of regions corresponds to a better log r ratio response to cnas for beadstudio normalization compared to tqn. we observed small differences for all four data sets . for the urothelial tumors, beadstudio showed a better response for segments with gains, while tqn showed a better response for segments with losses. such opposing findings indicate that the two methods result in different centering of the data rather than in different response to cnas. thus, tqn does not appear to alter the log r ratio response to cnas compared to beadstudio.

to investigate the effect on variation in cn estimates by tqn we computed sample adaptive noise thresholds  for tqn and beadstudio data as previously described  <cit> . we obtained significantly lower sats using tqn for four of six tested data sets, while sats were essentially unchanged for the remaining two data sets . the lack of effect by tqn on tumors hybridized on infinium  <dig> k v <dig> beadchips is in concordance with the reference data set . the lack of improvement by tqn for tumors in the breast cancer data set is more difficult to explain. all tumors in this data set are either hyper-diploid or of high aneuploidy resulting in highly unbalanced cn profiles. unbalanced cn profiles may be problematic for the affine transformation in beadstudio, which scales the data based on that homozygous snps on average should exist in two copies, and therefore may confound normalization and data interpretation for aneuploid tumors  <cit> . a detailed investigation of this hypothesis is however not within the scope of the current study. the cll data set is part of a comparison of four different array platforms for detection of cnas and loh  <cit> . in that study, gunnarsson et al. compared the average copy number ratio and standard deviation for the normal chromosome  <dig> in all samples between the different platforms. the illumina platform showed the highest average standard deviation  of the four platforms. we found that the average standard deviation for chromosome  <dig> after tqn was  <dig> , which is comparable to the results obtained by gunnarsson et al. for the agilent platform . furthermore, when applying tqn the asymmetry in cn estimates observed in figure 1d was removed . the effect of tqn on cn and baf estimates for various tumor and normal samples is further illustrated in additional file  <dig>  in conclusion, we find that tqn of infinium ii data is beneficial for cn estimates as variation is reduced while the dynamic response in copy number ratios to cnas remains unchanged. a decreased variation for cn estimates can be beneficial for downstream analysis and detection of cnas.

to investigate whether the reduced variation in copy number estimates by tqn affected cnv detection compared to beadstudio we applied the penncnv algorithm  <cit>  to the hapmap  <dig> k reference data set. the overlap of identified snps between beadstudio and tqn data was on average 80% across the  <dig> hapmap samples for cnv regions larger than  <dig> snps. importantly, the overlap percentage increased for larger cnv regions. even though we cannot validate the correctness of cnv regions identified in either tqn or beadstudio data these findings indicate that tqn reduces noise without removing biologically relevant regions.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a normalization method that improves the quality of data obtained from illumina infinium ii genotyping arrays. we show that both allelic intensity ratio and copy number estimates are improved by using a quantile normalization strategy with a threshold for the intensity transformations  for correction of intensity dye bias when infinium ii beadchips are applied to cancer samples. this dye bias results in an asymmetric detection of the two alleles for each snp leading to asymmetry for both allelic intensity ratios and copy number estimates. importantly, tqn not only removes such asymmetry but also reduces variation in copy number estimates. essential for the improved result is to create reference data sets for calibration of b allele frequency and copy number estimates that are normalized with the same method that is applied to the investigated samples. the normalization strategy was successfully applied both to normal blood samples and tumor specimens with varying tumor heterogeneity and normal cell contamination. our strategy is applied on a sample per sample basis and we have not evaluated if infinium ii data can be improved by using between array normalization. further optimization of the normalization approach for infinium ii data should include adjusting x and y intensities on a sub bead-level instead of the currently used summarized bead level to address the initially unequal x and y distributions. such a correction would presumably alleviate the need for an additional normalization. potentially, such improvements may also address the lower ratio response to cnas and signal to noise observed with snp-cgh compared to conventional acgh  <cit> .

