BACKGROUND
considerable progress in the knowledge of the genome of several species has been achieved with the release of complete sequences giving new information about mechanisms controlling gene expression. however, genetic modifications are not sufficient to explain all phenotypes observed and gene expression can be modified by epigenetic factors. these epigenetic factors can influence the organization of chromatin conformation and chromatin loops in the nucleus as well as their interactions with other nuclear compartments. numerous data have convincingly proven that there is a link between 3d genome organization in the nucleus and its function  <cit>  and that the position of chromosomes in the nucleus plays an important role in gene regulation. in this context, studies of the nuclear topography of whole chromosome territories in various cell types have revealed their non-random organization . telomeres, the end of chromosomes, have been particularly studied because of their essential role . they consist of hexameric nucleotide sequences that are repeated hundreds or even thousands of times  coated by a group of proteins, termed shelterin. intact telomeres prevent end-to-end fusions and degradation of the chromosome ends and contribute to appropriate chromosome positioning within the nucleus  <cit> . they demonstrate an intrinsic tendency for clustering as observed in mammalian nuclei both in somatic cells  <cit>  and gametes  <cit> . in plants and animals, during early meiosis all or most telomeres cluster to a single region on the nuclear membrane  <cit> , probably because of their key roles in meiosis in chromosome pairing and recombinogenic processes . telomeres were also found clustered at the nuclear periphery in human sperm  <cit> , in yeast where they are known to form large silencing clusters  <cit> , and in drosophila  <cit> . they were shown to be organized in a non-random, cell-type and cell-cycle dependent manner in somatic cells  <cit> . with the help of controlled light exposure microscopy, it has been shown that telomeres share small territories positioned at the interface of chromatin domains on living cells, where they associate dynamically  <cit> .

it is now clearly demonstrated that telomeres assume a regulated order in the nuclei of normal cells and that their aberrant organization is linked to the initiation and dynamic propagation of genome instability, a hallmark of various diseases including cancer  <cit> . it has been observed that normal and tumour cell nuclei differ in their 3d telomeric organization, with differences including modifications in the spatial organization, in numbers and size  <cit> . these changes have been used to define the transition of mononucleated h-cells to multi-nucleated reed-sternberg cells, the latter being the diagnostic cells in hodgkin lymphoma  <cit> .

telomere is maintained primarily by telomerase. in the absence of this enzyme, telomeres shorten with cell divisions. in human nucleated blood cells, the average telomere length shows a highly significant decline with age that is most pronounced for the cells of the immune system. while telomere length in lymphocytes and granulocytes is quite similar early in life, it becomes increasingly shorter with age in lymphocytes compared to granulocytes  <cit> . neutrophils, the major part of granulocytes, are terminally differentiated cells with a finite lifespan that do not express telomerase  <cit> . however in an inflammatory context, telomerase reactivation has been observed in these cells, prolonging their survival by delaying apoptosis  <cit> .

we previously investigated the innate immune response in pig. detailed knowledge of molecular and cellular events that occur in immune cells in response to pathogen infection is very important both for biomedical research, as swine serves as an important biomedical model for various human diseases, and for agricultural production  <cit> . we started with an analysis of the nuclear architecture of neutrophils which are, with monocyte-derived macrophages, the primary effector cells in severe infection. in response to a pathogen aggression, these immune cells undergo a series of distinct functional changes in state, including cytoskeletal rearrangements, reactivation of telomerase and variations in gene expression. gathering more precise information on how telomeres are organized and interact in neutrophils and determining whether this organization changes during the activation process therefore remains of interest due to their essential role in nuclear architecture.

in an earlier study, we gave an overall view of the organization of chromosome territories, and we showed that telomeres also form clusters in spite of the polylobed structure of their nuclei  <cit> . however, the use of the n repeat probe, which labels all the telomeres uniformly, did not allow us to define the nature of these telomeric associations nor to determine whether p and q telomeres of homologous chromosomes associate and, if they associate, how and at what frequency.

to answer these questions, we isolated bac-containing subtelomeric sequences  specific to p and q telomeres for each porcine chromosome to examine the spatial arrangements of telomeres and particularly the telomere associations in resting and in lipopolysaccharide -stimulated neutrophils. for this purpose, we used exclusively three-dimensional fluorescence in situ hybridization  on structurally preserved neutrophils in combination with confocal microscopy and 3d image analyses.

RESULTS
selection of bac-containing subtelomeric sequences
while a complete set of human subtelomeric probes has been generated for use in fish assays  <cit> , such a collection was not available for swine. to construct one, we took advantage of the physical map of the swine genome generated by an international project using both high-throughput fingerprinting and bac end sequencing. the project constructed a highly continuous bac contig map covering 98% of the euchromatin of the  <dig> pig autosomes and the x and y chromosomes  <cit> . on this map, accessible through pre-ensembl, we selected the bac clones situated closest to the telomeric extremity on both the p and q arms of each porcine chromosome. at least two bac clones for each telomere were selected and their chromosomal locations were controlled by 2d-fish on metaphases. we finally chose one bac clone for each p and q telomere harbouring a specific, terminal and strong fish signal .

analysis of p and q telomere organization
the first step of the study consisted in determining whether, in immune cells, p and q telomeres of a specific chromosome join, how they join and at what frequency. to do so, we selected the p and q telomeric bac probes of seven porcine chromosomes, chosen for their difference in length and morphology:  two submetacentric: ssc <dig> ,  one subtelocentric: ssc <dig>   two metacentric: ssc <dig> and ssc <dig>  and finally  two telocentric: ssc <dig> and ssc <dig> chromosomes  <cit> . the p and q telomeric probes, specific to each chromosome pair, were cohybridized in 3d-fish experiments on structurally preserved neutrophils. two states  were analyzed to ascertain whether a response to a pathogen aggression modifies this organization. the neutrophils were activated using lps, one of the best studied models for investigating innate immune response to infection with gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . under the conditions of our experiment, the cells are activated  <cit>  but are not at the stage corresponding to the release of nets   <cit> , which would have been incompatible with our analysis. indeed at this ultimate state, corresponding to cell death, the nuclear membrane is broken down and decondensed chromatin is released in the cytoplasm.

3d-fish performed with the various subtelomere probes gave discrete signals in all experiments attempted. after each 3d-fish experiment, we generated serial optical sections using confocal microscopy from around  <dig> to  <dig> nuclei of neutrophils in both resting and activated states. image stacks were processed with nemo software  <cit>  to investigate the nuclear positioning of the p and q telomeres and the distance between them.

position of the p and q telomeres
we first investigated the position of the p and q telomeres near the nuclear periphery in resting and activated neutrophils by measuring the distance between the centre of the telomeric dots and the outer nuclear membrane clearly delimited by the use of anti-lamin b . this analysis was performed for the  <dig> different chromosomes ssc <dig>  ssc <dig>  ssc <dig>  ssc <dig>  ssc <dig> and ssc17: for  <dig> chromosomes , the q telomeres were found to be significantly closer to the outer nuclear border compared to the p telomeres both in resting and activated states . for ssc <dig>  no significant difference was found between the mean distances of p and q telomeres from the outer membrane, while for ssc <dig> and ssc <dig>  the p telomeres were significantly closer to the border than the q telomeres in both states .

we next investigated whether activation of neutrophils modifies the position of telomeres relative to the nuclear outer border. this analysis revealed that the p telomeres change their position significantly when the neutrophils are activated, moving closer to the nuclear outer border for ssc <dig>  ssc <dig> and ssc <dig>  inversely, for the largest chromosome  and for the two smaller chromosomes , the distances between the p telomere and the nuclear outer border increased significantly in the activated state. when the same analysis was performed for the q telomeres, activation was found to have a weaker effect on their positioning, as a change was observed for only three chromosomes , with the same behaviour as observed for the p telomeres of these chromosomes .

number of nuclei harbouring at least one telomere association
we first determined for each chromosome pair the percentage of nuclei harbouring at least one association between two telomeres . this analysis was performed for both states . figure  <dig> provides an example of typical patterns observed in neutrophil nuclei after hybridization with subtelomeric-specific probes. as a comparison of the data obtained in these two states revealed no difference, they were pooled for the following analyses . the percentage of nuclei harbouring at least one telomeric association varies significantly  between chromosomes: from 32% for ssc <dig>  ssc <dig> and ssc <dig> to 62% for ssc <dig>  however, this percentage can be the same for chromosomes very different both in morphology  and in size . comparing the data from these chromosomes suggested that there is no correlation between the percentage of nuclei with telomeric associations and chromosome size as confirmed by a regression analysis .

r resting state, a activated state.

ap value: test on the effect of the activation process: χ <dig> comparisons of the number of nuclei with  <dig> or at least  <dig> telomeric association in resting and lps-activated neutrophils. statistical significance p ≤ <dig> .

preferential association types
for each chromosome pair, we then tried to determine which type of telomeric association  is observed between homologous chromosomes when associations between telomeres occur. the use of two different colours to label the p and q telomeres enabled us to define whether we had a pp, qq or pq  association. this analysis was done separately for each chromosome pair in each state . no difference was observed in the two states analyzed, so the data were pooled . the analysis revealed that the pq associations are the most numerous except for ssc <dig>  indeed, this chromosome behaves differently compared to all other chromosomes tested. overall, few telomeric associations were detected and these were mainly pp associations. to determine whether the pq telomeric associations observed are the result of an association between the p and q telomeres of one chromosome or by the association of the p and q telomeres of the two homologs, we performed 3d fish combining the p and q subtelomeric probes and the corresponding whole chromosome paint . this demonstrated that the pq associations result essentially from an association between the p and q telomeres of the same chromosome rather than an association between the p and q telomeres of the two homologs. this intrachromosomal tethering of telomeres that can be called “chromosome bending” occurs at high frequency as it accounts for 60% to 92% of the pq associations observed. this is the case for all the chromosomes investigated regardless of size or morphology . this type of association will be denoted pqloop  while the association between the p and q telomeres of the two homologs will be denoted pqcross . this analysis done with the chromosome painting probes combined with the subtelomeric probes revealed that in some cases, one telomere can reside far from its chromosome territory showing that a chromatin loop can extend between the lobes. we carefully analyzed the images in order to quantify this phenomenon . it varied from 25% to 42% depending on the chromosomes .

n = total number of nuclei scored .

apercentage of pqloop or pqcross calculated on the total number of associations.

bpercentage of pqloop or pqcross calculated on the total number of pq associations.

comparisons revealed that the distribution of pp, qq, pqloop and pqcross associations differs significantly among the  <dig> chromosomes analyzed . for each chromosome, we then compared the distribution of pp, qq, pqloop and pqcross associations observed to the theoretical distribution expected if each of the  <dig> telomeric associations occurs with the same probability and independently, i.e. there is no preferential association type. taking these data into account, we found that for each chromosome, the observed probabilities of the type of associations differ from the theoretical probabilities  , showing that the type of telomeric association influences the probability of association.

to pursue the investigation on chromosome comparison, a principal component analysis  was computed on the relative frequencies of each association type i.e. the distribution of association type given an association occurs . the first axis explains  <dig> % of the total observed variance and represents chromosomes based on pqloop and pp association relative frequencies which are negatively correlated. ssc <dig> has preferentially pp associations and a low frequency of pqloop association while ssc <dig>  ssc <dig>  ssc <dig> and ssc <dig> have a low frequency of pp associations and a high frequency of pqloop associations. the second axis explains  <dig> % of the total observed variance and represents chromosomes based on qq association relative frequencies. ssc <dig> and ssc <dig> have preferentially qq associations. overall, in terms of telomeric association, ssc <dig> behaves differently to all the other chromosomes analyzed.

frequencies of telomere associations
for each chromosome pair, we estimated the frequency at which a telomeric association  occurs by calculating the probabilities of association . a classical nested binomial regression model was used to evaluate the existence of a significant effect of lps-activation and of telomere association types . we first compared the association probabilities in resting and activated nuclei . a difference was found only for ssc <dig> but it remains weak as shown by the p value. we therefore considered that the activation process has no effect on the frequency of telomeric association and the data were pooled. we then sought to see whether these frequencies are the same, irrespective of the type of association. all the chromosomes investigated were found to be significantly association-type dependent . to take our investigation even further and compare the chromosomes with one another, we conducted a principal component analysis. the first axis explains 66% of the total observed variance and discriminates between ssc <dig> and ssc <dig> on pqloop association frequency, which is high for ssc <dig> and low for ssc <dig>  the second axis explains 23% of the total observed variance and opposes, on pp association frequency, ssc <dig> and ssc <dig>  to ssc <dig> and ssc <dig>  .

telomere associations between heterologous chromosomes
to complete the analysis of telomeres from homologs, we tried to determine whether the telomeres of heterologous chromosomes associate. for this, we chose to investigate the behaviour of p and q telomeres in pools of chromosomes, composed of chromosomes belonging to the same group according to their morphology . four different pools were analyzed:  the  <dig> submetacentric chromosomes: ssc <dig> to ssc <dig>   the  <dig> subtelocentric chromosomes: ssc <dig> and ssc <dig>   the  <dig> metacentric chromosomes: ssc <dig> to ssc <dig> and  the  <dig> telocentric chromosomes: ssc <dig> to ssc <dig>  for each pool, two probes were generated containing either the p subtelomeric or the q subtelomeric probes . these probes were labelled in red and green respectively and hybridized on 3d-preserved resting and lps-activated neutrophil nuclei . more than  <dig> nuclei were analyzed for each pool in each condition. for all the pools analyzed, the average number of telomere signals was inferior to the expected number both for p and q telomeres, suggesting that clustering occurs. although the level of clustering remains globally low irrespective of the pool analyzed , it is higher in the metacentric and telocentric groups for p and q telomeres compared to the submetacentric and subtelocentric groups. in addition, in the metacentric group, the p telomeres associate significantly more than the q telomeres, both in resting and activated states. we then investigated whether the activation process modifies this level of association. when the neutrophils are activated, the tendency of the p telomeres to associate in the metacentric and telocentric groups increases significantly . the same phenomenon is observed for the q telomeres. we also looked for pq associations between telomeres in pools containing heterologous chromosomes. only a very small number of this type of association was detected  . in addition, in the submetacentric and metacentric groups, this number decreases significantly in lps-activated neutrophils.

discussion
positioning the p and q telomeres toward the outer nuclear border
telomeres play an essential role in preserving chromosome integrity and by their contribution to chromosome positioning within the nucleus. their organization has been studied in various cell types. in yeast, telomeres form limited clusters that appear to be attached to the nuclear envelope while in humans, telomeres are dispersed throughout the nucleus. however some telomeres show a preferential association with the nuclear periphery. this is the case for the q telomere of human chromosome  <dig>  <cit> . similarly a preferential association with the nucleolus has been shown for the short arms of acrocentric chromosomes due to the presence in these arms of rdna clusters  <cit> . telomeres were reported to be strongly tethered to the nuclear architecture by lamins, the main component of the lamina layer forming the interface between chromatin and the inner nuclear membrane. however, in spite of their close association with the nuclear lamina, telomeres are highly mobile structures, as shown by live imaging studies  <cit> . while the organization of telomeres has been studied in various cell types, information available for neutrophils is very limited, probably due to the complex structure of their nuclei. we studied the position of p and q telomeres of different chromosomes in relation to the outer nuclear border which, in these cells with polylobed nuclei, corresponds to the cell border directly in contact with the cytoplasm. our data demonstrate that for ssc <dig>  ssc <dig>  ssc <dig> and ssc <dig>  the q telomeres were significantly closer to the nuclear outer border compared to the p telomeres, while this was not the case for the two smaller chromosomes ssc <dig> and ssc <dig>  however no correlation with size or chromosome morphology can be made as ssc <dig>  the largest chromosome, behaves like the two smaller chromosomes. upon neutrophil activation by lps, the p telomeres move significantly towards the nuclear border while this effect is less pronounced for the q telomeres. our data are consistent with the observations on living cells, showing that telomeres are highly mobile structures and that the motion of chromosome ends is highly heterogeneous  <cit> . short telomeres have been shown to be more mobile than longer telomeres. this greater motility could be the result of the active decompaction of a large sub-telomeric region.

defining the type of association between the subtelomeres of homologous chromosomes
telomere associations have been found to be more prevalent in the interphase of non-cycling cells than in their cycling counterparts  <cit> . different roles have been suggested for these associations, including maintenance of chromosome positional stability and creation of a 3d transcription-permissive environment  <cit> . in neutrophils, which are terminally differentiated non-cycling cells, but transcriptionally active, we also found associations between the subtelomeres of homologous chromosomes. a high frequency of association between the subtelomeres of the short and the long arms  irrespective of the chromosomes studied, was described in non-cycling fibroblasts  <cit> . in neutrophils, our data demonstrate a more variable pattern of association depending on the chromosomes . we also found that when an association occurs, a pq association is more prevalent  except for ssc <dig> for which this type of association represents only 13% of all associations. for this chromosome, pp-telomere tethering is more prevalent. the same observation was made for human chromosome  <dig> in non-cycling lymphocytes, where qq associations were found in up to 80% of all nuclei studied  <cit> .

the use of whole chromosome specific paints enabled us to clearly determine that when pq associations occur, they mainly originate from intrachromosomal telomeric tethering between homologs denoted pqloop, the pqcross associations remaining marginal .

there are clear similarities between the chromosome bending seen in these non-cycling cells and that observed in spermatozoa, which are also terminally differentiated cells  <cit> . in spermatozoa, telomeres associate in doublets of telomeres from the same chromosome. it has been hypothesized that this chromosome looping is a consequence of the associations between specific subtelomeric dna sequences, protein complexes and chromatin structures located in the terminal domains of chromosome arms  <cit> . these associations are probably more complex than previously through as two hundred and ten proteins have been shown to interact with dna and might influence telomeric structure  <cit> . in this context, chromosome looping would play an important functional role by promoting telomere-telomere interactions in specialized domains. our data are in agreement with these findings as we showed that the percentage of pqloop is high for some chromosomes  and low for others .

our results demonstrate that the lps-activation process does not change the pattern of telomeric associations. a similar observation was made concerning human lymphocytes: after stimulation by a mitogen, only minor changes in the incidence of telomere associations were reported  <cit> . however, our data show that lps activation induces significant changes in the position of telomeres in relation to the outer nuclear border.

defining the probability of telomeric association in a pair of chromosomes
we first analyzed what types of association occur between the subtelomeres of homologous chromosomes. the second level of analysis consisted in determining at what frequency these associations occur. the analysis revealed that:  the probability of an association between the subtelomeres of homologous chromosomes differs significantly between chromosomes. two chromosomes  behave differently compared to the others: they each show a high probability that their p telomeres associate. in addition, ssc <dig> also has the highest probability of intrachromosomal associations occurring between the p and q telomeres, while this event remains very rare for ssc <dig>   the probabilities of the different types of association occurring can differ significantly for a given chromosome pair: for example, the probability of an association between the two p subtelomeres of ssc <dig> is high while the probability of a pq association  is very low .

overall, therefore, the probability of a telomeric association is high for ssc <dig>  it has been shown that associations of telomeres in interphase nuclei might contribute to the establishment of transcription-permissive 3d nuclear compartments  <cit> . this could be an explanation, as gene density is higher in this porcine chromosome than in the other chromosomes investigated  <cit> , . ssc <dig>  which is similar in size  but very different in gene density , behaves differently in terms of telomeric associations, which supports this hypothesis. our results concur with the observation made recently by foster and collaborators  <cit>  on the non-random organization of the porcine genome in the nucleus of cells from various origins or lineages.

analyzing the telomere associations between heterologous chromosomes
little information is available on the association of telomeres from heterologous chromosomes. this phenomenon was studied in human lymphocytes using specific probes for the p and q arms of chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  no significant incidence of telomere associations was found between these chromosomes  <cit> . however, no information is available for neutrophils. using pools containing the p and q telomeres of different chromosomes, we defined the level of telomere associations within the  <dig> groups of chromosomes tested . the analysis revealed that the level of telomere associations differs between the groups: the lowest level is observed for the subtelocentric chromosomes. overall, it remains fairly small, with the ratio / ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . this suggests that the higher level of clustering observed with the pna probe  is probably the result of telomeric associations occurring between chromosomes belonging to different groups.

CONCLUSIONS
this study adds new data on genome organization in one cell type which is relatively complex due to the polylobed structure of its nucleus and which is particularly important as it plays a major role in immune response. we focussed our study on 3d telomere organization and its modifications when these immune cells are activated in response to a pathogen aggression. we showed that  for all chromosomes, the p telomeres changed their position significantly during the activation process while the effect is less pronounced for the q telomeres;  the percentage of nuclei harbouring at least one telomeric association varies significantly between chromosomes, the smallest metacentric chromosome ssc <dig>  which is also the richest in gene-density, harbouring a high level of association between its telomeres;  the distribution of types of telomeric associations differs significantly between the  <dig> chromosomes, the largest telocentric chromosome ssc <dig> showing a very different pattern compared to the other chromosomes;  the frequency of telomeric association occurring between homologs is highly dependent on the type of association and the type of chromosome;  overall, the lps-activation process induces only minor changes in these patterns of associations, probably because the drastic structural changes come later during netosis; and finally the most noteworthy  when telomeric associations occur between homologs, the most prevalent association type consists of pq tethering of the telomeres from one chromosome, suggesting that chromosomes bend back on themselves in neutrophils to promote telomere-telomere interactions in specialized domains.

