BACKGROUND
macrophages, a class of myeloid leukocytes with phagocytic activity and inflammatory signaling properties, play a pivotal role in antimicrobial defense and tissue homeostasis  <cit> . these tissue-resident immune cells express receptors that detect the presence of signature molecules associated with microbial infection and tissue damage  <cit> . such receptors signal to induce macrophage production of cytokines and other inflammatory mediators that effect pathogen clearance and tissue repair. many cell-intrinsic and -extrinsic regulatory mechanisms act to limit inflammatory signaling in macrophages, thereby preventing excessive, self-destructive responses of the cell. furthermore, the spatial and temporal turnover of macrophages in tissue is subject to dynamic control by the local microenvironment and metabolic state. uncontrolled macrophage recruitment and activation is associated with development of rheumatic, cardiovascular, metabolic, and neoplastic disorders.

selenium is a dietary trace element that exerts both beneficial and adverse effects on health depending on the specific chemical form and dose. deficiency or excess of dietary selenium has been linked to immune dysfunction and inflammatory disorders  <cit>  although the precise molecular mechanisms remain to be determined. in living organisms, selenium either exists as low-molecular weight compounds such as selenite, selenomethionine, methylselenol or selenomethylselenocysteine, or is assimilated into selenium-containing proteins  by way of the amino acid selenocysteine . apart from nonspecific selenium incorporation into protein, the pathway of sec and selenoprotein biosynthesis requires a unique trna, sec trnasec  <cit> .

using a conditional gene knockout strategy, we have shown that ablation of sec trnasec results in the loss of expression of the whole selenoprotein set, or selenoproteome, in hepatocytes  <cit> , and t cells  <cit> . therefore, cell type-specific deletion of the sec trnasec gene  offers a useful way to examine the physiological effects of selenium in the form of selenoproteins in relation to the function of a desired cell type. in this paper, we present data from a study of mice lacking sec trnasec in macrophages and describe the molecular and cellular abnormalities caused by the ablation of macrophage selenoprotein expression.

RESULTS
selenoprotein expression in macrophages
the mouse genome contains  <dig> selenoprotein genes  <cit> . individual selenoproteins exhibit tissue specificity in their expression levels and regulation patterns  <cit> . to examine selenoprotein mrna expression in primary mouse macrophages, we isolated total rna from bone marrow-derived macrophages  and analyzed the expression of all  <dig> mouse selenoprotein genes by real-time qpcr . compared to 3t <dig> fibroblasts, a non-myeloid cell type that we used in parallel, macrophages expressed relatively high levels of genes encoding glutathione peroxidases  <dig> , thioredoxin reductase  <dig> , the 15-kda selenoprotein , and selenoproteins p, r, k, and t . to compare selenoprotein gene expression in resting and activated macrophages, bmdms were subjected to rna extraction with and without treatment with lipopolysaccharide , a toll-like receptor  <dig>  agonist that induces potent inflammatory responses. tr <dig> gene expression was significantly increased in bmdms after  <dig> h of incubation with lps .

selenoprotein expression in macrophages was further examined by labeling bmdms with 75se, and analyzing labeled selenoproteins by gel electrophoresis  <cit> . bmdms expressed a distinct set of selenoproteins, whose repertoire was largely unchanged by lps activation . however, the amount of tr <dig> was substantially increased, whereas that of gpx <dig> was modestly decreased in lps-treated macrophages, which was verified by immunoblotting with antibodies specific to individual selenoproteins . in addition to tr <dig> and gpx <dig>  several other selenoproteins with high mrna abundance in macrophages were detected as 75se-labeled protein bands on the gel.

ablation of trsp and selenoprotein expression in macrophages
to study the macrophage-specific functions of selenoproteins, we generated mutant mice in which deletion of floxed  alleles of trsp is driven by cre recombinase expressed under the control of the lysozyme m  promoter. lysmcre expression is restricted to macrophages and other leukocyte subpopulations of myeloid origin  <cit> .trspfl/fl-lysmcre  mice were born at mendelian ratios, survived to adulthood, and displayed no spontaneous pathology under the specific pathogen-free condition .

we examined the effects of trsp deletion on selenoprotein expression and function in macrophages. in Δtrspm macrophages, synthesis of sec trnasec was almost completely abolished . correspondingly, the level of 75se-labeled selenoproteins was dramatically diminished in Δtrspm macrophages as compared to that of control  cells , indicating that the sec trnasec-mediated cotranslational mechanism is the major pathway for selenium incorporation into protein in macrophages. the low amounts of residual 75se-labeled proteins in Δtrspm macrophages  likely represent selenoproteins derived from non-macrophage cells contaminating the bmdm preparation and also from a small fraction of cells that have escaped trsp deletion. many selenoproteins function to quench reactive oxygen species  and other forms of oxidants, or function to repair oxidative damage  <cit> . we previously found that selenoprotein-deficient t cells accumulated higher ros than control cells and failed to mount ros-sensitive t cell receptor responses  <cit> . similarly, steady state levels of ros were higher in resting Δtrspm macrophages than in control cells . therefore, the antioxidant function of selenoproteins is required to maintain redox homeostasis in various cell types including macrophages.

inflammatory responses in Δtrspm macrophages and mice
macrophages contribute to the initiation of inflammation by producing cytokines in response to microbial infection and tissue injury. lps and other inflammatory stimuli bring about transient ros accumulation as part of cellular signaling events  <cit> . selenoproteins such as gpx isoforms were previously shown to regulate inflammatory responses  <cit> . we therefore explored the effect of selenoprotein deficiency and the resultant redox imbalance on the macrophage inflammatory response. signaling to the transcription factor nf-κb, and the mitogen-activated protein kinase  cascades are crucial for cellular responses to inflammatory stimuli. in lps-treated macrophages, degradation and replenishment of iκbα, both indicative of nf-κb activation, occurred independently of selenoprotein status . induction of phosphorylated erk, jnk and p <dig>  the active forms of the protein kinases, by lps was also normal in Δtrspm macrophages . we also compared lps-induced inflammatory gene expression in control and Δtrspm macrophages. the magnitude and kinetics of expression of the genes encoding the cytokines tumor necrosis factor-α and interleukin-1β, and the chemokines kc and macrophage inflammatory protein- <dig>  were similar in both macrophage groups .

to assess the effects of myeloid-specific selenoprotein deficiency on in vivo pathology, control and Δtrspm mice were subjected to different models of the inflammatory response. the models employed in our study include lps endotoxemia, chemical irritant  dermatitis, and zymosan-induced peritonitis. in these experimentally induced inflammatory responses, Δtrspm mice manifested rates of mortality, and levels of cytokine production, local edema formation, and neutrophil infiltration that are comparable to those seen in control animals . hence, despite selenoprotein deficiency and deregulated ros generation in macrophages, Δtrspm mice appeared normal in macrophage-mediated inflammatory responses.

changes in gene expression in Δtrspm macrophages
a recent study that used independently created trsp mutant mouse lines also showed that sec trnasec ablation resulted in elevated ros generation in macrophages and hepatocytes, yet its effects on cell survival and function were masked by compensatory induction of a cytoprotective transcription program mediated by nf-e2-related factor  <dig>  <cit> . the lack of discernable inflammatory phenotypes in Δtrspm mice may be attributable to such redundancy in cellular antioxidant mechanisms. we reasoned that, in addition to their known activities, selenoproteins expressed in macrophages provide other, nonredundant functions, the loss of which may be translated into gene expression patterns. to test this idea, we analyzed global gene expression profiles of control and Δtrspm macrophages. mouse whole-genome dna microarrays were used to determine mrna levels in the two macrophage groups that were left unstimulated and stimulated with lps. specific sets of genes showed significantly higher or lower expression in Δtrspm macrophages . the data obtained from the dna microarray experiments were verified by real-time qpcr analysis .

the most salient feature of the genes showing aberrant expression in selenoprotein-deficient macrophages was that many were functionally related to the formation and remodeling of and cellular interaction with the extracellular matrix . in both resting and lps-stimulated Δtrspm macrophages, these ecm-related genes were expressed at higher levels relative to control cells , and included those that encode ecm components , inhibitors of ecm proteolysis , and ecm-induced cytoskeletal remodeling . a few other genes were detected as being expressed at lower levels in lps-treated Δtrspm macrophages, but their repertoire did not point to any particular shared attributes .

effects of selenoprotein deficiency on macrophage invasiveness
the dna microarray data obtained from the analysis of Δtrspm macrophages suggested that loss of selenoprotein expression alters macrophage-ecm interactions in such a way as to decrease matrix remodeling, and in favor of reinforcing the surrounding ecm. those effects would also affect macrophage migration through the ecm and basement membrane. we tested this idea by comparing the invasiveness of control and Δtrspm macrophages in a protein gel matrix . macrophages devoid of selenoprotein expression showed substantially reduced migration in gel-laden transwell chambers . we also tested whether the gel invasion phenotype arised from a cell-intrinsic motility defect by repeating the assay without the gel in the transwell chamber; migration of Δtrspm macrophages in gel-free media was not reduced and rather slightly higher than that of control macrophages . thus, the changes of ecm-related gene expression in macrophages appear to impair the cells' migration properties only in an environment comprising ecm components.

discussion
the immune regulatory effects exerted by dietary selenium are complex, and appear to be determined by multiple variables associated not only with the micronutrient but also with the immune system. despite the epidemiological link between selenium deficiency and inflammatory disorders, little insight has been gained as to the role of selenium and selenoproteins in the pathology, and the cell types wherein they serve protective and self-destructive functions. inflammation is driven by multiple types of leukocytes and parenchymal cells of the immune system. we previously reported that t cells lacking sec trnasec and selenoprotein expression were defective in t cell receptor-induced proliferation, a key step for activating t cell-mediated immune responses  <cit> . in the current study, we determined the selenoproteins abundantly expressed in resting and activated macrophages, and identified a role for selenoproteins in macrophage gene regulation and invasive behavior.

redox regulation is an inherent component of inflammatory signaling in macrophages  <cit> . in accord with the antioxidant activities of many selenoproteins, we observed elevated ros generation in selenoprotein-deficient macrophages. however, this ros dysregulation did not lead to overt phenotypes in the mouse models of inflammation that were used in this study. these results may imply that the levels of ros and oxidative damage increased in Δtrspm macrophages are subthreshold for effects on inflammatory responses. alternatively, there may exist fail-safe mechanisms in macrophages that act to maintain inflammatory events in the absence of selenoprotein function. it was indeed shown by others that cytoprotective enzymes that are induced in a manner dependent on the transcription factor nf-e2-related factor  <dig> can counter oxidative stress in sec trnasec-deficient cells and thereby compensate for the loss of selenoproteins  <cit> . whichever the case may be, selenoprotein function is likely dispensable for the onset as well as the termination of inflammatory responses, at least under the specific experimental settings employed in our tests. of note, the selenoprotein deficiency of Δtrspm macrophages resulted in increased expression of ecm-related genes. therefore, although the precise mechanism remains to be determined, selenoproteins serve nonredundant gene regulatory functions in macrophages.

cell migration in vivo entails proteolytic remodeling of ecm. matrix metalloproteinases  and other groups of protein-degrading enzymes are well known for their role in cellular ecm invasion. amongst the ecm-related genes overexpressed in Δtrspm macrophages are tagln and timp <dig>  whose protein products were shown to inhibit the expression or activity of mmps and thus suppress cell invasive activity  <cit> . in keeping with the high expression of these genes, Δtrspm macrophages displayed greatly diminished invasion in a protein gel matrix. other ecm-related genes identified in our dna microarray experiments are also likely to contribute to this phenotype. invasive macrophages play a central pathogenic role in certain chronic inflammatory lesions: most notably foam cells in atherosclerotic plaques, and tumor-associated macrophages. therefore, Δtrspm mice may show an altered severity or kinetics of disease in as-yet-unexplored experimental conditions, and serve as animal models of chronic human diseases that are associated with selenium deficiency.

CONCLUSIONS
selenium and selenoproteins may regulate immunity and tissue homeostasis through ecm-related gene expression and macrophage invasiveness.

