BACKGROUND
gliomas are primary brain tumors arising from the supporting tissue of the brain. the presenting symptoms in glioma patients include epileptic seizures in 20-45% of patients  <cit> . another 15-30% of patients develop seizures during their disease  <cit> . multiple factors may contribute to epileptogenesis , but all possible factors that have been studied up till now do not suffice when trying to clarify the course of tumor-related epilepsy. possibly, a better understanding of tumor-related epilepsy could be achieved using a relatively new concept in neuroscience: 'functional connectivity' refers to the statistical interdependencies between neurophysiological time series such as eeg, meg, or fmri-bold signals  <cit> . functional connectivity is thought to reflect communication between different brain areas, thus having a major impact on brain functioning  <cit> . furthermore, the brain can be seen as a complex integrated network, in which focal changes influence the integrity and status of the brain as a whole. an 'optimal' brain network probably includes concepts that are pivotal in many types of complex networks, such as localized segregation combined with overall integration  <cit> . watts and strogatz proposed a theoretical framework for such a network, the so-called 'small-world' network  <cit> . the small-world network is an intermediate type of network in between the 'random' network, in which all connections between nodes are randomly drawn, and the 'regular' network, in which connections between nodes are present in an ordered fashion and all nodes have the same number of connections. several studies have shown that both structural and functional brain networks in healthy humans and animals can be characterized by the small-world principle  <cit> .

previous studies using magnetoencephalography  recordings show that functional connectivity and network topology are significantly altered in brain tumor patients when compared to healthy participants: low frequency connectivity  is pathologically increased, and the normal small-world configuration is disturbed  <cit> . these differences are not only limited to the area around the tumor, but involve brain-wide networks and are related to cognitive deficits. altered connectivity and network topology have also been reported in epilepsy patients, even in the inter-ictal period. increased theta, but also delta, frequency eeg connectivity in between seizures was found in two studies investigating epilepsy patients  <cit> . furthermore, therapy-resistant epilepsy patients have been reported to have a more regular network topology than healthy controls as measured with eeg  <cit> .

changes over time in connectivity and network patterns in neuro-oncological or epilepsy patients have only been sparsely reported. in a previous study, we investigated a patient group with varying types of primary brain tumors with meg before and after tumor resection  <cit> . after tumor resection, functional connectivity in the theta band significantly decreased in these patients, suggesting 'normalization' of the previously reported pathologically increased connectivity. moreover, this decrease was related to better postsurgical outcome in terms of seizure-freedom. studies using both fmri and acute corticography  recordings in mtle patients suggest that prolonged therapy-resistant epilepsy is related to decreases in broadband functional connectivity  <cit> . furthermore, the small-world architecture is more disrupted in the temporal cortical networks of tle patients with longer epilepsy history, as measured with acog  <cit> .

previous studies suggest that both epilepsy and brain tumors are related to changes in connectivity, which may be most prominent in the theta band. furthermore, brain networks of both epilepsy patients and brain tumor patients display a loss of small-world features when compared to healthy controls. in the current study, we first aimed to investigate the relation between functional connectivity, network topology, and tumor-related epilepsy in a group of glioma patients. we hypothesized increased connectivity and less optimal network topology in the theta band to be related to epilepsy characteristics. secondly, we studied the longitudinal changes in connectivity and network architecture during the first six months after neurosurgery in relation to changes in epilepsy features. the patients participated in a clinical study investigating levetiracetam monotherapy ), which implies that patients were homogeneous with respect to aed use.

RESULTS
patients
a total of  <dig> patients were included, but  <dig> patients had to be excluded due to meg artifacts at t <dig>  further analyses were performed using the remaining  <dig> patients. all patients had undergone surgical intervention and histopathological diagnoses were obtained . patients' mean age was  <dig> years  and four patients were females. the majority of patients was diagnosed with glioblastoma multiforme . the tumor was localized in the right hemisphere in  <dig> patients. these tumors were all localized in the frontal or temporal lobe. five patients had left-sided tumors, which were localized in the frontal lobe in most patients. most patients  had at most one seizure per month in the last month before t <dig> , while three patients had more than one seizure per day. seizures were likely to be due to the tumor in all patients. at t <dig>   <dig> patients underwent a second meg recording: two patients were excluded because they switched to another aed, while one patient had died due to disease progression. in two patients, no artifact-free meg epochs were available. of these  <dig> patients,  <dig> patients did not have seizures anymore, while  <dig> patients still had occasional seizures. at t <dig>  only  <dig> patients were tested. due to the small number of patients available at t <dig>  no further analysis was performed on these measurements. patient characteristics at t <dig> are displayed in table  <dig> 

note. ct = chemotherapy, rt = radiotherapy, dex = dexamethasone, kps = karnofsky performance status, m = male, f = female, ps = partial seizures, gs = generalized seizures, r = total resection, b = stereotactic biopsy, oii or iii = oligodendroglioma who grade ii or iii, aii or iii = astrocytoma who grade ii or iii, gbm = glioblastoma multiforme, rf = right frontal, lf = left frontal, rt = right temporal, lpo = left parieto-occipital, rft = right fronto-temporal, n = no, y = yes.

note. ct = chemotherapy, rt = radiotherapy, dex = dexamethasone, kps = karnofsky performance status, n = no, y = yes.

power analysis
relative power in each frequency band was calculated. no significant changes in relative power occurred between t <dig> and t <dig>  there were also no correlations between relative power in each frequency band and clinical characteristics, such as seizure frequency and total number of seizures.

functional connectivity
significant correlations were found between functional connectivity and the total number of seizures, which refers to the total number of seizures that patients had experienced from the first to the last seizure before meg measurement at the first time point. at t <dig>  higher total number of seizures was significantly associated with higher theta band pli . this correlation remained significant when excluding an outlier patient, who had experienced a total of  <dig> seizures . at t <dig>  the same association was found, although significance was lost after correcting for the number of comparisons . seizure frequency significantly dropped between t <dig> and t <dig> from on average  <dig> seizures at t <dig> to less than one seizure between t <dig> and t <dig> . there were no significant changes in functional connectivity between the three time points .

in order to explore which type of theta band connectivity was related to the total number of seizures at t <dig>  we summarized connectivity into three values:  short-distance pli,  long-distance intrahemispheric pli, and  long-distance interhemispheric pli . there were highly significant correlations between the total number of seizures at t <dig> with both short-distance theta band pli  as well as with long-distance intrahemispheric theta band pli . theta band functional connectivity in the temporal lobe seemed to have the strongest relation to the number of seizures: left temporo-occipital pli , right fronto-temporal pli , right temporo-occipital pli , and left temporal pli .

several possible confounders regarding the reported results were explored in post-hoc analyses. there were no significant associations between functional connectivity and patients' age, the total daily dose of levetiracetam, anti-tumor treatment , performance status, and the duration of epilepsy at t <dig>  furthermore, there were no differences in functional connectivity between men and women , patients with disease recurrence versus newly diagnosed patients, patients suffering from partial or generalized seizures, patients with low-grade versus high-grade tumors, left-sided and right-sided tumors, and type of resection total resection), although only two patients underwent biopsy.

graph analysis
increasing theta band edge weight correlation  was significantly related to higher total number of seizures at t <dig> . higher total number of seizures at t <dig> was related to higher theta band path length, although this correlation was not significant after correcting for multiple comparisons . there were no significant changes in network features between the two time points .

coefficient, s = small-world index, wr = edge weight correlation.

again, confounders were explored. there was no correlation between network features and duration of epilepsy, tumor treatment , performance status, and daily dose of levetiracetam. there were no differences in network features between male and female patients, patients with recurrent disease or newly diagnosed brain tumors, patients who had undergone resection versus biopsy, patients with tumors in the left and right hemisphere, and patients with partial seizures and patients with generalized seizures. however, higher age was related to lower edge weight correlation .

discussion
significant associations exist between epilepsy characteristics and both functional connectivity and network topology in brain tumor patients directly after neurosurgical intervention: increased theta band phase lag index  is related to a greater total number of seizures. this association mostly concerns theta band connectivity within the temporal lobe, and between the temporal and other lobes. there is also a correlation between higher total number of seizures and higher theta band edge weight correlation . no significant changes in functional connectivity or network variables were observed over time. furthermore, the total number of seizures from the first seizure to both time points seemed to be the only factor related to differences in connectivity and network variables , while other variables such as treatment characteristics, type of tumor, and lateralization of the tumor were not significantly related to connectivity and network topology.

our findings concerning the association between theta band functional connectivity and number of epileptic seizures corroborate several lines of previous research and confirm our initial hypothesis. earlier studies in brain tumor patients have shown that these patients have increased connectivity in lower frequency bands, and particularly in the theta band  <cit> . furthermore, theta band functional connectivity significantly decreased after tumor resection in a group of brain tumor patients, suggesting 'normalization' of the previously reported pathologically increased connectivity  <cit> . in epilepsy, increased theta band connectivity has also been reported in the inter-ictal eeg  <cit> . increased theta band functional connectivity seems to be a hallmark of epilepsy, tumor-related epilepsy, and/or brain tumors, and the current results stimulate further investigations into this hypothesis.

brain tumor patients have been found to have disrupted small-world brain networks when compared to healthy controls  <cit> . in the current study, there was a significant relation between higher number of seizures and higher edge weight correlation in the theta band. although high edge weight correlation has been thought to be beneficial to functional status of the network, because of increased transport of information  <cit> , correlations that are too high may increase vulnerability to seizures due to an abnormally high synchronisability of the brain network. using a model of rat hippocampus, it has been shown that adding highly connected hubs increases network vulnerability to seizures  <cit> . furthermore, single-cell recordings in rats also show that hubs are highly influential throughout the network, and may or may not promote synchronisability  <cit> . at seizure onset, epilepsy patients also show increases of average interconnectedness of the network  <cit> . thus, it seems as though there is a critical threshold of connectivity and synchronisability. there was also a trend towards a correlation between higher total number of seizures and longer theta band path length. this increased path length in epilepsy patients has been found with eeg  <cit> .

the associations between connectivity and seizures in this study were mainly due to connectivity with and within the temporal lobe. this result could be due to the relatively high number of patients with temporal tumors , but may also be related to the origins of theta band oscillations and its relation with epilepsy. the theta band contains an oscillatory pattern that has for long been thought to emanate from the hippocampal structures, after which it spreads to the outer layers of the brain. however, later studies have shown that other regions of the brain may also generate theta oscillations in certain cognitive states  <cit> . power, amplitude, and synchronization of the theta band has mainly been linked to cognitive functioning, particularly processes involved in learning and memory  <cit> . microscopically, theta band oscillations may be regulated by gabaergic interneurons  <cit> . moreover, blockade of gaba receptors in induced epilepsy alters patterns of theta activity  <cit> , and hubs consisting of gabaergic interneurons may determine network synchronization  <cit> . also, neuronal changes associated with temporal lobe epilepsy can disrupt hippocampal theta function  <cit> . these studies point towards a possible link between epilepsy and the theta band. in human neurophysiological data, the association between the theta band and epilepsy has increasingly been studied over the past two decades. pathological thalamo-cortical theta oscillations have been described in absence seizures  <cit> , and increased theta band absolute spectral power is related to absence epilepsy  <cit>  and generalized epilepsies  <cit> . another study reports increased theta band power to be related to the severity of epilepsy  <cit> . moreover, interhemispheric theta band coherence proved to be a selective feature of patients with generalized epilepsy  <cit> .

functional connectivity and network topology did not change significantly over the two time points in this study, although seizure frequency did change over time. the limited sample size in this study may have impacted significance, but the lack of change may also be due to the possibility of a stable plateau phase in connectivity and network topology. possibly, resection of the tumor induces a great change in functional connectivity  <cit> , after which this stable phase is reached at t <dig>  approximately  <dig> weeks after neurosurgical intervention. future studies should aim at elucidating this possibility. a number of explored variables also did not have a significant impact on connectivity and network features, although this intuitively may have been expected. this could be due to the small sample size and heterogeneous group, but the impact of radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and dexamethasone on the background eeg is largely unknown. a study investigating epilepsy patients receiving add-on levetiracetam treatment reports no changes in background eeg, although they did not look at connectivity  <cit> . furthermore, there was no significant influence of the type  and lateralization  of the tumor on functional connectivity or network characteristics, corroborating previous research that has also pointed out that the location of the tumor does not determine the pattern of connectivity changes in the brain, although patients with right-sided tumors were generally better off in terms of alterations in connectivity  <cit> . another possible explanation for the lack of change may also be the high heritability of both functional connectivity and network topology  <cit> : the effect of factors such as tumor treatment may not be strong enough to overcome the constancy of the genetically determined network architecture.

this study has some limitations, one of which is the small sample size, limiting statistical power. although patients were homogeneous with respect to brain tumor type  and aed, variation was present regarding a number of variables. these variables were not significantly related to functional connectivity or network features, but future studies should aim to investigate more homogeneous subgroups of brain tumor patients to elucidate more specific effects. furthermore, all meg experiments have the limitation of the inverse problem, common sources and volume conduction. however, the pli is very strict in this respect and disregards all zero-lagged correlations, which means that our results are not the result of spurious correlations because of common sources or volume conduction.

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that theta band connectivity and network topology may be important for tumor-related epileptic seizures. these findings bring up thoughts about possible mechanisms of epileptogenesis in brain tumor patients. functional connectivity and network characteristics in the theta band seem most important in tumor-related epilepsy. future research should focus on elucidating this correlation between epilepsy and the theta band.

