BACKGROUND
many natural populations are continuously exposed to chemical stressors. one indication of this is that in  <dig>  over  <dig>  billion pounds of industrial chemicals were disposed or released to the environment by facilities required to report to the epa, including  <dig> million pounds of air emissions and  <dig> million pounds of surface water releases  <cit> . what are the biological consequences of chronic exposure to environmental pollution? we addressed this question using natural populations of the teleost fundulus heteroclitus that inhabit and have adapted to highly polluted superfund sites  <cit> . these populations are exposed to some of the highest concentrations of aromatic hydrocarbon pollutants of any vertebrate species  <cit> . compelling evidence for adaptation in these populations is that embryos from the polluted sites are resistant to the toxic effects of the contaminated sediments while reference embryos are not  <cit> . both first and second generation embryos from superfund sites at new bedford harbor and elizabeth river and first generation embryos from depurated newark bay fish are resistant, suggesting that differential survival is due to genetic adaptation rather than physiological induction. the central question we asked is, what differences in metabolic gene expression appear to be evolutionarily important within and among populations subject to anthropogenic stress?

to address this question we examined brain gene expression in individuals from three independent populations of fundulus that inhabit and have adapted to highly polluted superfund sites. the superfund sites are highly contaminated with aromatic hydrocarbons, including polychlorinated biphenyls , dibenzo-p-dioxins, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons  among other contaminants  <cit> . gene expression was measured in field-caught fish raised for one year in common re-circulating tanks which removes physiological differences among populations induced by temperature, water quality, feeding, and other environmental factors  <cit> . although many pollutants have long residual body-times, one year depuration should eliminate most pollutants . we assume that differences found after this common gardening are predominantly genetic rather than physiological.

we used a metabolic array since exposure to stress is likely to affect metabolic gene expression due to the additional energy needed to protect against harmful effects. metabolic gene expression was examined in brains since brain tissue is metabolically active and may be highly susceptible to lipophilic pollutants: high energy demands, high lipid content, low antioxidant levels, reactive microglial cells, and inability to replicate neurons make it vulnerable to pollution and resulting oxidative stress  <cit> .

multiple fundulus populations that have independently evolved adaptive resistance to complex suites of pollutants provide independent contrasts for identifying genes involved in adaptation. we compared brain gene expression levels in common gardened fundulus heteroclitus from three independent, resistant superfund sites to individuals from six nearby reference populations. we report significant differences in gene expression that were unique to each polluted population or shared among two polluted populations as well as conserved responses in gene expression among all three superfund populations.

RESULTS
population genetics and experimental design
we found large amounts of significant variation in gene expression among individuals within each of nine populations . these results are similar to previous studies of fundulus metabolic gene expression  <cit> . using a mixed model to test for differences between populations but without considering geographic distances between populations  or whether a population is polluted, up to 25% of the genes have significant differences in expression among any two of the nine populations . on average 12% of the genes differ between populations. two reference populations  spanning a steep transition zone between northern and southern populations of fundulus  <cit>  exhibit the most differences. because most of the variation in gene expression among populations is a function of the variation within populations , these differences are consistent with a neutral or nearly-neutral model of evolution  <cit> .

with the large number of differences in gene expression among individuals within a population, one should expect differences between genetically distinct populations. these differences are not necessarily due to evolution by natural selection since the variation in expression does not necessarily affect a biologically important phenotype. to distinguish biologically important differences, those evolving by natural selection, from among the many genes exhibiting significant differences within and among populations, we specifically tested whether gene expression in a superfund population is statistically different from the two reference populations . these three populations have similar genetic distances from each other such that the superfund population and the two reference populations share similar numbers of neutral alleles and have similar differences in allele frequency  <cit> . without the effect of natural selection, the combined variation in the two reference populations should be greater than the variation between the superfund population and each reference population. in an analysis of variance , the variation between the polluted versus two reference populations will be significant if it is greater than the average variation within the polluted population and the combined reference populations. if the variation is significant, it exceeds the expectation of neutral evolutionary models  <cit>  and thus is consistent with evolution by natural selection. traits evolving by natural selection affect biologically important traits. thus, this analysis of variance provides evidence for which gene expression changes are of functional significance.

we also asked which gene expression levels were significantly different in all three polluted populations compared to all six reference populations. since there is as much genetic distance among populations within these two groups  as there is between groups , the variation in gene expression due to random drift is accounted for in the anova. thus, similar to the separate comparisons with the three superfund populations, the genetic differences in gene expression most likely represent evolution by natural selection and in these comparisons, adaptation to chronic exposure to pollution.

differences in brain gene expression between polluted and paired reference populations
a linear mixed model was used to test for differences between superfund populations versus the two surrounding reference sites. we made three comparisons: each superfund population versus two reference populations . for the most northern superfund population, new bedford harbor, ma,  <dig> genes are significantly differentially expressed compared to two reference populations . for the superfund site in newark bay, nj,  <dig> genes are differentially expressed . for the most southern superfund site, elizabeth river, va,  <dig> genes are significantly different . these numbers are greater than the  <dig> genes expected by chance . after a bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons,  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes are significantly different in new bedford harbor, newark bay and elizabeth river populations, respectively . we did not find greater inter-individual variation in gene expression in the elizabeth river and surrounding reference populations. thus, the failure to detect as many differences in expression in the elizabeth river population compared to the new bedford harbor and newark bay populations is not due to greater individual variation.

common gene expression differences among all polluted populations
the venn diagram summarizes significant genes  for each comparison of a superfund population to two reference populations . the new bedford harbor population had  <dig> genes in common with the newark bay population and  <dig> genes in common with the elizabeth river population. the newark bay population had  <dig> genes in common with the elizabeth river population. two genes are common to all  <dig> populations, a nadh-ubiquinone oxidoreductase aggg subunit precursor , a subunit in oxidative phosphorylation complex i, and thioredoxin, a general protein disulfide oxidoreductase.

we statistically compared brain gene expression patterns among individuals from all three polluted populations  to individuals from all six reference populations to determine if there were gene expression changes due to common pollution stress. analyses indicate that 17%  of the genes were more similar among polluted populations and significantly different from reference populations at p =  <dig>  . sixteen genes were more highly expressed and eleven genes were less expressed. after a bonferroni correction, eleven genes remain significant.

discussion
metabolic gene expression differences in polluted populations
we used natural populations of fundulus that inhabit and have adapted to highly polluted superfund sites to identify gene expression changes involved in adaptation to pollution. expression of 17% of the metabolic genes examined differed between the new bedford harbor, ma superfund population compared to two reference populations, 12% differed in the newark bay, nj comparison, and 5% differed in the elizabeth river comparison. genes contributing to phase i and phase ii biotransformation of xenobiotics are likely candidates for adaptation at the physiological or genetic level in pollution-impacted populations. transcripts for the phase i enzymes cyp2n <dig> and cyp1b <dig> were less expressed in the new bedford harbor population and cyp2n <dig> expression also was lower in the newark bay population. cyp1a induction is important in many toxic responses to dioxin-like compounds although it is refractory to induction in individuals from all of these polluted populations  <cit> . not unexpectedly, its expression did not differ in these un-induced individuals.

several gene expression changes are consistent with toxic effects from exposure to dioxin-like contaminants. for instance, expression of many genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation differed in the three polluted populations, as might be expected since dioxin affects the respiratory mitochondrial electron chain  <cit> . additionally, in response to an increase in reactive oxygen species caused by leakage from the electron transport chain or directly via phase i and ii metabolism, there is an increase in glutathione s-transferase a and glutathione peroxidase expression, as seen in other studies  <cit> . the expression of superoxide dismutases , and glutathione s-transferases mu  <dig> and mu  <dig> did not differ. interestingly, all three superfund populations had differences in the expression of fatty acid binding protein genes which may be central regulators in inflammatory and metabolic signaling  <cit> .

common significant genes among polluted populations
an important question for adaptation in general is whether common solutions to environmental stress evolve. recent transcriptional studies suggest multiple mechanisms to a biological end  <cit> . in drosophila, the number of evolved responses depends on selection strength: altered expression of different cytochrome p450s  develops in response to ddt in laboratory drosophila, yet in resistant field isolates, over-expression of cyp6g <dig> predominates  <cit>  . one approach to address this question is to discern significant changes in expression shared among superfund populations . two genes are common in all  <dig> populations, the nadh-ubiquinone oxidoreductase aggg subunit precursor , a subunit in oxidative phosphorylation complex i, and thioredoxin, a general protein disulfide oxidoreductase. however only ndub <dig> has a consistent pattern with significantly more highly expressed in the superfund populations. thioredoxin expression was greater in one superfund population but decreased in the other two, suggesting that the expression of this gene is evolutionarily labile.

a statistically more powerful test of a shared adaptive response in gene expression is to compare all three polluted populations to all six reference populations. in these analyses, expression levels of 17% of the genes examined were statistically significantly different in the polluted populations compared to reference populations. these differentially expressed genes suggest a shared response to pollution stress in the independent polluted populations. however, by comparing significant expression among polluted populations, many of these differences in gene expression appear to be driven by only one or two of the superfund populations  and might reflect the different pollutants at each site. only ndub <dig> is consistently differentially expressed at p <  <dig>  in the three separate comparisons of each superfund site versus surrounding reference sites and also in the comparison of all polluted versus all reference populations. thus its altered expression is unlikely to be due to a type i error. if we are interested in defining the limited number of genes with a common response among all polluted populations, we are concerned with type ii error  rather than type i error. to better control for type ii error we use a less stringent significance level of p <  <dig>  and stipulate that direction of expression is consistent . at this significance level, cyp1b <dig> also is consistently differentially expressed in all four comparisons. thus, in the comparisons of each superfund site versus its two reference sites and among the three polluted versus six reference populations comparison, two of the  <dig> genes  appear to have shared derived changes in gene expression in response to anthropogenic pollution.

evolutionarily important adaptive genes
we suggest that these two genes are of critical importance in stress response and are involved in resistance to pollution stress. for instance, ndub <dig> is part of complex i in oxidative phosphorylation. defects in this complex have been linked to parkinson's disease and other genetic metabolic diseases, and modulation of complex  <dig> activity can generate oxidative stress  <cit> . although we analyzed 27/ <dig> subunits of nadh-ubiquinone oxidoreductase, only ndub <dig> was significantly more highly expressed in polluted populations, suggesting that its transcription may be limiting. this is surprising since transcriptional activators and coactivators such as nuclear respiratory factors nrf <dig> and  <dig> co-regulate many nuclear encoded, mitochondrial genes  <cit> , and expression of ndub <dig> was positively correlated with many, but not all, complex i subunits, suggesting a common transcriptional regulation. if there is a common transcriptional regulation for ndub <dig>  then one would expect many complex i genes to be significantly altered. although we used  <dig> individuals, a greater sample size might have identified significant differences in expression for more complex i genes.

cyp1b <dig> has a physiological induced responsiveness to exposure to dioxin-like compounds  <cit>  found in these superfund sites. while cyp1b <dig> is usually induced  <cit> , we found significantly lower expression levels. since cyp1b <dig> activates chemically diverse procarcinogens  <cit> , our analyses suggest that decreased expression may be a protective genetic response to chronic pollutant exposure. these two genes, ndub <dig> and cyp1b <dig>  are not significantly correlated  suggesting that the variation in their expression is not due to a single trans-acting factor. the observation that consistent differences in these two genes have evolved independently in these three populations suggests that the changes in gene expression are evolutionarily important and thus functionally important.

if these superfund populations were similar to breeding selection experiments, we would expect a decrease in variance compared to reference populations. among individuals in superfund populations, the average variation in gene expression is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and in the six reference populations it is  <dig>  ±  <dig> , and the correlation of variances among genes is 97%. statistically, there is a homogeneity of variance among these two groups. why would the variances be similar? pollution is a relatively recent event compared to the evolutionary history of this species. these polluted populations clearly have adaptive differences in survival and development that are maintained in the first and second generations  <cit> . yet, we find no reduction in the variation in gene expression in polluted populations. since most of the variation in gene expression is thought to be genetically based  <cit> , maintenance of variation in gene expression most likely represents steady influx of alternative alleles by migration. migration in this species, although empirically low, is enough to minimize genetic difference among populations in chesapeake bay  <cit> , and among populations greater than  <dig> km apart in georgia  <cit> . the maintenance of variation for gene expression in populations subjected to significant selection suggests that outbreeding and migration have mitigated the loss of genetic variation and allelic variation has been maintained. consequently, the shared selective differences in gene expression are both biologically important and represent an advantageous and superior response among the many options.

CONCLUSIONS
independent fundulus populations provide the opportunity to discover adaptive responses to pollution evolved in a complex natural environment. in each of the superfund populations  <dig> to 17% of genes are differentially expressed, yet only two genes  have a consistent difference in expression among all polluted sites. consistent significant differences in gene expression between polluted and reference populations, statistical analyses that indicate evolved adaptive changes, and lack of reduction in variation in gene expression suggest that multiple fundulus populations have independently evolved common mechanisms of adaptive resistance to complex suites of pollutants. integrating an evolutionary population genetics approach with an environmental toxicology study allowed us to differentiate genes that vary due to chronic pollutant exposure from those that vary due to random genetic drift. the shared response of two genes among these three independent populations supports the idea that high selective pressures may favor similar responses.

