BACKGROUND
due to their rapid ex utero development, optically clear embryos, ease of chemical administration, short generation time and many other advantages, zebrafish  have experienced a rapid growth in popularity as a research model  <cit> . a pubmed search of zebrafish articles between  <dig> and  <dig> revealed ~ <dig> publications, a more than 80% increase over the previous decade. the impetus for expansion of zebrafish research can be ascribed in part to sequencing of the genome and technical advances in manipulating gene functions, but continued development and validation of molecular tools in this model is needed. to measure gene expression changes associated with normal development and physiology, endocrine disruption, toxicology and drug discovery, zebrafish researchers increasingly apply real-time quantitative reverse transcription pcr . qpcr has many benefits including fast readout, high sensitivity, reproducibility, and the potential for high throughput as well as accurate quantification  <cit> ; however, there are problems associated with its use, including the intrinsic variability of rna, impurities during rna extraction, and differences in reverse transcription and pcr efficiencies  <cit> . it is important, therefore, to apply an accurate method of normalization to control for these errors.

a widely used method for normalization involves the measurement of an internal reference or "housekeeping" gene. housekeeping gene normalization has the advantage over some other methods in that it takes into account many variables such as enzyme efficiency and rna quality. the characteristics required of an ideal reference gene should include its stable expression in samples from different subjects, different tissues, across developmental and life stages, and after undergoing experimental treatments. if these requirements are not met, normalization to a varying reference gene could produce erroneous results  <cit> . recent findings in mammalian tissues and cell lines reveal that commonly used housekeeping genes such as bactin <dig> and gapdh may be inappropriate as internal references because of their variability  <cit> . additional studies have demonstrated the potential regulation of typically used housekeeping genes under experimental conditions  <cit> . a survey of  <dig> papers using qpcr in zebrafish shows bactin <dig> as the most popular housekeeping gene with  <dig> publications. the remaining articles employed gapdh , 18s , elfa , b2m , g6pd  and other/unlisted  as their housekeeping genes. a panel of eight housekeeping genes has been evaluated in fathead minnows  <cit> , but only one other study has compared different housekeeping genes in zebrafish  <cit>  and there remains a need for further validation and characterization under additional conditions.

as part of a program of research in which we are studying genes involved in estrogen biosynthesis, estrogen actions and endocrine disruption in zebrafish  <cit> , we observed discrepancies when using different housekeeping genes to normalize qpcr data. the present study was designed to systematically evaluate expressed levels of eight commonly used housekeeping genes as a function of developmental stage and chemical treatment in embryos/larvae, and by tissue type and sex in adult zebrafish. results reported here show that all genes tested display some degree of variability under the conditions tested, identify those most suitable for studying development, different tissue types and chemical treatments, and illustrate how normalizing with an unstable housekeeping gene can affect apparent experimental outcome.

RESULTS
pcr efficiency analysis
eight housekeeping genes were selected for analysis from commonly used reference genes. gene names, abbreviations, cellular functions, genbank accession numbers and primer sequences are listed in table  <dig>  all primers were optimized for efficiency as follows: a cdna dilution series  was developed from embryonic rna and qpcr was performed on each gene using the dilution series as template. ct values were exported to qgene and efficiency values for each primer pair were determined . the dilution series was duplicated using cdna prepared from adult tissue rna to verify that similar primer efficiencies were obtained. using optimized qpcr conditions, all targeted mrnas were detected during all developmental stages and in all tissue types of both sexes, but ct values varied, indicating that transcript abundance is gene-, stage-, tissue-, sex- and treatment-related .

the first  <dig> were candidate housekeeping genes. cyp19a1b and cyp1a, targets of er and ahr mediated signal transduction, respectively, were used to tests effects of normalization on apparent gene expression. asterisks  indicate primers designed in this study.

values represent ct values  of tissues of each type pooled by sex . for details, see methods and results. boldface indicates significant difference between male and female of the same tissue by t-test p < . <dig>  all genes showed significant differences across tissue types by one-way anova p < . <dig> 

values represent ct values  from  <dig> biological replicates . for details, see methods and results. asterisks  indicate significant difference between vehicle  and control . boldface indicates significant difference between treatment  and dmso .

expression levels of housekeeping genes by sex and tissue type in adult zebrafish
to assess housekeeping gene expression by sex and tissue type, brain, eye, heart, liver, muscle, testes and ovary were collected from adult, reproductively active male and female zebrafish. tissues were pooled by sex and tissue type . mean ct values for all housekeeping genes in the seven tissues are shown in table  <dig>  all eight genes showed significant differences in their expression across tissue types when analyzed separately in males and females. the most pronounced variation  for a given gene  was found when brain and muscle were compared in females. in addition, when expressed levels of a given gene and tissue type were compared in males and females, some significant differences were observed. for example, the expression of tbp and g6pd in skeletal muscle and heart was significantly higher in females than in males. significant differences were also observed in five of the eight genes  when ovaries and testes were compared. whether male-female differences in housekeeping gene expression can be translated to individual differences within each tissue pool is a question for future studies.

housekeeping gene expression during development
for each of the eight housekeeping genes, transcript abundance was measured in  <dig> independent embryo/larval pools  collected at timed intervals from  <dig> –  <dig> hours post fertilization . expression levels during development, represented as mean ct values, are shown in figure  <dig>  the genes segregated into three categories based on transcript abundance: elfa, bactin <dig>  and 18s were highly expressed , g6pd, tpb, and b2m were expressed at a moderate level , and tuba <dig> and gapdh showed highly variable expression levels . each of the eight genes showed significant differences in expression over the developmental time course as determined by anova. however the magnitude of change over the course of development ranged from less than  <dig>  ct  to more than  <dig> cts . generally, the variability in expression was greatest between  <dig> and  <dig> hpf and subsequently stabilized.

the effect of vehicle/hormone/toxicant treatment on housekeeping gene expression in embryos/larvae
to determine whether variation in housekeeping gene expression is affected by chemical treatment, pooled zebrafish embryos/larvae  were exposed between 24– <dig> hpf to commonly used vehicles for administration and agents that represent known environmental endocrine disruptors  <cit> . shown in table  <dig> are the mean expression levels  of each gene in embryos treated with vehicle , an estrogen receptor  agonist , an er antagonist , an aromatizable androgen/androgen receptor agonist  and aryl hydrocarbon receptor  agonists . in our laboratory, exposure to these chemicals at the doses used affects er- or ahr-mediated target gene effects  without a general toxic response  <cit> . all eight genes tested revealed significant differences in expression levels across treatment groups. of particular interest are the changes seen with the two vehicles. both dmso and etoh significantly altered expression of three of eight measured genes. of these, gapdh and elfa expression increased with dmso and etoh when compared to untreated controls, but g6pd and 18s were differentially affected by vehicle treatment. also, tcdd, a potent toxicant, strongly suppressed expression of one gene , whereas hormonal estrogen  had modest effects on two genes . interestingly, the pattern of effects with t, an aromatizable androgen, that markedly upregulates estrogen responsive genes at the doses used  <cit> , differed from that of e <dig>  this suggests that t effects are er independent. the overall variability in expression levels of the eight genes following treatment of embryos/larvae was less than that seen when the same mrnas were measured in different tissue types of adult fish or during the course of development . it is noteworthy here that all ct values had low sems, signifying low sample-to-sample biological and technical variation within a given experimental condition.

expression stability of housekeeping genes
the relative expression levels of the eight housekeeping genes were calculated for the developmental series, treatment series, and tissue panel . genorm software was then used to compute the expression stability values  for each gene where a lower m value corresponds to more stable gene expression. 18s, elfa, and b2m were found to have the most stable gene expression during development . following hormone/toxicant treatment elfa, bactin <dig>  and tuba <dig> were the most stably expressed genes . as with development, 18s, b2m, and elfa also showed the most stable expression across tissue types . despite significant sex differences in expressed levels of certain genes and tissue types, the order of gene stability by genorm analysis varied little when males and females were plotted separately .

effect of using different housekeeping genes to normalize genes of interest
to test the accuracy of qpcr results after normalization with different housekeeping genes, cytochrome p <dig> 19a1b  was selected because it is an estrogen responsive gene that displays a modest downregulation of constitutive expression when embryos are treated with the er antagonist ici, as measured by standard rt-pcr/southern transfer hybridization  <cit> . as shown in figure  <dig>  when the expression levels were normalized to housekeeping genes unaffected by ici treatment , cyp19a1b expression was down-regulated approximately 2-fold as expected. the modest effect of ici treatment on 18s expression however, resulted in an exaggerated down-regulation of cyp19a1b  when 18s was used for normalization. in contrast, ici had no apparent effect on cyp19a1b expression when the data were normalized to those housekeeping genes down-regulated by ici . the variation in expression levels due to normalization could not be accounted for by variations in the ct values of the target gene . to further test effects of different housekeeping genes, a second target gene, cytochrome p <dig> 1a , was chosen. cyp1a is robustly upregulated by tcdd acting through the ahr, as measured by rt-pcr/southern transfer  <cit> . when the expression levels were normalized to housekeeping genes unaffected by tcdd treatment  cyp1a expression was up-regulated  <dig> to 1000-fold as expected. in contrast, when cyp1a mrna levels were normalized to housekeeping genes down-regulated by tcdd  the up-regulation was greatly overstated .

discussion
there are now numerous reports describing the unreliability of commonly used housekeeping genes for the normalization of qpcr data . the expectation of identifying an "ideal" housekeeping gene that is stably expressed under all conditions was not met in this study. rather, all eight housekeeping genes evaluated here show unstable expression under more than one experimental condition. nonetheless, the degree of instability is important to note. we find that gapdh is one of the most unstable and elfa and 18s among the most stable genes during development  and across tissue types. our results are consistent with the earlier zebrafish study in which five of our eight housekeeping genes were measured between  <dig> and  <dig> hpf and in pooled male-female tissues  <cit> . based on the agents tested in our treatment series, however, we would eliminate 18s as a suitable housekeeping gene. instead, our choices for studies using zebrafish embryos to test hormones and endocrine disrupting chemicals that interact with er and ahr l would be elfa and bactin <dig> 

it is important to note that the rank order of gene stability reported in the present study cannot be generalized, without further testing, to other fish species, tissue types, life stages, or treatment paradigms. an examination of the fish literature reveals many contradictory findings . to illustrate, a qpcr study of eight housekeeping genes in adult fathead minnows reported that  <dig> d exposure to ethinyl e <dig>  markedly suppresses hepatic expression of four genes, including elfa, bactin <dig>  gapdh and g6pd   <cit> . a similar study in adult medaka also found a suppression of bactin <dig> expression in the liver with a  <dig> d exposure to ee <dig> but in contrast found the ee <dig> exposure increased hepatic expression of gapdh  <cit> . in zebrafish embryos, on the other hand, we find that a  <dig> d exposure to e <dig> suppresses g6pd, upregulates 18s but has no effect on elfa or bactin <dig>  similarly, results showing e <dig> and ee <dig> effects on gadph and bactin <dig> expression in zebrafish by microarray analysis are inconsistent with our qpcr results, indicating that it may be incautious to compare findings using different methods of mrna analysis  <cit> .

although changes in housekeeping gene expression in response to etoh, dmso or low doses of chemicals appear small, even small differences can add significant error to target gene expression during normalization. the example of cyp19a1b expression following ici treatment demonstrates the impact on a modest gene response. when housekeeping genes affected by ici are used for normalization the expected down-regulation is negated. if this situation were to occur when testing a novel chemical, or when using qpcr to verify results of microarray analysis, a real effect could be overlooked. in the case of cyp1a, a gene that is robustly induced by ahr ligands, a difference in housekeeping gene expression results in a more than 3-fold exaggeration in upregulation. this kind of overstatement could have real implications for data interpretation, for example, when comparing dose-response characteristics of different chemical agents, or when screening environmental samples for bioactivity. to avoid unforeseen errors in normalization, for example, by the presence of unknown agents in complex mixtures that affect reference gene expression, the stability of the chosen housekeeping gene can be routinely monitored by recording changes in ct values.

given that many of the classical reference genes have proven unreliable  <cit> , alternative normalization strategies have been proposed. one typical approach is to normalize to total rna levels. while this avoids the difficulties of selecting and validating a housekeeping gene, the shortcoming of this method is that it does not control for errors introduced at the reverse transcription step of pcr reactions. in addition, it primarily measures ribosomal rna  whereas qpcr aims to determine mrna expression. furthermore, normalization for total rna assumes that the rrna: mrna ratio is the same in all groups, which might not always be the case  <cit> . finally, the high abundance of rrna compared to mrna makes it difficult to subtract the baseline value in qpcr analysis  <cit> . for the same reasons, markers of rrna such as 18s or 28s rrna might be suboptimal as normalization factors in many settings  <cit> . also, as our data shows, it cannot be assumed that rrnas are stably expressed under all conditions.

another promising method for normalization is the use of statistical software to determine the most stably expressed gene  <cit> . by using the geometric average of multiple control genes, genorm software provides accurate normalization of qpcr data  <cit> . when genorm was applied in this study, the recommended housekeeping genes were indeed those with minimal ct changes and overall stable expression. other statistical programs  have been developed to determine the most appropriate reference gene for a given experimental condition  <cit> . they use different algorithms to analyze the variation in the expression of reference genes, which could result in different recommendations for the most suitable reference gene. the disadvantage of using statistical programs is that considerable effort and cost is expended to generate data for analysis, but similar constraints apply to any strategy that requires the validation of multiple housekeeping genes.

the intent of this study was to provide a database that helps zebrafish researchers to identify a shortlist of candidate housekeeping genes for specific experiments. for example, although it has been a relatively popular housekeeping gene for zebrafish research, gapdh clearly has large variability in its expression under all experimental conditions tested in our study and so would not be recommended for normalization. studies by tang et al in zebrafish  <cit>  and filby and tyler in fathead minnows  <cit>  also found gapdh to be unsuitable for data normalization. the gene with the least variability across all the conditions assessed in this study was elfa and so may be an appropriate initial selection for normalization.

CONCLUSIONS
all eight housekeeping genes tested were found to have some degree of variability under the conditions tested here, but genes most suitable as normalizers during development, across tissue types, and in chemical treatment experiments were identified. the gene with a low degree of variability across all conditions was elfa, whereas gapdh was unstable under all conditions. results of this study are intended to guide zebrafish researchers with initial selection of a reference gene, but underline the importance of accurate housekeeping gene validation for each new experimental paradigm.

