BACKGROUND
previous studies have found that gene expression diverges as the distance between species increases, and that this divergence is linearly related to the time since divergence . this expression evolution has been reported to be slow enough that orthologous genes still have highly correlated expression, even in species that diverged up to  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . several studies have reported that genes with specific attributes change expression more quickly  <cit> , though it is not known whether the expression of such subsets of genes also diverges linearly with time.

rna-seq offers a methodological improvement over microarrays for measuring expression divergence because it does not suffer from the probe-based biases that confound cross-species microarray measurements  <cit> . technical replication studies, in which expression values are assayed more than once from the same sample, have shown that rna-seq quantifies relative gene expression accurately  <cit> .

however, measuring gene expression by rna-seq is complicated by alternate sources of variance  <cit> . the gross inter-species measurement of gene expression by rna-seq contains four components:  true inter-species gene expression difference;  expression differences caused by environmental variance;  variance from technical measurement imprecision; and  poisson sampling noise. because of these alternate sources of variance, it is possible for a gene without true inter-species gene expression changes to be measured with different values in different species.

therefore, we first developed methods to quantify biologically relevant expression differences between species that are greater than the variance within each species by collecting expression data from biological replicates of the well-characterized model organism s. cerevisiae and the three related yeasts: s. paradoxus, s. mikatae, and s. bayanus  <cit> . in all cases we used diploid, prototrophic strains of the yeast. this approach ensures that we are measuring the expression change that can be attributed to evolution rather than artificial expression changes that occur due to the disruption of the auxotrophic pathways.

we applied our methods to identify differentially expressed  genes and examine the rate and properties of expression evolution in yeast.

RESULTS
we grew two independent cultures of each the following prototophic, diploid strains: s. cerevisiae  and fy <dig>   <cit>  which we mated to get a diploid, s. paradoxus , s. mikatae , and s. bayanus  according to the protocols described in methods. rna was isolated and sequenced using a strand-specific protocol. a total of over  <dig> million  <dig> base pair reads were generated between two runs of an ab solid sequencer  <cit> . a third sample of s. cerevisiae was also grown and sequenced as a pair of technical replicates.

over  <dig> million single end ab solid reads aligned to their respective genomes  using the mosaik alignment program  as described in methods and additional file  <dig>  supplemental methods  <dig>  the reference genome and annotations for s. cerevisiae were downloaded from the saccharomyces genome database . genome, annotations, and orthology mappings for the other species were from kellis et al.  <cit>  .

of these aligned reads, ~ <dig> million  aligned uniquely. the dominant source of unaligned reads was sequencing errors . we examined the effect of reference quality and found that alignment rates increased as reference genomes were sequenced to higher depths .

not all genes can be measured accurately using rna-seq, particularly in cross-species comparisons where the length of genes and the percentage of genes that can be uniquely aligned can vary between species. when comparing the expression in 1: <dig> orthologs across species, we selected genes where we were confident that accurate measurements could be found . genes that were annotated with measureable orthologs in all four species were designated as "core" genes.

environmental variance accounts for up to 60% of the expression variance observed in inter-species comparisons
we compared the differences in expression observed in different species to the differences in expression observed in biological replicates of the same species to determine what portion of the variance is due to genomic variation, versus environmental and measurement variance. expression is highly correlated between orthologous genes in s. cerevisiae vs. s. paradoxus . correlation between biological replicates of s. cerevisiae  and s. paradoxus  suggest that up to 60% of the observed variance between samples of two separate species can be attributed to environmental response and measurement imprecision .

the distribution of the log <dig> fold changes observed between species also shows a high level of overlap with the distribution of fold changes between biological replicates, with the distribution widening as the comparison species become more diverged . for example, in the biological replicates of s. cerevisiae, 95% of the genes show a log <dig> fold-change in the range of . even in the most distant interspecies comparison , 84% of the fold changes were still within this range.

source of variance in expression measurements
we then examined the sources of variation in expression measurements by comparing technical and biological replicates. technical replicates were prepared from rna isolated from a single culture of s. cerevisiae that was divided into two samples that were separately processed through the entire library preparation and sequencing protocol. biological replicates were prepared from two separate cultures of s. cerevisiae. technical replicates contain variance from measurement imprecision and poisson counting noise but no environmental variance. biological replicates contain counting noise, measurement imprecision, and environmental variance but not true inter-species gene expression differences.

we compared the reproducibility of measurements of the same gene in technical versus biological replicates of s. cerevisiae using fold change as our metric . within the technical replicates, we found that coding genes showed better reproducibility than non-coding genes, which were comprised mainly of snrnas, snornas, and trnas . non-coding genes were therefore excluded from further analyses. to isolate and quantify the effects of technical and biological variance, we excluded genes which were measured with fewer than ten reads. at low counts, poisson variance is high relative to the total read count, and poisson fluctuations can cause large fold changes . poisson error is lower in genes measured with at least ten reads, which is true for > 95% of our core genes, in all samples used for de calls. when we considered genes with at least ten reads in each condition, ninety-five percent of gene expression measurements reproduced within a  <dig> x fold-change between the two technical replicates. in biological replicates, 95% of genes reproduced within  <dig> x fold change, but a small number of genes showed large expression differences with fold changes as high as 25x. while technical variance is low, it acts subsequent to biological variance, and can therefore amplify or dampen the fold changes that occur to due to environmental variance. we note that fold changes measured with rna-seq are expected be higher than comparable measurements taken with microarrays due to the limited dynamic range inherent in microarrays  <cit> . we show estimated conversion factors in additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig> 

to demonstrate that the variance that we observed in our biological replicates occurred due to responses to normal laboratory conditions, rather than a poorly controlled environment or unusually imprecise rna-seq measurements, we compared our results to the correlation of s. cerevisiae replicates measured by rna-seq using illumina technology in nagalakshmi et al.  <cit> . the r <dig> value of log <dig> expression values of our biological replicates ranged from  <dig>  for the replicates of s. cerevisiae to  <dig>  for s. paradoxus. the corresponding values reported in nagalakshmi et al. are nearly identical . we then compared the fold changes that occurred between repeated measurements of the same gene in biological replicates and found that, while differences exist between replicate runs, our results were comparable to the results from nagalakshmi .

because samples were grown on different days, we examined whether batch effects could introduce an additional source of variability in gene expression measurements. we identified a set of  <dig> genes that appeared to have higher expression in the second replicate of s. paradoxus versus the first. we found that the orthologs of these genes were also disproportionately up-regulated in the second replicate of s. cerevisiae , s. mikatae , and s. bayanus  . these genes showed enrichment for involvement in rna metabolic processes . therefore, in subsequent analyses comparisons were only made between samples which were grown within the same batch.

this reveals the difficulty of calling de genes in comparisons of samples separated by evolutionary distances: the signal  to noise  ratio is very low.

fold change measurements obtained from rna-seq are confirmed with qpcr
to demonstrate the accuracy of our gene expression measurements, we compared fc measurements obtained with rna-seq to those obtained using qpcr . in order to adequately quantify the effects of environmental variance, the qpcr was run on three additional biological replicates that were not those used for rna-seq . additional file  <dig>  figure s6a shows the results obtained in the comparison between s. cerevisiae and s. mikatae, which is representative of the results found in all six of the cross-species comparisons. due to the response of genes to subtle environmental differences and measurement imprecision in both technologies, the 2σ  confidence intervals around the fc measurements in each test span multiple log <dig> fold-changes for both rna-seq and qpcr. in this validation,  <dig> out of the  <dig> measurements  of the qpcr measurements are within the boundaries of the fold change intervals for both rna-seq fold change measurements. while this result is somewhat below expectations, we note that measurements are not independent and single outlier measurements can cause validation failure for multiple tests.

identifying differentially expressed genes using a Χ <dig> test
to identify genes that are differentially expressed to a statistically significant degree, we developed a Χ <dig> test that models the combination of environmental, technical, and poisson variance as poisson fluctuation with over-dispersion .

to test the sensitivity of our method, we used simulations of rna-seq data based on distributions measured in the actual data . we tested our method against a paired t-test and deseq  <cit>  run with the default settings. while there are many differences between the methods, all test whether the difference in the measured expression between the two species is greater than the variance. the methods have fundamental differences in the value that they use as the variance. a paired t-test uses the measured variance, and thus provides an unbiased result and p-values that closely match the false positive rate of the dataset. however, because variance is poorly measured with only two replicates, the power of the t-test is relatively low . the other methods integrate additional information into the estimate of variance, which improve their power but can bias the results. in our method, we assumed that the variance for a given gene will be conserved across all four species. our main variance measurement is therefore the mean measured variance of the gene across the four species, which is calculated as described in methods. additionally, we used the knowledge that the variance of some genes will be measured at values lower than the true variance due to random fluctuations. we corrected these measurements by replacing ones where the measured variance is below the value of the variance observed in technical replicates with that value. we did this under the assumption that the true variance cannot be lower than the resolution of the technology . deseq estimates variance by sharing information between different genes that are expressed at a similar expression level. in simulations, we found that when differences in expression were modeled as random changes of a consistent effect size, as defined by cohen's d, the power of our method was comparable power to deseq . we found that the false positives called by deseq were more enriched for high variance genes than those called by our method . both deseq and our method showed small deviations between the p-value calculated and the actual false positive rate . in the actual data, we found that deseq identified a greater number of genes as differentially expressed than our method . in particular, our method was less likely to identify genes with high measured variance as differentially expressed . we believe that our conservative approach is justified by the fact that genes with high variance tended to also show deviations from qpcr measurements in validation experiments . additionally, we used the mean expression and variance of biological replicates that was reported by deseq to test whether the variances used in the differential expression calls would produce confidence interval boundaries consistent with the qpcr measurements. we found that qpcr measurements fell within the boundaries of the 95% deseq confidence intervals in 83% of the  <dig> tests. the comparable metric for our variance measurement was 91% . we also tested our metric against a poisson exact test  <cit>  and a fisher exact test, but were not able to obtain a false positive rate lower than 10% with either test, even with a p-value cutoff of 10- <dig> 

a Χ <dig> test that uses the expected value as the denominator  would call 4% of the measured genes de at p <  <dig>  in the technical replicates of s. cerevisiae, 58% in the biological replicates of s. cerevisiae, and 81% in the comparison between s. cerevisiae and s. bayanus. these results indicate that even in technical replicates the variance between samples is substantially over-dispersed relative to poisson.

using our Χ <dig> metric, we found that the percentage of measured genes that are called de in cross-species comparisons ranged from 19-25%, at a p-value <  <dig>  . at this p-value cutoff, the false discovery rate is low for all comparisons . figure 1c and additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig> show that differentially expressed genes are far from the null model, even at the highest level of expression.

the intergenic substitution rate was reported in kellis et al. . differential expression is measured at p <  <dig> .

identifying the lineage of changes in expression
under a simple model where changes in expression offer selective advantage to a given organism, one would expect the changes in the genome that underlie these adaptations to become fixed in a given lineage. for example, the gene rme <dig>  is expected to have higher expression in this strain of s. cerevisiae relative to the other three species because there is a known variation in rme1's transcription factor binding site that leads to an increase in the gene's expression  <cit> . this mutation occurs only in the s. cerevisiae genome and is known in one strain to cause an increase in s. cerevisiae's sporulation efficiency. in our data, this gene had significantly higher expression in s. cerevisiae versus each of the three other species, with fold changes greater than 15x . by contrast, the gene tsc3/ybr058c-a had higher expression in s. cerevisiae than in s. bayanus  or s. paradoxus , but was not significantly de against s. mikatae  . differences such as this cannot be ascribed to an individual lineage. while these changes could result from multiple selective events, they are more consistent with a model of drift where changes in expression occur randomly, and do not become fixed in any lineage because they have neutral or nearly neutral phenotypic effects.

where possible, we identified the lineage where a change in expression took place . we did this using a conservative approach that identified core genes where there was a change in expression that showed a consistent, statistically significant relationship against all of the other species in the lineage.

while a large number of genes were de in individual cross-species comparisons, only a small number of these differences could be attributed to changes in an individual lineage. for example,  <dig> of the core genes  are de at p <  <dig>  in at least one cross species comparison with s. cerevisiae, but only 13% of those  maintained the de relationship versus each of the three other branches of the phylogeny. across the entire phylogeny of these four species,  <dig> genes showed consistent phylogenetic relationships at p <  <dig>  , and the number of genes diverged at each branch is shown in figure  <dig>  overall, lineage-specific changes were equally likely to increase or decrease a gene's expression. within the individual branches, genes that were differentially expressed in the s. bayanus branch were more likely to have decreased expression . ninety-five of the total  <dig> genes  showed statistically significant changes in more than one lineage. for example, the gene ydl124w showed significantly increased expression in s. cerevisiae versus the  <dig> other species, and significantly decreased expression in s. bayanus. gene ontology analysis revealed no common themes uniting these  <dig> genes.

while this set of  <dig> genes showed statistically significant changes, there were few changes of as large a magnitude as the change observed in rme <dig>  only  <dig> genes showed changes that were at least 10x versus each of the other species .

we performed a gene ontology enrichment analysis on genes that showed evidence of lineage-specific differential expression to search for evidence of directional selection using amigo through the saccharomyces genome database  <cit> . we used the entire set of core genes as our background set. we found that genes that had decreased expression in the branch separating s. cerevisiae and s. paradoxus from s. mikatae and s. bayanus were enriched for genes producing products that localize to the mitochondria . the genes that had decreased expression in s. mikatae also showed enrichment in the form of three genes that participate in nucleobase-containing compound transmembrane transporter activity in . overall, however, only  <dig>  of the total  <dig> genes that had lineage-specific differential expression were members of these enriched go categories . no categories were enriched in the other branches.

overall, these results are consistent with a model where the primary driver of evolutionary changes in expression is random drift, rather than functional selection.

expression levels recapitulate phylogeny
gene expression evolves through changes in the recruitment of the polymerase by transcription factors, from which it is reasonable to expect that expression evolves multiplicatively. if this expression evolution were to follow clock-like behavior, then we would expect the σ <dig> of the log <dig> fold changes to scale linearly with divergence time between species. to determine whether clock-like divergence is a good model for our expression data, we compared the σ <dig> of the log <dig> fold changes to the inter-genic substitution rate between species as measured in  <cit> . we plotted the σ <dig> of the log <dig> fcs for each biological replicate and each same-day species-to-species comparison versus the evolutionary distance between samples. the results showed a close fit to a linear relationship with an r <dig> of  <dig>  . we found similar results using hierarchical clustering on the expression data from each species using the core genes .

classes of genes evolve at different speeds
we examined the rate of evolution between specific classes of genes, based on the variance of the log <dig> fc distributions for the genes and found significant differences in the rate of evolution between groups of genes.

genes with a tata box in the promoter   <cit>  and genes with a coding sequence shorter than  <dig> bases  have diverged more quickly than tata-less genes and genes with a longer coding sequence. by controlling for each of these factors we observed the increased expression divergence observed in genes with tata boxes and genes with short coding sequences appear to be independent effects . the finding that genes with a tata box diverge faster was previously reported in tirosh et al.  <cit>  using a dataset of microarray-based expression measurements in four yeast species. we used this dataset to confirm the finding that genes with shorter coding sequences diverge faster , though the correlation between length and expression divergence is weak .

genes with more than  <dig> transcription factor binding sites  <cit>  and genes whose mrna decays more slowly than the median  <cit>  also had significantly higher rates of expression divergence . however, both of these properties are more common in genes with tata boxes, and we could not demonstrate that this effect is independent of tata status. when we controlled for the number of transcription factor binding sites and mrna decay rates, genes with a tata box still had an increased rate of expression divergence, indicating that neither of these factors is responsible for the behavior of genes that contain a tata box.

potential confounding factors such as the expression level of the gene , the variance of the gene in biological replicates , and mean coding sequence divergence  were not significant components of expression evolution in these species .

while genes with tata boxes and shorter coding sequences diverged faster than non-tata genes and genes with longer coding sequences, the σ <dig> of these classes still maintained a linear relationship with regards to divergence time .

gene duplication events often give rise to an heir and a spare
we examined whether having duplicated copies of a gene increased the total expression of the gene following a gene duplication event. to do this, we tested whether we could detect differential expression between the copies of duplicated genes following what appeared to be lineage-specific duplication in s. bayanus, the species most diverged from s. cerevisiae. while there are many s. cerevisiae genes annotated with non-unique s. bayanus orthologs  <cit> , we used additional filtering to ensure that the gene was a duplication that could be accurately assessed with rna-seq. these criteria included ensuring that each copy of the gene in s. bayanus covered more than 60% of the original the s. cerevisiae genes, which excluded most potential duplication events . filtering left us with a set of  <dig> stringent gene duplications.

for each pair of paralogs, we determined which gene sequence was more diverged from the common ancestor by creating a phylogenetic tree of the orthologous sequences from all species. in  <dig> out of the  <dig> cases, the less divergent copy maintained an expression level consistent with s. cerevisiae while the divergent copy dropped in expression level . in  <dig> of these cases, the diverged paralog had an expression significantly below the level of expression observed in s. cerevisiae. there were no examples where the less divergent copy dropped expression to this degree. additionally, there were no examples where expression dropped substantially for both duplicated genes. overall, this suggests a predominant model where one of the duplicates inherits the function of the original gene while the other becomes obsolete.

discussion
rna-seq offers a significant improvement in measuring cross-species gene expression over microarrays because it allows for orthologous genes from multiple species to be measured and compared to one another without the significant complications of species or strain-specific probe biases. for this reason, it is likely that rna-seq will replace microarrays in cross-species experiments. however, many of the challenges that were present in measuring gene expression using microarrays will continue to be present in rna-seq experiments because they originate from biological rather than technical sources. overcoming these challenges in cross-species experiments will be particularly difficult because measurement artifacts can both mimic and obscure the effects of evolution. for example, we found that shorter genes tended to have higher expression divergence between species and are more likely to be differentially expressed. this finding unlikely to be an artifact of rna-seq measurements as it is consistent with a finding in a microarray-based study of drosophila  <cit> , and was observed in the microarray measurements of yeast  <cit> . however, shorter genes that are truly de are less likely to be detected as such than longer genes with expression changes of the same fold change because their transcripts produce fewer nucleotide fragments, and thus are measured relatively higher poisson noise.

normalizing read counts between samples can also be problematic. under a neutral model of gene expression evolution, the number of genes with increased expression in one species versus another should equal the number with decreased expression. deviations from symmetry can be viewed as evidence of selection  <cit> . most methods for normalizing rna-seq data assume that the overall expression of the two species will be the same, forcing some degree of symmetry. because reference assemblies will usually differ in quality in cross-species experiments, it is important to use normalization strategies that are robust to the effects of missing regions and errors in genomes. missing regions will have a limited effect on our normalization method because only genes that are present in both species are included in the normalization equations. the effect of errors can be better ameliorated by using an alignment strategy such as ours that allows for some mismatches between the reads and the reference genome. in our qpcr validation, our results did not show any systematic, directional differences compared to our rna-seq results. despite this strategy, we did see a tendency for genes with consistent expression changes in s. bayanus to have decreased expression. there was, however, no evidence that these genes represented a functional class of genes, and across the entire phylogeny genes with changes in expression were equally likely to have increased and decreased expression.

to confirm that our statistical approach adequately accounted for both technical and environmental variance in our experiment, we validated our de calls using qpcr with rna isolated from biological replicates grown separately from the samples used for rna-seq. by contrast, running qpcr on the same rna used for rna-seq would have only assessed whether the technical variance was correctly assessed. rna-seq measurements are already known to have a high level of technical reproducibility, in our study and others  <cit> , and therefore validations of technical reproducibility add little value. because our qpcr was run on independent samples, and our results generally reproduced within our calculated confidence, we are confident that significant p-values correspond to the probability of consistent results if the experiment were repeated.

the sensitivity of experiments to detect differentially expressed genes is determined by the ability to distinguish true changes in gene expression from alternate sources of variance. sensitivity in rna-seq experiments will be limited for genes that are measured with low read counts and high poisson counting noise. in this experiment, our samples were sequenced deeply enough that we could measure the expression of greater than 95% of genes with greater than  <dig> reads. this sequencing depth is much more difficult to achieve in mammals and other species with large transcriptomes. we found that for genes measured with fewer than  <dig> reads, the signals from biological and technical variance were largely obscured by poisson sampling noise, and only large fold changes could be detected as significant. while deeper sequencing will reduce this poisson noise, using the same number of reads to sequence an additional replicate will reduce both poisson and non-poisson variance, and should theoretically provide a greater increase in sensitivity than deeper sequencing.

in a review of studies of gene expression evolution, clarke et al.  <cit>  noted that the reported de rates between evolutionarily diverged organisms shows a high degree of variation between studies, and suggested that this variation was caused by differences in the sensitivity of the experiments. additionally, the way in which biological variance is measured and accounted for in the experimental design is a crucial factor in determining not just how many genes will be detected as de, but also the reproducibility of findings. for example, cassone et al.  <cit>  reported that the calculated rate of de genes between two insipient species of mosquitoes was 1-2% of genes when they applied a model that correctly controlled for the biological variance observed between colonies of mosquitoes, but would be measured at ~54% if less stringent controls were applied. their finding of little differential gene expression in these closely related strains is consistent with our results.

large deviations from our linear model of expression divergence would be possible if a single mutation altered a gene's expression dramatically, and this event had a cascading effect on the expression of other genes. however, we believe that in wild populations such changes are likely to be selected against. for example, the change in expression of rme <dig> demonstrates that a single base mutation can dramatically alter the expression of a gene. however, despite the high divergence within the intergenic regions of these species, there were only ten examples of changes in expression that were of the same magnitude as the change observed in rme <dig>  a role for purifying selection is further supported by our finding that the more diverged copy of duplicated genes also dropped in expression 35% of the time while there were no such cases for the less diverged copy. this finding is consistent with, and further clarifies, microarray-based findings of expression divergence following gene duplication events  <cit> .

while there are clear signs of purifying selection in our study, several lines of evidence support the premise that the primary driver of changes in expression is neutral drift. only a small fraction of the genes differentially expressed between individual species showed evidence of being fixed in any lineage. while two gene ontology categories were over-represented in genes exhibiting lineage-specific de, the majority of such genes were not members of these categories. furthermore, the linear correlation between the expression divergence and the intergenic substitution rate suggests a clock-like divergence. while properties such as tata boxes and gene length were associated with increased gene expression divergence, divergence rates within these categories still maintained a linear relationship with intergenic substitution rate, consistent with a drift model with a faster diffusion coefficient.

a recent study of a s. cerevisiae - s. bayanus hybrid identified several categories of genes as being directionally differentially regulated between s. cerevisiae and s. bayanus, and suggested that these categories were under evolutionary selection  <cit> . we did not replicate differential expression in any of their gene ontology categories in our study. there were, however, large differences between our study designs and the statistical analyses used. a hybrid construct is used to identify genes that are expressed at different levels due to differences in transcriptional efficiency caused by cis regulatory differences. in tirosh et al.  <cit>  it was shown that genes observed as de between species are not necessarily observed as de within the hybrid, and vice versa. additionally, our strains were prototrophic, whereas the hybrid strain had several auxotrophies and therefore required amino acid supplements in the media, making the growth conditions in the two experiments different. the auxotrophies may be particularly important differences in light of the fact that two of the five networks that bullard et al. identified as directionally regulated in the hybrid  contained pathways that were not functioning normally because the strain was auxotrophic for his <dig> and lys <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
overall, we found that the changes in expression that occurred in response to even the subtle environmental variation of a well-controlled laboratory were similar in magnitude to the changes in expression that accumulate over millions of years of evolution. this finding emphasizes the need to design experiments that measure the evolution of gene expression to avoid introducing any alternate sources of expression variation into the experiments. the statistical significance of gene expression changes measured in rna-seq experiments must account for the effects of these different types of variance in each measurement.

