BACKGROUND
collagens are the fundamental structural proteins in vertebrates, where they fulfill a variety of critical roles in connective tissue structure and mechanics. as such, alterations in collagens’ composition, resulting from genetic modifications, aging, and diabetes, have been identified with an extensive list of diseases  <cit> . additionally, due to their natural role as the structural component in the extracellular matrix, collagens have found widespread use in biomaterials, used for cellular and tissue engineering, drug delivery, and a wide range of other applications .

most studies on collagens use protein extracted from animal tissues. while this provides a large-scale supply of the protein, the lack of control over protein composition has its drawbacks. for example, there is minimal ability to select protein sequence, since generally type i collagen is most easy to extract and its sequence varies little among different animal species. furthermore, because posttranslational modifications play a role in collagen’s mechanics, and can influence cellular phenotype, batch-to-batch variability in collagen composition can arise due to animal age or diet . to surmount issues arising from variability of tissue-derived collagen, an alternative strategy employs harvesting collagen directly from cultured cells. a benefit of this approach is the ability to gain insight into the etiology of disease by using patient-derived cells. however, because most collagenopathies are heterozygous, harvesting collagen from these cell lines results in a mixture of both wild-type and mutant proteins.

to overcome these challenges and exert control over collagen’s sequence, recombinant expression systems have been developed. these utilize a host cell line to express the desired collagen gene of interest, permitting expression of mutated genes and also of completely novel protein sequences. benefits of a recombinant expression system include control over the expressed protein sequence, control over extent of posttranslational modifications, and reproducibility of culturing conditions and hence protein composition . because collagen is harvested shortly after expression, it is also devoid of age-related crosslinks inherent to tissue-derived samples, thus having the potential to serve as an ideal source of “young” collagen for studies on aging. the ability to alter protein composition in a controlled manner suggests the opportunity to engage in rational design of materials, by correlating composition of the collagen building blocks with desired mechanical properties of self-assembled structures, offering the potential of tuning parameters such as fibril diameter and pore size within a matrix via protein composition.

to date, collagen has been expressed in a variety of host cell lines . because fibrillar collagens require posttranslational modifications such as proline hydroxylation for stable folding of the triple helix, this constraint must be accommodated in any recombinant expression system. thus, while bacteria generally offer easy access to protein expression, their lack of endogenous posttranslational machinery makes the expression of stable triple helical collagen challenging, requiring co-expression of enzymes such as prolyl hydroxylase  <cit> . more success has been obtained in yeast lines, again by co-expressing prolyl hydroxylase, which have produced full-length protein with a thermal stability similar to that of wild-type and have been used as a viable source of collagen at industrial levels  <cit> . the successful use of this collagen in tissue implants demonstrates the feasibility of using recombinant human collagen for in vivo biomaterials applications . however, this expression system does not encode for the numerous other posttranslational modifications, such as hydroxylation of lysines and glycosylation of the hydroxylysines, that are part of collagen’s higher-order assembly pathway and affect its stability and physiological function  <cit> . to encode each of these additional enzymatic modifications would add yet more complexity to the expression system, requiring additional genetic manipulation for each added post-translational modification. a more direct route to fully modified collagen is preferred.

for applications seeking a more realistic model of disease, cells possessing and expressing the full suite of posttranslational modification machinery are required. mammalian cells possess all of the genetic instructions to do so. earlier work demonstrated that the ht <dig> fibrosarcoma cell line endogenously expresses this suite of enzymes, producing correctly modified collagen from a recombinant expression system  <cit> . this system has enabled studies of sequence-dependent structural changes of triple helical type ii collagen monomers and of morphological changes of self-assembled fibrils . we wished to exploit the success of this work, and to develop a similar system for collagen expression that would enable more facile screening for stable protein expression. to that end, we have developed a recombinant expression system for type ii procollagen in this previously validated ht <dig> cell line.

type ii collagen is the second-most abundant fibrillar collagen and is found in cartilage, the vitreous humour of the eye, the inner ear, and in intervertebral disks. it is the predominant protein component of articular cartilage, whose enhanced digestion is associated with aging and is particularly severe in osteo- and rheumatoid arthritis  <cit> . mutations in the col2a <dig> gene encoding type ii procollagen can lead to diseases including achondrogenesis, hypochondrogenesis and various skeletal dysplasias  <cit> . type ii collagen matrices have been used to support cell growth and have proven particularly useful for promoting proliferation of chondrocytes, which are important for repair of damaged cartilage .

here, we describe a human type ii procollagen recombinant expression system that utilizes a fluorescent marker to screen for selection of stably transfected human fibrosarcoma cells that produce endogenously post-translationally modified protein  <cit> . though inspired by a closely related system  <cit> , ours differs in that it expresses the complete sequence of wild-type procollagen and utilizes a fluorescence-based reporter system for monitoring expression, thereby facilitating confirmation of stable expression. notably, the fluorescence reporter is co-expressed with the procollagen but is not fused to it, differing from other expression systems  <cit> . this approach avoids possible disruption of folding, assembly or secretion of the native form of the protein and to our knowledge has not been applied previously to collagen production. in our system, the procollagen is produced as an isolated full-length protein in its native form, permitting facile comparison with procollagen purified from patient-derived cell lines. thorough biochemical and biophysical characterization of the purified protein demonstrates that this easy-to-screen recombinant expression system produces properly structured and biochemically recognized collagen at the molecular level, capable of self-assembly into fibrils . the demonstrated fidelity of the system opens the doors to the use of this recombinantly produced protein in a wide variety of fundamental and applied assays, offering tunable control over molecular parameters not accessible in tissue-derived samples.fig.  <dig> schematic of procollagen and collagen structures. procollagen is purified from the cell culture medium. post-purification enzymatic processing results in removal of the propeptides, creating a form of collagen  capable of self-assembly into fibrils. a portion of a collagen fibril, illustrating highly ordered lateral packing , is shown



RESULTS
to produce post-translationally modified type ii human procollagen, ht <dig> human fibrosarcoma cells were used as the host cell line. this cell line was chosen for the transfection and expression of the recombinant protein because its endogenous expression of collagen iv provides the requisite enzymes for correct post-translational modification and secretion of the recombinant type ii procollagen  <cit> .

we sought an expression vector that produced an easy screening mechanism for selection. the pyic vector  was chosen, as it incorporates an aminoglycosidase which allows for selection in both bacterial  and eukaryotic  systems. in this vector, we replaced the gene for enhanced yellow fluorescent protein  with that of cdna-derived human type ii procollagen . this resulted in the plasmid shown in fig. 2a. following transfection into ht <dig> cells, this construct gave rise to simultaneous, uncoupled translation of procollagen and a downstream marker protein used to screen the cells, enhanced cyan fluorescent protein , from a single mrna transcript using an internal ribosome entry site  located between the two open reading frames. the blue ecfp fluorescence from the transformed cells is an indirect, but coupled, indicator of the expression of procollagen and was used to screen the cells. by performing serial dilution and subsequent expansion of transfected cells, we obtained a uniform stably transfected population expressing procollagen, as seen by the blue fluorescence signal from all cells in fig. 2b.fig.  <dig> expression of recombinant human type ii procollagen. a expression vector transformed into ht <dig> cells, showing location of the col2a <dig> procollagen gene, the ires sequence and the ecfp gene. b confocal fluorescence microscopy image of ht <dig> cells stably transfected with col2a1; the blue color results from co-expression of ecfp



type ii procollagen was purified from the cell media by modifying a literature-based protocol  <cit>  as described in the methods section. the peak elution from the q-sepharose anion-exchange column occurred at low nacl . bands corresponding to the purified protein are shown in the gel of fig. 3b. eluted fractions displaying strong collagen signal were pooled and concentrations were assessed using the sircol assay  <cit> , which has high sensitivity for triple helical collagen. typical final concentrations were 80 μg/ml, though could range up to 150 μg/ml. each harvest yielded 10-12 ml of this purified collagen, for a total yield of ~1 mg procollagen per liter of medium. in order to boost this yield, strategies to increase cellular density during culturing, such as the use of suspended microcarriers or fixed-bed reactors, could be considered.fig.  <dig> fplc purification of type ii human recombinant procollagen from ht <dig> cell line. a western blot for type ii collagen of samples eluting from the q-sepharose column. samples were eluted in q sepharose buffer plus a step gradient of nacl as indicated. numbers at the top the lanes refer to the fraction collected, and samples are loaded in equal volumes into each lane of the gel. the earliest fractions contain the most procollagen; this decreases with increasing ionic strength. b coomassie-stained gel showing pooled fractions 1– <dig>  and a molecular weight marker . the two bands of highest molecular weights are full-length type ii procollagen pro-α chains, presumably with different internal crosslinking in the propeptides 



coomassie-stained gels show the predominant presence of high-molecular-weight species, demonstrating the purity of our sample . we observe two bands in the vicinity of the expected molecular weight ; this observation of two bands in a purified sample has been seen previously for type ii procollagen  <cit> . both high-molecular-weight bands are recognized by an antibody specific to the n-telopeptide sequence of type ii collagen that does not cross-react with other collagen types . as discussed below, the purified protein collapses to a single band following chymotrypsin treatment to remove the propeptides, i.e., these mobility differences do not reflect differences within the triple helical collagen structure.

to provide further evidence of the identity of the purified protein, and to check for expected posttranslational modifications, protein analysis  identification of tryptic fragments, uvic-genome bc proteomics centre) was performed. a search of the identified peptides against the uniprot-swissprot database found the highest match to be with human type ii procollagen, with a molecular weight search  score of  <dig>  <cit> . sequence coverage of identified tryptic peptides represented 62 % of this large protein . peptide mass analysis showed expected post-translational modifications of hydroxyproline, hydroxylysine, galatosyl-hydroxylysine and glucosyl-galactosyl-hydroxylysine . this provides evidence of the fidelity of expression and purification of post-translationally modified human type ii procollagen from our system.

we wished to confirm that the purified protein was correctly assembled into a triple helical structure. to do so, protease digestion was used as an initial assay, as the triple helix of collagen is resistant to digestion by most proteases  <cit> . the purified procollagen was incubated with different concentrations of chymotrypsin for 30 min at room temperature . an increase in protease concentration resulted in a greater extent of digestion of procollagen, but even at the highest concentrations used, a single high molecular-weight  band remained in the gel, correlating with the presence of the intact collagen triple helix. . at the highest concentration of chymotrypsin the  n-terminal telopeptide of collagen was removed, as indicated by the disappearance of the high-mw band in the western using an antibody targeting this epitope, though the triple helix remained intact. a similar shift from procollagen to collagen was observed following treatment of the purified protein with lysyl endopeptidase    <cit> . the lack of degradation of the α-chains of the core region of collagen following treatment with either of these proteases is evidence of the stability of its extended triple helix.fig.  <dig> chymotrypsin digest of recombinant type ii human procollagen. alexa 647-labelled procollagen was incubated with different concentrations of chymotrypsin for 30 min at 4 °c. increasing concentrations led to successful removal of the propeptides, while leaving the triple helix intact, as evidenced by the collapse of all signal into a unique, high-mw band following incubation with  <dig>  μg/ml chymotrypsin. a fluorescence scan of the gel, showing all protein in the sample. b western blot with a monoclonal antibody to the n-telopeptide. this western shows that the high-mw signal is due to collagen, and furthermore demonstrates that only at the highest concentration is the telopeptide epitope removed

fig.  <dig> proteolytic digestion by lys-c or cathepsin k shows expected cleavage pattern. a lys-c incubation with purified type ii procollagen shows a reduction in protein size, as seen by silver staining, consistent with removal of n- and c-propeptides. b western blot with an antibody specific to the n-telopeptide shows that shorter incubation times result in the removal of propeptide but not telopeptides, while longer incubations result in cleavage of the n-telopeptide by lys-c. c western blot showing increasing time-dependent cleavage of type ii collagen  by recombinant cathepsin k



to assess the thermal stability of the triple helix, we measured the melting temperature using circular dichroism  spectroscopy. here, we used lys-c-generated collagen to eliminate any influence of propeptides on the results. the cd spectra showed the expected shape for triple helical collagen, displaying significant negative ellipticity at 198 nm and a slight peak at 223 nm . by measuring the change in cd as a function of temperature, we showed that collagen thermally denatured near the expected 37 °c   <cit> . a fit to the denaturation curve using equation  gave a melting temperature of tm =  <dig>  °c. as is well established for collagen, its irreversible nature of unfolding results in an overestimate of the true melting temperature for the scan speeds used here,  <cit>  and this value for tm is similar to values previously reported using this technique  <cit> .fig.  <dig> circular dichroism  spectroscopy to probe collagen’s triple helical structure. a cd spectrum of our type ii collagen, produced by lys-c digestion of recombinant human type ii procollagen, shows significant negative ellipticity at 198 nm and a slight peak at 223 nm, indicative of proper formation of the triple helix. b thermal melt curve for the type ii collagen sample of , measured by recording the ellipticity at 198 nm as a function of temperature. the temperature was increased at a rate of  <dig>  °c/min. as the triple helix denatures, ellipticity is lost at 198 nm. the melting temperature obtained from a fit to this plot with equation   is tm =  <dig>  °c



as a further assessment of the correspondence of our recombinant type ii collagen to the native version, we examined its cleavage pattern when treated with the collagenase cathepsin k  <cit> . we found that cathepsin k cleaves recombinant type ii collagen , giving a banding pattern upon enzymatic digestion consistent with previous findings on tissue-derived type ii collagen  <cit> . furthermore, the time-dependent appearance of the discrete cleavage bands also agrees with results on tissue-derived type ii collagen  <cit> .

a final assay at the molecular level employed optical tweezers to stretch single molecules of our recombinant type ii procollagen. the resulting force-extension curves were analyzed, first to ensure that they corresponded to a single molecule, and then to extract information on molecular flexibility. previous optical tweezers studies investigated the force-extension behavior of types i and ii procollagen, freshly obtained from mammalian cells in culture  <cit> . there, collagen was described as possessing entropic elasticity at forces f <  <dig> pn, i.e., that stretching collagen at these low forces removes configurational entropy but does not deform native structure. this intrinsic flexibility of triple-helical collagen was described by the persistence length, a parameter that describes the length scale over which a polymer can be thought of as unbent . the force-extension behavior we observed for our type ii procollagen can similarly be fit at low forces by the inextensible worm-like chain model ), as seen in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> optical tweezers stretching curves of type ii procollagen described at low force by entropic elasticity. a the worm-like chain  model ) is fit to an example force-extension curve , giving a persistence length of 32 nm for a molecule of 300 nm contour length, when a maximum force of  <dig> pn is used for the fit. inset: a schematic showing procollagen stretching in the optical tweezers and illustrating the extension z and bead offset from trap Δz, from which force is determined. schematic is not to scale. b the persistence length from fitting the wlc model decreases as the maximum force used in the fitting increases. the error bars show the uncertainty of the fitting parameter



analysis of an example curve demonstrates the sensitivity of the output persistence length to the range of forces included in the fit. while fitting the data up to a maximum force of ~ <dig> pn returned a persistence length comparable to values previously published in the literature, limiting the data range to lower maximum forces resulted in a systematic increase in the best-fit persistence length . this result has not been observed before for single collagen molecules. while persistence length is sensitive to parameters such as slight geometric offsets between the tethering and stretching axes,  <cit>  it is possible that the systematic trend observed here reflects a force-dependent structural transition that could alter the stability of the triple helix as it is stretched . characterization of the force dependence of collagen’s structure is beyond the scope of the current work; here the agreement in persistence length within a similar force range used by previous optical tweezers studies adds further evidence to the proper assembly of collagen at the molecular level.

in its physiologically abundant form, collagen is found not as isolated molecules but incorporated into fibrils. thus, we wished to verify that our recombinant collagen was capable of fibril assembly and to characterize this process and the properties of the assembled fibrils. these experiments necessitate removal of propeptides to enable fibril assembly , and so, to generate a form of collagen capable of fibril formation, we cleaved procollagen ii with lys-c   <cit> . the cleavage sites of lys-c lie 9- <dig> residues internal to the cleavage sites of the endogenous n- and c-terminal propeptidases, but this slightly truncated collagen nonetheless has been shown previously to produce fibrils morphologically indistinguishable from those prepared from the full-length collagen  <cit> .

fibrillogensis of the lys-c treated type ii collagen sample was characterized by atomic force microscopy  imaging   <cit> . after 10 min, filaments grew to 1–3 μm long and around 8 nm high . one can observe asymmetric morphologies in the shorter  filaments, with one tapered and one blunt end, suggesting a unipolar structure  <cit> . both ends of longer filaments tend to appear tapered, indicating that in some cases fibril growth continues from both ends. after 20 min, the fibril height increases to around 9 nm , but without a corresponding increase in length. after 30 min, the fibril height increases to around 10 nm and their length appears unchanged . no significant change can be observed under further incubation of up to 24 h. therefore, when grown under these conditions, the fibrils become mature after 30 min of incubation. as before, both unipolar and bipolar fibrils are observed.fig.  <dig> atomic force microscopy analysis of type ii collagen fibrillogenesis. a-c images of collagen fibrils formed after a 10 min, b 20 min, and c 30 min of incubation. the upward pointing arrows show tapered ends and downward pointing arrows show blunt ends. d bending modulus versus filament diameter extracted from afm images at different time points of the fibrillogenesis process



from these images, the bending modulus of fibrils at different stages of assembly was extracted. equation  was used to determine persistence lengths from angular correlations along the collagen fibrils. from this value and the height   <cit>  of the fibrils, the bending modulus is given by equation . this approach to extracting mechanical parameters has been applied to other types of images as well  <cit> . as the method does not require indentation, pulling, or other direct manipulation of the sample it offers advantages in measuring soft and thin samples  <cit> . the link between persistence length and mechanical properties is well established  <cit> , including direct comparative measurements of mechanical response from persistence length and from stretching  <cit> . our analysis assumes the collagen samples to be equilibrated on the surface prior to drying . if they are instead two-dimensional projections of solution conformations, or pinned somewhere between the two-dimensional and three-dimensional cases, then estimates for persistence length and hence bending modulus will be significantly different  <cit> .

a plot of bending modulus versus filament diameter is shown in fig. 8d, which also includes the data for the earliest stages of formation. these data indicate that the bending modulus decreases as fibril diameter increases, with a bending modulus for the thickest 11 nm diameter fibrils of around 8 mpa. while the persistence length should depend on the diameter, as seen in equation , the bending modulus is not presented as depending on diameter. in fact, however, the bending modulus does change with diameter. this decrease in stiffness for fibrils vis a vis monomers has been observed for type i collagen and can be explained by the weaker interactions between components in a fibril  than between components in a monomer .

as a final assay of fibril morphology and organization, we imaged fibrils formed from our recombinant type ii collagen using transmission electron microscopy  . tem images show fibrils displaying distinct light/dark d-periodic banding patterns, a distinguishing feature of well-ordered collagen fibrils. fibrils imaged using tem consistently exhibited larger diameters than those formed for the afm imaging experiments. we attribute this to the different protocols followed to initiate fibril formation in the two sets of experiments. it is well known that fibril properties can be influenced strongly by the conditions used for their formation  <cit> . importantly, here the d-banding revealed in the tem images confirms the formation of well-ordered fibrils, and the measured d-band spacing  is consistent with literature values for type ii collagen  <cit> . this result offers a final demonstration of the native-like performance of our recombinantly expressed procollagen.fig.  <dig> transmission electron microscopy  shows evidence of highly ordered collagen fibrils. tem images showing a section of a fibril formed in vitro from lys-c-treated recombinant type ii procollagen, exhibiting the dark/light d-banding pattern of a well-ordered structure, and showing substructure within each d period. fibrils were negatively stained using 3 % uranyl acetate. a scale bar = 500 nm. b scale bar = 100 nm



CONCLUSIONS
utilizing a human fibrosarcoma cell line, we have developed a recombinant system for expressing human type ii procollagen. demonstrated advances of this system over past approaches are  an easy-to-screen, non-covalently linked fluorescence reporter for transfected cells;  a demonstrated suite of post-translational modifications including hydroxylation and glycosylation in the resultant purified protein; and  a full-length native procollagen sequence, whose wide range of biophysical properties characterized within this work all correspond to the expected values of the native protein. this system should enable future work investigating the effects of chemical composition on these properties, and could provide a viable alternative to other approaches seeking to produce correctly modified collagen for materials or medical investigations.

