BACKGROUND
bacterial nitrogen  uptake and assimilation are influenced by availability and nature of dissolved organic and inorganic forms of n  <cit> . simple n compounds are readily available to heterotrophic bacteria , whereas more complex n compounds require enzymatic degradation prior to uptake and assimilation  <cit> . heterotrophic bacterial communities use a variety of dissolved organic nitrogen  compounds, including amino acids  <cit> , nucleic acids  <cit> , and proteins  <cit> , as carbon, n, and/or energy sources, or directly as specific compounds, such as via salvage pathways for amino acids  <cit> . in addition to don, dissolved inorganic  species, such as nitrate  <cit>  and ammonium  <cit> , are also used to meet n requirements.

the ability of bacterial communities to utilize particular n types  depends on taxonomic composition  <cit> , biochemical capacities, and competition with other bacteria for n  <cit> . interactions under differing conditions result in varied n-utilization profiles  <cit>  among members of a bacterial community and may lead to ecological specialization  <cit> . ultimately, although n-utilization differs among heterotrophic bacterial communities, there is uncertainty regarding the scale at which common metabolic capabilities are shared regardless of the dominant forms of available n.

in this study, we investigated utilization of n substrates, ranging from labile to recalcitrant, by heterotrophic bacteria isolated from stream sediments under different n-enrichments . we sought to determine: 1) whether bacteria isolated from complex and simple n-enrichments would be taxonomically and compositionally different, and 2) if n-substrate utilization by isolated bacteria was dependent on initial n-enrichment conditions.

methods
bacterial isolation
stream sediment samples from three streams used in prior n studies: west branch of mahoning river near ravenna, oh  <cit> , sycamore creek located in morgan county, in  <cit> , and sugar creek near shirley, in  <cit>  were incubated in m <dig> minimal media,  with  <dig> different n compounds. all final n concentrations were 94 mm. these included five single-source n treatments , an equimolar mixture of these compounds , a bacterial protein  and nutrient broth . the bacterial protein was obtained as described in ghosh et al.   <cit> . briefly, soluble bacterial proteins were extracted from cultures of bacillus subtilis, pseudomonas aeruginosa, and staphylococcus aureus incubated at 27 °c for 24 h and proteins were obtained using the qproteome bacterial protein prep kit  and total don quantified using a shimadzu tnm- <dig>  among the enrichments, ammonium, nitrate, and glycine were considered simple n-enrichments. nutrient broth and the bacterial protein extract were considered complex enrichments, as were tryptophan and urea. in this study, urea was considered a complex enrichment due to low bacterial uptake compared to inorganic n species, amino acids and carbohydrates in a study of freshwater bacterial n turnover  <cit> . tryptophan was considered complex due to its large molar mass, and chemical composition  <cit> . the defined-n-mixture  was considered a simple enrichment for three reasons. first, the abundance of simple compounds relative to urea and tryptophan. second, repression of the nitrogen assimilation control  operon for urea uptake in the presence of ammonium and other simpler n compounds  <cit> , as is the case in the defined-n-mix. third, the high affinity for electrophilic substitutions in the indole ring of tryptophan renders it readily deoxidized in the presence of other compounds  leading to modifications into other compounds that could be utilized by bacterial cells  <cit> .

enrichments were incubated at 25°c for 24 h to isolate fast-growing bacteria or for 72 h to isolate slow-growing bacteria. samples from each enrichment were used to inoculate plates of the same composition mixed with agar. distinct colonies from respective plates were selected for isolation into pure cultures.

16s rrna gene amplification and sequence analyses
genomic dna was extracted from bacteria isolates using the ctab method followed by phenol: chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation as in moore et al.   <cit> . polymerase chain reaction  was carried out with the universal primers 27f  and 1552r   <cit>  in a ptc  <dig> dna engine cycler  with a thermal profile of 94 °c for 3 min and 35 cycles of 94 °c for 30 s, 58 °c for 30 s and 72 °c for 90 s followed by a final extension of 72 °c for 5 min. each 25 μl pcr reaction mixture consisted of 2 μl of template dna,  <dig>  μl of water,  <dig>  μl of both forward and reverse primers, and  <dig>  μl of gotaq pre- mixed green master mix . amplified products were visualized on a 1% agarose via gel electrophoresis, purified and submitted for sanger sequencing at the advanced genetic technologies center, at the university of kentucky , using the same primer pair.

resulting amplicon sequences were quality checked in sequencher  using default settings. sequences were classified using the classifier tool in the ribosomal database project  server  <cit> . taxonomic affiliations of the isolates were determined at a cut-off threshold of 80% in rdp, and an operational taxonomic unit  table generated summarizing the taxa and abundance of isolates from each enrichment at the class level. this table was subsequently used to determine within-enrichment alpha diversity estimates   <cit>  in qiime   <cit>  following rarefaction. the reliance of chao <dig> estimates on singletons, makes it a more robust estimate. a non-metric multidimensional scaling   <cit>  analysis was performed on the bray-curtis distance matrix and axes used to visualize relatedness among the enrichments. compositional difference between enrichments was assessed using the analysis of similarity  multivariate test in qiime.

nitrogen substrate utilization assays
substrate utilization by bacterial isolates was assessed spectrophotometrically in 96-well microtitre plates.  <dig> single-source n-substrates  ranging from labile to recalcitrant forms were used. the labile and recalcitrant designations are based on known resistance/refraction to degradation, bioavailability, and impacts on bacterial growth. the substrates were nitrate, ammonium, urea, glycine, proline, tryptophan, bacterial protein, peptidoglycan, nucleic acid , algal exudate, putrescine , and humic matter. humic matter, algal exudates and nucleic acids were obtained as described in ghosh et al.   <cit> . briefly, algal exudates were extracted from cultures of chlamydomonas, chlorella, and synedra  grown in artificial stream water with 20 mg/l of nano <dig>  under constant light for 35 days. humic matter was extracted from senescent red oak , witch hazel , and corn leaves  in  <dig> % nacl and pooled. nucleic acids were obtained following dna extraction from cultures of bacillus subtilis, pseudomonas aeruginosa, and staphylococcus aureus incubated at 27 °c for 24 h; extractions were performed using the power-soil dna extraction kit  and nucleic acids were pooled among the three cultures. following initial cell lysis and precipitation of bacterial cultures during dna extraction, cell debris was collected and quantified to represent peptidoglycan. putrescine was purchased from mp biomedicals . of n treatments, algal exudates, ammonium, nitrate, glycine, tryptophan, and urea were considered labile  <cit>  whereas, bacterial proteins, nucleic acid, and humic matter were considered recalcitrant  <cit> . peptidoglycan, polyamine  and proline  were considered intermediate compounds. the rationale for these designation is that proline, as a n source in the presence of glucose, is suboptimal for e. coli growth  <cit> , and disproportionately accumulates in particulate residues following microbial exposure, suggesting proline utilization following degradation of more bioavailable n sources  <cit> . in contrast, bacterial growth is positively correlated with tryptophan availability  <cit> . peptidoglycan is designated an intermediate compound because the efficiency of peptidoglycan degradation by bacteria has ranges from 49% - 58% depending on whether they were from gram negative or positive bacterial sources, respectively  <cit> . each of the  <dig> single-source n media had the same amount of nitrogen  as the standard minimal media used in maheswaran and forchhammer  <dig>  <cit>  with glucose as the only carbon source.

before beginning the assays, bacterial cultures were incubated in their respective broth media for 24–48 h depending on growth rate. after cultures reached an optical density  of  <dig> , they were centrifuged and washed five times with n-free minimal media and diluted 1: <dig> with the n-free minimal media to minimize transfer of n to the test plates. washed cultures were subsequently transferred to plates, making up 10% of the final assay volume. plates were incubated at room temperature for 6 days and od determined at 600 nm every 12 h for the first 48 h, and every 24 h for the remaining 4 days. treatments were carried out in triplicates for each isolate. bacterial growth rates  were calculated from od <dig> values recorded at the different time points.

assessment of substrate utilization and substrate range used by isolates was carried out by dividing the growth rates  into ranges as: − <dig> for growth rates < <dig>   <dig> for rates between  <dig> and  <dig>   <dig> for rates between  <dig> and  <dig>   <dig> for rates between  <dig> and  <dig>  and  <dig> for growth rates > <dig>  substrate range for each isolate was calculated by determining the mean score for each isolate across all  <dig> substrates. the score difference  for each isolate was determined and then used to categorize the substrate range of each isolate. isolates with positive score differences were categorized as having broad substrate ranges and those with negative score differences were categorized as having narrow substrate ranges.

statistical analysis
one-way analysis of variance  was used to examine differences among enrichments based on the chao <dig> estimates without transformation. this was followed by visualization of the nmds coordinates using the generated distance matrix, after the anosim multivariate test of compositional differences. differences in patterns of n-utilization by bacteria isolates were analyzed using a mixed-model analysis with actual growth rates as the dependent variable and n-enrichment and n-substrates as independent variables. relationship between phylogenetic distance and substrate utilization  was examined using regression analysis, and the relationship between categorical bacterial n-utilization profiles  and taxonomic affiliations was examined using contingency analysis followed by the pearson’s chi-square test. statistical analyses were carried out in jmp  <dig>  and qiime .

RESULTS
composition and diversity of bacterial isolates from n-enrichments
a total of  <dig> isolates representing  <dig> families were obtained . the highest number of isolates were from the nutrient broth enrichment , followed by tryptophan , ammonium , defined-n-mixture , glycine , nitrate  and urea , with the bacterial protein enrichment yielding the least number of isolates .

taxonomically, four bacterial families, comamonadaceae, enterobacteriaceae, bacillaceae, and pseudomonadaceae, were most commonly isolated from complex n-enrichments . in addition,  <dig> unique bacterial families  were detected from these complex enrichments. three families, alteromonadales incertae sedis , unassigned sphaerobactereales , and methylophilaceae , were only detected from the urea enrichment. planctomycetaceae  was only detected from the bacterial protein enrichment and five bacterial families, burkholderiales incertae sedis , shewanellaceae , pseudoalteromonadaceae , ferrimonadaceae , and rhodocyclaceae , were only detected only from the nutrient broth enrichment . partial 16s rrna sequence data for each isolate are provided in additional file 2: document  <dig> fig.  <dig> relative abundances  of bacterial families of bacterial isolates from the eight initial n-enrichments




three bacterial families  were well represented in isolates from the simple n-enrichments  and  <dig> unique bacterial isolates were detected. oceanospirillaceae  was only detected from the glycine enrichment. halobacteriaceae  and chitinophagaceae  were only detected from the ammonium enrichment and unassigned calescibacterium  was only detected from the defined-n-mixture enrichments .

mean chao <dig> diversity estimates at the family level differed significantly among n-enrichments , but there was no significant difference in alpha diversity between simple and complex n-enrichments when grouped together. individually, the least diverse enrichments, tryptophan  and defined-n-mixture , were significantly different from the most diverse enrichments, glycine  and nutrient broth . bacterial protein , urea , nitrate  and ammonium  enrichments had comparable richness estimates.

in spite of observed differences in chao <dig> diversity estimates among n-enrichments and the presence of a few enrichment-specific isolates, overall community composition were very similar among n-enrichments . in the nmds plot , the complex n-enrichments, tryptophan and nutrient broth grouped separately from each other and from the remaining two complex enrichments , and the simple n-enrichment glycine, was displaced from the other three simple n-enrichments, ammonium, nitrate, and defined-n mixture, which clustered closely together . the observed displacements may be attributed to the presence of single unique isolates in several of the enrichments, but these were not sufficient to result in significant differences in overall community composition.fig.  <dig> displacement of bacterial communities within the nmds plot . complex n-enrichments were tryptophan , nutrient broth , urea , and bacterial protein . simple n-enrichments were glycine , ammonium , nitrate , and defined-n mixture 




bacterial isolate n-utilization
substrate utilization by isolates differed significantly among the  <dig> initial source n-enrichments . overall, substrate utilization was lowest in bacteria obtained from the bacterial protein enrichment and highest in bacteria obtained from glycine, defined-n mix, and tryptophan . there were significantly differences in substrate utilization by isolates among the 12 n-substrates used , as well as significant n-enrichment by n-substrate differences in utilization by bacteria isolates  . substrate utilizations were lowest on recalcitrant nucleic acid  and humic matter substrates  for bacteria from all enrichments, followed by peptidoglycan  and bacterial protein  substrates. on the other hand, all labile substrates, except for glycine and tryptophan were efficiently utilized by bacteria from all n-enrichments. utilization of glycine, proline and tryptophan differed among bacteria in a n-enrichment driven manner; utilization of glycine and proline substrates were greater among bacteria from the simple enrichments, whereas utilization of tryptophan was greater among bacteria from the complex enrichments . growth rates for each of the  <dig> isolates are shown in additional file 3: table s <dig>  the relationship between substrate range/utilization and n-enrichment was statistically significant , demonstrating that initial enrichment influenced subsequent substrate utilization and the range of substrates used. however, there was no significant linear correlation between average phylogenetic distance and average substrate utilization .fig.  <dig> actual growth rates averaged across all n substrates   for bacterial isolates from the eight initial n-enrichments  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). the n-enrichments were: nitrate, ammonium, glycine, tryptophan, urea, defined-n-mixture, bacterial protein, and nutrient broth. different letters represent significantly different growth rates on each n-enrichment at p =  <dig> 


fig.  <dig> substrate utilization by groups of isolates from the initial enrichments on the twelve substrates used in the substrate assay  =  <dig>  p <  <dig> ) depicted in a heat map. the color legend indicates the scaled scores from − <dig>  to  <dig> , with high and moderate substrate utilization shown as red and orange respectively, and the low and least substrate utilization shown as shades of yellow and green respectively




finally, among enrichments there were differences in the range of substrates that were effectively utilized by bacteria. bacterial isolates from the simple defined-n-mixture and ammonium n-enrichments had comparatively broader substrate ranges, followed by isolates from the complex tryptophan and urea n-enrichments  . the bacterial protein enrichment yielded isolates with the narrowest substrate range, whereas the proportions of isolates with narrow and broad substrate ranges were equivalent in the nitrate and nutrient broth enrichments.fig.  <dig> proportion  of isolates with broad and narrow substrate ranges from each enrichment following the substrate utilization assay




discussion
initial n-enrichments significantly impacted subsequent n substrate use. however, these differences were not related to taxonomy of the isolates. likewise, bacteria isolated from each of the  <dig> initial n-enrichments did not differ in taxonomic composition in spite of differences in richness and the presence of a number of unique taxa in specific enrichments. in general, patterns of n substrate use were influenced by enrichment rather than taxonomy, suggesting there was enrichment-specific selection for organisms independent of 16s rrna gene sequences. thus the lack of a relationship between substrate utilization and taxonomic affiliations is most likely explained by taxon-independent capacity for n-utilization   <cit> .

bacterial functional traits, such as nitrogen utilization and substrate ranges are influenced by environmental factors leading to variations in metabolic capabilities and, ultimately, ecological specialization within microbial assemblages and are taxon-independent  <cit> . additionally, substrate utilization patterns may be a function of acclimation and physiological change rather than reflective of genotypic differences. isolates from two complex enrichments  and three simple enrichments  had similar substrate utilization profiles and greater proportions of broad substrate range isolates, suggestive perhaps of activated metabolic pathways enabling utilization of subsequent various n substrates regardless of the initial enrichments. the same explanation may be applied to the substrate utilization profiles of the defined-n-mixture enrichment, wherein a broad range of n compounds that can be utilized by bacteria is to be expected. as a result, the nitrogen-rich condition in this enrichment may have facilitated growth of metabolically versatile and broad substrate range. utilization of other single n compounds and the production of intermediates, such as ammonium by bacteria isolates from these enrichments, may explain the breadth of n substrate use and similarities in n-profiles in the substrate assay  <cit> .

various operons within the bacterial nitrogen regulation system  enable degradation and/or uptake of diverse n sources  <cit> . some of these operons are only activated by specific n sources leading to their rapid uptake, while others are repressed by certain n sources and only activated in their absence leading to instantaneous and primed n uptake pathways, respectively  <cit> . priming may have contributed to the observed substrate ranges of isolates from complex enrichments. for example, one pathway for tryptophan use is non-oxidative degradation to ammonia, indole and pyruvate via the indole pathway  <cit> . the pyruvate and ammonia formed are then respectively used for respiration and amino acid biosynthesis  <cit> . along these same lines, urea can be taken up by a variety of bacteria and hydrolyzed to ammonium and co <dig> by urease; the resulting ammonia is subsequently used for biosynthesis and growth  <cit> . finally, glycine is oxidatively degraded into ammonium, co <dig> and a methylene group via the glycine cleavage system or glycine synthetase  <cit> . thus, among these bacterial communities, similar substrate utilization profiles may be attributed to shared/activated metabolic capacities by differently primed nitrogen utilization pathways selected by the various enrichments.

although several bacteria families, including planctomycetaceae, were obtained from the bacterial protein enrichment, isolates from this enrichment were predominantly narrow in their substrate ranges. the combined presence of refractory n compounds, such as membrane-bound proteins and histones in the protein extract  <cit> , in addition to reported antimicrobial activity of histones  <cit>  during the initial bacterial protein enrichment may have selected for bacteria with different traits. thus, the reduced growth rate and subsequent narrow substrate range of these isolates during the substrate assay may be attributed to delayed or reduced activation of n scavenging enzymes in these bacteria.

isolates from the nutrient broth enrichment had comparable proportions of members with broad and narrow substrate ranges. some of the substrates effectively utilized by these isolates  were also present in the nutrient broth enrichment . thus the subset of available and recalcitrant n compounds in the initial enrichment may have primed different nitrogen regulatory pathways in isolates from this enrichment, resulting in broad and narrow substrate ranges. nitrate isolates also exhibited a similar profile as seen in nutrient broth. lower growth rates of a variety of bacteria have been encountered when nitrate is provided as the only nitrogen source under aerobic conditions, due to lowered assimilatory nitrate reductase function  <cit> . in addition, isolates under high nitrate conditions have been shown to reduce the production of n scavenging enzymes  <cit> , and extracellular hydrolytic enzymes that degrade dissolved organic nitrogen species  <cit> . thus the initial nitrate enrichment condition may have selected for isolates capable of effectively using some substrates but not others.

nitrogen substrates examined inherently differed in their use regardless of the properties of the isolates. specifically, the most complex, recalcitrant compounds  were generally used poorly in comparison to other substrates. the crystalline and polymerized forms of these compounds makes them refractory to enzymatic degradation although degradation of humic matter  <cit> , nucleic acids  <cit> , and peptidoglycan  <cit>  occurs under certain growth conditions. thus, the observed low utilization of these recalcitrant substrates relative to the labile substrates may be a function of the minimal media conditions used in the substrate assay in this study.

CONCLUSIONS
we observed differences in n substrate use patterns of bacteria from some complex and simple n-enrichments while others were unexpectedly similar. this is attributed to priming and metabolic flexibility. taxonomic composition of bacterial isolate groups from the n-enrichments did not differ and was unrelated to n use, suggesting breadths of function and strong functional redundancy. given the considerable functional variations among bacterial isolates, further studies examining expression of functional gene markers  related to n utilization, quantification of gene abundances, and direct quantification of substrate utilization via stable isotope techniques may provide insights into the metabolic processes responsible for observed similar n utilization profiles from different enrichment conditions.

additional files

additional file 1: table s <dig>  taxonomical affiliations  of the  <dig> bacterial isolates from the  <dig> initial n-enrichments. description of data: the name, and taxonomic identification to the genus level obtained for bacterial isolates obtained from this study using the classifier tool in the ribosomal database project . 

 
additional file 2: document  <dig>  partial bacterial 16s rrna sequence data. description of data: the partial 16s rrna bacterial sequence information for all  <dig> bacterial isolates obtained in this study. 

 
additional file 3: table s <dig>  title: growth rates of all bacterial isolates from the initial n-enrichments on each of the  <dig> substrates. description of data: the growth rates of each bacterial isolate from each n-enrichment on the 12 n-substrates used in the study. 

 
additional file 4: table s <dig>  title: score differences  and substrate range classification of bacterial isolates from the initial n-enrichments across substrates. description of data: the score difference between mean scaled growth rates and total scaled growth rates for each isolate on the 12 n-substrates. positive score differences represent isolates with broad substrate range and negative score differences represent isolates with narrow substrate range. 

 


