BACKGROUND
vitamin e is a lipid soluble natural antioxidant. tocopherols and tocotrienols are the two major families that made up vitamin e. the tocotrienols are the major form of vitamin e found in palm oil, at a typical ratio of 30% tocopherols to 70% tocotrienols. tocotrienols are similar to tocopherols except that they have an isoprenoid tail with three unsaturation points instead of a saturated phytyl tail. the presence of this unsaturated side chain allows tocotrienols to penetrate into tissues with saturated fatty layers in the cell membrane of brain and liver efficiently  <cit> . this enables tocotrienols to have far reaching and efficient free radical scavenging properties compared to tocopherols. it is therefore not surprising that the accumulation of tocotrienols in tissues is associated with a range of health benefits. studies have shown that apart from their potent antioxidant properties  <cit> , tocotrienols are cardioprotective  <cit> , hypocholesterolemic  <cit> , anti-cancerous  <cit>  and neuroprotective  <cit> . apart from its antioxidant properties, the latter properties are remotely associated with tocopherols, and thus unique to tocotrienols even though both are important members of the vitamin e family. tocotrienols are also a nutrient and have recently been certified as gras  by the us fda grn  <dig> as of april  <dig>  <cit> .

cognition refers to the mental processes that are involved in memory and learning  <cit> . various factors such as nutrition, environment and genetics have strong influence on memory and learning. nutrition affects cognition and mental health as the brain structure and function are dependent on nutritional inputs  <cit> . various dietary factors such n- <dig> fatty acids, antioxidants, vitamins, minerals, curcumins and flavonoids among others have been identified to have beneficial effects on cognition  <cit> . these dietary factors affect multiple brain processes involving neurotransmitter pathways, synaptic transmission, membrane fluidity and signal transduction pathways that are associated with synaptic plasticity  <cit> . in contrast, diets rich in saturated and trans fats are known to affect cognition adversely. this is typically attributed to the role of trans and saturated fats in reducing the synaptic plasticity mediated by the hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor   <cit> .

the brain develops rapidly during the last trimester of fetal life  and within the first two years  of childhood in humans  <cit> . during this period, the intake of n- <dig> and n- <dig> long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids , particularly docosahexanoic acid , eicosapentaenoic acid  and arachidonic acid , have been proven to be beneficial for the development of sensory, cognitive and neuromotor systems in human and animal  <cit> . many other nutrients such as antioxidant compounds may also fill this role as they are able to protect the vulnerable brain cells from lipid peroxidation  <cit> . an optimal supply of antioxidants such as vitamin e is thought to be beneficial to the cognitive development in infants. indeed, optimal supplementation of a specific nutrient during early life could influence or ‘program’ long-term cognitive development, as well as development of major diseases well into adulthood  <cit> .

an accumulation of tocotrienols in the brain is needed to protect the vulnerable neurons from oxidative stress, and to enhance the existing neuronal function as well as neuronal remodelling. long-term oral supplementation was reported to be effective in delivering tocotrienols to vital organs via tocopherol transfer protein  independent delivery systems  <cit> . delivery is also observed to be more pronounced in the fetal brain when pregnant rats are fed with tocotrienols  <cit> . previous animal studies on the effects of tocotrienols on cognition are mostly focused on the role of tocotrienols in improving or preventing cognitive impairments associated with diabetes  <cit> , alcoholism  <cit> , oxidative stress  <cit>  and aging  <cit> . apart from the positive health benefits observed during adulthood, we postulated that prenatal and early postnatal tocotrienol supplementation could elicit some degree of protective effects against lipid peroxidative damage in the fetal brain. this would therefore resulted in brain development favorable to the development of healthy mental cognitive functions. thus, it is the aim of this study to investigate the potential prenatal and early postnatal effects of trf supplementation on cognitive function development among male progenies, born from dams supplemented with trf.

RESULTS
plasma vitamin e content
the plasma tocopherol and tocotrienol levels in the male offsprings reflected their respective dietary supplementation levels . α-tocotrienol and α-tocopherol were the major vitamin e fraction found in plasma followed by γ- and δ-tocotrienol. however, the tocotrienol levels were very much lower than the tocopherol levels in plasma. the levels of α-, γ-and δ-tocotrienol were found to have increased among the trf and dtrf supplemented animals compared to the control animals. it was also noted that the level of β-tocotrienol fraction was negligible and was no different among the trf and dtrf supplemented rats. conversely, the α-tocopherol level was elevated in trf and dtrf supplemented rats. the levels of other tocopherol fractions were mostly negligible.

vitamin e content in the brain
α-tocotrienol and α-tocopherol were the major vitamin e fractions found in the brain . other vitamin e fractions were not detected. this indicated that the α-tocotrienol and α-tocopherol fractions selectively taken up by the brain tissue. α-tocopherol levels were no different in almost all groups, with the exception of an increased noted among the dtrf supplemented animals. the α-tocotrienol levels were increased among the trf and dtrf supplemented animals.

effects of trf supplementation on morris water maze performance
acquisition trial
the effects of dha, trf and dtrf supplementation on spatial learning as evaluated using the morris water maze test is depicted in figure  <dig>  there was a significant improvement in mean escape latency over a 5-day period . this indicated that all rats learned the spatial task during the training trials. it is evident that animals supplemented with dha and trf demonstrated significantly better escape latency after day  <dig> , indicating that they had learnt the position of the escape platform much more rapidly compared to the other groups after day  <dig>  those fed with dtrf were only able to achieve the same feat on day  <dig>  these differences were not attributed to swimming speeds as all groups had similar swimming speeds . there were no differences in terms of path efficiency across groups even though path efficiency seemed to be improving with day. similar development was also noted for distance travelled . it was noted that the control animals took significantly longer path  to locate the platform on the first day. however, no difference was detected across groups from day  <dig> onwards.

it is interesting to note that dha supplemented animals spent significantly more time in the quadrant where the escape platform was formerly placed in comparison to either vehicle treated or control animals  during the memory retention testing procedure . this possibly indicates that the dha supplemented animals remembered the prior location of the escape platform much better as compared to other groups. other parameters or indices for probe trial such as number of entries, number of lines crossing, as well as the average duration in the area where the platform was located during training, were no different across treatment groups.

reversal trial
figure  <dig> depicts the results of the reversal test in which the platform was placed on the opposite side of the quadrant. the reversal test evaluated memory plasticity and re-learning abilities. results showed that the escape latencies of all groups gradually declined over 5 days. however, significant differences between treatment groups was seen only on day  <dig> , day  <dig>  and day  <dig> . dha-supplemented group recorded a shorter escape latency on day  <dig> and day  <dig>  compared to the control group. by day  <dig>  in addition to the dha group, both trf and dtrf groups  also logged a shorter escape latency compared to the control group. collectively, these results showed that the rate of acquisition improved on day  <dig> in the reversal trial. the results also showed that rats from all treatment groups logged similar distances to arrive at the escape platform during the reversal trial on days  <dig> and  <dig>  however, the differences were only observed on day  <dig> , day  <dig>  and day  <dig> . trf, dha and dtrf supplemented animals swam significantly shorter distance compared to control animals on day  <dig>  and day  <dig>  . however, no differences were found on day  <dig>  however swimming speeds did not differ across treatment groups. the reversal probe trial  also indicated that all supplemented animals had quadrant preference, all supplemented groups spent more time in ne quadrant formerly containing the platform compared to control animals.

discussion
the aim of the present study is to examine the possible prenatal and early postnatal effects of trf supplementation on the cognitive function development of male progenies from dams supplemented with trf. in general, the results demonstrated that the long-term trf supplementation regime during the prenatal and postnatal period resulted in higher brain α-tocotrienol levels among the male off-springs. this also corresponded to significantly better cognitive performance among these rats in the morris water maze test.

the level of tocopherol and tocotrienol enrichment in the plasma and brain of male offspring rats reflected the level of trf supplementation among these study subjects. α-tocopherol was the major tocopherol fraction found in plasma as ttp facilitated α-tocopherol concentrations in plasma and extra-hepatic tissues  <cit> . the lower plasma tocotrienols level in comparison to that of tocopherols could be attributed to the lower binding affinity of tocotrienols to ttp compared to tocopherols  <cit> . in fact, tocotrienols have about  <dig>  times less affinity to ttp compared to tocopherols  <cit> . our present observation of the level of vitamin e in the brain is in line with previous studies  <cit> . in fact, it was also reported that tocotrienol uptake is higher in the fetal brain compared to the dams  <cit> . however, the actual role of ttp in tocotrienol transport remained to be investigated as it was not clear whether the delivery of tocotrienols to the vital organs is also ttp-dependent. it was reported that the ttp-deficient mice fed with tocopherol were infertile due to tocopherol deficiency. in contrast tocotrienol fed ttp-deficient mice were fertile, suggesting that tocotrienol was successfully delivered to the relevant organs even in the absence of ttp. further accumulation of α-tocotrienol also observed in vital organs in ttp deficient mice supplemented with tocotrienol indicates that the tocotrienol delivery is ttp-independent  <cit> .

the cognitive parameters of trf supplemented animals from the current study were comparable to that of the dha-treated group which was a positive control for this experiment. dha is a long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids  known for its beneficial effects on cognition in human infants  <cit>  and in aged individuals  <cit> . the fact that all supplemented  animals demonstrated improvement in spatial learning over a 5 day period indicates that the ability to learn improves with dietary supplementation as employed in this study. in fact our results are in agreement with a recent report on the positive effects of trf supplementation on spatial learning and memory in 11-month old wistar rats  <cit> . previous studies have also shown that trf supplementation prevented cognitive impairment associated with diabetes  <cit> , chronic alcohol consumption  <cit>  and intra-cerebroventricular streptozotocin-induced oxidative stress  <cit> . these studies showed that tocotrienol exerted a protective effect against oxidative damage in rat brain. brain damage by free radicals may induce cognitive deficit via dysfunction in neurotransmission. the memory enhancing effects shown by trf from palm oil in the present study could be at least in part, due to its antioxidant properties. neuronal oxidative damage by reactive oxygen species  has been implicated in various neurodegenerative disorders such as alzheimer’s disease , parkinson’s disease and dementia. increased oxidative stress in the brain often leads to increased lipid peroxidation markers, protein oxidation, dna and rna damage  <cit> . in fact, oxidative damage to rat synapses have been proven to result in cognitive deficits  <cit> . thus the protective effects of tocotrienols against peroxidative damage in the brain could be the main explanation for the improved cognitive performance seen in the current experiment. to lend further support to this fact, tocotrienols have also been known to exert a protective effect against oxidative damage in diabetes  <cit>  and rat brain mitochondria  <cit> , and thus the associated improvement in cognitive functions.

our data showed shorter escape latency with trf supplementation and these differences were not due to swimming speed as no group differences were observed in this measure. the trf and dha supplemented groups had equivalent swimming speed during the morris water maze acquisition phase; we concluded that the groups were equally competent in physical ability and motor function to perform the trial. prior to the morris water maze test, all animals were also examined and verified to be free from physical disabilities that would affect their maze performance. our current results also showed that trf supplemented animals had better memory retention compared to dha supplemented animals. this is evident in the performance of trf supplemented animals during the probe trial. trf supplemented animals exhibited better relearning ability in learning the new platform location during the reversal phase. during the reversal trial, it was observed that the trf treated animals returned efficiently to the last known position of the escape platform, before starting to re-learn their way to the new location of the escape platform. this is further proof that trf supplementation did not result in learning deficit, instead exhibiting better interpretation in the general mechanisms of acquiring, encoding or storage. these findings clearly indicate that spatial acquisition and reversal memory performances are improved with pre and post-natal trf supplementation, possibly through mechanisms related to the improvement of hippocampal long term potentiation . the present evidence also suggests that early loads of trf may promote long lasting learning ability in the adult progeny by influencing brain developmental process. the current study depended solely on the morris water maze test to assess the behavioural, spatial learning and memory performance of the study subjects, similar to that reported an earlier study  <cit> . this is mainly because maze tests that require feed restriction such as radial arm maze would potentially result in disruption to the breeding performance of the f <dig> dams, and litter size for subsequent experiments employing male progenies. however, performing additional tests using other mazes would definitely add credence to the results  <cit> .

only male progenies were used in this study, as previous reports stated that male mice  <cit>  and rats  <cit>  performed better and yielded consistent results compared to female rats. the sex differences in memory and learning performance is known to be strongly influenced by sex hormones. testosterone present in males has little effect on sex-differences memory and learning performance. however, the female hormone estrogen does play a role. the difference in performance between male and female was greater when females begin training in pro-oestrus cycle when oestrogen levels were high  <cit> . the structure of hippocampus has been shown to undergo structural changes with more dendritic spines at pro-oestrus phase when there are high levels of oestrogen. this suggests that the structural changes in the brain may rely on gonadal hormone levels which may affect the performance in behavioural tasks  <cit> . besides, that oestrogen and progesterone have been shown to influence the enzymes, receptors and transporter mechanisms associated with neurotransmission, which are vital for storage and processing of memories  <cit> . in the light of these findings, the current study therefore placed a considerable degree of emphasis on male animals to assess spatial memory learning and performance among offsprings.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the current study demonstrates that maternal intake of trf increases the α-tocotrienol level in the progeny’s brain. this results in better behavioural performance and cognitive function development in the progeny. further studies are needed to ascertain the molecular correlation between prenatal and early postnatal trf supplementation on the synaptic function and cognition in the rat model.

