BACKGROUND
from a purely biochemical point of view, enzymes constitute the most important group of proteins. they are versatile, catalyzing most chemical reactions involved in the metabolism of living organisms, and abundant, representing approximately 15% to 35% of a given proteome  <cit> . enzymes are classified according to the enzyme commission  system, a hierarchical system that assigns a unique four-field number to each enzymatic activity  <cit> . the first field of an ec number indicates the general class of catalyzed reaction. the second and third fields depend on different criteria related to the chemical features of the substrate and the product of the reaction, and the fourth field is a sequential number without any special meaning. a comprehensive and detailed enzyme function annotation of the available genomes is necessary not only to increase our understanding of the biochemistry of living organisms, but also to gain more insight into the evolutionary processes that originated the diversity of enzymes currently found in nature  <cit> . the precise assignment of ec numbers to catalytic proteins is a vital requirement for the correct reconstruction of metabolic pathways  <cit> . moreover, reconstructed metabolic pathways play a key role in many biomedical approaches  <cit> , but the success of these applications strongly depends of the quality of the functional annotations of the enzymes comprising such pathways  <cit> .

despite the great importance of precise ec number assignments, enzyme functions as well as other molecular, cellular or physiological functions, are often inferred from sequence similarity to previously characterized proteins  <cit> . in this annotation modality, commonly known as "prediction by homology transfer", the  assumption is that all homologs have the same function  <cit> . this functional annotation strategy is negatively affected by at least two factors. the first factor is the functional diversity of highly similar sequences observed in many protein families  <cit> . for example, to transfer detailed enzyme function, given by four-field ec numbers, with an average precision of at least 90%, a sequence identity threshold of 60% is required  <cit> . however, the functional annotation of many genomes has been carried out employing much lower thresholds  <cit> . the second factor is the structural and functional modularity of proteins  <cit> ; thus, when the modular nature of proteins is disregarded, functional annotations based on best database hits are often erroneous  <cit> . mainly due to these factors, sequence similarity-based annotation strategies result in a high number of errors  <cit>  that often propagate in public databases  <cit> . for instance, it has been estimated that functional assignments inferred by sequence similarity in the gene ontology sequence database , have an estimated error rate of 49%  <cit> . other approaches for enzyme function prediction do not directly depend on the level of similarity between sequences. for example, several methods are based on the identification of specific structural patterns associated with functional sites  <cit> , but they are limited by the requirement that the query protein's structure be solved. yet other approaches are based on the analysis of properties of proteins such as tissue specificity, subcellular location and phylogenetic information  <cit> , or genome context and other functional association evidence  <cit> . however, these methods also suffer from the lack of consistent and comprehensive database annotations related to this kind of sequence-independent features.

to address the limitations of transfer of enzyme function by sequence similarity, we developed eficaz , an engine for large-scale high-precision enzyme function inference  <cit> . the original implementation of eficaz combines the predictions of four independent methods:  chiefc family based fdr recognition: detection of functionally discriminating residues  in enzyme families obtained by a conservation-controlled hmm iterative procedure for enzyme family classification ,  multiple pfam family based fdr recognition: detection of fdrs in combinations of pfam families that concurrently detect a particular enzyme function,  chiefc family specific sit evaluation: pairwise sequence comparison using a chiefc family specific sequence identity threshold , and  high specificity multiple prosite pattern recognition: detection of multiple prosite patterns that, taken all together, are specifically associated to a particular enzyme function. since each predictive component was designed to be highly precise and predictions made by any pair of components do not completely overlap , at the final stage, eficaz makes a particular ec number assignment when one or more of the four component methods predict a given ec number. since eficaz and its components have been fully described before  <cit> , here, we briefly introduce the basics of the predictive components based on the recognition of fdrs and highlight possible improvements.

a chiefc or pfam enzyme family e is defined by a multiple alignment of sequences evolutionary related to a seed group of sequences sharing a particular ec number ece. fdrs are residues in specific positions of the alignment, selected via an evolutionary footprinting method  <cit>  for their ability to discriminate between homo-functional and hetero-functional family members. homo- and hetero-functional family members are defined as sequences annotated or not annotated with the ec number ece, respectively. to apply an fdr recognition method, we first determine if a query sequence q is a member of an enzyme family e by evaluating a hidden markov model derived from e. if so, we check if q exhibits conservation of the fdrs associated with e. when both conditions are fulfilled, we predict that q is a homo-functional member of e and assign the ec number ece to the query sequence q. a figure illustrating the concept of fdrs can be found in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  example of functionally discriminating residues . a potential pitfall of the fdr recognition methods is that if the number of fdrs for a given enzyme family is too small, it can be difficult to achieve high prediction precision, because the matching of a very small number of residues in an alignment is more likely to occur by chance. conversely, if the number of fdrs is too large, the prediction recall might suffer, because the matching of a large number of residues in an alignment imposes a very restrictive condition. in principle, these issues could be addressed by techniques more advanced than fdr matching in terms of their ability to detect the signals characteristic of homo-functional enzyme family members in the query sequence. in this work, we describe the development of a method for enzyme function inference that is based on this premise. we employ a support vector machine  learning approach  <cit>  that evaluates all the aligned positions between a query sequence and the multiple sequence alignment associated to a given pfam or chiefc enzyme family. we term these components:  chiefc family based svm evaluation and  multiple pfam family based svm evaluation, and our benchmarks show that they yield higher predictive performance than their counterparts based on fdr recognition.

as mentioned above, in the previous implementation of eficaz, all ec numbers predicted by the four original component methods were been reported, whether they agreed with each other or not. here, based on estimations of the method's performance that are more realistic than those published before  <cit> , we show that such a strategy tends to negatively affect prediction precision, especially at low levels of maximal test to training sequence identity . to address this issue, we have developed a tree-based classification algorithm  <cit>  that applies a set of hierarchical rules to generate an ec number assignment from the list of the component methods that predict such ec number and the query sequence's mttsi. we have included the two additional svm-based component methods as well as the classification tree algorithm in the current implementation of eficaz, that we term eficaz <dig>  according to the results of our performance benchmarks, eficaz <dig> is dramatically more precise than eficaz at low mttsi, while it shows only a modest decrease in recall in this mttsi regime.

the rest of this paper is organized as follows: in the results and discussion section, we describe the development and benchmarking of the svm-based enzyme function inference method and the classification tree algorithm to generate the final ec number prediction, and present a comparative study of enzyme function annotations of the human proteome by eficaz <dig> and kegg  <cit> . in the conclusions section, we summarize the present work, stress its significance, and discuss its limitations. finally, in the methods section, we describe the data sources and procedures for training and benchmarking of eficaz <dig>  provide details about the statistical analyses and technical aspects of the generation of svm and classification tree models, and describe the data sources for the comparative analysis of enzyme function annotation of the human proteome.

RESULTS
novel eficaz components based on svm
two of the four component methods in the original implementation of eficaz are based on the identification of homo-functional members of a given chiefc  or multiple pfam enzyme family , i.e., members whose enzymatic activity coincides with that of the seed enzymes that originated the family. the criterion followed by these methods to consider a query sequence as homo-functional  is the matching of fdrs. since fdrs constitute a subset of all residues in the multiple sequence alignment associated to an enzyme family, we reasoned that an algorithm operating over all the aligned positions  could achieve higher discriminatory power, at least in certain cases. this situation is analogous to that of patterns and profiles for the identification of protein families and domains in the prosite database  <cit> .

initially, prosite consisted of patterns alone and was later enriched by the inclusion of profiles. although, in general, prosite profiles exhibit increased sensitivity with respect to patterns, profiles and patterns complement each other, i.e. both types of descriptors offer unique advantages in particular cases  <cit> .

our implementation of the profile-like approach to the recognition of homo-functional sequences is based on svm models associated to each enzyme family. the basic idea of the svm algorithm is mapping the data from an input space into a high-dimensional feature space via a kernel function, and finding a hyper-plane to separate positive and negative samples in the feature space  <cit> . the training of the svm models is carried out using the whole set of aligned residues in the corresponding multiple sequence alignment, which include both positives or homo-functional sequences and negatives or hetero-functional sequences . the new component methods were termed:  chiefc family based svm evaluation and  multiple pfam family based svm evaluation. in order to compare the performance of the new svm-based components to that of the fdr-based components, we carried out extensive benchmarking. first, we trained the two fdr-based  and the two svm-based components  using previous releases of the corresponding databases; these specific versions of the component methods were later included in eficaz <dig> version  <dig>  based on the release  <dig> of uniprot  <cit>  . then, we selected test sequences from all of the well annotated, newly added swiss-prot sequences in uniprot release  <dig>  that were not included in the release  <dig>  finally, for each test sequence, we collected the enzyme function predicted by each of the four components under evaluation and calculated the average precision and recall . the statistical significance of the differences in method's performance was evaluated as described in "statistical analyses", in the methods section.

since eficaz works by combining the predictions of different non-completely overlapping methods, even if the fdr- and the svm-based approaches had identical average performance, they could still be both useful, provided that each method can generate its own set of unique predictions. figure  <dig> shows the fraction of test sequences correctly predicted by either approach, both approaches, or none of them, when implemented on three-field or four-field ec number classifiers based on pfam or chiefc enzyme families. although the overlap of the approaches is high, each method provides a set of unique predictions, with a higher contribution from the svm-approach for three-field ec number classifiers , and similar contributions from each approach for four-field ec number classifiers. thus, we decided to keep the fdr-based predicted components and incorporate the svm-based components:  chiefc family based svm evaluation and  multiple pfam family based svm evaluation in the new version of eficaz.

combination rules based on classification trees
the original version of eficaz adopted the simple strategy of predicting a given ec number when at least one of its four component did  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the result of a benchmark that compares the performance of three different implementations of eficaz , in terms of average recall  and average precision , distinguishing between two levels of detail of enzyme function given by three-field  or four-field ec numbers . as opposed to the results from previous benchmarks  <cit> , the original eficaz implementation shows poor average precision at mttsi < 30% . the discrepancy arises because in this work we employed a more rigorous way to estimate the precision of our method . we analyzed the effect of adding the two svm-based components to eficaz, bringing the total number of component methods to six . as expected, a general pattern of increased recall  and decreased precision  with respect to the original four-component eficaz can be observed, although only for three-field ec number classifiers at mttsi < 30% was the decrease in precision statistically significant.

in order to improve the precision of our approach, we decided to investigate more efficient ways to integrate the predictions generated by the six eficaz component methods. we had demonstrated in our previous work that increased precision can be achieved by requiring the consensus of two or more components of eficaz  <cit> . here, we decided to train decision tree models to find the optimal way to take advantage of consensual information from the different components. decision trees are very effective tools in machine learning that produce accurate, highly interpretable predictions and have been successfully used in several computational biology and bioinformatics applications  <cit> , including enzyme function prediction  <cit> . for our particular case, we sought decision trees able to output a binary outcome , based on the prediction results of each component. decision trees that produce discrete outcomes are called classification trees  <cit> . there are several possibilities to consider regarding the level of generalization of the classification trees, for example, whether or not they depend on the specific ec number type. in principle, ec number-specific classification trees could yield more accurate predictions. however, since not all the ec number types are represented in the set of test sequences, we opted for an ec number-independent solution.

after the training procedure detailed in "decision tree learning model" in the methods section, we obtained the four classification trees shown in figure  <dig>  one for each combination of three or four-field ec number classifiers and low  or high  mttsi. inspection of the questions associated to the nodes of the classification trees indicates that the svm-based components are the most informative ones, for example, chiefc family based svm evaluation plays a role in all four trees . the version of our approach that employs these classification trees to integrate the information from the six possible component methods was termed eficaz <dig> 

we compared the performance of eficaz <dig>  to that of the original eficaz with four components or the updated version with six components. compared to the original eficaz, eficaz <dig> displays a statistically significant decrease in average recall at mttsi < 30%  and at a few other mttsi intervals, although the difference in recall is less than 5% in these latter cases. more importantly, eficaz <dig> shows a dramatic increase in average precision at mttsi < 30% . similar tendencies, with average recall increases and average precision decreases of higher magnitude, can be observed when eficaz <dig> is compared to eficaz updated to six components. in summary, we first shifted the precision-recall trade-off towards higher recall and lower precision by adding the svm-based components to the original eficaz implementation. then, by making more efficient use of consensus between predictions from different components via classification tree models, we achieved acceptable levels of average precision at low mttsi, with low impact on the average recall. the eficaz <dig> code is available upon request to academic and non-profit users. in addition, we have made eficaz <dig> available as a web service  <cit>  that allows the submission of query protein sequences and returns the output via email. if an enzyme function inference is made, the output consists of the four-field or three-field ec number prediction/s, the predictive component/s that recognized the ec number/s, the mttsi interval associated to the query sequence and the mean and standard deviation of the precision performance obtained from benchmarks.

eficaz <dig> exhibits an average precision of at least 90% for mttsi ≥ 40% , a non trivial achievement, considering that to achieve this level of precision from a sequence similarity criterion alone, mttsi ≥ 60% is required  <cit> . moreover, we significantly improved the prediction precision at mttsi < 30%, compared to the original implementation of eficaz. nevertheless, the recall in this regime still requires additional improvement . one possibility to overcome this eficaz2's limitation is to include methods that do not depend on sequence information. some protein features that have been used before with the purpose of enzyme function prediction include protein- protein interaction  <cit> , phylogenetic distribution, tissue specificity and subcellular localization  <cit> . although we will explore the possibility of including non-sequence-dependent features of proteins in future versions of eficaz, its implementation may be impaired by the low availability or inconsistency that this kind of annotations exhibits in current databases.

enzyme function annotation of the human proteome by eficaz2
we carried out an enzyme function reannotation of the human proteome  using eficaz <dig> version  <dig>  and compared our annotations with those available in a recent release of kegg . we decided to use kegg annotations rather than other sources to compare against our eficaz <dig> predictions because of the emphasis that this database puts on detailed ec number information, a fundamental requirement for the correct mapping of metabolic pathways. two different levels of detail of the enzyme function assignment  were considered separately for the analysis. table  <dig> summarizes the results of the comparison. a single protein may have more than one enzymatic activity; therefore, multiple ec numbers can be assigned to the same protein. where it is pertinent, both the number of protein sequences and the number of annotations  were reported.

 the source of the  <dig>  human protein sequences is the kegg genes database release  <dig> +/06- <dig>  of june  <dig>   <dig> 

 predictions made by eficaz <dig> version  <dig> 

 annotations obtained from the kegg brite database release  <dig> +/06- <dig>  of june  <dig>   <dig> 

 includes non-enzymes, considered as having zero-field ec numbers.

 non-bolded font indicates number of annotations while bolded font refers to the number of annotated protein sequences .

 here, we compare the agreement between annotations from kegg and eficaz <dig> that have the same level of detail, whether three-field or four-field ec numbers. three different levels of agreement are considered: 1) full: all ec numbers assigned to the protein by kegg and eficaz <dig> are identical, 2) partial: at least one but not all the ec numbers assigned to the protein by kegg and eficaz <dig> agree, and 3) none: none of the ec numbers assigned to the protein by kegg and eficaz <dig> coincides.

the level of agreement between kegg and eficaz <dig> can also be assessed on the basis of the total number of ec number predictions by one or the other source, rather than by the total number of annotated proteins. the number of annotations and the number of proteins may differ because a single protein may have more than one enzymatic activity; therefore, more than one ec number may be associated to it. in this case, we only distinguish between agreement and lack of it. the number annotations by eficaz <dig> and kegg for the  <dig>  sequences annotated with three-field ec numbers by both sources is  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. thus, the level of agreement is  <dig> %  and  <dig> %  when expressed in terms of the number of eficaz <dig> and kegg three-field ec number annotations, respectively. the number of annotations by eficaz <dig> and kegg for the  <dig>  sequences annotated with four-field ec numbers by both sources is  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. therefore, the level of agreement is  <dig> %  and  <dig> % , when expressed in terms of the number of eficaz <dig> and kegg four-field ec number annotations, respectively.

this comparative analysis indicates that when both sources make ec number assignments for the same protein sequence, there is a high chance that these assignments are consistent. on the other hand, at the level of detail of three-field ec numbers, eficaz <dig> generates more than double the number of unique assignments , while it provides more than 50% additional unique assignments when four-field ec numbers are considered. the unique ec number assignments made by eficaz <dig> can be found in additional file 2: novel enzyme function annotations of the human proteome by eficaz <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we described, implemented and tested eficaz <dig>  a new version of eficaz  <cit> , our automated approach for enzyme function prediction, enhanced by means of machine learning techniques. we increased the number of eficaz components from four to six by adding two methods based on the evaluation of pfam and chiefc enzyme families by svm classifiers. the svm-based components showed statistically significant performance improvements compared to their counterpart methods based on the detection of fdrs. we generated a set of classification trees to integrate and take advantage of the complementarity between the predictions from the six component methods, and achieved a remarkable increase in average precision at low mttsi, with only moderate impact on average recall. when we applied eficaz <dig> to the enzyme function reannotation of the human proteome, we found that for proteins annotated as enzymes by both eficaz <dig> and kegg, the assigned ec numbers were highly consistent. moreover, the number of unique enzyme assignments generated by eficaz <dig> is significantly higher than the unique enzyme annotations in kegg. thus, the results of the performance benchmark and the comparison with kegg, demonstrate that eficaz <dig> is a powerful and precise tool for enzyme function annotation, with multiple applications in genome analysis and metabolic pathway reconstruction.

