BACKGROUND
high-throughput quantitative profiling of transcripts and proteins is a widely used approach for studying biological processes. as a consequence, technologies develop rapidly in order to improve quality, increase the throughput and reduce the cost of expression profiling. currently, transcript profiling technologies include dna microarray  <cit> , serial analysis of gene expression   <cit> , massive parallel signature sequencing   <cit>  and recently the sequencing technologies from  <dig> life sciences   <cit>  and solexa . hybridization-based microarray technologies have been the dominating method for transcript profiling and are characterized by their ability to globally profile gene expression in large numbers of tissue samples. we recently developed and applied the cdna microarray technology in porcine studies of gene expression in multiple samples of diseased  <cit>  and healthy  <cit>  tissues. microarray expression profiles are extracted from signal intensities reflecting the amount of hybridized mrna to spotted dna whereas the above mentioned sequencing-based technologies provide expression levels that are absolute values computed as the number of transcripts observed for individual genes. at the protein level, introduction of the itraq-tagging approach, has allowed simultaneous quantitative comparison of individual protein levels in multiple tissue samples  <cit> . currently the itraq-based proteomics technology is not able to fully characterize entire proteomes  <cit> , which is a limiting factor in global comparative studies of transcript and protein expression. comparative analysis of protein expression in pig tissues using itraq-based tagging was recently reported  <cit> . in comparison to sage, mpss and solexa, 454-sequencing has increased the sequence length to a minimum of  <dig> bp. the ability for transcript profiling across multiple tissue samples has been reported for most high-throughput sequencing-based technologies, but has been limited to single tissue profiling for 454-sequencing  <cit> .

as new high-throughput technologies emerge and develop, more comparative expression studies across technologies and across transcriptomes and proteomes have been reported. at the transcript level, these studies have been dominated by comparisons of sage data with either affymetrix short oligonucleotide microarrays  <cit>  or cdna microarrays  <cit> . a few studies have compared long oligonucleotide microarrays with sage  <cit>  and mpss  <cit> . in one study, several commercial oligonucleotide-based platforms were compared with mpss  <cit> . as demonstrated by many previous studies, computation and evaluation of pearson's or spearman correlation coefficients allows for comparison of transcript-based expression profiles across technologies  <cit> . comparison of transcript and protein profiling has been used in studies of various mammalian tissues including high productivity chinese hamster ovary  cells  <cit> , murine stem cell populations  <cit>  and recombinant ns <dig> cells  <cit> . studies in yeast have also been reported that integrate transcript and protein expression  <cit> . integrative studies of transcriptomic and proteomic profiles by means of 454-sequencing and itraq-based proteomics have not been reported. the reported levels of correlation in gene expression across technologies have been fairly inconsistent. the observed discrepancies between transcript-based technologies have been suggested to result from errors in sage tag-to-gene mapping, errors in microarray probe-to-gene mapping  <cit>  and alternative polyadenylation  <cit> . the correlation between quantitative proteomics data and microarray data may be affected by alternative splicing  <cit> . studies of the correlation between the regulation of transcriptomes and proteomes have mostly used direct comparisons of absolute measurements within single tissues where the differences across genes in translational efficiencies, turn-over rates and half life will have great impact on the level of agreement. on the other hand, it seems appropriate to assume that, when comparing the transcript and protein level of a gene in two tissues, the tissue with the highest transcript level will also be the tissue with the highest protein level. hence, tissue expression ratios should be more compatible measurements when analyzing the relationship between transcript and protein abundances.

here we report a comparative study of three high-throughput technologies for multi-sample expression profiling using tissue samples from pig heart and skeletal muscle. we compare transcript profiles from 454-sequencing and cdna microarray based on relative expression within tissues and expression ratios across tissues. furthermore, we analyze the relationship between transcript and protein regulation between the two tissues by direct comparison of expression ratios from cdna microarray, 454-sequencing and itraq-based proteomics.

RESULTS
expression profiles for genes overlapping between technologies
identical tissue samples were used in expression profiling with 454-sequencing, cdna microarray and itraq-based proteomics, three for heart and three for skeletal muscle. an overview of the experimental setup is shown in figure  <dig>  for cdna microarray and itraq-based proteomics, a common reference sample was constructed by mixing equal aliquots from all six samples facilitating computation of relative expression profiles and expression ratios across tissues. for 454-sequencing data, relative expression profiles were computed from absolute transcript count per unigene id identified by sequence homology. expression profiles were compared across technologies by matching unique pig unigene sequence ids as the gene ids from the different expression sets. the unigene ids for 454-sequencing and microarray cdnas were identified by blastn whereas the unigene ids for the itraq-based proteins were identified by searching mass spectrometry data against the database of predicted proteins from unigene sequences downloaded at trest  <cit> . table  <dig> shows the number of unigene ids identified by microarray cdna, 454-sequencing and the overlapping unigene ids between the two transcript-based technologies. a major portion of the unigene ids identified by 454-sequencing is overlapping with unigene ids represented by microarray cdnas. of  <dig>  cdna sequences, we were able to map  <dig>  cdnas to unique unigene ids. a total of  <dig> . <dig> sequences were generated using the 454-based technology divided into  <dig>  for heart and  <dig>  for skeletal muscle. in total,  <dig>  sequences were mapped to  <dig>  unigene ids. the expression profiles from 454-sequencing were obtained by blastn sequence homology between  <dig> sequence reads and unigene database sequences. absolute gene expression was determined by counting the number of transcripts per gene, in this case computed as the number of  <dig> sequences for each unigene id in each of the six samples. in total,  <dig>  unigene ids were found to have sequence counts in all six samples. we were able to compare expression profiles from microarray and 454-sequencing for  <dig>  unigene ids by using the matching ids. relative expression profiles for 454-sequencing were represented by relative abundance  values computed as the absolute sample sequence count divided by the total sequence count in that sample. microarray ra values were computed as the sample signal intensity divided by the total sample signal intensity. ra values have previously been used as estimates of relative gene expression for rough comparisons within and across expression platforms  <cit> . logarithmic transformed ra values were used for subsequent analysis of differential gene expression using 454-sequencing. with the itraq-based proteomics we identified proteins corresponding to  <dig> unigene ids. in terms of matches between protein identifications from itraq-based proteomics and transcript profiles, we were able to map  <dig> unigene ids to 454-sequencing,  <dig> unigene ids to microarray cdnas and  <dig> unigene ids to both 454-sequences and microarray cdnas.

rna
count with
n ≥  <dig> indicates that these unigene ids are identified by blastn at least once in all six rna samples by 454-sequencing.

reproducibility of gene expression within and across 454-sequencing and cdna microarray
to determine the level of reproducibility of 454-sequencing and cdna microarray for measuring gene expression in heart and skeletal muscle and to evaluate the level of correlation in expression across the two technologies, pearson's correlations between ra for pairs of tissue samples for the  <dig>  shared genes were computed. for each of the six samples and two technologies, a vector of ra expression values was prepared. the resulting  <dig> ra expression vectors were then used to compute pair-wise tissue sample correlations, of which the average values within and across the two tissues and technologies are plotted in figure  <dig>  both technologies show good reproducibility within the same tissue shown by the high correlation values. for measuring expression in heart the average correlation is  <dig>  with 454-sequencing and  <dig>  with cdna microarray. the corresponding values for skeletal muscle were found to be  <dig>  for 454-sequencing and  <dig>  for cdna microarray. although high reproducibility was observed with both technologies, microarray has a slightly higher reproducibility than 454-sequencing for measuring these two particular tissues. the correlation within cdna microarray is relatively high across the two tissues with average correlation at  <dig>  in comparison to the average correlation at  <dig>  observed for 454-sequencing. to further analyze this difference between 454-sequencing and microarray, a comparison of the distribution of ra values was made. this revealed that 454-sequencing generates expression profiles with higher dynamic range in comparison to microarray, indicating that the relative expression profiles measured by 454-sequencing are more different . across 454-sequencing and microarray, the highest correlation in gene expression was observed between skeletal muscle samples with an average value at  <dig> . the correlation across 454-sequencing and microarray for measuring the gene expression in heart was less pronounced with an average value at  <dig> . these correlations are relatively low, but are still higher than the average correlation value at  <dig>  across heart and muscle using the two different transcript-based technologies as would be expected.

level of agreement between 454-sequencing and cdna microarray in detecting differentially expressed genes
the agreement between 454-sequencing and cdna microarray in identifying differential gene expression was evaluated by comparing lists of differentially expressed genes between heart and skeletal muscle. a t-test was carried out to compute the fold changes and p-values corrected for multiple testing was set to  <dig>  as a cutoff for significant regulation. identification of differentially expressed genes using 454-sequencing produces the lowest number of significantly regulated genes,  <dig> out of  <dig>  tested genes . out of the tested  <dig>  genes, microarray produces a list of  <dig>  genes that are significantly regulated, a much higher percentage  compared to that of 454-sequencing. of the  <dig> significantly regulated genes identified using 454-sequencing,  <dig> genes  are overlapping with the  <dig>  genes identified using cdna microarray. plotting the log <dig> of the expression ratios between heart and skeletal muscle for these  <dig> genes shows that the direction of the regulation is identical for a majority of the genes . out of  <dig> genes,  <dig>  are regulated in the same direction using both 454-sequencing and cdna microarray. however, some discrepancy was found between these two technologies in terms of the direction of the regulation. for instance,  <dig> genes were found to be up-regulated in heart compared to skeletal muscle with microarray, whereas 454-sequencing identified these genes as being down-regulated. similarly,  <dig> genes were found to be up-regulated in heart compared to skeletal muscle according to 454-sequencing but found to be down-regulated with microarray. thus, out of  <dig> genes,  <dig>  genes were significantly regulated in both technologies but in the opposite direction. the plot in figure  <dig> also demonstrates a higher dynamic range of the expression ratios for 454-sequencing than for cdna microarray.

correlation between heart-muscle expression ratios across transcript-based technologies and itraq-based proteomics
to investigate the level of agreement between transcript and protein ratios, heart-muscle expression ratios were extracted for the two transcript-based technologies and pair-wise comparisons were made to protein ratios obtained from itraq-based proteomics. using the unigene ids it was possible to link expression ratios for  <dig> genes across the three technologies. the pair-wise ratio comparisons for cdna microarray versus itraq and 454-sequencing versus itraq with indications of transcript and protein concordance are shown in figure  <dig>  the slopes for the fitted straight lines for cdna microarray and 454-sequencing were calculated to be  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. the corresponding pearson's correlation coefficients were positive and computed to be  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively, indicating that 454-based mrna expression ratios are slightly more in agreement with the protein ratios in comparison to mrna expression ratios produced by the cdna microarray platform. we made a list of the  <dig> overlapping genes and classified each gene in terms of concordance between transcript and protein ratios based on the distance of the data point to the fitted straight line and a cutoff value at one time the standard deviation of all distances . in the comparison of itraq and 454-sequencing,  <dig> unigene ids are not in concordance and the corresponding number for the comparison of itraq and microarray was  <dig> unigene ids. the observed positive correlations between transcript and protein ratios for both transcript-based technologies demonstrate that for most genes differences in transcript levels across heart and skeletal muscle is accompanied by similar differences in the protein level.

discussion
in this study, cdna microarray and 454-sequencing have been compared for transcript expression profiling in porcine heart and skeletal muscle tissues. protein abundance data for identical tissue samples was generated using itraq-based proteomics to analyze the relationship within genes between transcript and protein ratios across tissues.

a total of  <dig>  genes were detectable by both transcript-based technologies. the degree of overlapping genes detectable by both cdna microarray and 454-sequencing is affected by the nature of the two technologies. with cdna microarray, spot intensities are provided for all genes printed on the microarray slides, regardless of whether the genes are expressed or not. in case of 454-sequencing, expression of a gene can be measured if the gene is transcribed and if the sequencing depth of the experiment is sufficiently high. for example, low expressed genes will require that more sequences are generated in order to be captured. thus, the degree of overlap will depend largely on the genes being expressed in the particular tissues being examined. in order to compare t-tests for differential expression with cdna microarray we restricted the 454-sequencing data set to genes with expression values in all six tissue samples, which reduced the number of genes and thereby the number of overlapping genes. this restriction may have removed informative data, but was necessary to allow comparison.

the reproducibility in profiling gene expression across replicates of the same tissue sample is high for both transcript-based technologies with correlation values at  <dig>  for 454-sequencing and  <dig>  for cdna microarray. the expression correlation between heart and skeletal muscle within cdna microarray is relatively high  in comparison to the corresponding correlation observed for 454-sequencing , which suggests a larger tissue difference. we speculate that the main reason for the difference between these two transcript-based technologies is the differences in the dynamic range of the expression profiles. thus, the distribution of the ra values from 454-sequencing is considerably wider than that observed for microarray, indicating that sensitivity for detecting expression difference across tissue samples is highest for 454-sequencing. whether the larger number of genes detected to be different across skeletal muscle and heart by 454-sequencing is reflecting real biological differences between these two tissues is uncertain. the correlation values across 454-sequencing and microarray at  <dig>  and  <dig>  for heart and muscle respectively was relatively low, but considerably higher than the correlation value at  <dig>  across the two transcript-based technologies and across the two tissues. this means that even though the technologies are quite different they still measure the respective expression profiles within heart and muscle to be most similar.

the number of differentially expressed genes identified in relation to the number of tested genes was much higher for cdna microarray  than for 454-sequencing . because it is not the same set of genes being tested, it will of course not lead to the same list of identified differentially expressed genes. however, microarray tends to predict more genes that are differentially expressed. some might be false positives, even though p-values were corrected for multiple testing. if expression ratios across any given two tissues are close to one, they are vulnerable to random shifts between up-regulated, not-regulated and down-regulated genes. this has previously been suggested as a reason for discrepancy between cdna- and oligonucleotide-based microarray platforms in expression ratios  <cit> . cardiac and skeletal muscles represent two different tissues, although they can both be classified as muscle type tissues. the fact that only about 10% of the monitored genes with 454-sequencing are differentially expressed may not be surprising due to the similarity of these two tissues. thus, genes that are related to basic functions in muscle tissue cells would be expected to be expressed in both tissues. a relatively low number of differentially expressed genes between similar tissue samples has previously been observed in a study of rhabdomyosarcoma, fetal and skeletal muscle tissues, where  <dig> tags out of  <dig> unique tags were identified as differentially expressed, although this study was based on the sage technology  <cit> . the fact that cdna microarray has a lower dynamic range suggests that this technology is less sensitive to minor differences in gene expression across tissues than the sequencing-based approach. however, microarray detects more genes than 454-sequencing that are differentially expressed across cardiac and skeletal muscle. one explanation may be that if the variation in expression across sample replicates within tissue is considerably lower than the variation across tissues, significantly regulated genes can still be detected. this is supported by the high reproducibility observed for microarray within tissues in figure  <dig>  of the  <dig> genes identified as being differentially expressed with 454-sequencing,  <dig> was also identified by microarray and  <dig> were regulated in the same direction. out of  <dig> genes found to be significantly regulated between the two tissues,  <dig> genes are regulated in opposite direction with the two transcript-based technologies. this may also be due to random shifts between positive and negative values in the log <dig> ratio in either of the two technologies. other reasons for the disagreement in detection of differential expression could be gene mapping errors or alternative splicing events.

to investigate the relationship between the regulation of transcript and protein levels across tissues, the expression ratios across heart and skeletal muscle from microarray, 454-sequencing and itraq-based proteomics were compared. transcript and protein ratios across heart and skeletal muscle were shown to be positively correlated for  <dig> genes detectable by all three technologies. the correlation appear to be slightly more positive for the comparison with 454-sequencing  than for the comparison with cdna microarray . the slope is  <dig>  for cdna microarray and  <dig>  for 454-sequencing when ratios are compared against itraq-based ratios. the positive correlation between transcript and protein ratios suggests that for most genes, a relative tissue difference across a given tissue pair in transcript level leads to a similar difference in the protein level. a list of all  <dig> genes with expression ratios for the three technologies and indications of concordance was generated. genes, where the transcript-protein relationship deviates from this linearity might be interesting to study further, since they could be examples of differential regulation of either translation or mrna- or protein-turnover among the tissues. alternatively, translation of mrnas from genes that generate high levels of transcripts might be limited by the availability of rna-binding factor or the capacity of the translational machinery. deviations may also result from gene annotation errors  <cit>  or alternative splicing events taking place differentially across the two tissues, which are not equally detected by the transcript-based technologies and the itraq-based technology  <cit> . discrepancies arising from alternative splicing may potentially be verified with real time pcr. future improvement of the proteomics-based technologies should also increase the depth of comparative studies of transcripts and proteins profiles. while the analysis described here allows for the detection of genes with alternative regulation in different tissues, further experiments are needed in order to understand the biological basis of these differences.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have analyzed the reproducibility of expression data within and between microarray and 454-sequencing technologies. furthermore, we have integrated expression data from both transcriptomic and proteomic profiling to analyze the gene regulation across two porcine tissues by comparing tissue expression ratios of transcripts and proteins. both transcript-based technologies displayed a high degree of reproducibility within technology, but the reproducibility across these two technologies was modest. the majority of the differentially regulated genes identified by 454-sequencing was also found by the cdna microarray platform. most interesting was the comparison of data from both transcript-based technologies with relative expression values from itraq-based proteomics. integrative analysis revealed that the regulation of transcript and protein levels across the two tissues is positively correlated for most genes using tissue expression ratios for comparison. some genes without transcript-protein concordance were identified, which may arise from annotation errors or differential regulation of translation, turnover or alternative splicing. the results presented here should be of high importance for integration and analysis of high-throughput expression data, in particular for studies of the regulation of transcript and protein abundances in mammalian tissues.

