BACKGROUND
src is a non-receptor cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase activated by integrins and receptor tyrosine kinases  <cit> . in normal cells, src is involved in a vast range of physiological functions, including cell proliferation, cytoskeletal regulation, cell shape control, cell-matrix adhesion dynamics and motility  <cit> . in many types of human cancer, src is overexpressed or hyperactivated  <cit> . the prominent role of src in regulating cytoskeletal dynamics and cell motility makes the study of src indispensable in understanding cancer cell migration and invasion.

initially identified as a tyrosine-phosphorylated protein in v-src infected chicken embryo fibroblasts  <cit> , cortactin is a direct substrate of cellular src kinase  <cit> . it is phosphorylated by src at three tyrosine residues  in vitro  <cit> . the phosphorylation of tyr <dig> was identified by a mass spectrometry study  <cit> . these tyrosine phosphorylation sites reside in the proline-rich region, which is the least conserved domain in cortactin from different species  <cit> .

many studies have suggested that cortactin and its tyrosine phosphorylation regulate lamellipodial protrusion, cell spreading, intercellular adhesion and cell motility  <cit> . src-catalyzed cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation is involved in integrin-mediated cell adhesion and spreading  <cit> . cortactin knockdown in murine fibroblasts impairs both random and directional cell migration  <cit> . the expression of cortactin mutated at src phosphorylation sites  decreases cell motility in ecv <dig> endothelial cells  <cit> . the impaired cell motility in cortactin knockdown gastric cancer cell lines, with a low cortactin phosphorylation level, can be rescued by the ectopic expression of wild-type cortactin, but not by the mutant cortactin   <cit> .

early studies revealed that cortactin colocalizes with f-actin in the cortical structures of adherent cells  <cit> . it associates with the f-actin cytoskeleton through the f-actin binding tandem cortactin repeats and the n-terminal acidic domain that interacts with the actin-related protein  2/ <dig> complex for dendritic actin nucleation  <cit> . at the cell periphery, the f-actin cytoskeleton forms a highly organized meshwork that controls membrane protrusion and regulates cell motility  <cit> . during cell migration, the propelling force is generated by membrane protrusions and by membrane-matrix adhesions, called focal adhesions, at which transmembrane integrins link the extracellular matrix to the intracellular actin cytoskeleton  <cit> .

in contrast to the cortactin that colocalizes with f-actin at cortical regions, tyrosine phosphorylated cortactin  is almost exclusively localized at focal adhesions  <cit> . it is colocalized with paxillin and vinculin at the ends of f-actin stress fibers  <cit> . at focal adhesions, the clustered integrins recruit fak and facilitate its activation, forming an active fak-src complex that initiates many intracellular signaling events  <cit> . the autophosphorylation of fak at tyr <dig> creates a high affinity binding site for the src-homology  <dig> domain of src kinase  <cit> . the binding of src to fak leads to the formation of an active fak-src complex in which the active src kinase trans-phosphorylates fak at tyr <dig>   <dig> for maximal fak catalytic activity  <cit> .

fak recruits adaptor proteins and signaling molecules into focal adhesions, at which many are phosphorylated by the fak-src complex. the n-terminal ferm domain binds to growth factor receptors, the c-terminal fat domain interacts with talin and paxillin, and the proline-rich regions recruit src-homology  <dig>  domain-containing proteins, such as p130cas, graf and asap <dig>  <cit> .

in this study, we report that cortactin interacted with fak at focal adhesions at which it is phosphorylated by the fak-src complex. cortactin helps mediate the association of f-actin with focal adhesions. its n-terminus interacts with f-actin, and its c-terminus associates with fak. the tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin by the fak-src complex reduces its interaction with fak, most likely to increase its turnover at focal adhesions to promote cell motility.

RESULTS
colocalization of tyrosine phosphorylated cortactin and the active fak-src complex at focal adhesions
cortactin, src and actin are colocalized at the leading edge of lamellipodia in several types of cells, including cos <dig> cells   <cit> . in contrast, the tyrosine phosphorylated cortactin  clustered into dots, which were localized to focal adhesions marked by paxillin   <cit> . the phosphorylated cortactin at focal adhesions was phosphorylated at all three src kinase sites   . it could be dephosphorylated by alkaline phosphatase. no signal was detected by antibodies against phosphorylated cortactin in alkaline phosphatase-treated cells . in addition, the active src kinase  was also colocalized with focal adhesions . the kinase and its product of phosphorylated cortactin were colocalized at focal adhesions to which actin stress fibers were attached.

cortactin and its phosphorylated forms had very different cellular distribution pattern in cell, implicating additional functions for phosphorylated cortactin . at the lamellipodial leading edge, cortactin and its tyrosine phosphorylated forms had a different localization . cortactin traced the lamellipodial edge. however, phosphorylated cortactin dotted the edge and was colocalized with paxillin and tyr418-phosphorylated src at the newly formed focal contacts . during cell-matrix interactions, the clustering of integrins forms focal contacts, and then focal adhesions, at the leading edge of the lamellipodia  <cit> . at focal adhesions, src binds to tyr397-phosphorylated fak to form an active fak-src complex   <cit> . the colocalization of tyrosine phosphorylated cortactin with tyr418-phosphorylated src at focal adhesions implicates src in cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation at focal adhesions . it was further supported by the colocalization of phosphorylated cortactin with tyr397-autophosphorylated fak .

cortactin interacts with fak and its tyrosine phosphorylation reduces the interaction
results from immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that cortactin interacts with fak but not with paxillin . cortactin was clustered with fak at newly formed focal adhesions at the leading lamellipodial edge of migrating cells . to examine their interaction at focal adhesions, gfp-tagged cortactin mutants were expressed in cos <dig> cells, and the cellular extracts were immunoprecipitated using an anti-fak antibody . as shown in figure 4c, only the cortactin c-terminus interacted with fak. there was no interaction between the cortactin n-terminal f-actin binding domains and fak.

the cortactin c-terminus contains two important functional domains: the proline-rich region containing src kinase phosphorylation sites and the sh <dig> domain . the cortactin sh <dig> domain participates in the interaction with fak. in gst pulldown experiments, the deletion of the sh <dig> domain reduced, but did not completely block, the interaction with fak . cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation was not required for the interaction with fak, but it regulated their interaction. the phosphorylation-incompetent cortactin  bound fak, similar to wild-type cortactin . however, the cortactin phosphorylation mimic  exhibited a much weaker association with fak . thus, both the proline-rich region and the sh <dig> domain at the cortactin c-terminus were important for the cortactin-fak interaction.

the autophosphorylation of fak at tyr <dig> is essential for the binding to src to form the fak-src complex. to determine if src in the fak-src complex mediates the interaction between cortactin and fak, tyr <dig> in fak was mutated. exogenous gfp-tagged fak was expressed in cos <dig> cells and was found to localize to focal adhesions . in the gst pull-down assay, the gfp-tagged fak and the gfp-tagged fak mutant  exhibited no difference in their association with gst-cortactin , indicating that the interaction between cortactin and fak is not mediated by src.

of the several functional domains in fak, the cortactin-interaction domain resides in proline-rich regions  <dig> and  <dig> . by mutating the proline residues in these regions , their interaction with cortactin was decreased . this suggests that the interaction between cortactin and fak is mediated by the c-terminal domains of cortactin and proline-rich regions  <dig> and  <dig> of fak, and that it is regulated by cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation.

cell adhesion induced cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation at focal adhesions
cell adhesion induces the formation of the fak-src complex, which leads to the phosphorylation of various fak-associated proteins  <cit> . during the adhesion of suspended hek <dig> cells in a fibronectin-coated dish, fak autophosphorylation and the phosphorylation of fak-associated p130cas were both increased . as a fak associated protein, cortactin was also phosphorylated on tyrosine residues during this cell adhesion process . the co-immunoprecipitation of fak and its autophosphorylated form from adherent cells using an anti-cortactin antibody demonstrates the association of tyrosine phosphorylated cortactin with the fak-src complex .

during the initial stage of cell adhesion and spreading, fak, cortactin and actin were all colocalized at the edge of the membrane . cell adhesion induced fak clustering and focal adhesion formation. fak at focal adhesions was autophosphorylated . in these adherent cells, cortactin was still primarily localized to the cell cortex, and cortactin clustering could only be observed at newly formed focal contacts at the leading edge of the lamellipodia . however, cortactin was tyrosine phosphorylated at focal adhesions . the tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin might decrease its interaction with fak, because the cortactin phosphorylation mimic  exhibited a much weaker association with fak .

fak-src complex is required for cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation at focal adhesions
to examine the function of the fak-src complex in cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation, fak was knocked down by rna interference in cos <dig> cells . cortactin expression was not affected by fak knockdown, but cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation was greatly reduced . because focal adhesions can still form in fak-deficient cells  <cit> , cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation at focal adhesions in fak knockdown cos <dig> cells was analyzed by immunofluorescence staining. as shown in figure 5h, cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation was not detected at focal adhesions. in contrast, cortactin knockdown by rna interference had no effect on fak or its autophosphorylation . thus, these results suggest that at focal adhesions cortactin interacts with fak, which is required for cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation.

fak autophosphorylation at tyr <dig> is essential for the formation of the fak-src complex. by mutating tyr <dig> of fak into phe, the formation of the fak-src complex at focal adhesions can be disrupted  <cit> . in the gfp-tagged fak  mutant, autophosphorylation at tyr <dig> was abolished and src-catalyzed tyr <dig> phosphorylation was inhibited . however, the interaction of fak with cortactin was not affected by the mutation at tyr <dig> in gst pull-down experiments , and the tyr397-mutated fak, overexpressed in cos <dig> cells, could be co-immunoprecipitated with cortactin by the anti-cortactin antibody . although cortactin could still interact with the mutant fak, the mutation disrupted the interaction between fak and src, leading to a decrease in cortactin phosphorylation. tyrosine phosphorylation in cortactin immunoprecipitated from cos <dig> cells overexpressing the mutant gfp-tagged fak  was dramatically reduced . thus, it appears that cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation at focal adhesions requires the formation of the fak-src complex.

to determine whether cortactin is phosphorylated by fak or by src in the fak-src complex, cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation was analyzed in hek <dig> cells overexpressing gfp-tagged fak, src or both. the results of this experiment suggest that cortactin was phosphorylated by src . furthermore, cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation could be promoted by expressing the constitutively active src, but not the inactive src. and mutating the src phosphorylation sites in cortactin  inhibited src-catalyzed cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation .

the activation of src in the fak-src complex was designated by an increase in tyr418-phosphorylated src following cell adhesion . src was recruited to focal adhesions by tyr397-autophosphorylated fak to form the fak-src complex during cell adhesion . although cortactin interacted with fak at focal adhesions, it was phosphorylated by src kinase in the fak-src complex. in cells overexpressing active src, most cortactin was phosphorylated and recruited to cortical focal adhesions . in these cells, cortactin and its phosphorylated form were well co-localized. in contrast, the expression of inactive src did not affect cortactin phosphorylation or the formation of focal adhesions .

cell motility is regulated by fak-src complex-catalyzed cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation
the fak-src complex holds the center stage in the regulation of cell motility  <cit> . cell migration is inhibited in fak-deficient cells and in cells treated with the src family kinase inhibitor, pp <dig>  <cit> . in ht <dig> cells, fak knockdown by rna interference inhibited cell migration, as did inhibiting src kinase activity with pp <dig> . in addition, overexpressing the gfp-tagged fak mutant , which prevents formation of the fak-src complex, also inhibited cell migration . as a substrate of the fak-src complex, cortactin was involved in regulating cell motility. cortactin knockdown in ht <dig> cells by rna interference inhibited cell migration .

cortactin interacted with fak and was phosphorylated by the fak-src complex . to investigate the role of fak-src complex-catalyzed cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation in cell motility, the phosphorylation sites in cortactin were mutated into phe residues  to block tyrosine phosphorylation. the phe mutations in cortactin incompetent tyrosine phosphorylation by the fak-src complex, but did not block the interaction of cortactin with fak . overexpressing the phosphorylation-incompetent cortactin mutant  in ht <dig> cells inhibited cell migration , indicating that cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation regulates cell migration.

the tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin by the fak-src complex most likely promotes its dissociation from fak because the interaction between the cortactin phosphorylation mimic and fak was greatly reduced . the phosphorylation-incompetent cortactin mutant  formed a stable interaction with fak, and cell migration was inhibited. in contrast, the cortactin phosphorylation mimic exhibited increased turnover at focal adhesions   <cit> , greatly enhancing cell migration . overexpressing wild-type cortactin in ht <dig> cells led to an increase in cellular cortactin, which might increase levels of the phosphorylated form, thereby slightly enhancing cell migration . taken together, these results suggest that tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin regulates cell motility by increasing cortactin turnover at focal adhesions.

cortactin interacts with f-actin through its n-terminal f-actin binding domains  <cit> . in order to understand the effects of cortactin turnover on f-actin dynamics at focal adhesions, the cortactin n-terminal domains were truncated to disrupt its interaction with f-actin. without these domains, the remaining cortactin c-terminus could still interact with fak and could be phosphorylated by the fak-src complex . however, cell migration was inhibited by overexpressing the cortactin c-terminus in ht <dig> cells . in addition, overexpressing the c-terminus of the cortactin phosphorylation mimic also inhibited cell migration . thus, the c-termini of cortactin and the phosphorylation mimic interfere with the ability of native cortactin to regulate cell migration.

the tyrosine phosphorylation of the cortactin c-terminus was essential for its inhibitory effect on cell migration. cell migration was not inhibited by the phosphorylation-incompetent cortactin c-terminus . the presence of the non-phosphorylated cortactin c-terminus did not affect the function of phosphorylated cortactin. in summary, the increased turnover of the cortactin phosphorylation mimic at focal adhesions increased f-actin dynamics and promoted cell migration. the stable association of the phosphorylation-incompetent cortactin at focal adhesions reduced f-actin dynamics and inhibited cell migration. truncating the n-terminal f-actin binding domains did not affect f-actin dynamics. the stable association of the phosphorylation-incompetent cortactin c-terminus at focal adhesions appears to be independent of f-actin dynamics and then had no effect on cell motility. however, the mechanism by which the c-terminus of the cortactin phosphorylation mimic interferes with cellular phosphorylated cortactin and inhibits cell migration requires further study.

discussion
at focal adhesions, src and fak form an active kinase complex to phosphorylate associated proteins. the identification of cortactin, a src kinase substrate and f-actin associated protein  <cit> , as a fak interactor at focal adhesions suggests that fak-src-catalyzed cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation is involved in the regulation of cell motility . src was the first oncogene to be discovered and is one of the most intensely studied  <cit> . in cancer cells, active src not only increases cell growth and survival, but also promotes actin cytoskeleton reorganization and decreases cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesions to facilitate motility and invasiveness  <cit> . cortactin is frequently overexpressed in malignant tumors and there is a correlation between cortactin phosphorylation and enhanced cell migration and metastasis  <cit> . cortactin and its tyrosine phosphorylation are involved in adhesion-dependent cell edge protrusion  <cit> . cortactin is phosphorylated by src at the leading edge of lamellipodia, where in association with the arp2/ <dig> complex, it initiates the branching of actin filaments to promote the formation of membrane protrusions  <cit> . the overexpression of constitutively active src appears to induce cortactin phosphorylation and membrane protrusions at the edge . cell migration and invasion are essential elements of cancer metastasis. during cancer cell invasion, cortactin is one of the proteins that direct actin bundles to form invadopodia  <cit> . the involvement of src-catalyzed cortactin phosphorylation in cell motility control suggests cortactin might be a crucial regulator of cancer metastasis.

for cell migration, the turnover of the cytoskeleton at focal adhesions is more important than stable association. to propel cell movement, the dynamic interplay between the actin cytoskeleton and cell adhesion sites induces membrane protrusions and generates traction force. the external force exerted on the cell and the internal force generated by the f-actin cytoskeleton during cell migration are anchored and sensed at focal adhesions, particularly by the fak-src complex  <cit> . one method of cell motility control by the fak-src complex is the phosphorylation of fak associated proteins such as paxillin and p130cas  <cit> . mutating the fak-src phosphorylation sites in paxillin  inhibits the turnover of focal adhesions and reduces cell motility  <cit> . cortactin is phosphorylated by the fak-src complex at c-terminal tyrosine residues   <cit> . the structural configuration of cortactin, which contains n-terminal f-actin binding domains and c-terminal fak association domains, enables it to mediate the association between the f-actin cytoskeleton and focal adhesions   <cit> . by regulating the interaction between the cortactin c-terminus and fak, cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation is able to control the association or dissociation of f-actin at focal adhesions. this hypothesis is supported by the results of the phosphorylation-incompetent cortactin mutant  and its n-terminal domain truncated form. blocking tyrosine phosphorylation by mutating tyr into phe  stabilizes the interaction of cortactin with fak, decreases the turnover of f-actin at focal adhesions and inhibits cell migration . by truncating the n-terminal f-actin binding domains, the remaining cortactin c-terminus can no longer interact with f-actin. its association or dissociation at focal adhesions has no effect on f-actin dynamics--the inhibitory effect on cell migration by the stably-associated phosphorylation-incompetent cortactin could be reversed by truncating the n-terminal f-actin binding domains .

the reduced interaction between the cortactin phosphorylation mimic and fak suggests that cortactin dissociates from focal adhesions after being phosphorylated . our results and those of others indicate that the cortactin phosphorylation mimic promotes focal adhesion turnover and increases cell migration   <cit> . it is very likely that cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation by the fak-src complex dissociates cortactin from focal adhesions and promotes f-actin turnover. the inhibition of cell migration by the n-terminal truncated cortactin phosphorylation mimic implies additional functions for tyrosine phosphorylated cortactin . without the n-terminal f-actin binding domains, the phosphorylation mimic c-terminal can no longer interact with the f-actin cytoskeleton. this suggests that the c-terminus of the cortactin phosphorylation mimic interferes with the ability of cortactin to regulate motility. importantly, the c-terminus of the phosphorylation-incompetent cortactin mutant does not have a similar inhibitory effect on cell migration . thus, the effect of the cortactin phosphorylation mimic c-terminus on cell migration is phosphorylation specific. the wild-type cortactin c-terminus can also inhibit cell migration because it can be phosphorylated within the cell . it is not clear what functions are perturbed by the cortactin phosphorylation mimic c-terminus. fak autophosphorylation and centrosome orientation, which are important for cell motility control, are not affected by the cortactin c-terminal mutants . further study is required to clarify the role of the cortactin phosphorylation mimic c-terminus on cell migration.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we demonstrate that cortactin is recruited by fak into focal adhesions, where it is phosphorylated by the fak-src complex. the interaction between fak and cortactin is mediated by the sh <dig> domain and the proline-rich region and is regulated by fak-src complex-catalyzed cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation. cortactin at focal adhesions can further recruit cortactin interacting proteins. the structure of cortactin, which contains n-terminal f-actin binding domains and c-terminal fak association domains, allows it to function as a bridge between the f-actin cytoskeleton and focal adhesions. after the tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin by the fak-src complex, the reduced interaction of cortactin with fak leads to an increased turnover of the associated f-actin at focal adhesions. these changes in local f-actin dynamics ultimately regulate cell motility.

