BACKGROUND
immobilization of captive and free-ranging pinnipeds is often required for biological studies, translocation or the examination of sick or injured animals. however, pinnipeds present unique problems when using chemical immobilization agents because they have evolved specific adaptations in their respiratory, cardiovascular and thermoregulatory systems enabling them to dive for extended periods. these adaptations can exacerbate problems associated with chemical immobilization procedures  <cit> . this physiological "dive response" is characterized by profound bradycardia, shunting of blood away from peripheral tissues, and periods of prolonged apnoea  <cit>  that can be aggravated by the presence of immobilizing agents in the blood and tissues. this may result in relatively high concentrations of drug being transported to central organs, particularly the brain, which also affects the level of immobilization and recovery time  <cit> . the physiological status of an animal has also been shown to have a profound effect on sensitivity to immobilization and on the ability to metabolize chemicals  <cit> . furthermore, the number of previous captures and immobilizations can increase recovery time  <cit> . therefore, knowledge of the physiological  and anatomical characteristics , methods of administration, and species-specific response to particular drugs are important for the effective, safe and optimal application of chemical immobilization in free-ranging wildlife species.

intramuscular  injection has been one of the most commonly used routes for administration of immobilizing agents in pinnipeds , and it is thought to be relatively safe and easy compared to other methods. immobilization by intravenous  injection has recently become more common with some species  <cit> . although physical restraint is required prior to the administration of drugs using iv methods, smaller doses and better control of the intensity and duration of immobilization are generally achieved compared to im injection methods. pinnipeds that received the same drugs by iv and im injection have been reported to have shorter induction and recovery times and less variable responses when iv methods were used  <cit> .

weddell seals  are deep-diving  predators that have been the subject of many studies requiring immobilization. many of these studies have reported varying responses to immobilizing agents  <cit> , and most have reported mortality rates ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> %, indicating that weddell seals may be particularly sensitive. more recently, a safe method of gas anaesthesia  of weddell seals has been reported by kusagaya & sato  <cit>  and bodley et al.  <cit>  ; however, this procedure is not always practical for field situations due to the cumbersome equipment required. therefore, a reliable, safe and direct technique of immobilization is still required for this species.

a 1: <dig> mixture of tiletamine and zolazepam  has been characterized by rapid, smooth induction, good analgesia , maintenance of pharyngeal and laryngeal reflexes, and a smooth recovery phase  <cit> . the tiletamine:zolazepam mixture has been used successfully to immobilize a range of domestic and wild mammals, including some pinniped species  <cit> . in its experimental stage , telazol was effective with weddell seals  <cit> ; however, some complications  were encountered in a later study by phelan & green  <cit> . this may have been due to the method of administration rather than the drug itself . the 1: <dig> mixture of tiletamine:zolazepam potentially offers a safe and effective method for immobilizing weddell seals in the field.

in this study we investigated the use of tiletamine:zolazepam  for weddell seals. we compared performance between iv and im injection, and examined the relationship between age, body condition  and stage of lactation on induction and recovery time. we hypothesized that variation in these parameters among individuals would influence drug sequestration and recovery time and that this may be more pronounced than at other stages in this species' life history due to the physiological pressures and energetic constraints of lactation  <cit> . in addition, we examined differences in recovery time due to the number of previous immobilizations. we hypothesized that recovery time would decrease for individuals that had been chemically immobilized previously, as has been found in other species  <cit> .

RESULTS
there was a strong linear relationship between dosage  and recovery time . examination of two outliers revealed that there was nothing unusual about these individuals. both were captured more than once and had average recovery times for the other captures. exclusion of these outliers improved the relationship . to control for the size of the seal and the level of immobilization, recovery times were weighted by the reciprocal of the dosage  <cit> , referred to as 'weighted recovery time'

intravenous injection
induction
the mean dosage of tiletamine:zolazepam injected iv was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg/kg, with an average induction time of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  seconds . using information-theoretic weights of evidence  <cit>  to examine the variation in induction time, there was no evidence that tbl or age affected induction time , but that stage  had some effect , with induction time being longer at the end of lactation . we examined if there was an effect of the number of previous captures on induction time using a generalized linear mixed-effects model . here, capture was the total number of captures experienced by that female and induction was the induction time measured for the last capture. the term stage was also included as a random effect to account for variation due to stage of lactation . the results revealed that capture explained  <dig>  % of the variation in induction time , indicating  that this model was  <dig>  times more likely to explain variation in induction time than the null model . table  <dig> shows average induction times for each of the model predictors at average dose rates.

recovery
information-theoretic weights of evidence revealed that none of the terms considered explained the variation in weighted recovery times . the glmm used to examine the influence of the number of previous captures on weighted recovery time revealed that capture only explained  <dig>  % of the variance in weighted recovery time and the evidence ratio of this model to that of the null model was only  <dig> , indicating no evidence of an effect of capture .

intramuscular injection
only  <dig> females were injected intramuscularly with the tiletamine:zolazepam mixture. three of these were post-partum captures and one was an end-lactation capture. average dosage was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg/kg, with an average induction time of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  minutes. one female was immobilized  both post-parturition and at the end of lactation. no problems were associated with her first immobilization procedure. during her second capture at the end of lactation, induction was fast , indicating possible accidental intravenous injection. regular shallow breathing was maintained through most of the procedure. however, after approximately  <dig> minutes she experienced a prolonged apnoeic event, was unresponsive to resuscitation procedures and subsequently died.

discussion
telazol administered intravenously was an effective drug for the immobilization of weddell seals. however, intramuscular administration was less successful with a longer induction and recovery times and a  <dig> %  mortality rate. the im route of injection has been previously favoured because physical restraint is often not required so administration is easy and safe for personnel. nonetheless, the im route of administration has some disadvantages. accidental injection into the blubber  can lead to variable induction and recovery times. furthermore, how quickly the drug is absorbed into the bloodstream depends, in part, on the blood supply to the muscle. blood supply increases during physical activity, which could account for the deaths reported by phelan & green  <cit>  because they physically handled and restrained females before injection. in this study, females were only immobilized im when iv injection was impossible , so individuals were physically handled and potentially agitated similar to those in the phelan & green study. the single death in this study may have resulted from the accidental injection of a larger amount of drug into a vein. other studies administering the tiletamine:zolazepam mixture im have also shown variable results, especially with higher doses , although these may have also resulted from accidental injection iv. taken together, these observations suggest that the tiletamine:zolazepam combination may have a narrow margin of safety in some seal species when administered im, and that im administration increases the risks associated with immobilization. by contrast, iv administration may be an acceptable alternative.

weddell seals appear to be more sensitive, to some extent, than other species to drug type  <cit>  and method of administration. some drugs  that have lead to fatalities in weddell seals have also had variable and lethal results with other similar-sized phocids  <cit> . ketamine hcl, a rapid acting dissociative with a similar molecular structure to phencyclidine hcl, has also been lethal to weddell seals, but not to other species at similar dosages  <cit> . in general, weddell seals appear to respond to tiletamine and zolazepam in a similar way to southern elephant seals, but we can only speculate as to why differences might exist for other drug types. weddell seals live in an extreme environment year round and their energetic adaptations might influence their sensitivity and response.

in this study, chemical immobilization with tiletamine and zolazepam using the iv method was successful in all cases. there was a small effect of stage of lactation on induction time, with an increase of about six seconds  at the end of lactation. the number of previous captures appeared to increase induction time , suggesting a decrease in sensitivity to the chemical when first introduced into the bloodstream, even up to 2– <dig> weeks later. on the other hand, there were no detectable effects of age, condition, stage of lactation or number of previous captures on weighted recovery time. the animals immobilized were under varying degrees of physiological pressures associated with the negative energy balance of lactation  <cit> . it seems reasonable that if physiological state was to affect weighted recovery time it would be most evident in these individuals.

previous studies on southern elephant seals have shown an effect of age and condition on recovery time  <cit> . however, woods et al.  <cit>  found no significant difference in recovery time between post-parturition and end-of-lactation females, although they did find that pre-moult seals  had shorter recovery times. the differences between individuals found in the field et al.  <cit>  study were based on measurements of condition and recovery times at three different haul-out periods separated by months as opposed to weeks in our study. therefore, our results in combination with the findings of woods et al.  <cit>  suggest that recovery time does not differ between physiologically stressed animals within the same state , although differences resulting from changes in physiological status at other times  may affect recovery times enough to be measurable in field studies.

although we did not find a difference in weighted recovery time and number of captures, our sample size was low. with a larger sample size and more repeated captures , field et al.  <cit>  found a positive relationship between weighted recovery time for southern elephant seals and the number of times an individual had been immobilized previously. however, this relationship was not as apparent up to  <dig> captures , so it is possible that we did not have the statistical power to detect a relationship. consequently, we suggest careful monitoring of immobilization recovery times during longitudinal studies  on weddell seals to examine this potential relationship further.

CONCLUSIONS
the 1: <dig> mixture of tiletamine and zolazepam appears to be a suitable and safe drug for intravenous immobilization of weddell seals. it appears that variability in recovery rates generally increases with higher doses  likely due to individual differences in the rates of metabolism and elimination of tiletamine and zolazepam  <cit> . taking these differences into consideration, we recommend a mass-specific dose of  <dig>  –  <dig>  mg/kg which gives an average recovery time of  <dig> minutes that should be suitable for most procedures requiring immobilization . this corresponds to the dosage recommended for southern elephant seals by mcmahon et al.  <cit> . although immobilization techniques will vary for species and situations, this suggests that a mass-specific dose of  <dig>  mg/kg may be a good starting point for other age classes and other phocid seals.

