BACKGROUND
as soon as genome sequences of sufficient length were available, three groups  <cit>  independently described powerful methods  to study large-scale genome structure at sequence level. the emerging view was the existence of long-range, power-law correlations, thus pointing to fractal  structure in dna sequences. however, such fractal structure, implying the existence of dna segments of all sizes, directly clashes with the view of the genome as composed of long, homogeneous segments .

isochores - long , compositionally fairly homogeneous genome regions of different average gc levels were uncovered by analytical ultracentrifugation of bulk dna  <cit> . the phylogenetic distribution of isochores was traditionally studied by centrifugation techniques  <cit> , but the analysis of base composition at third codon position or the comparison of gc content between coding and non-coding sequences  <cit>  has been also used.

the paradox between a fractal  or an isochore structure for the genome has been recently solved in the human genome by the discovery that correlations can show deviations from the power-law behavior  <cit> . interestingly, such deviations can be associated to isochore-like regions  <cit>  -long-homogeneous genome regions computationally predicted by directly examining the genome sequence and sharing many compositional and biological features with true isochores  <cit> .

in this way, the phylogenetic distribution of large-scale genome patchiness can be now explored by analyzing the deviations of power-law behavior in long-range correlations. the method of choice is detrended fluctuation analysis or dfa; the deviations from the power-law can then be revealed by the variations in the local behavior of the scaling exponent α  <cit> . here, we determined the variation of α at different scales in a wide phylogenetic range of genome sequences. our analysis clearly distinguishes two characteristic length scales, the larger of which is demonstrated to be unambiguously associated with the isochore-like regions, as detected in silico. the phylogenetic distribution of such patterns leads to insights in understanding the evolution of genome compositional heterogeneity.

RESULTS
two characteristic length scales in human dna
long-range correlations are detected by log-log plots of the fluctuation function f vs. the length scale ℓ. the scaling exponent α is then given by the slope of the linear fit . figures  <dig> and  <dig> show how α profiles are used to uncover characteristic scales in human dna sequences. significant deviations from the power-law behavior reveal two main characteristics scales in a large human sequence contig . the intermediate scale goes from log <dig> ℓ >  <dig>   to log <dig> ℓ ≈  <dig>  , while the large scale spans up to log <dig> ℓ ≈  <dig> . these values are representative for the entire human complement, but when the available contigs were shorter, the large scale typically extended only until log <dig> ℓ ≈  <dig> .

biological source for the two characteristic scales in human dna
short- and long-range genome structure is shaped by a wide range of structural, functional, and evolutionary factors acting on the dna sequence: mutational bias, transcriptional activity, translational constraints, patterns of gene expression, open or closed state of the chromatin, insertion of repeat elements, etc. . because of its overlap, discerning the role of each of these factors is a difficult task. experiments of selective shuffling of some genome regions, while leaving others intact, can be used to approach this problem. here, we used such selective shuffling to identify the biological source for the two characteristic scales identified in dna sequences  <cit> . as an example, figure  <dig> shows the results for human chromosome  <dig>  when the sequence segments corresponding to the isochore-like regions  were internally shuffled, the small scale properties disappeared, and the α profile remained flat with a constant value of  <dig> , as expected in a random sequence without compositional structure. the only effect of the shuffling in the large scale was a slight increase in the corresponding peak: as the shuffling homogenizes the small scale, the large scale patchiness becomes more discernible. therefore, the large scale properties observed in the α profile can be unambiguously attributed to the computationally predicted, isochore-like regions  <cit> . however, when the isochore-like sequences were shuffled internally but transposable elements  were left untouched, or when only the tes were shuffled internally, the α profile is almost identical to the original α profile of the natural sequence. this means that the tes are the main contributors to the heterogeneity at intermediate scale, although introns and exons also make a contribution .

phylogenetic distribution
as shown above, the α profile revealed as a simple and powerful method to determine the phylogenetic distribution of large-scale patchiness. two α profiles have been already shown for the human genome in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  we have also plotted sample α profiles for good-quality chromosome sequences from chimpanzee and dog , mouse and rat , chicken and danio , drosophila and caenorhabditis elegans  and arabidopsis thaliana and saccharomyces cerevisiae . the numerical values to trace the α profiles for the remaining chromosomes with sequence contigs of good-quality and sufficient length from all these species are given in the additional file  <dig> 

the extension of the intermediate scale in the other vertebrate genomes is similar to that observed in the human genome, and also in the arabidopsis genome, while in the invertebrates  the intermediate scale reaches only to  <dig> kbp. notably, in the yeast genome this intermediate scale does not exist at all. the beginning of the large scale in all the genomes analyzed ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> kbp, while the ending length often extended beyond  <dig> kbp, or even  <dig> mb, depending mainly on the length of the available sequence contigs.

the phylogenetic distribution of compositional patchiness within vertebrates has been traditionally assessed by ultracentrifugation of bulk dna  <cit> , uncovering a clear isochore structure in mammals and birds  <cit>  and also in some reptiles  <cit> . the α profiles used here reveal large-scale genome patchiness on a wider phylogenetic range, extending to invertebrates , plants  and yeasts .

besides the profiles for the natural sequence, all these figures also include the profiles for the corresponding artificial sequence obtained by internally shuffling the isochore-like sequence regions, as predicted by isofinder  <cit> . in all the genomes analyzed, the large scale was practically unaffected . therefore, the large-scale patchiness observed in the α profiles in all these species can be attributed to the in silico determined, isochore-like regions.

discussion
large-scale genome compositional heterogeneity has been traditionally revealed through analytical ultracentrifugation of bulk dna in a large range of genomes . however, at the sequence level, such demonstration has been hampered by the lack of a consistent, reliable, and widely applicable method. the α profiles used here prove to be an excellent tool for this task, allowing us to determine the extent of the different scales of genome compositional heterogeneity in a wide phylogenetic range: yeasts, plants, invertebrates, fishes, birds and mammals. additionally, the selective shuffling experiments used here to specifically randomize selected genome segments, while not touching others, allow us to identify the in silico determined, isochore-like regions as the biological source for large-scale patchiness throughout the entire range of the species analyzed.

a clear limitation of our approach is that it depends critically on the availability of good-quality sequence contigs of sufficient length. for this reason, we have analyzed only the best genome assemblies from eleven eukaryotic species. however, as these species cover a wide phylogenetic spectrum  the conclusions should be general.

in all these genomes, the large-scale patchiness revealed by α profiles can be associated with the isochore-like genome regions predicted by isofinder, thus emphasizing the reliability of this algorithm in predicting isochore-like regions at the sequence level.

CONCLUSIONS
the analysis of the deviations in the power-law behavior of long-range correlations, through α profiles, allowed us to uncover large-scale genome structure in the eleven sequenced genomes for which sequence contigs of sufficient length and quality are available. furthermore, through selective shuffling experiments, we were able to identify the computationally-determined, isochore-like structure of these genomes as the biological source for such large-scale patchiness.

