BACKGROUND
pheromones are specific chemical signals, produced for communication between individuals of the same species, that trigger a specific natural behaviour or physiological process  <cit> . signals can be single compounds or combinations of compounds in a precise ratio, detected either by smell or taste  <cit> . ubiquitous among invertebrates, pheromones are used to coordinate many aspects of social behaviour, including sexual recognition and attraction to bring opposite sex conspecifics together for mating  <cit> . vertebrates also make widespread use of chemical scent signals for within-species communication. however, the more complex individual-specific odours of mammals, combined with variable responses to scents that often depend on context and learning, have led many to suggest that mammalian scent signals generally do not trigger the specific inherent responses required to fulfil the classical definition of pheromones  <cit> . how then do mammals use scent signals to stimulate the individual-specific responses that underpin the typical flexibility of mammalian social behaviour?

scents play an integral role in mediating reproductive interactions in many mammals. this includes not only the recognition and location of opposite sex conspecifics but also assessment of the suitability and, thus, the attractiveness of different individuals as potential mates  <cit> . in common with many species, male house mice advertise their location, successful territory ownership and dominance through scent marks continually deposited around their defended territory  <cit> . these urinary scents provide a broad range of individual-specific information on a male's genetic compatibility and quality that is used by females in mate selection, influencing the relative attractiveness of individual males and their scents  <cit> . females range over several male territories under natural conditions, strongly preferring to mate with dominant territory owners, and approach selected males when ready to mate  <cit> .

sexual attraction which causes an animal to spend more time in the vicinity of chemical signals from the opposite sex, and much greater interest in opposite sex scents, is common to many animals, from c. elegans to elephants  <cit> . although the specific chemical signals involved have not been identified, previous studies have revealed that adult female mice are inherently attracted to spend more time near scents from adult males than those from other females or from castrated males, regardless of any prior familiarity with males or their odours, as long as females can contact the scent  <cit> . contact with male scents appears to be rewarding to females  <cit>  as this induces a conditioned place preference such that females will continue to spend more time in a location where they had previously encountered male soiled substrate, even after the scent has been removed  <cit> . however, in addition to this inherent contact-mediated attraction, females also learn attraction to airborne volatiles emanating from male urine  <cit> . although female mice are readily able to discriminate between male and female airborne odours  <cit> , attraction to airborne odours is learned only on contact with the scent and is specific to the individual airborne urinary odour of the male  <cit> . this suggests that:  there may be an unidentified sexual attraction pheromone that elicits inherent female attraction to spend time near adult male mouse urine; and  contact with this sex pheromone may stimulate associative learning of a male's airborne urinary odour as a conditioned stimulus, so that, subsequently, females are attracted to that specific male. here we show that a single sex-specific protein expressed in adult male mouse urine elicits the highly repeatable inherent attraction of females to spend more time near male than near female urinary scent marks. this involatile protein also stimulates female learning and subsequent selective attraction to the airborne urinary volatiles of individual males. we show that a simple sex attraction pheromone can elicit a flexible response to individual-specific odours through stimulating learning and memory in a complex social mammal, allowing female sexual attraction to be both inherent, yet selective towards particular males.

RESULTS
in order to identify the molecule that elicit inherent sexual attraction to male mouse urine, female house mice  were presented with a choice between a male versus a female urine stimulus. these were streaked onto filter papers in the shape of scent marks, placed  <dig> cm apart on the perspex ceiling of a clean test chamber, such that females could make nasal contact with each stimulus by stretching upright on their hind legs ; wild mice normally spend very little time in this central area of the arena, preferring to stay close to the outer walls. we used a large number of wild-derived female house mice in oestrus or proestrus as subjects throughout this study . this ensures that any attraction to male scent is a general response across normal genetically-variable female mice rather than a response that is specific to a laboratory strain, and has not been influenced by many generations of artificial selection for successful breeding in the laboratory. it also avoids the problem of unnatural genetic similarity between subjects and stimulus donors that would be implicit with inbred laboratory mice  <cit> . all male scent donors were unrelated to the subject females, singly housed , in good health and their scents were not competitively countermarked  <cit> , so should be attractive to females. in order to standardize the stimuli used in different fractionation experiments, we used pooled urine from c57bl/ <dig>  inbred mice after first confirming that female attraction to male urine from this inbred strain was as strong as that towards urine from many different wild-derived house mice .

inherent sexual attraction through scent contact
candidate molecules in male mouse urine that are detected on scent contact include many low molecular weight  androgen-dependent volatiles detected through v1r receptors in vomeronasal sensory neurons  <cit> . in addition, v2r vomeronasal receptors detect high molecular weight  involatile proteins and peptides including major urinary proteins   <cit> , exocrine-gland secreting peptides   <cit>  and synthetic peptides that emulate major histocompatibility complex  peptide ligands  <cit> . all of these molecules have been implicated in sexual signalling in the mouse, although esps are secreted in tears and saliva rather than in urine  <cit> . separation of urine into hmw and lmw fractions by centrifugation through a  <dig> kda molecular filter revealed that the lmw fraction stimulated little interest but the hmw fraction stimulated similar attraction to intact urine . this was due largely to the time spent under the stimulus without sniffing , a more robust measure of attraction than the time spent sniffing in order to gather information from the scent  <cit> . the main components of the hmw fraction are urinary proteins  and their bound ligands . the male stimulus contained approximately five times more urinary protein than the female stimulus . however, higher protein concentration per se was not responsible for the greater attraction to male scent: dilution of intact male urine to the same protein concentration as female urine did not eliminate the attraction response .

as the main components of the hmw fraction consisted of a mixture of different mup isoforms and their bound ligands  <cit> , these were further separated by anion exchange chromatography into four specific charge group fractions  that contained different mups. the same four fractions were collected from b <dig> female urine, although female fractions i and iv contained very low levels of protein . mups predominated in these fractions. intact mass analysis by mass spectrometry confirmed that male fractions i and iv contained distinct mups expressed predominantly or exclusively by males . the mups in fractions ii and iii were expressed by both sexes  albeit at different concentrations .

a mixture of these four mup-containing fractions  presented at concentrations similar to that in intact urine was highly effective in eliciting much greater time near the male stimulus . the difference was due to the time under the stimulus but not sniffing rather than to active sniffing behaviour  and was thus similar to the response to the complete hmw fraction. when each charge fraction was tested separately, fractions ii and iii failed to stimulate significant preference for the male fraction , although the mup concentration was much greater in the male than in the female fraction in both cases . male fractions i and iv both stimulated greater attraction than the equivalent female fractions. as this might have been due to the absence of detectable mup in female fractions i and iv , we tested the attraction to each of these male fractions when paired with female fraction iii . although male fraction i contained five times more protein than female fraction iii, the male fraction was not more attractive . by contrast, male fraction iv elicited strong attraction compared to female fraction iii ; these male and female fractions contained approximately equal concentrations of urinary protein but very different mup isoforms.

in house mice, most urinary mup isoforms are encoded by mup genes in the central region of the mup cluster on chromosome  <dig> where there has been recent rapid expansion of gene-pseudogene pairs  <cit> . variation in expression of these mup isoforms, which differ in sequence from each other by only a few amino acids, underlies the strong individual variation in mup profiles between wild mice. these central mup genes encode the urinary mups expressed by both sexes as well as the 18645da isoform in male fraction i. while expression of the 18645da mup is male-specific among laboratory strains  <cit> , it is expressed only by some wild mice and male-specificity varies between wild mup genotypes . by contrast, the 18893da mup isoform in male fraction iv is encoded by a gene in the peripheral region of the mup cluster where there is considerably greater divergence between mup genes  <cit> . this protein is variously known as the '18893da mup', 'peripheral region  <dig> mup 17', 'class a mup 24' or 'mup20' but may be best referred to according to the mouse genome informatics database  nomeclature: . this mup is consistently expressed in the urine of male but not female wild mice across a large number of genotypes . it shows unusually high mobility on reducing gel electrophoresis , and is responsible for binding most of the male-specific volatile 2-sec-butyl  <dig>  dihydrothiazole  in mouse urine  <cit> . in order to highlight its unusual characteristics compared to all other known mups, and its role in female sexual attraction , we named this 18893da mup as darcin .

the tight binding of thiazole to darcin considerably extends the release of this volatile pheromone from scent marks over many hours; when artificially displaced from mups, thiazole evaporates from scent marks within minutes  <cit> . thus, greater attraction to male fraction iv may be due to the binding of thiazole  to darcin. in order to explore this possibility, we compared attraction to male urine that was freshly deposited with attraction to urine deposited  <dig> h or  <dig> days prior to testing. virtually all  thiazole is lost  <dig> h after deposition under similar conditions  <cit> . if females are attracted by volatile components specifically bound to darcin in male fraction iv, attraction should reduce as scent marks age and volatiles are lost. however, scent age had no significant effects on the strength of attraction to the male sample whether intact urine or hmw stimuli were used in tests  and females continued to show significant attraction even when urine deposits were aged by  <dig> days.

attraction to recombinant darcin
continued attraction to aged male urine does not rule out the possibility that females are sensitive to extremely low levels of thiazole that may still be bound to darcin or, perhaps, to other unidentified components in male mup fraction iv. in order to test attraction to darcin itself, we constructed an artificial gene, codon optimized to drive high level heterologous expression of the recombinant protein in escherichia coli . the recombinant darcin  had atypical mobility on sds-page , suggesting similar folding to the native protein. when presented alone, at a physiological level similar to that in normal wild male or b <dig> strain urine, r-darcin stimulated significant attraction relative to both female urine and to a buffer control . indeed, response levels were very similar to a b <dig> intact urine control test . tests of other recombinant mups  confirmed that females showed no attraction either towards recombinant 18694da mup  or towards recombinant 18645da mup . note that response to the 18694da r-mup had abnormally high variability  because one female spent an unusual 85s resting under this stimulus. excluding this trial, the mean time under the recombinant 18694da mup was  <dig>  ±  <dig> s, very similar to the time normally spent under water, buffer or female urine. this complete absence of response to other recombinant mups confirms that attraction to r-darcin was not due to simple unfamiliarity or to a contaminant from the expression system.

under normal conditions, darcin would not be encountered alone but as a constituent of urine, which also contains a large number of volatile molecules. airborne volatiles are likely to be important for alerting attention to the presence of a scent and stimulating the close contact investigation that is necessary to detect involatile proteins  <cit> . as we were testing the inherent attraction that females show in response to contact with a male's scent, trials sometimes had to be excluded because females did not make contact with one or both stimulus locations during the  <dig> min test. when r-darcin alone was tested against female urine, there was a strong response and most females contacted the stimuli during their normal exploration of the test arena . however, when r-darcin was tested against just a buffer control, 9/ <dig> trials were excluded due to lack of contact. while this may have been a chance effect, the absence of any urinary volatiles in the arena may also have contributed by failing to stimulate investigation during these trials. in order to confirm that darcin elicits female attraction in the normal context of intact male urine, we also tested sexual attraction to urine from an inbred laboratory strain that expresses this mup at only trace levels. several of the laboratory strains derived through the castle lineage express extremely low and sometimes undetectable levels of darcin  <cit> , with balb/c males expressing darcin at <  <dig> % of their total mup output . these classic laboratory strains have been bred in captivity over a considerable number of generations  <cit> , divorced from the normal pressures of sexual selection and the need to attract females through scent. by contrast, adult male wild mice consistently express a high level of darcin . as predicted, females were strongly attracted to urine from a random selection of males recently derived from the wild, but failed to spend significantly more time near male balb/c urine than near female urine . however, addition of r-darcin to male balb/c urine at a normal male level stimulated a normal level of attraction . they showed no such attraction when other recombinant mups were added to male balb/c urine , confirming that darcin alone stimulates greater attraction to male than to female urine.

thus, darcin acts as a sex pheromone that reliably elicits female sexual attraction to a male's urine scent, doubling the time spent near a male compared to a female urine mark. unlike most mammalian scents that have been termed 'pheromones', we have shown that darcin meets the criteria widely accepted for the definition of the term pheromone  <cit> : it is a species-specific molecule, produced deliberately for scent signalling, and elicits a clear behavioural response that is inherent and highly consistent across the large number of genetically variable wild-derived animals used in this study. it is also equally as effective in eliciting female attraction whether encountered in urine or presented alone. we expressed darcin and other mups as recombinant proteins to ascertain the role of these proteins in the absence of natural ligands. we cannot exclude the possibility that r-darcin carries exactly the same thiazole in the same stereochemical configuration as the mouse, but this is extremely unlikely. first, the ligand 2-sec-butyl  <dig>  dihydrothiazole is not a central metabolite  but is unlikely to be a metabolic pathway that is essential for life. second, a comprehensive search of the metabolic pathways of e. coli reveals that the only thiazole known in e. coli metabolism is that related to biotin synthesis, an essential metabolic function that has been lost in mammals . third, as one of the other recombinant mups tested  also binds thiazole in mouse urine  <cit>  it provided a good control for putative contaminant ligands from e. coli, and clearly stimulated no response. thus the response appears to be to darcin alone rather than to a darcin-ligand complex.

although the response to darcin is inherent and highly consistent, this does not mean that female sexual attraction to male mice is inflexible. nor does this mean that other components of male urine scent have no role to play in sexual attraction. importantly, female attraction is to the individual owner of the scent encountered, not to males in general  <cit> . as darcin is a single protein that is not polymorphic between males, it has no capacity itself for providing the individual-specific scent signatures that females need to recognize particular males, which is an essential component of selective mate choice. instead, females learn an attraction to individual-specific airborne urinary volatiles on contact with male urine  <cit> .

learned attraction to individual-specific airborne volatiles
to test whether it is contact with darcin in male urine that stimulates this learned attraction to individual-specific airborne volatiles, we provided females with the opportunity to learn odours by pre-exposing them to a male and female urine stimulus prior to testing. we then tested female attraction to airborne volatiles from a male versus female urine stimulus when they were unable to contact the stimuli during the test. using urine from males that expressed normal adult levels of darcin, females learned an attraction to airborne urinary volatiles if they had prior physical contact before the test either with urine from the same individual male , or with urine from a genetically identical male . they did not learn any attraction if they were exposed only to the airborne urinary volatiles of the male before the test without any contact with involatile cues . we also confirmed that females learned the specific airborne odours of the individual male on contact with male urine, as females pre-exposed to contact with urine from one male showed no subsequent attraction to airborne odours that came from a different genetically distinct individual male in the test .

by contrast, prior contact with urine from balb/c laboratory males, which express only trace levels of darcin , failed to elicit any learned attraction to the males' airborne volatiles . however, when r-darcin was added to male balb/c urine to a level expressed by normal males, contact elicited a strong learned attraction to airborne volatiles from the stimulus . this was not because r-darcin altered the airborne volatile profile such that the volatiles themselves became more attractive to females: a control test confirmed that airborne volatiles from this stimulus were not attractive if females had prior contact only with water . instead, contact with darcin stimulates females to learn the individual-specific airborne odour associated with that male's scent and subsequently show attraction only to that airborne odour; contact with r-darcin in balb/c male urine led to no attraction to airborne odours from males with different individual airborne odour signatures . the individual urinary volatile profiles of mice are complex, and are influenced by many genes including mhc  <cit> , as well as by non-genetic differences such as bacterial microflora and diet  <cit> . darcin itself may also have some influence on the pattern of airborne volatiles learned on contact: while contact with balb/c male urine plus r-darcin resulted in strong attraction to volatiles from this same stimulus, it resulted in only weak attraction to airborne volatiles from balb/c male urine without r-darcin . as darcin binds and slowly releases the volatile thiazole  from male scent marks, it is likely to have induced a slight mismatch between volatiles in the manipulated and unmanipulated balb/c urine. finally, to confirm that learned attraction to airborne urinary volatiles is a specific response to darcin, other recombinant mups added to male balb/c urine failed to stimulate any learned attraction to airborne volatiles from the stimulus .

discussion
we have shown that female sexual attraction to spend time near male urine scent is an inherent response to a single male-specific protein pheromone, darcin, detected through physical contact. this involatile pheromone also stimulates females to remember the associated airborne volatile profile and, subsequently, also show attraction to this individual-specific airborne stimulus. contact with darcin, whether presented alone or combined with urinary volatiles, consistently doubled the time spent near a male compared to a female scent mark. response to the airborne volatiles learned in association with darcin was even stronger, tripling the time spent near to the source of the learned individual male's scent mark relative to female airborne scent. the consistency of response is all the more remarkable in view of our deliberate use of a large random selection of genetically heterogeneous wild-stock mice to ensure that responses reflect normal functional behaviour in this species, mirroring the attraction to male urine shown by females from seminatural populations  <cit> . adult males consistently express darcin at a high level in their urine and, under natural conditions, cover their territories with many hundreds of these small urine scent marks  <cit> . attraction to spend time near the source of a male's scent will thus be the primary mechanism that allows females to locate a selected mate, stimulated by contact with this protein pheromone. indeed, a wild female ready to mate will return repeatedly to a site and wait for short periods for a male to return if he is not currently present  <cit>  .

inherent attraction to darcin in male urine ensures that females naturally discriminate between conspecific male and female scents, without any need for social learning. however, females fail to show the same inherent attraction to male airborne urinary volatiles, despite the prevalence of many androgen-dependent volatiles in male mouse urine  <cit>  that allow females to discriminate readily between male and female airborne odours  <cit> . importantly, sexual attraction involves more than the simple recognition of opposite sex conspecifics, which could be achieved through any male-specific scent components. females must assess an individual male's suitability as a mate, including both quality and genetic compatibility with the female's own genome  <cit>  and then choose between those males available. the requirement for initial contact with the male-specific mup darcin to stimulate attraction ensures that females gain full information from other involatile and volatile components of the male's scent during contact investigation, prior to showing any attraction to spend time near the male's scent. while some information may be encoded in airborne urinary odours, such as male infection status  <cit> , we have shown that female mice depend on information encoded by other involatile mups in a male's urine to assess the individual attractiveness of a male according to several separate criteria: females use contact with individual-specific mup patterns to recognize and assess the competitive ability of males from their territorial scent marks  <cit> ; sharing of the same mup type to avoid inbreeding with close kin  <cit> ; and mup homozygosity to avoid sharing nest sites with males that are likely to be inbred  <cit> . all of this information provides important modulation of attraction to a particular male. other involatile protein signals detected on contact  <cit>  may further influence a male's attractiveness, although specific behavioural responses to other involatile scent components remain to be established.

most importantly, contact with the male-specific pheromone darcin also stimulates females to learn and become attracted to the individual-specific airborne volatiles associated with this pheromone. thus, this pheromone signal stimulates both inherent attraction on contact and the learned individual-specific attraction that is essential for choosiness in females. intuitively, it has been assumed that attractant pheromones in terrestrial animals will be small airborne volatiles that can be detected at a distance from the scent source  <cit> , with involatile peptides acting as sexual attractants only in aquatic animals such as newts and other amphibia, where they can transmit through water from signaller to receiver  <cit> . however, we have uncovered a new mechanism used by terrestrial mammals such as mice, in which an involatile protein pheromone elicits the learning of associated airborne volatiles, which can then attract females to spend time near that male's scent even when they are not in direct nasal contact with the scent. the inherently attractive involatile component of male scent may itself be rewarding  <cit> , as repeated contact with male soiled bedding in a particular location induces a conditioned preference for that location  <cit> ; thus, females are attracted to male scent marks that they have previously contacted through the memory of their location. however, by also learning the airborne volatiles associated with the pheromone, they can then detect that male's scent wherever they encounter the same volatile profile. as many genes contribute to complex mammalian scents, the airborne volatiles learned are specific to that individual, unlike the attraction pheromone itself; this mechanism therefore allows inherent sexual attraction to be directed to particular males. we have shown previously that contact with just a single scent mark from a male induces a subsequent preference both to spend more time near to that individual scent owner and to gnaw at a barrier to get to that male  <cit> . at present, we do not know whether females learn all the volatiles that contribute to an individual's airborne signature or focus only on a pattern or subset of male-specific volatiles expressed by each male. nevertheless, the high level of many androgen-dependent volatiles in male mouse urine, together with female sensitivity to these odorants, will increase the chances that a learned male's scent will be detectable, particularly from a distance. airborne volatiles thus play an important role in selective attraction to a particular male, but this learned attraction is driven by initial contact with darcin, which elicits an inherent attraction response. the rabbit mammary pheromone , which stimulates inherent searching and grasping for a nipple in newborn rabbits, is also a potent enforcer of odorant learning  <cit> . a single brief pairing of any odorant with the mammary pheromone also leads to a rapid transfer of the mammary pheromone response to the odorant. under natural conditions, pups are likely to learn the volatile odours of their mother associated with this pheromone, which then become additional direction cues for subsequent nursing.

the learning of individual odours during prior contact with scents from the opposite sex appears to be common across many mammals, resulting in memory and selective attraction to that scent owner  <cit> . however, previous studies have not suspected that this learning of individual scents may be driven by a specific pheromone, as we have shown here in mice. notably, when inbred mice contact darcin, the airborne odours that are learned generalize to all males of that strain because they share the same genetically determined odortype. the importance of learning a particular individual male's scent, and selective attraction to this, is thus not apparent when using an inbred laboratory strain to assess the role of scents in the control and coordination of sexual behaviour. nevertheless, individual selection is the key to female sexual behaviour outside the laboratory. however, the use of males from different laboratory strains has confirmed the importance of learning an individual male's scent in the context of pregnancy block. exposure of recently mated laboratory females to lmw in urine constituents  from an unfamiliar strain male blocks pregnancy  <cit> ; importantly, though, the individual scent of the familiar stud male is learned during a brief sensitive period after mating and has no such inhibitory effect  <cit> . further research will be needed in order to establish whether darcin plays a role in stimulating this learning of a stud male's scent during mating or whether vagino-cervical stimulation alone provides sufficient reward to stimulate associative learning of a male's volatile urinary scent  <cit>  regardless of the presence of darcin.

the involatile protein darcin is most likely to be detected through the accessory olfactory subsystem which detects scents that are actively pumped to the vomeronasal organ on nasal contact with the scent source  <cit> . while unique vomeronasal receptors for darcin have yet to be established, a mixture of recombinant mups, that included darcin, activated vomeronasal sensory neurons expressing v2r receptors  <cit> . lesion of the accessory olfactory bulb  is also known to abolish both the female innate preference for adult male soiled bedding and learned attraction towards airborne volatiles  <cit> . by contrast, the airborne individual-specific volatiles detected at a distance from the scent source are most probably detected through the main olfactory subsystem. this is activated when females explore airborne chemicals emanating from male soiled bedding or urine  <cit> , with different patterns of glomerular activation in the main olfactory bulbs stimulated by airborne urinary odours from genetically distinct individuals  <cit> . a major future challenge will be to understand the brain pathways and neural mechanisms by which the involatile pheromone darcin stimulates the learning and memory of individual-specific airborne odours and results in attraction to this conditioned airborne stimulus.

CONCLUSIONS
there has been much debate about whether the original concept of a 'pheromone'  <cit>  has any useful meaning when applied to complex vertebrates such as mammals, because learning modulates most responses to odours, and the pattern of many scent components is specific to each individual  <cit> . indeed, very few pheromones that trigger a defined instinctive and consistent response across genetically diverse individuals have ever been identified in mammals. using careful molecular dissection closely coupled to assessment of a highly repeatable functional response among recently wild-derived animals, we provide evidence for the first identification of a male-specific signalling protein  that drives the inherent sexual attraction of female mice to spend time near a male's scent. moreover, we show that contact with this protein pheromone stimulates associative learning of airborne urinary volatiles, resulting in targeted attraction to a specific individual male by choosy females. the ability of this invariant pheromone to stimulate a learned response towards individual-specific scents suggests that such pheromones may play a much more important role than previously recognized in driving flexible individual-specific social responses that are typical of mammals. indeed, such pheromones could even underlie some complex, individual-specific responses of humans. darcin is species-specific, like other mups expressed by mice, as would be expected for any pheromone that plays an important role in sexual attraction. however, mup-like lipocalins show sex-specific expression in other rodents  <cit> , while other scent components may be candidates for this role in more diverse species. identifying pheromones with similar effects in other species could have important applications for manipulating mate selection in mammalian breeding programmes . further, the reliable response to darcin in mice could be used to investigate the neural basis of individual-specific memories in the brain that are fundamental to regulating social behaviour in mammals and other vertebrates.

