BACKGROUND
starting about  <dig> years ago molecular phylogenetic approaches established a new system of animal taxonomy  <cit> . bilateria are split into three major subtaxa, the traditional deuterostomia and two recently established groups, which were founded initially by molecular evidence: the ecdysozoa  and the lophotrochozoa . despite controversy about the specific position of some taxa, these three major groups now seem to be well established and are frequently recovered in analyses of different molecular datasets like ribosomal rnas  <cit> , mitochondrial genomes  <cit>  and est datasets  <cit> .

the lophotrochozoan taxon nemertea  comprises about  <dig> free-living species, most of which inhabit marine environments, but a few species also occur in freshwater and even in terrestrial habitats  <cit> . morphological characters like the acoelomate organisation, the architecture of the nervous system, the sense organs and the protonephridial excretory structures were arguments for the traditional placement of nemertea close to the platyhelminthes , while a trochophora-like larva with a prototroch gives some evidence for an inclusion into trochozoa  <cit> . special features like the closed circulatory system  and the retractable proboscis, serving for prey catching, are apomorphies which clearly support monophyly of the nemertea  <cit> .

nemerteans are among the first acoelomates to be brought together with coelomates, providing the ground for the 'new view' of animal phylogeny  <cit> . meanwhile further molecular analyses came up with diverse hypotheses for their phylogenetic position. depending on datasets and methods used for phylogenetic inference the propsed sister group of nemertea was platyzoa  <cit> , mollusca  <cit> , molluca + annelida   <cit> . recent approaches with large datasets from est libraries added another hypothesis: in the phylogenetic analyses of dunn et al.  <cit>  and helmkampf et al.  <cit>  nemertea cluster with brachiopoda and phoronida.

animal mitochondrial genomes provide a large set of orthologous sequence data which are often used in phylogenetic analyses from population to phylum level. in addition to sequence information several other features are used to support phylogenetic hypotheses, e.g. gene order rearrangements, derived secondary structure of rrnas and trnas, changes in genetic code . mitochondrial gene order data had an early impact on formation of the lophotrochozoa hypothesis: stechmann and schlegel  <cit>  demonstrated a highly similar gene order when comparing the brachiopod terebratulina retusa and the mollusc katharina tunicata, giving a strong argument in favour of the lophotrochozoa hypothesis. the main difference between the two species is one big inversion covering about half of the entire genome. gene order of the partial mitochondrial genome from the nemertean cephalothrix rufifrons is not much different from that of katharina and terebratulina  <cit> .

in this study we present the first complete mitochondrial genome record for a member of the nemertea, lineus viridis. we use mitochondrial gene order and sequence data to evaluate the phylogenetic position of nemertea. furthermore, we discuss mitochondrial gene order data among lophotrochozoa and conclude that specific inversions may have occurred independently in different taxa, probably providing a rare example of homoplasious change of gene order.

RESULTS
general features of the mitochondrial genome of lineus viridis
all  <dig> genes usually present in bilaterian animals are found in the mitochondrial genome of l. viridis . all protein-coding and ribosomal rna genes, as well as all but two trna genes  are found on the same strand, therefore defined as plus-strand . this preference of one strand is also found in other lophotrochozoan taxa   <cit> , as well as in tunicata  <cit> . the size of the genome  is well in the range of other lophotrochozoans  <cit> . the complete genome has an at content of  <dig> %, which is not significantly different from other lophotrochozoa like lumbricus terrestris , katharina tunicata  or terebratulina retusa . plus-strand shows a strong gc-skew  and at-skew , as the nucleotide composition is clearly biased towards g and t .

* start and stop position of ribosomal rna and ncr according to adjacent gene boundaries

a total of  <dig> non-coding nucleotides is found in the mt genome, comprising about  <dig> % of the complete sequence. the major non-coding region is found between nad <dig> and trns/nad <dig>  and has a slightly higher at content  than the remaining genome. other lophotrochozoans with a similar gene order as lineus  do not have a non-coding sequence at that position. near the 3'-end there is a  <dig> bp segment having the potential of forming a stem-loop structure. figure  <dig> shows this structure and flanking sequences in minus-strand annotation, to show the flanking regions with putative signal sequences similar to that described from arthropod control regions  <cit> . the second-largest non-coding part is found between trnl and nad <dig> , which has a higher at content than other parts of the genome . other non-coding regions > <dig> bp are found between atp <dig> and trnc , trny and trnp , trng and cox <dig> , trna and trnf  and trnr and trnn . between nad <dig> and trnh there seems to be an overlap of  <dig> nucleotides.

protein-coding genes and rrnas
all protein-coding genes use exclusively atg as start codon, while stop codon taa  and tag  are used almost equally often . four genes have incomplete stop codons , a feature often found in animal mitochondrial genomes. incomplete stop codons are probably subject to post-transcriptional polyadenylation  <cit> . all protein-coding genes are encoded on the plus-strand and show a positive gc-skew, ranging from  <dig>  in cox <dig> to  <dig>  in nad4l. there is a trend for higher gc-skew in usually less conserved sequences like nad <dig>  nad <dig>  nad <dig>  compared to more conserved genes like cox1- <dig>  cob. the two ribosomal rna genes  are similar in length to those from other lophotrochozoan taxa, and as in many bilaterians, both are separated by trnv.

transfer rnas
the set of  <dig> trna genes typical for bilateria were found in the mitochondrial genome of lineus viridis .  <dig> of them can be folded into the typical cloverleaf secondary structure. the cloverleaf structure of trna-ser misses the dhu-arm, which is missing in most metazoan species, and is probably lost early in animal evolution  <cit> . a few mismatches are found in the acceptor stem of trna-his, trna-lys, trna-leu, and trna-phe, as well as in the anticodon stem of trna-glu and trna-leu.

mitochondrial gene order in lophotrochozoa
gene order is not conserved in nemertea, as the partial mt genome of cephalothrix rufifrons  <cit>  and the complete mt genome of lineus viridis presented here differ in the position of nad <dig> and five trna genes . we assume that cephalothrix shows the more derived condition among nemertea, as the adjacency of nad <dig> and cob is very common in lophotrochozoan and also arthropod mitochondrial genomes. therefore the condition nad1-nad6-cob, as observed in lineus is likely the plesiomorphic state in nemertea. as well the relative positions of most of the trna genes are conserved in lineus and other non-nemertean taxa. the only exception is trnf, which is in a derived position in lineus and in the ancestral position in cephalothrix. lineus is a member of the heteronemertea, while cephalothrix is a member of the palaeonemertea, a group which is thought to be the sister group to the remaining nemertea  <cit>  and which has many ancestral characters compared to other nemertea. it is another example of the fact that a taxon showing ancestral states for many characters may as well show derived states in other character complexes.

gene order of lineus viridis is very similar to that of some other lophotrochozoan taxa. most of the differences between lophotrochozoan taxa concern translocations of trna genes, which seem to be more "mobile" than the larger genes  <cit> . analysis of relative positions of trna genes yielded no phylogenetic informative character , so we focused on the relative positions of the protein-coding and rrna genes. their gene order is identical in lineus, the brachiopod terebratulina retusa  <cit> , and some gastropods, e.g. conus textile  <cit> , ilyanassa obsoleta  <cit> , thais clavigera , and lophiotoma cerithiformis  <cit> . turbeville and smith  <cit>  also analysed mitochondrial gene order of a partial genome of the nemertean cephalothrix rufifrons. their gene adjacency analyses clustered cephalothrix with molluscs, preferentially haliotis, but the brachiopod terebratulina was missing in their analyses. other molluscs like the gastropod haliotis rubra  <cit> , the polyplacophoran katharina tunicata  <cit>  and the cephalopod octopus vulgaris  <cit>  show a similar gene order, but distinguished by a large inversion of about half the mt genome . the segment spanning from trnf to trne  is found in opposite direction than the remainder of the genome. due to the broader distribution among mollusca  it is most parsimonious to assume the gene order of katharina and octopus  to be ancient within molluscs and to interpret gene order in the gastropods conus, ilyanassa and thais to be secondarily re-inverted . besides molluscs a similar inversion is seen in the mt genome of phoronis psammophila  <cit>  and, secondarily complicated by another inversion, in the entoprocts loxosomella and loxocorone  <cit> . this inversion may be a synapomorphy of phoronida + entoprocta + mollusca. however, there is no good support from sequence based analyses for a clade combining exclusively these three taxa . furthermore, an inversion similar to that described for lophotrochozoa is found in ecdysozoa, comparing arthropod and priapulid gene order  <cit> . thus there is also reason to suspect some parts of the genome to be more often involved in rearrangements than others. in particular the mitochondrial control region may represent a region with "predetermined breaking points" in the mitochondrial genome, as there is non-coding sequence and no functional gene will be disrupted by a breakpoint. besides its position the second breaking point cannot be further characterized by now. as there is a re-inversion in some gastropods, we cannot exclude that this inversion took place independently two or three times in phoronida, mollusca and entoprocta. nonetheless, it is reasonable to assume that the basal condition in bilateria or at least lophotrochozoa is to have all genes on the same strand – this is actually seen in brachiopoda, annelida, platyhelminthes and acanthocephalans.

phylogenetic analysis 
for phylogenetic analyses concatenated amino acid alignments from twelve mitochondrial protein-coding genes  were built and analyzed by maximum likelihood and bayesian methods. for a preliminary analysis a taxon set of  <dig> metazoan species was chosen. seven species from porifera and cnidaria served as outgroup for rooting the bilaterian tree. this large taxon set was analysed with a maximum likelihood approach  and the best topology was tested by bootstrapping . bilateria is split into three large clades:  deuterostomia + xenoturbella,  arthropoda + onychophora + priapulida,  lophotrochozoa with some long-branching taxa from other groups, prominently nematoda. while many other molecular datasets favour ecdysozoa hypothesis, thus a position of nematoda with arthropoda and priapulida, our result seems to be artificial due to long-branch attraction. in our analysis nematoda, platyhelminthes, syndermata and some subtaxa of mollusca have the longest branches of all taxa and cluster together. molluscan polyphyly is another strange effect of this problem. in the large dataset nemertea are found to be sister group to short-branched taxa of mollusca , with a bootstrap support of 88%. other gastropod species and bivalvia are found near the long-branching taxa of nematoda, syndermata and platyhelmithes. basal splits among lophotrochozoa do not exceed moderate support in bootstrap analysis.

for more sophisticated analyses we used a smaller dataset of  <dig> lophotrochozoan species and four outgroup members from deuterostomia and ecdysozoa. we omitted platyhelminthes, nematoda, syndermata and some of the molluscan taxa with long branches. as well we did not use sequences from chaetognatha, due to their uncertain relation to lophotrochozoa and we ignored sequences from the molluscs albinaria, aplysia, biomphalaria, which did not cluster with the other molluscs in the first analysis. the best tree obtained by raxml with mtrev+g+i  found the two nemertean species as sister group to the polyplacophoran mollusc katharina tunicata, but without bootstrap support exceeding 50%. thus, mollusca again are not monophyletic under these parameters. the best tree from treefinder analysis  with a model specified for lophotrochozoan taxa  has a different topology, with entoprocta being sister group to nemertea, with moderate support from resampling analysis . the five molluscan species form a monophylum with 91% edge support and are sister to the nemertean/entoprocta clade . phoronis is sister to that assemblage. the rest of the tree is similar to the raxml tree. the best tree from treefinder analysis with the mtrev+g+i  model differs from that with mtzoa+g+i only in the position of myzostoma as sister group to ectoprocta. here, support from lr-elw for the nemertea+entoprocta relationship is 78%. the best tree of a bayesian analysis  of the same dataset resulted in a taxon combining entoprocta and phoronis as sister group to nemertea . here, mollusca is monophyletic , while myzostoma clustered with ectoprocta  instead of annelids as in the shown trees. the remaining tree topology is the same as in the treefinder-mtzoa analysis. all four analyses favour a clade combining phoronida, entoprocta, nemertea and mollusca . au test of the raxml analyses with constrained trees  rejects the hypotheses of sister group relationships nemertea+annelida or nemertea+brachiopoda. mollusca, phoronida and entoprocta cannot be excluded as possible sister groups to nemertea according to that test.

dunn et al.  <cit> , analysing a large est dataset, found entoprocta as sister group to the remaining taxa mollusca, annelida, phoronida, brachiopoda and nemertea. nemerteans are found to be sister group to brachiopoda in one of their analyses, and sister group to a clade combining brachiopoda and phoronida in the second analysis . the latter assemblage found support in some of their parameter settings. here, annelida sensu lato were the sister group of nemertea, brachiopoda and phoronida, but only with moderate support. struck & fisse  <cit>  found good support for mollusca+nemertea in bayesian analyses of an amino acid alignment derived from est data, while ml analyses were rather indifferent between annelida and mollusca as sister group to nemertea. but these analyses did not include phoronid and brachiopod species. a partial mitochondrial genome of another nemertean species, cephalothrix rufifrons, was previously published  <cit> . the corresponding phylogenetic analyses favoured an affinity to molluscs, which appeared paraphyletic in that study.

CONCLUSIONS
phylogenetic analyses of available mitochondrial sequence data  do not clearly resolve lophotrochozoan interrelationships, but favour a clade combining nemertea, mollusca, phoronida and entoprocta on one hand, brachiopoda, ectoprocta, annelida, sipuncula and myzostomida on the other. recent large analyses of est datasets with similar taxon sampling came to other results. mitochondrial gene order is very similar in nemertea, some brachiopods and some molluscs, suggesting a shared ground pattern at least for a lophotrochozoan subtaxon. phoronid and entoproct gene order is easily derivable from this ground pattern, while gene order of annelids and ectoprocts seems to be strongly derived, also in comparison to gene order of outgroup taxa from ecdysozoa and deuterostomia. in conclusion, none of the recent molecular based studies  found support for a relationship between nemertea and platyhelmithes, but the sister group to nemertea remains an open question with more evidence for the candidates mollusca, phoronida, entoprocta, brachiopoda and less evidence for annelida.

