BACKGROUND
phylogeography and molecular systematics have been of great utility for delimiting the species boundaries of morphologically cryptic taxa
 <cit>  and understanding the origins of diversity both at and below the species level
 <cit> . within taxa, high genetic diversity in a small region often indicates long-term historical persistence in the face of environmental change, while genetic breaks between populations suggest a more complex demographic history involving periods of isolation or restricted gene flow. climatic barriers or geological features are often associated with such phylogeographic breaks and can be hypothesized to have caused population isolation. given that allopatric divergence is hypothesized to be the prevailing geographic mode of speciation for most animal taxa
 <cit> , understanding which barriers have led to divergence within species should elucidate the impact of such barriers on species diversity over longer timescales. an improved understanding of both species boundaries and phylogeographic structure enables tests of hypotheses related to the geographic origin of clades, connecting their divergence to regional processes, and facilitates comparisons of patterns of lineage divergence across taxa.

understanding the historical factors promoting population divergence and species formation is of particular interest in areas of high species diversity, such as humid tropical regions. here we investigate how the complex geological history of southern mexico and nuclear central america, the area between the isthmus of tehuantepec and the nicaraguan depression
 <cit> , relates to population divergence in a group of morphologically similar plethodontid salamanders. we interpret their divergence history in the light of patterns seen in other taxa in order to understand how regional biogeography may have influenced current patterns of species diversity and faunistic relationships between subregions.

salamanders have often been shown to have historical signatures of geological or climatic changes in their geographic patterns of genetic variation
 <cit> , due to their short dispersal distances
 <cit>  and environmental sensitivity
 <cit> . most species of neotropical salamanders, however, are characterized by small range sizes, and often are known from only a single mountain range
 <cit> , precluding studies of population differentiation at a regional scale. this tendency toward small range size could be a direct result of stronger population isolation in the tropics, leading to higher rates of allopatric speciation and thus producing many species with small geographic ranges
 <cit> . the few wide-ranging tropical salamanders offer the chance to study species of low dispersal ability that are distributed across major geographic barriers, and allow us to understand the processes that may have been important in generating the high diversity seen in the tropical salamanders as a whole.

our study focuses on species of bolitoglossa subgenus nanotriton, which has only four described species, yet is distributed throughout a wide area of mesoamerica
 <cit> . the species of this subgenus span multiple biogeographic boundaries in mesoamerica, including the isthmus of tehuantepec, which appears to have restricted dispersal of mesic-adapted species
 <cit> , while acting as a corridor for arid-adapted species
 <cit> . species in the subgenus occur in multiple geological regions, including the eastern terminus of the trans-mexican volcanic belt  and los tuxtlas region in veracruz, the northern highlands of oaxaca, the sierra de los chimalapas, mexico and on both the pacific and caribbean sides of chiapas, mexico and guatemala in nuclear central america . bolitoglossa rufescens, the most widely distributed species in the subgenus, ranges across the isthmus of tehuantepec, making it one of only three salamander species to occur on both sides of this major barrier
 <cit> . as presently known, b. rufescens also occurs on both sides of the motagua-polochic fault system, an important barrier for many other taxa in central america
 <cit> .
 <dig>  species assignment based on phylogenetic analyses .

although species of nanotriton generally occur only in mid- to low elevations, populations are known from up to  <dig> m elevation and are not found in dry forest, savannah, or other low-elevation subhumid habitats. many populations are currently associated with banana plantations and other anthropogenic habitats adjacent to forest, but salamanders can also be found in forested habitats. because of these associations, species of nanotriton, like higher elevation salamanders, could be used to test for effects of historical forest fragmentation or expansion, in addition to examining effects of geological barriers such as major mountain ranges or fault zones.

in at least two localities, two species of the subgenus are found in sympatry
 <cit>  and another instance of near-sympatry is known
 <cit> , despite overall morphological similarity of these species that might be expected to limit their co-occurrence
 <cit> . the only obvious character separating two of the species  from the other two  is the presence or absence of maxillary teeth, and even this character is variable within b. rufescens <cit> . this group of salamanders exhibits little variation in morphology, possibly because of their generally paedomorphic state; development of features such as digits or skull bones that distinguish other species of salamanders is truncated, leading to a reduction or absence of these elements
 <cit> . because of this high similarity in external appearance, genetic markers provide one of the best tools to delimit these species’ geographical limits, an essential endeavor for understanding the biogeographic history of the group. the use of both mtdna and nuclear markers also allows us to test for a signature of introgression across species boundaries, with finer-scale sampling in possible areas of contact identified by analyses of allozymes
 <cit> .

in this study, we use both mitochondrial  and nuclear dna  to investigate phylogeographic structure within species of nanotriton as well as phylogenetic relationships between described species. we compare patterns of mtdna and ndna to look for discordance that might indicate introgression across species boundaries, especially near previously identified possible contact zones, and to identify hybrids or signatures of past population admixture. we use a likelihood-based phylogeographic history estimation method  to test hypotheses of the geographic location of the origins of clades. in particular, we examine in which biogeographic region  and in which mountain range or subregion species originated. we examine the impact of major biogeographic boundaries known from other taxa on the phylogeographic patterns within these salamander species, and compare patterns across these boundaries to those seen in other taxa.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses reveal deep divergences between species, as well as a high degree of phylogeographic structure within species. the mtdna results  strongly support the monophyly of nanotriton , as well as that of all four members of the group: bolitoglossa occidentalis , b. chinanteca , b. nympha  and b. rufescens . b. occidentalis and b. chinanteca are strongly supported as sister taxa , as are b. nympha and b. rufescens .

within species, markedly different patterns of phylogeographic structure emerge. bolitoglossa chinanteca shows little divergence in 16s sequence between the only known localities . bolitoglossa occidentalis shows several strongly supported lineages  corresponding to populations from 1) the pacific coast of chiapas and guatemala, 2) a single population from the eastern side  side of the sierra madre de chiapas , 3) a single population from cerro baúl in the isolated sierra de los chimalapas , and 4) various populations from other areas of northern and central chiapas . maximum gtr distances between samples of b. occidentalis are large ; gtr distances between individuals from all localities for each gene are given in additional files
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
3: tables s <dig>  s <dig>  s <dig>  our samples from the sierra de los chimalapas  are from near the type locality of bolitoglossa bilineata <cit> , synonymized with b. occidentalis by wake and brame
 <cit> . locality  <dig> is nested within b. occidentalis in our mtdna gene tree.

bolitoglossa rufescens comprises several well-supported, divergent lineages. two groups of populations from the los tuxtlas region form a basal polytomy with all remaining populations. samples from either side of the isthmus of tehuantepec are not reciprocally monophyletic; those from the eastern end of the tmvb in veracruz and northern highlands of oaxaca are in a clade with samples from chiapas and the sierra de los chimalapas . yet another clade of b. rufescens consists of samples from northwestern guatemala.

although b. nympha was described only from the type locality  in guatemala
 <cit> , rovito et al.
 <cit>  hypothesized that populations from eastern guatemala and western honduras could be assigned to this species based on morphological data as well as allozyme results from larson
 <cit> . campbell et al.
 <cit>  also stated that a specimen from belize might be assignable to b. nympha based on a published cytb sequence. the mtdna gene tree shows a deep divergence between populations formerly assigned to b. rufescens from mexico and northwestern guatemala and those from eastern guatemala, belize, and honduras . given that the latter group of populations includes the type locality of b. nympha, we assign all these populations to that species, which is now known from a much broader geographic area than in the original description.

results from phylogenetic analyses of the pomc data  mirror those from mtdna in most respects. bolitoglossa occidentalis and b. chinanteca are again placed in a clade that is the sister lineage of the other two species of nanotriton, and b. chinanteca is monophyletic. the sample from nearest the type locality of b. bilineata is again nested within a group of other samples of b. occidentalis from chiapas, in agreement with the mtdna results, providing no support for the distinctiveness of this named taxon. the single sample of b. hartwegi included in the dataset fell within this clade, rather than outside nanotriton; this relationship is strongly supported , suggesting that the relationship between the subgenera nanotriton and mayamandra should be further investigated using additional markers. both b. rufescens and b. nympha are supported as monophyletic. within b. rufescens, the initial divergence is once again resolved to be between populations from los tuxtlas and all other populations , and samples on either side of the isthmus of tehuantepec are not reciprocally monophyletic. a haplotype network constructed using the program tcs with the pomc data shows four separate networks and similar patterns to the phylogenetic tree results . the first corresponds to b. nympha and b. rufescens, which are separated by  <dig> mutational steps. the second network consists of samples of b. occidentalis and b. chinanteca, which are separated by  <dig> mutational steps, and the final two networks correspond to samples of b. hartwegi and b. mexicana . bolitoglossa rufescens and b. occidentalis show both a higher diversity of haplotypes and more divergence between haplotypes compared to b. nympha. there was no discordance between the mitochondrial and pomc gene trees in terms of individuals being placed within clades corresponding to species; all samples from near contact zones fall into a clade corresponding to the same species in both the mtdna and pomc gene trees. no individual has pomc haplotypes belonging to two different species, as we would expect if our dataset contained interspecific hybrids.

we are reluctant to undertake a molecular dating analysis of all divergences in the group due to a lack of appropriate fossil calibration points. despite this, we estimated a chronogram with mtdna data from all samples used in our phylogenetic analyses in order to calculate the divergence time of populations of b. rufescens that span the isthmus of tehuantepec. we used two different published substitution rate estimates for cytb from a fossil-calibrated phylogenetic analysis of plethodontids
 <cit>  and a rate that has been used as a general vertebrate molecular clock
 <cit>  in order to compare the timing of this divergence to that seen in other species. populations of b. rufescens separated by the isthmus of tehuantepec were estimated to have diverged  <dig>  million years ago  using the slower substitution rate estimate in the beast analysis, or  <dig>  ma using the faster rate.

results of analyses of phylogeographic structure and ancestral origin of clades from phylomapper analyses indicate that significant phylogeographic structure is present within both bolitoglossa occidentalis and b. rufescens. both species show a significant association between phylogenetic and geographic distance, as measured by the scaled dispersal parameter , compared to the null expectation derived from randomizing the location of sampled individuals
 <cit>  . the ancestral location of b. rufescens was reconstructed as being on the eastern side of the isthmus of tehuantepec , but is not significantly different from the null expectation of an origin at the center of its range . furthermore, likelihood ratio tests failed to reject an ancestral location of b. rufescens in either the northern highlands of oaxaca  or in los tuxtlas . for b. occidentalis, the location of the ancestor was estimated to be on the eastern side of the sierra madre de chiapas . the ml estimate of the location of the ancestor of b. occidentalis was significantly different from the center of the species’ range . alternate locations for the ancestor of b. occidentalis in the berriozabal area , sierra de los chimalapas , and the pacific coast of southeastern chiapas  were all significantly less likely than the ml estimate .

for species with significant phylogeographic structure detected in phylomapper, we performed analyses to determine the geographic location of genetic barriers using the program barrier v <dig> . these analyses identified the split between populations in guatemala from all others in mexico as the primary genetic barrier within b. rufescens. two barriers separating the los tuxtlas populations from others in mexico were then demarcated, followed by a fourth barrier across the isthmus of tehuantepec . within b. occidentalis, the first barrier identified was between a group of populations on the pacific coast of guatemala/southeastern chiapas and the sierra madre de chiapas  and all other populations in mexico. the second barrier delineated the populations in the sierra de los chimalapas  and a single locality from central chiapas from others in central and northern chiapas, and the third separated the single population in the sierra madre de chiapas  from others in southeastern chiapas and guatemala.

a hierarchical analysis of molecular variance  for bolitoglossa rufescens was used to test for significant genetic structure at two levels: 1) among regional groups consisting of los tuxtlas, nuclear central america, and the tmvb/oaxacan highlands, and 2) among populations from chiapas and guatemala within nuclear central america and from the tmvb and oaxacan highlands within third group. the amova showed significantly more genetic variance partitioned between populations within regional groups compared to the null expectation from permuting haplotypes among populations within groups , but variance among regional groups was not larger than would be expected by chance . an amova for b. occidentalis with four populations from the sierra de los chimalapas, northern and central chiapas, the sierra madre de chiapas, and the pacific coast of southeastern chiapas and guatemala showed significantly more genetic variance partitioned among populations than expected by chance .

discussion
a high degree of phylogeographic structure characterizes both bolitoglossa rufescens and b. occidentalis, as revealed both by the significant phylogeographic association test from phylomapper and the presence of multiple divergent lineages present within both species. bolitoglossa rufescens is known from a number of localities on both sides of the isthmus of tehuantepec and in the isolated sierra de los tuxtlas, making it one of only two species of salamander  to be distributed in all three of these areas. although the phylomapper results reconstruct a central american origin for the species, an ancestral location within either the highlands of northern oaxaca or in los tuxtlas could not be rejected. indeed, the null hypothesis of an ancestral location at the center of the species' current range could also not be rejected. our inability to distinguish between these hypotheses may be due to the fact that the three major areas where b. rufescens is found meet in approximately the center of its range, and its history appears to be relatively deep in both los tuxtlas and nuclear central america. nucleotide diversity for 16s is low in the tmvb/northern oaxacan highlands  compared to both los tuxtlas  and central america , which points to an origin for the species outside of the tmvb/northern oaxacan highlands. the fact that initial divergences within b. rufescens are between los tuxtlas and all other areas in both the mtdna and pomc gene trees suggests that this area may have been the origin of the species, or minimally that b. rufescens has been present in los tuxtlas for a long period of time. volcanism that created the sierra de los tuxtlas began around  <dig> ma, and several of the major volcanoes were formed sometime between from 3– <dig> ma
 <cit> . although no calibration points are available for an accurate molecular dating analysis, the deep divergence between the samples from los tuxtlas and the clade from the tmvb/oaxacan highlands and nuclear central america for both mtdna and pomc most likely coincided with the early formation of the tuxtlas volcanic complex.

multiple species of amphibians show either disjunct distributions  or sister species pairs  between the eastern terminus of the tmvb of veracruz or highlands of northern oaxaca and los tuxtlas, while other sister species pairs are found on either side of the isthmus of tehuantepec in los tuxtlas and the sierra de los chimalapas
 <cit> . the only other lowland bolitoglossa in the area, b. platydactyla, is present at low elevations in the sierra madre oriental, eastern terminus of the tmvb, northern oaxaca, los tuxtlas, and in northern chiapas. campbell  proposed a closer relationship between the herpetofauna of los tuxtlas and the chimalapas than between los tuxtlas and the northern oaxacan highlands, and observed that the lowland area between los tuxtlas and other highland areas of southern mexico must have contained forest in the past to allow for interchange between these areas. the lowland areas around los tuxtlas today, which include both savannah and wetlands, do not contain any known populations of b. rufescens that would indicate a more continuous distribution in the recent past between these volcanoes and other areas where nanotriton are found, although more searches would be needed to confirm this. the high nucleotide diversity of los tuxtlas compared to the tmvb/northern oaxacan highlands and the high genetic distance between los tuxtlas and all other populations of b. rufescens follow the pattern of divergence and endemism seen in more highland amphibian and reptile species with similar distributions and indicate the los tuxtlas populations have been isolated from other highland areas of southern mexico for a long time. indeed, the b. rufescens from los tuxtlas are the only population of the species with maxillary teeth
 <cit> , a morphological character often used to delimit species of tropical salamanders
 <cit> . the los tuxtlas populations may warrant description as an additional species endemic to the volcanic complex, and merit further study.

mulcahy et al.
 <cit>  found that the isthmus of tehuantepec corresponded to a phylogeographic break in both incilius valliceps and rhinella marina, two lowland toads distributed widely in mexico and central america. they dated this divergence to approximately 2– <dig> ma in both species, and suggested that these data were consistent with the existence of a pliocene seaway across the isthmus that may have caused vicariance between populations on either side. using divergence values recalculated separately for each gene, their data show levels of divergence across the isthmus for both species that are higher those seen for b. rufescens for 16s  but lower for cytb ; b. rufescens populations from the tmvb/northern oaxacan highlands and those from chiapas in nuclear central america have mean pairwise gtr distances of  <dig>  for 16s and  <dig>  for cytb. the fact that the trans-isthmus divergence values for b. rufescens are not consistently higher or lower suggests that b. rufescens may have been affected by this barrier in a similar manner as the toads. although substitution rate estimates for this group of tropical salamanders are not available, using two substitution rates for cytb from the literature gives a divergence estimate of  <dig>  or  <dig>  ma, roughly concordant with the timing of the pliocene seaway; the second estimate uses a rate derived from a phylogenetic analysis of plethodontids
 <cit> , and may represent a better estimate of the divergence time. samples of b. rufescens from north and south of the isthmus are not reciprocally monophyletic for mtdna; samples from the tmvb/northern oaxacan highlands render those from central american paraphyletic. this suggests that any phylogeographic structure caused by the breaks in forested habitat associated with formation of the isthmus or by formation of a seaway across the isthmus postdates earlier phylogeographic structure associated with geologic or climatic barriers within central america. the fact that genetic structure within b. rufescens associated with the isthmus is relatively shallow compared to that within nuclear central america is reflected in the barrier analysis results, which showed that the isthmus corresponds to the fourth most important barrier within the species, after barriers within nuclear central america and los tuxtlas. similarly, the amova results show that while significant genetic structure is present among populations within regions, genetic structure is not significant at the regional level, indicating that divisions between regions such as the isthmus do not correspond to locations of the primary genetic divisions between the species.

in addition to its possible role as a barrier between the oaxacan highlands and central america, the isthmus may have isolated populations in los tuxtlas from those in central america. the much deeper divergence seen between los tuxtlas and all populations in central america may have been partly driven or reinforced by the formation of the isthmus in the late miocene or early pliocene
 <cit> . at an even deeper timescale, bolitoglossa occidentalis and b. chinanteca were found to be sister taxa and are separated by the isthmus of tehuantepec. based on our rate calibrations, their divergence is much too old to have been caused by a pliocene seaway and likely predates the event. given this difference in timing of the divergence between the two species and the formation of the isthmus, the fact that their ranges are currently separated by the isthmus suggests that caution must be used when inferring a causal role for geographic barriers based solely on overlap with genetic breaks.

despite its small range and its distribution entirely within the mayan geological block
 <cit>  of nuclear central america, b. occidentalis displays a high level of genetic diversity for both mtdna and pomc. the phylomapper results show significant phylogeographic structure within the species and reject an origin in any of the three main clusters of populations within our sampling or from the center of its current distribution. these results provide strong support for an origin of b. occidentalis on the eastern side of the sierra madre de chiapas, near one of our sampled populations . while increased sampling of populations on both sides of the sierra madre de chiapas could potentially change this result, our analyses indicate that b. occidentalis arose in an area of caribbean drainage. bolitoglossa rufescens is entirely confined to caribbean-draining areas of mexico and central america, while b. occidentalis is primarily found on the pacific side of central america
 <cit>  . if both species arose within the caribbean drainage, some other factor besides isolation across the caribbean-pacific divide must have been responsible for their initial divergence. the barrier results show that the primary division within the species is between populations in southeastern chiapas and guatemala and all others, and the amova results also show significant structure between the different areas where b. occidentalis is found.

the limited divergence between populations and lack of strong phylogeographic structure within bolitoglossa nympha stands in contrast to that seen in both b. rufescens and b. occidentalis. bolitoglossa nympha ranges across a major geographic barrier, the motagua-polochic fault system
 <cit> , yet this fault and associated subhumid areas seem not to have caused vicariance or population isolation within b. nympha. bolitoglossa nympha and b. rufescens may have been separated by the motagua-polochic fault in the past, with a subsequent expansion of b. nympha to the northwest of the fault, bringing the two species into secondary contact. likewise, areas where the distributions of b. nympha and b. rufescens approach each other in both the sierra de los cuchumatanes  and the sierra de xucaneb  in guatemala present no obvious geological or climatic barrier that could have either caused the divergence between the two species or maintained them in allopatry. the low haplotype diversity and lack of strong phylogeographic structure within b. nympha suggest that the species may have undergone a historical bottleneck or reduction in range. modeling of the extent of wet forest habitat, with which species of nanotriton are generally associated, in central america at the last glacial maximum predicted an absence of this habitat in northeastern honduras and eastern guatemala
 <cit> , covering most of the current range of b. nympha. while this area was previously hypothesized as a pleistocene refugium for plant taxa
 <cit> , the absence of humid forest over most of the range of b. nympha east of the motagua fault during the pleistocene could explain both the lack of strong phylogeographic structure within the species compared to b. rufescens and b. occidentalis and the lack of a phylogeographic break across the motagua-polochic fault.

CONCLUSIONS
species of nanotriton have a long history in central america. the deepest divergences within and between species of nanotriton do not appear to have been caused by restricted dispersal across biogeographic barriers identified for other taxa, such as the isthmus of tehuantepec and motagua-polochic fault system. while the isthmus of tehuantepec did cause vicariance of populations of bolitoglossa rufescens, this divergence is shallow compared to others within both b. rufescens and b. occidentalis. the distinctiveness of b. rufescens from los tuxtlas appears to be the exception to this pattern, and reinforces the importance of los tuxtlas as a site of high endemism and biogeographic distinctiveness within southeastern mexico. aside from los tuxtlas, the highest intrapopulation divergence within both b. occidentalis and b. rufescens has taken place within the mayan block of nuclear central america. this relatively strong phylogeographic structure over small spatial scales could result in the formation of separate species over longer timescales. the external morphological similarity of all species in the subgenus has hidden the high phylogeographic structure present within two of these species, and subsequent morphological examination of populations from los tuxtlas or b. occidentalis from chiapas could show that additional independent lineages warrant recognition as distinct species. despite their morphological similarity, we found no evidence of introgression at or near contact zones. differences in levels of phylogeographic structure between b. rufescens and b. nympha may be related to regional differences in historical forest extent, which is hypothesized to have varied over time
 <cit> . this phenomenon should be tested by examining patterns of genetic variation within other forest-inhabiting taxa with similar distributions to these two salamander species. the phylogeographic history of nanotriton serves as a useful comparison to both higher elevation forest taxa
 <cit>  and lowland, arid-adapted species
 <cit> , and provides an important addition to our understanding of factors responsible for population divergence and speciation across a geologically complex landscape.

