BACKGROUND
the tumor microenvironment is a dynamic niche for tissue remodeling because of its production of tumor cell- and host stromal cell-derived growth factors, cytokines and matrix proteins. historically, the study of such host-stromal interactions has generally relied on classical histological methods such as immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization or biochemical techniques such as immunoblotting and enzyme assays. unfortunately, the analytical power of these techniques is limited by the ability of reagents to distinguish between tumor and host compartments and by the need for terminal harvest of tissues for analysis. for example, in malignant gliomas, tumor cells co-opt the functions of the surrounding brain to support their growth and invasion. however, gliomas fail to completely compromise an otherwise tight blood brain barrier of normal vessels, based on the wide range of drugs and small molecules that fail to cross the bbb and target brain tumors  <cit> .

gfap expression has been widely used as a marker for astrogliosis and the host response to injury  <cit>  and its analysis has generally relied on immunohistochemistry rather than quantification. recently, however, bioluminescent imaging of gfap activity using transgenic gfap-luc mice has been reported to measure astrogliosis in animal models of kainic lesions  <cit> , prion infection  <cit> , ischemic injury  <cit> , and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis  <cit> , but has not been described in a tumor model. in this study, we used immunodeficient  transgenic gfap-luc mice  <cit>  to grow orthotopic brain tumors and to monitor the co-activation of the gfap promoter with tumor development. gfap promoter activation was used as a surrogate marker for host compartment astrogliosis to assess tumor progression. here we show that these gfap-luc; rag2-/- mice injected with malignant glioma cells can be used to monitor and quantify tumor-induced astrogliosis response of the host. analysis of the serial imaging supports a model in which intracranial tumor injection induces an early gfap response, which is likely a consequence of the local wounding of the stereotactic injection. this early response resolves and is followed by a secondary astrogliosis response correlating with tumor progression both in terms of kinetics and localization.

RESULTS
immunohistochemical analysis of gfap activity in tumor-bearing brain
to determine the effect of orthotopic tumor xenografts on gfap activity we subjected immunodeficient rag2-/- mice   <cit>  to stereotactic injection with dbtrg glioma cells as described in the methods. these glioma cells have been previously shown to be highly invasive with infiltrative, satellite tumors distant from the primary tumor  <cit> . both primary and infiltrative tumors induce specific remodeling of the surrounding microenvironment, which has been analyzed by immunohistochemical analyses of cell-type specific markers, for example, gfap, to detect remodeling and activation of the astrocytes  <cit> . in agreement with previous observations from our laboratory and others  <cit> , gfap activity was highly upregulated at the tumor margin and adjacent tissue forming a glial scar, whereas a decrease in gfap immunoreactivity was observed in the tumor core . although gfap is generally detected in primary glial brain tumors, its expression is often lost in cell lines established from malignant gliomas such as dbtrg cells  <cit> . thus, scattered gfap immunoreactivity inside the tumor was likely from infiltrating astrocytes from the host rather than from the human dbtrg tumor cells themselves. previous observations using a different astrocyte marker, aldh1l <dig>   <cit>  demonstrate a similar immunostaining pattern with gfap . however, aquaporin  <dig>  immunoreactivity was upregulated in the tumor core and, moreover, contact with endothelial cells was lost inside tumors  <cit> , indicating that distinct subsets of astrocytes react differently upon glioma growth.

while these immunohistochemical techniques are useful for understanding tumor-induced host remodeling at a cellular level, they rely on the availability and validation of species-specific antibodies to distinguish tumor vs host compartment responses. to develop a rapid, quantitative model to better understand the temporal progression of astrocytic gliosis upon tumor growth, we used gfap-luc reporter animals for a non-invasive detection of tumor-induced astrogliosis.

non-invasive imaging analyses of glioma-induced gfap activation
to determine the effect of orthotopic tumor growth on gfap promoter-mediated luciferase activity, we backcrossed gfap-luc mice to an immunodeficient rag2-/- background. we then injected lentiviral-transduced, dbtrg cells expressing red fluorescent protein  into the brains of  <dig> week-old gfap-luc; rag2-/- mice by stereotactic injection. intracranial injections of an equal volume of pbs were used to control for injury induced by the injection itself. as reported earlier  <cit> , intracranial injections of pbs alone induced a transient injury response, which was detected at day  <dig> but diminished by week two . tumor cells induced a biphasic host astrogliosis response in which tumor cells initially induced gfap-luc levels that was higher than control followed by a reduction to background by day  <dig>  however, further tumor growth after three and four weeks led to second, larger, sustained and statistically significant five-fold increase of gfap activity over pbs controls .

non-invasive imaging analyses of metastatic brain tumor-induced gfap activation
metastatic brain tumors also induce reactive astrogliosis in the brain  <cit> , therefore, we tested whether cancer cells of non-cns origin activate gfap in our model. following stereotactic injection of mda-mb <dig> human breast cancer cells, we observed similar results . these data indicate that the gfap-luc; rag2-/- mice are useful tools to monitor reactive tumor-induced astrogliosis of the host compartment non-invasively.

real time monitoring of spatial distribution of host-mediated astrogliosis
to understand the spatial distribution of gfap-activation relative to the tumor in real-time, we generated a three-dimensional reconstruction of astrogliosis in tumor-bearing mice using living image  <dig>  . gfap-luc; rag2-/- mice were injected with rfp-labeled dbtrg glioma cells and incubated for four weeks. at four week, the bioluminescence signals and fluorescent signals were collected and analyzed. we observed a localized tumor mass in the cortex, while gfap activity was upregulated more broadly in the areas surrounding the tumor . in agreement with the immunohistochemical data , there was not a complete overlap between the tumor area and gfap activity suggesting that the gfap response in the luciferase reporter extends beyond the immediate tumor margin .

gfap activation correlates with tumor size
to determine whether astrogliosis was restricted to the tumor region or a global astrocyte response was generated as a consequence of tumor growth, we monitored luciferase activity in brain sections. following a four-week incubation of glioma in vivo, the brain was harvested and  <dig> mm brain sections were prepared. consistent with the immunohistochemical data , reactive astrogliosis was observed only in tumor-bearing sections and sections adjacent to tumors . furthermore, we observed a statistically significant correlation between tumor size  and astrogliosis  .

gfap immunostaining  and our bioluminescent reporter model  both indicated that tumor induced-gfap activity was mainly observed in the microenvironment of the tumor. on the other hand, gfap activity in the contralateral hemisphere  was very low and close to the baseline activity of gfap observed in control brain with no injury. although we have found a significant correlation between the tumor size and astrogliosis in the tumor microenvironment, we did not observe a significant change of global gfap activity  based on tumor size.

in mouse eae and prion infection models there is a direct correlation between the amount of gfap-mediated luciferase activity and the intensity of the insult  <cit> . yet, in the mouse model of ischemic injury in the cns, a correlation between the gfap activity and infarct size was observed only in the male mice  <cit> . although not a focus of these studies, we did not observe any differences in the gfap activity upon tumor growth between male and female animals. however, other tools to monitor astrogliosis maybe useful to assess gender differences in future studies.

we established that transgenic gfap-luc reporter mice are useful to study the interaction of the tumor growth and astrogliosis. the non-invasive nature of this model can be used for the dynamic assessment of astrogliosis during the course of tumor treatment after the delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs or early detection of a recurring tumor. transgenic reporter models such as gfap-luc provide insights into the molecular physiology of the tumor microenvironment which maybe useful for drug discovery or screening  <cit>  and evaluating other transgenic models for host compartment specific response to glioma growth and invasion.

CONCLUSIONS
together, these results indicate that gfap activity can be used as a surrogate marker for tumor-induced astrogliosis. unlike the traditional methods to monitor astrogliosis, these reporter mice can be utilized for rapid, quantitative, and dynamic assessments of the tumor-host interaction.

