BACKGROUND
saliva  is an emerging biofluid for non-invasive diagnostics used in the detection of human diseases. the need to advance saliva research is strongly emphasized by the national institute of dental and craniofacial research , and is included in the nidcr's 2004- <dig> expert panel long-term research agenda  <cit> . the ability to monitor health status, disease onset, progression, recurrence and treatment outcome through non-invasive means is highly important to advancing health care management. saliva is a perfect medium to be explored for personalized individual medicine including diagnostics, offering a non-invasive, easy to obtain means for detecting and monitoring diseases. saliva testing potentially allows the patient to collect their own saliva samples at home, yielding convenience for the patient and savings in health costs, and facilitating multiple sampling. specimen collection is less objectionable to patients and easier in children and elderly individuals.

due to these advantages, finding biomarkers in saliva for the detection of serious illnesses such as cancers has been on the national healthcare agenda for several years, and the national cancer institute has accordingly recognized saliva as a promising source for cancer biomarkers  <cit> . a mandate in the government performance report act  report is that by year  <dig> proof of principle will be obtained for the ability of saliva to monitor health and diagnose one systemic disease  <cit> .

for the past six years the ucla salivaomics research group has developed proteome, transcriptome, microrna, metabolome, genome, microbiome, and point-of-care salivary diagnostic technologies. these research resources have proved highly valuable to basic and translational research groups around the world.

sjögren's syndrome  is an autoimmune disease that affects exocrine tissues, especially salivary glands and lacrimal glands. the autoimmune-mediated damage of the salivary and lacrimal glands leads to a decrease in the production of saliva and tears and to the development of dry mouth and dry eyes. without the lubricating and protective functions of saliva and tears, the oral and ocular surfaces are subject to infections and discomfort leading to significantly reduced quality of life. the disease can present either as primary sjögren's syndrome , when no other autoimmune diseases are present, or as secondary sjögren's syndrome , which involves co-presence of some other autoimmune diseases. sjögren's syndrome is one of the most common autoimmune disorders in the us, with an estimated prevalence of ~ <dig> million people, affecting primarily women . in addition, pss patients have a 40-fold higher risk of developing malignant lymphoma than the general population.

the rapid development and maturity of the genomics field has led to the emergence of other omics studies, such as proteomics and transcriptomics, which are now being implemented widely in studies of human disease. clearly, mining the data from multiple omics studies can provide deeper insight into the workings of biological systems than can be obtained from any single omics study. omics databases such as pharmgkb  and epo-kb  serve as important resources for the emerging discipline of systems biology as applied to the understanding of pathogenesis in humans and in model organisms. however, systematic management and analysis, and above all the integration, of omics datasets remains challenging, and the problems are compounded when these datasets need to be integrated with data of other sorts, including diagnostic data obtained by clinicians.

as a computational and informatics infrastructure that can permit global exploration and utilization, the salivaomics knowledge base  is being created by aligning  the saliva biomarker discovery and validation resources at ucla with  the ontology resources developed by the obo  foundry  <cit> , including the new saliva ontology  that is described in this communication.

the salivaomics knowledge base  is a data repository, management system and web resource constructed to support human salivary proteomics, transcriptomics, mirna, metabolomics and microbiome research. the skb will provide the first web resource dedicated to salivary omics studies and will contain the data and information needed to explore the biology, diagnostic potentials, pharmacoproteomics and pharmacogenomics of human saliva. at the same time it will allow a systems approach to the utilization of salivary diagnostic technology for personalized medicine applications. it has an effective information retrieval system and carefully designed data format and employs an open data model. figure  <dig> shows the skb's three-tier service oriented architecture with a data layer, ontology layer and interface layer.

RESULTS
we are creating the saliva ontology  as a consensus-based controlled vocabulary of terms and relations dedicated to salivaomics and to saliva-related diagnostics. figure  <dig> displays a fragment of salo in its current form.

salo
the saliva ontology  is being created through cross-disciplinary interaction between saliva experts, protein experts, diagnosticians, and ontologists. to aid development and testing of salo, we are incrementally developing a corpus of saliva-relevant literature in skb to assist in identifying core terms, synonyms and definitions for inclusion within the ontology, and to provide examples of usage and links between salo content and the corresponding items through their pubmed identifiers. in this way a growing body of semantically enhanced web-enabled literature will be created within the skb to support future research. additional resources upon which we will draw in populating and validating salo will include the results of experiments in data- and text-mining using the ontology, and cross-linking to existing ontologies and terminology resources involving treatment of saliva-relevant phenomena. we will also identify and represent within salo relationships to saliva-relevant types represented in ontologies such as gene ontology   <cit> , the protein ontology   <cit> , ontology for biomedical investigations  and chemical entities of biological interest   <cit>  and also provide links to corresponding snomed ct terms where available. to facilitate the maintenance of salo and its use in literature curation, text-mining tools such as gate http://gate.ac.uk/ and the python natural language toolkit are being used.

salo will be a public domain resource and entirely web-based. each term in the ontology will have its own url which will point to a webpage providing definitions, pubmed sources, references to annotations in skb and to external databases. the goal of the skb is then to integrate, store, organize and manage all saliva-relevant experimental data annotated and connected through salo and its associated ontologies. skb will include also data about saliva-related experiments, which will be captured using the ontology for biomedical investigations  in tandem with the salo ontology.

salo development
in order to build on the solid foundations of prior work on biomedical ontologies and on the associated software tools and ontology application techniques, we will work with the open biomedical ontologies  foundry, and with the developers of obo ontologies such as go, pro, chebi, and obi in order to ensure conformity with current best practices and to guarantee non-redundant development. we follow the principles of the obo foundry in constructing salo in order to ensure that salo is semantically interoperable with the other obo ontologies <cit> .

salivaomics standard literature corpus
we have access to full-text articles of the biomedical journals from pubmed until  <dig> and are using these as our primary resource in creating the salivaomics standard literature corpus . first we created a list of representative saliva literature items in collaboration with the following scientific leaders  in saliva research:

- arie v. nieuw amerongen 

- bruce baum 

- william giannobile 

- james melvin 

- nelson rhodus 

- charles streckfus 

- arjan vissink 

- stephen wotman 

- chih-ko yeh .

 <dig> literature items for inclusion were then selected on the basis of numbers of citations. some of the articles in the corpus are specifically related to the sjögren's syndrome test-case. this corpus now forms a constituent part of the skb, where the salo ontology, in tandem with go, pro and other ontologies, is being applied to create semantically enhanced versions of the initially selected representative articles through a process of manual curation.

in an interesting positive feedback effect, the process of annotating the corpus will in addition bring benefits to the process of development of the salo ontology itself, since it will help us to identify gaps in the ontology discovered in the process of curation. where an expression that is relevant to saliva research is used in the corpus but is not already present in salo, a new ontology term will be proposed and then either added to salo or submitted to one of the other relevant ontologies for inclusion. in this way, the comprehensiveness of salo can be incrementally achieved relative to the state of the art in salivaomics research at any given stage, and in a way which ensures the alignment of salo with other major ontologies.

in addition to the manual curation of the saliva corpus, we are also using text-mining algorithms to the  <dig>  pubmed articles identified as containing occurrences of the term "saliva" in their title or abstract. specifically we are applying information extraction algorithms for segmentation, part-of-speech tagging, semantic labelling, and entity and relation chunking recognition to these articles. figure  <dig> displays the result of entity chunking recognition applied to the text of one sample article.

this strategy, too, will identify additional terms needed in the saliva ontology or in the related ontologies with which salo must interoperate. we will thus pursue both manual and automatic processes for annotating the literature in our corpus, amending salo incrementally, and also submitting necessary amendment requests to related ontologies as we proceed.

salo resources
the saliva ontology consists of both hierarchical  structures supporting saliva-domain taxonomies and additional relationships  taken from the obo relation ontology  <cit> . figure  <dig> illustrates some illustrative examples of links between salo and other ontologies.

salo is a formal ontology created using the w3c standard ontology web language . the public release owl versions of the ontology will be published in the ncbo bioportal. for quality assurance and dissemination purposes, parallel versions will be created  in the obo format that is used by the go consortium and still favored by many biologists. these obo versions will be submitted for inclusion in the obo ontology library.

salo will employ the obo foundry principles http://www.obofoundry.org/crit.shtml in its development. this will help to ensure that the ontology is open, well-documented, specific to the domain , and that it works well with other biomedical ontologies. the principles require that both logical and natural language definitions are provided for each term in the ontology, and also that links between terms are asserted using relational expressions which have been logically defined in a way to the obo relation ontology  <cit> . cross-ontology reasoning is thereby supported by the definitional structure of the ontologies involved.

ontology of the salivary markers for sjögren's syndrome 
salo will be tested specifically in light of its capacity to meet the ontology needs for managing data derived from research on the use of a salivary genetic marker for sjögren's syndrome .

in results of a complete screening for the trim <dig> gene in patients with primary ss are presented  <cit> , together with results of a gene association study. a single-nucleotide polymorphism  in intron  <dig> was found to be strongly associated with the presence of anti-ro  <dig> kd autoantibodies in primary ss.

ss-relevant portions of our ontology will be validated through our work on annotation of representative research literature on sjögren's syndrome , through our research on the ss-a protein and on the trim <dig> gene. figure  <dig>  illustrates some of the relations involved in a saliva-specific genetic marker for sjögren's syndrome.

the end-result of this work is two-fold:  a better understanding of relationships between diseases and multiple biomarkers because more useful information can be obtained based on the ontology annotation and classification.  a better aid for data interpretation, analysis and mining through the ontology annotation.

CONCLUSIONS
saliva ontology is an ongoing exploratory initiative. the ontology is being constructed to interoperate with the gene ontology , the protein ontology , the chebi small molecule ontology and other standard ontology and terminology resources, including snomed ct. the ontology will be used to facilitate salivaomics data retrieval and integration across multiple fields of research together with data analysis and data mining. the ontology will be tested through its ability to serve the semantic enhancement of a representative corpus of salivaomics research literature that is to be included in the skb.

