BACKGROUND
many applications of high throughput sequencing, such as expression profiling  <cit> , splicing inference  <cit> , copy number variation  identification  <cit>  and repeat element annotation  <cit>  rely on observed variation in the depth of sequencing coverage within the genome or transcriptome. in addition, variance in coverage is of importance to de-novo assembly pipelines and read mapping strategies, since local regions of unusually high coverage may be interpreted as duplications or masked as repeat elements  <cit> . as a consequence, applications such as these may be impaired by random fluctuation and systematic bias in sequencing coverage across the genome. however, the details and extent of these effects are currently not well understood.

it is known that the pcr step involved in sequencing-by-synthesis methods introduces coverage bias related to gc content , possibly due to the formation of secondary structures of single stranded dna  <cit> . such gc dependent bias is seen on a wide variety of scales ranging from individual nucleotides to complete sequencing reads and even large  genomic regions  <cit> . systematic bias could also be introduced during the dna fragmentation step or caused by dna isolation efficacy  <cit> , local dna structure, variation in sequence quality and map-ability of sequence reads  <cit> . some efforts have been made to control for these biases during downstream computational analyses in various ngs  applications , and laboratory protocols have also been developed to reduce this problem  <cit> .

in addition to variation in coverage, there may be sequence dependent variation in nucleotide specific error rates. such systematic patterns of sequencing errors can also have consequences for downstream applications as errors may be taken for low frequency snps, even when sequencing coverage is high  <cit> . gc rich regions and sites close to the ends of sequence reads typically show elevated errors rates  <cit>  and it has also been shown that certain sequence patterns, especially inverted repeats and “ggc” motifs are associated with an elevated rate of illumina sequencing errors  <cit> . such sequence specific miscalls probably arise due to specific inhibition of polymerase binding  <cit> . homopolymer runs cause problems for technologies utilising a terminator free chemistry , and specific error profiles exist for other sequencing technologies as well  <cit> . the effects of such technology specific error patterns on sequencing coverage and read assembly algorithms remains poorly described. as sequencing reads with high error rates are more likely to be removed during trimming stages, regions with high error rates may also get decreased sequencing coverage  <cit> .

mitochondrial dna  is abundant in most cell types and whole genome, exome or transcriptome data from high throughput sequencing can therefore be efficiently mined for complete mitochondrial sequences, as shown in a number of recent studies . due to the haploid nature of the mitochondrial genome, such data is also comparatively easy to assemble and analyse. here we take advantage of ultra-deep sequencing of mtdna from two vertebrate species to evaluate fine scale variation in coverage and patterns of sequencing errors. we utilise data from several independently sequenced individuals in order to describe systematic coverage bias across the mtdna sequence. due to the extreme depth of our sequencing data , it is possible to provide very precise estimates of coverage bias and sequencing error rates. furthermore, a comparison in sequence coverage between two distantly related species  allows us to evaluate to what extent sequencing bias is conserved across evolutionary distant lineages.

RESULTS
sequencing the wolverine mitochondrial dna
about  <dig> million genome sequence reads from a single individual mapped against the wolverine mtdna sequence . the entire  <dig>  bp consensus mtdna sequence was covered by an average sequencing depth of  <dig> x . thus, 2% of all quality trimmed genome sequence reads mapped to mtdna, even though the mitochondrial genome only represents ~ <dig> % of the total genome. mitochondria may be expected to be especially common in tissues with high oxygen demands  <cit> , and the use of muscle tissue for genome sequencing could thus potentially explain the high coverage of mtdna sequences in our data.table  <dig> 
information about sequencing coverage and read mapping for the sampled individuals



wolverine:

flycatcher:


our consensus mtdna sequence from the wolverine differed from the previously published wolverine mtdna sequence  <cit>  by  <dig> snps and  <dig> indels. given the high sequencing coverage underlying the consensus sequence, we are fairly confident that it is error free. moreover, no mitochondrial sequence variation in non-repetitive regions was detected in sequencing of  <dig> additional samples from different parts of the same scandinavian population . since the previously sequenced individual was allegedly also sampled from the scandinavian population  <cit> , the observed discrepancies are most likely explained by sequencing errors in the ncbi entry. complete mtdna homogeneity has previously been found when analysing a small region of the mitochondrial genome in scandinavian wolverines  <cit> .

a k-mer count  of mtdna reads showed a peak at a multiplicity at  <dig>  , representing a mean depth of sequencing coverage of  <dig> x . based on the shape of the bimodal distribution , k-mers with multiplicity less than  <dig>  were inferred to be the result of sequencing errors. out of a total of  <dig> million k-mers in the data,  <dig> million were thus considered to be the result of sequencing errors. this gives an average per-base error rate of  <dig> % across the whole mtdna data.

variation in coverage across the mtdna sequence
the per-site depth of sequencing coverage across the wolverine mtdna ranged between  <dig> x and  <dig> x . given the extreme depth of covarage, stochastic variation in measurement should be negligible and the more than three-fold difference in coverage among sites observed should therefore be related to inherent characteristics of the sequence. we calculated sequencing coverage based on the number of individual sequencing reads covering each nucleotide. alternatively, coverage can also be calculated based on the whole dna fragments   <cit> . we found that the pattern of coverage variation was strikingly similar for read and fragment coverage in our data , the only qualitative difference being a slightly higher overall coverage for the fragment counts compared to the read counts.figure  <dig> 
mtdna sequencing coverage. sequencing coverage of the wolverine mtdna for the individual sequenced at high depth  and  <dig> additionally sequenced individuals . sliding window estimate of gc content in red .



there was a clear relationship between local  gc content and sequencing coverage . as in previous studies  <cit> , we found some evidence that this relationship is non-linear, indicated by the quadratic regression having a slightly better fit to the data than the linear regression . however, the peak of the quadratic regression lies very close to the lower extreme of our data range , meaning that the relationship between gc content and coverage is essentially negative for most of the sequence. this finding is strikingly different compared with nuclear genome sequences obtained using illumina technology, where the peak of sequencing coverage typically occur at a gc content close to 50% e.g.  <cit> . in our data, inter-genic regions had lower sequencing coverage than genes, and rrna genes had lower coverage than protein-coding genes and trna genes . this is in line with previous studies showing increased coverage on exons  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
gc dependent sequencing coverage. the relationship between gc content and sequencing coverage in wolverine . linear  and quadratic  regression lines are included.



individual g and c nucleotides had lower average sequencing coverage  compared to a and t nucleotides , also when controlling for gc content of the surrounding region . under-representation of gc-rich regions has been suggested to be a result of bias in the initial pcr steps during library preparation  <cit>  and of miscalls originating from the sequencer  <cit> . these local fluctuations in sequencing coverage may affect applications where coverage is used as a proxy for biological phenomena. for instance regions of high coverage  could be more likely to be interpreted as genomic duplications in cnv analyses  <cit> . moreover estimates of expression levels of gc-poor genes may be inflated in rna-seq experiments  <cit> . as gc-rich regions are common around promoters and transcription start sites, under-representation of sequencing there may hamper biological interpretation and annotation of low coverage genome data  <cit> .

reproducibility of sequencing coverage
strong repeatability in the pattern of heterogeneity in coverage across a sequence would evidence that the variation is mainly due to inherent characteristics of particular sites or regions of that sequence, rather than representing stochastic variation in library preparation and/or amplification. one means to further test this is to investigate among-individual consistency in sequencing coverage. we therefore sequenced  <dig> additional wolverines to a mean trimmed read depth of  <dig> x coverage for nuclear dna and  <dig> x coverage for mtdna. the per-site variation in coverage of mtdna was again considerable, ranging between three-fold and six-fold for the  <dig> individuals. variation was highly correlated between the individual sequenced at high coverage and the additional  <dig> individuals . the correlation was stronger when comparing among the  <dig> additional individuals . several peaks and dips of coverage were concordant among the independently sequenced individuals , even on a very fine scale. other regions  showed more variation among individuals . it is thus evident that although there is some random fluctuations in coverage, a large proportion of the variation is due to systematic and sequence dependent biases.

conservation of sequencing coverage bias across two distant vertebrate taxa
in order to further investigate the repeatability in variation in coverage we benefitted from the strong conservation in the genomic organisation of animal mtdna. using avian genome sequencing data from a single collared flycatcher with a nuclear genome coverage of 85x, we analysed variation in coverage of mtdna in a similar way as above. there was an even higher variation in sequencing depth, with per-site coverage ranging between  <dig> x and  <dig> x. as for wolverine, a clear relationship between gc content and coverage was found for flycatcher . we then used regions of the mitochondrial genome that were highly conserved  between wolverine and flycatcher  and found a positive correlation between coverage in wolverine and flycatcher at the nucleotide level . the pattern of sequencing coverage bias was thus strikingly conserved even across two distantly related vertebrate lineages.figure  <dig> 
conservation of sequencing coverage patterns across taxa. comparison of sequencing coverage of wolverine and flycatcher in three homologous regions of the mtdna.



site-specific variation in sequencing errors
for all positions  in the wolverine mtdna sequence we found that a small proportion of the reads had an aberrant nucleotide compared to the reference sequence. a large majority of sites have a non-reference nucleotide in ≈  <dig> % of the reads with a similar distribution across all eleven sequenced individuals. we interpret these alternative nucleotides as sequencing errors  based on their relatively low frequency and the fact that they were dispersed across all sequenced individuals and across the whole mtdna sequence. an observed transition/transversion ratio close to one , distinctly different from what is normally observed in diversity or divergence data, further supports this interpretation. the estimated mean error rate  is very close to our expectation based on the k-mer count analysis  and it is also in line with the specifications for hiseq sequencing , representing a qphred score of 30; and to that found in other studies after quality filtering  <cit> . six nucleotides had a very high number of one specific non-reference allele  in a single individual only , with all other individuals having a low  number of non-reference nucleotides at this site. we interpret this as evidence for heteroplasmy, i.e. mutations in the pool of mtdna molecules transmitted between generations  <cit> .

the mean site-specific error rate  of the wolverine individual sequenced at high depth was  <dig> %, with a range between  <dig> % and  <dig> %. sequencing errors thus occurred at all positions of the mitochondrial genome. g and c nucleotides had a slightly higher mean error rate compared with a and t nucleotides . sequence specific errors  were previously found to be common in illumina hiseq reads with the highest rates seen at the motif “ggc”  <cit>  and, in particular, “ggcng”  <cit> . our data support these findings. all three sites with error rates above 1% included the sequence motif “ccngcc”  directly downstream of the high error position . sse are likely to bias estimates of sequence diversity as they will lead to falsely inferred snps in specific error prone sites. an efficient way of overcoming this problem would be to consider on which strand snps are detected , as only reads from one direction should be affected by the increased error rate  <cit> . it is however, important to note that this strategy requires sufficient sequencing coverage of both strands at the variable nucleotide position.

there was a negative correlation between sequencing coverage and site specific sequencing error rate . when investigating areas directly downstream of “ggcng” , coverage clearly decreased with proximity  to the error prone motif . inspecting the details of the regions surrounding the three nucleotide positions with the highest error rates , it is obvious that there is a marked drop in sequencing coverage exactly at, and upstream of, the high-error base . miscall frequency may thus also be directly linked to the observed bias in sequence coverage. this link could potentially arise as a consequence of read trimming. if reads  from sse regions have lower quality scores, they will be more likely to be trimmed away during initial read filtering steps. to explore this, we also investigated coverage based on raw  reads . the coverage variation pattern seen after mapping the raw reads was strikingly similar to the trimmed coverage data .figure  <dig> 
sequencing coverage around peaks of sequencing errors. sequencing coverage  in the regions with peaks of sequencing error rates  associated with the sequence motif “ccngcc” . note the coinciding location of marked drops of sequencing coverage exactly at the sequencing error peak.



alternatively, the link between error rates and sequencing coverage could also be an effect of imperfect mapping of reads with sequencing errors if mapping parameters are stringently set. observed coverage is thus expected to decrease in such regions  <cit>  and may be falsely interpreted as having copy number variation  or reduced expression levels , if these factors are not properly controlled for. however, it should be noted that not all positions with an error prone sequence motif seems to be effected by sequencing coverage bias. for example, the sequence motif “ccngcc”  occurs  <dig> times in the wolverine mtdna sequence, and most of these show neither elevated error rates nor decreased sequencing coverage. in order to be able to apply proper controls for sse bias it is thus important to elucidate why some, but not all, regions with certain sequence motifs show marked increases in sequencing errors. an important development for the future is to develop and utilise more precise methods to control for these biases in bioinformatics pipelines . additionally, wet-lab based methods can be improved to produce a more even coverage across regions with different sequence characteristics  <cit> . as different sequencing technologies show different signatures of bias, combining different types of sequencing data could be a suitable strategy to reduce these effects  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have reported a striking variation in sequencing coverage across the mitochondrial genome. reproducibility of coverage patterns within and across species provide evidence that this variation is largely due to intrinsic properties of the dna sequence, with gc content as an important explanatory factor. coverage is also related to local levels of sequencing error rates, with peaks in sequencing error also showing marked drops in coverage. such error peaks are also often associated with certain error prone sequencing motifs. this highlights the importance of controlling for coverage bias when investigating sequencing data for applications such as rna-seq, cnv identification or whole genome sequencing.

