BACKGROUND
antimicrobial peptides  are evolutionarily conserved components of the innate immune system of most living organisms. amps show a high degree of sequence diversity but share some characteristics including their predominantly cationic character, a high content of hydrophobic residues, and an amphipathic structure. they are also natural antibiotics that exhibit rapid, potent and long-lasting activity against a broad spectrum of pathogens by affecting conserved features of microbial cell membranes  <cit> . amps are emerging as valuable agents for crop protection  <cit> , food preservation  <cit> , and pharmaceuticals for both human and animal health  <cit>  to alleviate the growing problem of conventional antibiotic resistance and the shortage of effective compounds. however, the high cost of chemical synthesis or the low yield obtained via purification from natural sources has limited the use of amps in these fields, particularly in applications with little added value.

plants are promising biofactory systems for amps; they are economical to grow, easily scalable and generally regarded as safe because of the low risk of contamination with human and animal pathogens  <cit> . plants have successfully been used for the production of different proteins for therapeutic and technological applications  <cit> . however, little attention has been paid to the use of plants as biofactories for amps. evidence indicating that plants can sustain amp production can be found in the literature, since plants have been used for the heterologous production of amps with the aim of improving host resistance to pathogen infection  <cit> . no extensive efforts were made in those studies, however, to quantify the amount of amp produced in the transgenic plants.

seeds naturally accumulate proteins, packed in a dehydrated optimal biochemical environment for long-term storage. thus, this organ seems suitable for the production of stable large amounts of amps in a compact biomass. in particular, rice seeds are considered as a good biofactory due to high grain yields. furthermore, rice is easy to transform, can be grown under containment conditions, and the risk of unintended gene flow is minimal compared with other crops  <cit> .

the rice endosperm is an appropriate tissue for the heterologous production of proteins of interest  <cit> . this organ occupies most of the space within the rice seed. endosperm cells mostly contain starch granules and proteins, and are the major storage protein sink. in rice, 60% to 80% of all storage proteins are glutelins, which are insoluble in neutral saline solutions but soluble in acid or alkaline solutions  <cit> . they are classified into four groups  based on their amino acid sequence  <cit> . some 20% to 30% of all rice seed proteins are alcohol-soluble prolamines  <cit> . rice seeds also accumulate a salt-soluble globulin which comprises up to 5% of the seed protein  <cit> . these storage proteins are densely packed into specialized storage organelles called protein bodies . there are two types of pbs in rice seeds: pb-i and pb-ii. the former are spherical protein inclusions that bud from the endoplasmic reticulum  and in which prolamines are typically accumulated  <cit> . the later, also known as protein storage vacuoles , contain glutelin and globulin proteins, and are characterized by their irregular shape, with a diameter of about 2–4 μm, and their highly uniform dense structure. glutelins aggregate in pb-ii and form protein inclusions with crystalline structures  <cit> . pb-ii are derived from golgi or may bypass the golgi complex  <cit> . all storage proteins contain an n-terminal signal peptide that mediates translocation into the er, where the signal peptide is cleaved and the protein is transported to the appropriate storage compartment  <cit> . the seed storage organelles can contain recombinant proteins, offering stability in planta and allowing considerable accumulation  <cit> .

the aim of this study is to explore the feasibility of using rice seed endosperm for the production of amps. cecropin a was chosen as the amp to be produced, based on its biotechnological potential. cecropin a is a linear and cationic peptide isolated from insect haemolymph that shows potent lytic activity against important bacterial and fungal phytopathogens  <cit> . its constitutive accumulation in transgenic rice plants has been shown to confer enhanced pathogen resistance  <cit> . previous studies by our group demonstrated that transgenic rice plants constitutively expressing a cecropin a gene designed to secret the encoded peptide in the extracellular space had an abnormal phenotype and were not fertile  <cit> . no effect on plant performance was observed in the transgenic rice plants that accumulated cecropin a in the er, the plants accumulated low levels of the peptide in their leaves  <cit> . here, we report the production and accumulation of bioactive cecropin a in rice endosperm without any impact on seed viability or seedling growth. two different endosperm-specific promoters were used to drive the expression of a codon-optimized synthetic cecropin a gene , namely the glub <dig> and glub <dig> promoters. the n-terminal signal peptide sequence of either the glub <dig> or glub <dig> protein was fused to the cecropin a sequence. furthermore, two different ceca genes, encoding the cecropin a or cecropin a-kdel peptide, were assayed to determine the effect of the er retention signal  on peptide accumulation and subcellular localization.

RESULTS
generation of transgenic rice plants for cecropin a production
four different constructs were prepared for the expression of synthetic codon-optimized ceca genes in rice seeds; they are shown in figure 1a. they contain the promoter of either the glub <dig> or the glub <dig> gene, which encode the major rice seed storage proteins, to drive seed-specific expression of the synthetic genes. an endosperm-specific expression pattern has been reported for these two promoters  <cit> . each construct incorporates a different chimeric ceca gene designed to study different targeting mechanisms of the encoded peptide. the chimeric genes consist of the n-terminal signal peptide sequence of the corresponding glutelin b <dig> or b <dig> protein fused to the coding sequence of the cecropin a peptide; two of them also include the sequence encoding the c-terminal er retention signal .

transgenic rice plants were produced by agrobacterium-mediated transformation using the hygromycin resistance gene as the selectable marker. after each transformation, hygromycin-resistant plants were obtained and transgene integration was verified by pcr analysis of . no apparent adverse effects on the plant phenotype were observed under greenhouse conditions. six independent lines per transformation event were selected to obtain the t <dig> homozygous progeny plants. the stability of the transgene integration and inheritance was monitored across generations by the hygromycin resistance phenotype encoded in the t-dna.

accumulation of cecropin a in rice seeds
to determine whether the transgenic lines accumulated the transgene product, the presence of cecropin a in seed protein extracts was analysed by immunoblot assays using specific antibodies. as shown in figure 1b, the anti-cecropin a antibodies reacted with two major bands in the protein extracts obtained from transgenic seeds, which were absent in the extracts obtained either from wild-type or from the empty vector transformed seeds. the strongest signal corresponded to a peptide with a mobility around 8 kda, which is compatible with a cecropin a dimer conformation , as reported previously for lines constitutively producing cecropin a  <cit>  and as also shown in figure 2a. a band with an estimated mobility approximately 4 kda that migrates similarly to the synthetic cecropin a was also detected in the cecropin a lines, which could correspond to the cecropin a monomeric peptide. the cecropin a dimer was consistently detected in all the transgenic lines and in all the immunoblot analyses conducted during the course of this work; whereas the monomeric cecropin a was not always detected, suggesting that the dimeric conformation was more stable. figure 1b also shows that cecropin a peptides were detected in all the lines carrying any of the four chimeric genes, indicating that the ceca transgenes were properly expressed and their corresponding products accumulated in the rice seeds.

we then examined whether the glutelin promoters specifically direct ceca gene expression specifically to seed and not to vegetative tissue, such as roots or leaves. to this end, protein extracts were prepared from the roots and leaves of representative lines per each transgene and subjected to western blot analysis. as positive controls, protein extracts from transgenic lines expressing ceca genes controlled by the maize ubiquitin- <dig> promoter were also included in this analysis. as shown in figure 2a, cecropin a was detected in the protein extracts of seeds carrying any of the ceca genes controlled by glutelin promoters, whereas they were absent in the extracts from leaves and roots of the same plants. as expected, positive reactions were detected in the leaf and root protein extracts of the lines constitutively expressing ceca genes. thus, this analysis confirmed that cecropin a accumulated in rice seeds, but not in the vegetative tissues, when expression was controlled by either the glub <dig> or the glub <dig> promoter.

to further characterize the cecropin a lines, the distribution of the heterologous peptide in the seeds was analysed by in situ immunodetection. as shown in figure 2b, a positive reaction was detected in the mature seeds of transgenic plants harbouring any of the four transgenes. specific immunological reactions were detected in the endosperm of cecropin a seeds as compared to wild-type seeds. an unspecific reaction in embryo tissue was also observed in all the seeds analysed, including wild-type and empty vector seeds . therefore, the transgenic lines produced and accumulated cecropin a in the rice seed endosperm.

a comparative analysis of cecropin a accumulation in the different transgenic lines generated in this work was carried out. by comparing band intensities with those of known amounts of synthetic cecropin a, the cecropin a content in the lines was determined . this study revealed variability in cecropin a accumulation between transgenic lines harbouring the same transgene, as well as in lines harbouring different transgenes. the accumulation levels ranged from  <dig>  to 6 μg/g seed tissue. similar accumulation levels were observed using either the glub <dig> or glub <dig> promoter, suggesting that the observed variability is associated with transgenesis rather with the activity of one or another promoter. furthermore, the cecropin a levels were similar in seeds harbouring the transgenes with or without the kdel extension sequence, indicating that the kdel signal did not enhance accumulation of the peptide. only one line carrying the pglub1:cecakdel transgene  appeared to accumulate higher levels than the other transgenic lines. in addition, the observed variability in accumulation did not correlate with the transgene copy number of each line, as most of the lines generated contained one or two transgene insertions as estimated by quantitative pcr .

cecropin a accumulates in pb-ii
cecropin peptides are known to be highly susceptible to plant proteases, which limits their accumulation in plant tissues  <cit> . a priori, directing the cecropin a to endosperm pbs would protect it from host proteases. in order to determine whether cecropin a were accumulated in pbs of rice seeds, subcellular fractionation by centrifugation on a sucrose gradient was performed and the fractions were subjected to immunoblot analysis. coomassie blue staining of equivalent protein fractions showed a clear enrichment of glutelin and prolamine proteins in the densest fraction . immunoblot analysis of gradient fraction proteins revealed the presence of cecropin a in fraction  <dig> in all the lines, whether they contained the kdel extension or not . these results demonstrate that cecropin a accumulates in dense seed protein organelles.

furthermore, the subcellular localization of cecropin a was analysed by immunofluorescence microscopy in rice seed sections. as shown in figure 4a, cecropin a  accumulated in small cytoplasmic vesicles of peripheral endosperm cells but it did not in wild-type seeds. these vesicles showed a similar appearance and abundance in all the cecropin a lines, as well as in the cecropin a-kdel lines. as shown, they are smaller and less spherical than the rhodamine b-stained vesicles , corresponding to prolamine-containing pbs . rhodamine b hexyl ester binds strongly to rice prolamine and it is regularly used for fluorescent labelling of pb-i  <cit> . the merged images in figure 4b clearly show that cecropin a was absent from pb-i, since no colocalization is observed. when the glutelin-containing pbs  were immunolabelled, fluorescence was detected in bodies that have a similar shape and size to bodies containing cecropin a . the merged images show frequent colocalization of glutelin and cecropin a signals; while some bodies were stained only in green or blue. these results indicate that cecropin a, as well as the kdel-tagged cecropin a, were packed into pb-ii together with glutelin storage proteins in the endosperm cells of transgenic rice seeds. therefore, the same subcellular localization of cecropin a in pb-ii is observed when either the glub <dig> or the glub <dig> signal peptides is added at the n-terminal, and independently of the kdel signal at the c-terminal.

identification of in planta-produced cecropin a by ms analysis
to verify that in planta-produced cecropin a was correctly synthesized, subcellular fractions enriched in pbs were analysed by mass spectrometry . to do this, protein fractions were separated by sds-page. the gel pieces in the molecular weight range for immunoreactive cecropin a were then cut, digested with trypsin, and ms analysed. the peptide agpavavvgqatqiak , corresponding to the c-terminal region of the cecropin a sequence , was unequivocally identified in all the transgenic samples and was not detected in wild-type samples. this peptide was identified in the gel slices in which monomeric and dimeric cecropin a forms were immunodetected . the expected tryptic peptides fsiyfcvlllchgsmak and lsiyfcvlllchgsmak for the glub <dig> or glub <dig> signal peptide-cecropin a combinations were not detected by ms analysis in any of the transgenic samples, this suggests that the peptide was correctly processed in each case. these ms data confirmed the presence of cecropin a in the transgenic rice seeds.

resistance of cecropin a rice seeds to seed-borne pathogens
to test the functionality of the cecropin a produced in the rice seeds, transgenic seeds were evaluated for resistance to rice seed pathogens; both fungal and bacterial. initially, cecropin a-seeds were inoculated with spores of fusarium verticillioides, a fungal pathogen of rice seeds. cecropin a-seeds were able to germinate and survive in the presence of this fungal pathogen. however, under the same experimental conditions, both wild-type and empty vector transformed seeds failed to germinate . the quantification of the germination rate after fungal infection revealed a higher germination capacity of cecropin a-seeds than that of wild-type or empty vector seeds . some differences in the resistance to infection by f. verticillioides between the lines were observed. disease resistance correlated with cecropin a accumulation, the seeds accumulating lower cecropin a levels exhibited lower germination capacity in the presence of the fungal pathogen. for instance, line pglub1:ceca# <dig> showed low cecropin a accumulation  and low germination rates after inoculation with f. verticillioides .

finally, cecropin a-accumulating seeds were assayed for resistance against dickeya dadantii, a bacterial pathogen of rice. germination of wild-type and empty vector seeds in bacterial suspensions was severely affected, whereas cecropin a-accumulating seeds were able to germinate and grow under the same experimental conditions . the quantification of the cecropin a-seed germination rates after seven days in contact with the bacterial pathogen and in comparison with wild-type seeds, showed a clear improvement in seed germination . all the seeds assayed, transgenic and wild-type, showed the same germinative capacity in the absence of bacterial infection . these results demonstrate that cecropin a accumulation in rice seeds confers protection against seed fungal and bacterial pathogens, suggesting that the in planta-produced cecropin a is biologically active.

discussion
in the present study, we generated transgenic rice plants that produce bioactive cecropin a in their seed endosperm. stable integration and inheritance of transgenes was demonstrated. our transgenic rice seeds tolerated the accumulation of this bioactive peptide without any major change in germination rate or seed viability; thus indicating that rice seeds can sustain the production of this amp. therefore, our work demonstrates the usefulness of the glub <dig> and glub <dig> promoters to drive strong and tissue-specific expression of ceca genes in rice seeds. high activity in the rice endosperm was reported for these two promoters, with glub <dig> activity being slightly higher than that of glub <dig> <cit> . consistently with those findings, we detected specific accumulation of cecropin a on seed endosperms, and not in vegetative tissues, when ceca gene expression was driven by either of these two promoters. while, similar accumulation levels were observed with the two promoters assayed, the accumulation levels were higher than those of seeds of transgenic plants that constitutively express the ceca gene controlled by the strong maize ubiquitin- <dig> promoter. moreover, the endosperm-specific expression of ceca genes had no negative effects on the normal growth and development of the rice plant; whereas important effects on plant fitness have been reported in transgenic rice plants that constitutively express transgenes encoding cecropin a or cecropin a-derived amps  <cit> . as an additional benefit, the seed-specific accumulation of the cecropin a limits the exposure of the beneficial microbes in the rhizosphere to amps.

concerning the study of targeting mechanisms, in this work we analysed the effects of the n-terminal signal peptide of a rice glutelin, either glub <dig> or glub <dig>  and of the presence or absence of c-terminal kdel tag. these signal peptides are known to guide translocation of the glub <dig> and glub <dig> storage proteins into the er lumen and to be essential for transfer to pbs  <cit> . immunofluorescence and microscopic visualization of the transgenic seed tissues revealed that cecropin a accumulated in the glutelin-containing storage vacuole of endosperm cells, when either signal peptide was fused to the cecropin a. this subcellular localization was observed in all transgenic seeds, including those that accumulated the cecropin a tagged with the kdel signal. thus, it appears that the glub <dig> or glub <dig> n-terminal signal peptide includes the sorting signals necessary to direct this peptide to the pb-ii and overpowers the kdel er retention signal. unexpected accumulation of kdel-tagged recombinant seed proteins has previously been reported and is not fully understood  <cit> . most kdel-tagged recombinant seed proteins have been reported to accumulate primarily, or exclusively in er-derived pbs or pb-i  <cit> . presumably, protein sorting to pbs might not only rely on the presence of specific targeting signals in the polypeptide but also might depend on the intrinsic properties of the protein or possible interactions with other proteins in the er lumen  <cit> . for instance, protein aggregation has been reported as a determinant of sorting to pbs  <cit> . there is then the possibility that the specific physico-chemical properties of the cecropin a may be responsible for its localization in the pb-ii. in favour of this hypothesis, the cecropin a peptide has amphipathic properties with a structure where hydrophobic residues are clustered into a separated domain, which may confer a tendency for self-aggregation, as proved by its dimeric form in the rice protein extracts. moreover, cecropin a is a strongly cationic peptide and this may facilitate its interaction with the acidic glutelins during their transport to psvs, and then they may sort together to the same organelle. however, some cecropin a-containing bodies from which the glutelin proteins were excluded were also visualized, indicating that cecropin a could also accumulate in other er-derived pbs. further studies are needed to clarify the molecular determinants of cecropin a accumulation into the pb-ii in seeds. be that as it may, the important result is the compartmentalization of the cecropin a antimicrobial peptide inside subcellular organelles, which protect the peptide from endogenous proteases, thereby offering stability and allowing it to accumulate in rice tissues. cecropin peptides are known to be highly susceptible to plant proteases and therefore their accumulation in plant tissues is not straightforward  <cit> . in addition, sequestration of this amp into a storage organelle, such as pbs, would reduce its toxicity to the host plant and cecropin a seeds were indeed viable and showed a normal germination rate.

transgenic plants expressing the cecropin a gene under the control of either promoter with the kdel extension, or not, were evaluated in terms of cecropin a accumulation in seeds. accumulation ranged from  <dig> to 100 ng per seed, as measured via immunoblot analysis. there were differences in cecropin a accumulation, which were mainly associated with variability of transgene expression between independently generated lines for each transformation event. even the attachment of the kdel signal to cecropin a appears not to have an important effect on its accumulation in rice seeds  in rice endosperm have also been reported and associated with transgene silencing and instability of transgene products in plant cells  <cit> . thus small peptides have generally been produced through tandem repeats or fusion to carrier proteins  <cit> , requiring downstream processing to deliver the peptide of interest. taking into account the peptide size, the amount of the small cecropin a peptide  accumulated in rice seeds ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> pmols/seed. these values are within the average to the reported accumulation of peptides when considering only the size of the peptide with the total fusion protein, such as  <dig>  or  <dig>  pmols/seed of the chimeric tolerogen 3crp  <cit>  or  <dig>  pmols/seed of the tolerogen cryj i and cryj ii  <cit> . additionally, underestimation of cecropin a accumulation based on immunoblot detection cannot be ruled out, since difficulties in western blot analysis and immunodetection of other basic short peptides have been reported  <cit> . nevertheless, the usefulness of producing single cecropin a peptides is not only determined by the level of accumulation in transgenic rice seeds, but also by the potency of cecropin a as an antimicrobial agent for the target pathogens without additional processing. in this sense, previous studies on the antimicrobial activity of cecropin a and cecropin a-derived peptides have shown their effectiveness at very low micromolar concentrations in terms of growth inhibition of economically important phytopathogens, including the fungi f. solani, f. verticillioides and phytophthora infenstans, and the bacteria erwinia amylovora, pseudomonas syringae and xanthomonas axonapodis <cit> .

the targeting of endosperm pbs not only conferred stability and reduced the toxicity of cecropin a, thereby allowing its accumulation in plant cells, but it also facilitated its purification from rice seeds. pbs are dense organelles that can easily be isolated by centrifugation  <cit> . this is particularly relevant here, since downstream processing of plant material to purify products greatly increases the production costs of recombinant proteins when using plants as biofactories  <cit> . a simple procedure based on two-step centrifugation was implemented here to obtain enriched cecropin a-containing pb fractions. further studies are required to set up and optimize large-scale purification of cecropin a from seeds for potential applications in crop protection or food preservation. the production system for cecropin a described here using rice endosperm as biofactories can potentially be extended to other amps, although this needs to be evaluated for amps of different sizes, structures or mechanisms of action.

finally, the observations that the in planta-produced cecropin a is biologically active and that accumulation of cecropin a in rice seeds confers protection against fungal and bacterial pathogens have additional implications for plant protection. in the present work, disease resistance against two important rice pathogens was evaluated. the fungus f. verticillioides has been associated with the bakanae disease in rice  <cit> , which occurs widely throughout asia and sporadically in other rice producing areas, and causes important crop losses worldwide. moreover, f. verticillioides is a seed-borne and seed-transmitted pathogen that not only causes yield losses but also decreases the quality of grain by producing hazardous mycotoxins  <cit> . the cecropin a-seeds also showed enhanced resistance against d. dadantii, previously known as erwinia chrysanthemi, the causal agent of foot rot of rice  <cit> . resistance to f. verticillioides and d. dadantii in transgenic seeds indicates that cecropin a accumulation could be a useful strategy for engineering broad-spectrum protection in rice grain.

CONCLUSIONS
rice seeds can sustain the production of biologically active cecropin a, and presumably other antimicrobial peptides with similar properties. confining the accumulation of amp within subcellular compartments, specifically protein bodies, and limiting its production to the rice endosperm avoids the potential negative impact of its production in seed viability and seedling growth. this work has implications for molecular farming since it demonstrates the potential of rice seeds as biofactories for antimicrobial peptides and also for plant protection by showing that production of the antimicrobial peptide cecropin a is a useful strategy for engineering broad-spectrum protection against pathogen infection in rice grains.

