BACKGROUND
attention was first drawn to the retroviridae when htlv- <dig> was characterized as pathogenic in humans  <cit> . they further increased in significance with the discovery of hiv- <dig>  the retrovirus responsible for aids in humans  <cit> . these  <dig> retroviruses represent only a small part of retroviridae diversity, which can be divided in seven genera; alpha-, beta-, gamma-, delta-, epsilon-, spumaretroviridae and lentiviridae . based on their strategy of transmission, the retroviridae can also be classified as endogenous retroviruses when they enter the germ lines of hosts and are vertically transmitted; or as exogenous retroviruses, when they can be transmitted horizontally from one host into another via infection. most recent trends in retroviridae taxonomy  <cit>  group endogenous and exogenousretroviruses into  <dig> major classes designated as i, ii and iii. both classifications are complementary as class i comprises gamma- and epsilonretroviruses; class ii includes lentiviruses, delta-, alpha- and betaretroviruses; and class iii groups spumaretroviruses with erv-l retroelements. the ancient history of the retroviridae is yet to be thoroughly investigated, but due to their similarity and identical gag-pol  genome structure, it is usually assumed that they evolve from the ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements of plants, fungi and animals  <cit> . the traditional view suggested by pol polyprotein domains such as the rt  <cit> , rnase h  <cit> , and int  <cit>  used to resolve the phylogeny, delineates a common ty3/gypsy origin for all vertebrate retroviruses. nevertheless little is known about this scenario because rt, rnase h and int analyses appear unable of agreeing on a precise well-supported ty3/gypsy root for the retroviridae. in an attempt to bring light on this topic, we investigated  <dig> non-redundant ty3/gypsy and retroviridae taxa based on the phylogenetic analysis of both gag and pol polyproteins. our results revealed conflicting phylogenetic signals between these  <dig> polyproteins. from that point, we aimed to investigate more in depth this evidence through comparative analyses performed based on  <dig> independent proteins rarely considered by prior studies due to their variability – the gag polyprotein, the pr and the gpy/f module. our study reveals taxonomic differences among the  <dig> retroviridae classes, and an evolutionary network that distantly relates each class with one or more ty3/gypsy lineages. this observation appears to be at odds with the traditional monophyletic view suggested by prior approaches to determining the origin of vertebrate retroviruses, but requires further study. in light of this new perspective, we introduce here a new hypothesis for debate and further evaluation. our hypothesis argues that classes i, ii and iii probably trace back to at least  <dig> independent ty3/gypsy ancestors. we call this the three kings hypothesis.

RESULTS
consistency of lineages but conflicting phylogenetic signals between gag and pol polyproteins in the ty3/gypsy and retroviridae evolutionary history
in a prior study  <cit> , we used the inferred phylogenetic reconstruction of ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements based on both gag and polpolyproteins as the criterion to create phylogenetically informative hmm profiles  <cit> . figure 1a shows a radial version of this tree, which clearly supports the usually accepted monophyly of the ty3/gypsy and retroviridae groups and all their assumed lineages   <cit> . this view of the origin of retroviridae indicates that these retroviruses had a common origin, e.g. a ty3/gypsy ltr retrotransposon . interestingly, inferred gag-pol tree suggests a putative retroviridae root in the ty3/gypsy evolutionary history, which according to this new analysis, is close to micropia/mdg <dig> clade  <cit>  and other ty3/gypsy lineages described in bilateria genomes. this perspective suggests that the first retroviridae ancestor emerged before or during the split between protostomes and deuterostomes together with several ty3/gypsy lineages, which apparently have distant counterparts  in the genomes of plants. taking into account that the retroviridae are true viruses capable of escaping their hosts, this scenario might also be traced back to an ancient horizontal transference from protostomes to vertebrates and the colonization of the vertebrate genomes by these viral agents from that point on. however these two alternatives, whilst equally exciting perspectives, should be re-evaluated based on the separate analysis of gag and pol polyproteins. the phylogenetic analysis of the pol polyprotein  is consistent with gag-pol tree, due to the grouping of the taxa into clusters. in fact, the bootstrap robustness of the different clades and genera reported by gag-pol tree comes from the strong pol phylogenetic signal. this means that the pol signal is the essential analytical substrate responsible for the current view on the evolutionary history and taxonomy of ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements. however, the pol signal does not support the retroviridae root suggested by the gag-pol tree, and does not reveal a well-supported alternative link between the ty3/gypsy and retroviridae groups. pol tree is consistent with gag-pol tree in to delineate a scenario of emergence for vertebrate retroviruses preceding the protostomes-deuterostomes split. however, the root suggested by pol tree falls close to errantiviruses the canonical ty3/gypsy retroviruses of flies  <cit> . indirectly, this indicates that whatever the relationship between micropia/mgd <dig> clade and the retroviridae, the relationship depends on the gag polyprotein. consistent with this, the independent phylogenetic analysis of the gag polyprotein  groups the retroviridae class ii with micropia/mdg <dig> clade and other ty3/gypsy lineages described in bilateria genomes. the gag phylogeny also reveals how the ty3/gypsy origin of vertebrate retroviruses is anything but straightforward. this tree also clusters gammaretroviruses  with the athila/tat clades of plants, and suggests proximity between the retroviridae class iii and errantiviruses, and other ty3/gypsy lineages. in other words, the gag signal fails to support the monophyly of the two ty3/gypsy or retroviridae groups and suggests an alternative scenario. that is, based on gag and depending on the class, it follows that the retroviridae code for different gags, each having one or more distant counterparts among ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements.

retroviridae differentiation into classes outlines phenotypic differences in the gag polyprotein that distantly relate each class with one or more ty3/gypsy lineages
phylogenetic analyses performed based on gag are rarely reported, due to the fast rate of evolution of this polyprotein. however, the alignment from which we inferred the gag tree was manually constructed and its accuracy tested by comparative analyses. we contrasted all gag sequences with each other using the ncbi blast search  <cit>  available at gydb. comparisons revealed that gag sequences belonging to a ty3/gypsy or retroviridae clade, genus or class are usually more similar to their lineage counterparts than to other gag sequences . this analysis also revealed a core of similarity that is common to all ty3/gypsy and retroviridae gags. this core spans the ca-nc region and its most conserved traits appear to be the mhr at ca  <cit> , and the zinc finger cys-x2-cys-x4-his-x4-cys  array at nc  <cit> . evaluation of this core shows that the retroviridae code for  <dig> different types of gag, each exhibiting a particular amino acidic architecture phenotype that depends on the class differentiation. while the  <dig> retroviridae classes i and ii appear to be related according to blast analyses , they present greater divergence based on several phenotypic features preserved depending on the class . class iii is extremely dissimilar to classes i and ii based on gag, but preserves several features at the c-terminus that might be distantly related or equivalent to those of class i . the most prominent, but obviously not unique, difference between the  <dig> classes is the variability in the number of cchc arrays at nc. class i ncs usually show one cchc array, class ii ncs exhibit two, and class iii gags have no cchc arrays at their c-terminus. blast analyses also revealed how the ty3/gypsy lineages related to classes i and ii by gag tree, display greater similarity to different retroviridae taxa belonging to these  <dig> classes than to other ty3/gypsy lineages. as an example, tables  <dig> and  <dig> summarize the top similarity hits obtained from  <dig> comparisons conducted using  <dig> micropia/mdg <dig> and  <dig> tatgag sequences as queries. all blast analyses were supported by additional sequence comparisons between the different gag queries and the collection of hmm profiles, available at gydb via the hmm server . additionally, we provide qualitative evidence of this relationship through alignment comparisons. figure  <dig> shows a multiple alignment revealing domain similarity between gammaretroviruses  and the athila and tat clades of plants. figure 4a demonstrates that micropia/mdg <dig> clade and other bilateria ty3/gypsy lineages, such as the mag clade, code for gags following similar ca-nc architecture to class ii lentiviral gags. gag relationship similarities between class iii and other ty3/gypsy or retroviridae lineages are not supported by blast analyses. however, figure 4b shows a multiple alignment between spumaretroviruses and errantiviruses, which according to the qualitative domain similarity merits further attention.

we only summarize the most significant  hits of similarity obtained with each search. retroviridae gags belonging to class ii are indicated with asterisks

we only summarize the most significant  hits of similarity obtained with each search. retroviridae gags belonging to class i are indicated with asterisks.

comparative analyses confirm phenotypic features in the gag polyprotein that distantly relate each retroviridae class with one or more of the ty3/gypsy lineages evaluated. the similarity spans the ca-nc core and the most prominent feature in common is the variability in the number of cchc arrays per nc. with very few exceptions, the athila/tat elements of plants usually code for ncs exhibiting one cchc array, micropia/mdg <dig> and mag elements code for ncs usually exhibiting  <dig> arrays , and errantiviral gags have not cchc arrays at their c-terminus. this indicates that the number of cchc arrays per nc is evolutionarily preserved depending on the ty3/gypsy lineage and the retroviridae class, and that this phenotype is an excellent indicator of taxonomy and evolution. for simplicity's sake, we do not discuss all ty3/gypsy cases. we discuss but one example, the most interesting instance of using this indicator – the chromodomain-containing ty3/gypsy ltr retrotransposons  <cit>  called chromoviruses  <cit> . chromoviruses are the most ancient branch of ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements as they have been described in the genomes of plants, fungi and vertebrates . it noteworthy that all ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements of plants can be divided in  <dig> major branches – chromoviruses and athila/tat – and that chromoviruses appear to be the only branch of ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements capable of colonizing the genomes of fungi. a prior study  <cit>  reported that this branch of ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements displays similarity  to gammaretroviruses based on ca-nc. however, we have also found how that chromoviruses show similarities to class ii in addition to a number of ty3/gypsy lineages . with rare exceptions, ncs coded by chromoviruses usually bear one cchc array . in contrast, the different ty3/gypsy lineages described in bilateria organisms show greater variability in the number of cchc arrays at nc thantheir ty3/gypsy counterparts of plants and fungi . gag evidence thus relates class i to the most likely ca-nc phenotype of ty3/gypsy ancestors predating the split between plants and the ophistokonts  and classes ii and iii with other ca-nc phenotypes, more frequently observed among the ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements of protostomes and deuterostomes.

retroviridae differentiation into classes reveals three protease isoforms based on flap motif polymorphisms, which are common to ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements
through phylogenetic analyses, we have shown that the pol signal is primarily responsible for the branching of ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements in  <dig> monophyletic groups. that is the usual evolutionary perspective based on the rt and other pol polyprotein domains. we have also shown that gag signal discloses an alternative scenario wherein each retroviridae class can be related to one or more ty3/gypsy lineages. an in-depth examination of gag diversity through comparative analyses has revealed the phenotypic variations involved in this differential similarity. gag evidence is thus well supported. an interesting question is whether this evidence should be considered a convergence due to the fast rate of evolution of the gag polyprotein, or if it is due to an ancient divergence. certainly, the most robust components of the pol polyprotein – the rt, rnase h and int – usually support the traditional perspective originally delineated by rt analyses  <cit> . however, the strong signal from these  <dig> proteins disguises the particular perspective provided by another pol protein domain – the pr. non-redundant studies focusing on ty3/gypsy and retroviridae prs are rarely reported as this enzyme presents identical analytical difficulty to gag due to its fast rate of evolution. despite this it is well known that ltr retroelement prs in general are aspartic peptidases belonging to clan aa . within clan aa, retroviridae prs are divided into  <dig> protein families, retropepsins  and spumaretropepsins . family a <dig> groups all prs coded by classes i and ii and family a <dig> collects the prs coded by spumaretroviruses . such a classification keeps going because retropepsins and spumaretropepsins are strongly dissimilar each other and do not group on a single branch in any analysis . on the other hand, ty3/gypsy prs are extremely variable and little is known about them. merops database at least classifies many ty3/gypsy examples within family a <dig> because these prs display great similarity to retropepsins. however, not all ty3/gypsy pr are similar to retropepsins as not all retroviridae prs are retropepsins. because no study evaluates the relationships between ty3/gypsy and retroviridae prs, we investigated this topic, taking into consideration the differentiation of the  <dig> groups of ltr retroelements into lineages. it is worth remembering that while gag and pol signals are in disagreement over the taxonomical groups, they do support the differentiation into clades, genera and classes of ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements.

prior research performed using structure-based alignments and structural comparisons based on hiv- <dig> pr and other retropepsins, have revealed how ltr retroelement prs dimerize in their active form . each lobe of the pr dimer carries a structural feature called the flap, which is a β-hairpin loop that covers the active site and has  <dig> flexible alternating forms, closed and semi-open . we have extensively studied not only ty3/gypsy and retroviridae prs but also other clan aa prs . interestingly, the retroviridae differentiation into classes reveals  <dig> pr isoforms each preserving a particular flap motif. class ii prs usually harbor a sequence gigg amino acid motif , which at the tertiary structure level constitute the flap in hiv- <dig> pr and other class ii prs . in contrast class i prs were found to preserve a gatg variant of this motif , and within class iii spumaretroviral prs preserve a tihg variant of the same sequence motif . ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements also code for a variety of isoforms, which evolutionarily preserve a particular flap motif state depending on the lineage, in the same manner as classes i, ii and iii. a number of these states are very similar but not identical to that preserved by class i. multiple alignment of gammaretroviruses  and several ty3/gypsy lineages based on pr is shown in figure 6a. in its consensus form, this variant delineates a gang motif recognizable by the predominance of an alanine  and an aspartate/asparagine/threonine at the second and third positions of the motif, respectively. the gang variant is widespread among the prs coded by ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements of plants, fungi and animals. this variant also predominates in the prs coded by caulimoviruses of plants and ty1/copia ltr retroelements, and two datasets of prokaryotic prs related to clan aa . therefore, gang variant appears to be the most likely ancestral state of the flap of the prs coded by ty3/gypsy ancestors predating the split between plants and the ophistokonts. consistent with gag evidence, gigg and tihg pr variants exhibited by classes ii and iii prs are rarely observed among ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements of plants and fungi. in plants, only tat clade elements code for prs presenting a poorly preserved flap motif, which might be discretely related to the gigg variant . as athila clade elements  code for gang prs, we may assume that the pr flap motif transits from one state to another. among the ty3/gypsy lineages of fungi, only tf1- <dig> clade code for gigg prs, which is a variant more frequently observed among ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements of protostomes. in contrast, the gigg variant carried by the prs coded by micropia/mdg <dig> clade and other ty3/gypsy lineages is almost identical to that of retroviridae class ii . the tihg variant is absent from the ty3/gypsy prs of plants. in fungi, only a putative chromoviral lineage called ty <dig> clade  code for prs harboring a highly diverged motif that in its consensus form can be distantly related to the tihg variant . in contrast, a number of ty3/gypsy errantiviruses code for prs carrying a tihg motif identical to that of class iii spumaretroviruses . finally, investigating other sequences not considered in this study, we also found that gmr- <dig> clade  <cit>  a ty3/gypsy lineage recently described in deuterostomes also code for tihg prs . the pr scenario thus reveals consistency with gag in suggesting that retroviridae class i is most likely related to the phenotype of ty3/gypsy ancestors predating the spilt between plants and the ophistokonts. in contrast, classes ii and iiishould be more properly related to ty3/gypsy lineages whose ancestors probably emerged before or during the transition of bilateria organisms into protostomes and deuterostomes.

retroviridae class i is a molecular fossil preserving gpy/f module phenotypes that probably were predominant among ty3/gypsy ancestors predating the split between plants fungi and animals
as already shown, gag polyprotein and the pr depict a new scenario as an alternative to the traditional monophyletic insight  suggested by prior rt, rnase h and int analyses. onto understand the two opposing scenarios, we performed phylogenetic analyses based on the rt, rnase h and int and found consistency with the traditional perspective of  <dig> separate ltr retroelement groups using the rt and rnase h . analysis of the int revealed different perspectives depending on the nj or parsimony method used in the analysis . while the nj method supports the  <dig> ltr retroelement groups, the parsimony method splits the retroviridae into  <dig> branches not supported by bootstrap . this is because our model of int alignment covers the  <dig> subdomains described in the amino acidic architecture of a conventional int domain. the traditional core used for inferring int phylogenies is common to all ints in general, and includes  <dig> of these sub-domains; the conserved zinc finger "hhcc" binding motif  <cit>  at the n-terminus, and the central sub-domain containing the conserved d-d-e trait  <cit> . the c-terminal sub-domain of all ints is usually dismissed from analysis because it is less preserved than the other  <dig> sub-domains. in ty3/gypsy and retroviridaeints, it is definite that this sub-domain is a small trait called gpy/f module, which was probably recruited modularly during evolution  <cit> . the module name refers to the strongly preserved gpy/f amino acid motif  <cit> , which will be referred to as the canonical motif throughout the rest of this paper. indeed, the gpy/f module appears to be responsible of the signal discrepancy in phylogenetic analyses . from that point, we investigated the gpy/f module in relation to the  <dig> retroviridae classes. the module, seen from this viewpoint, shows a number of protein isoforms based on gpy/f motif polymorphisms. with rare exceptions, the modules of class i ints usually preserve the canonical motif, while the modules of classes ii and iii exhibit other variants . here, classes ii and iii do not make an intrinsic phenotypic distinction, each genus exhibiting a particular variant of the motif within these  <dig> classes. the modules coded by ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements delineate similar perspective. as shown in figure 7b, while the canonical motif is practically predominant in the modules of ty3/gypsy elements of plants and fungi, the modules of bilateria ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements are rich in motif polymorphisms . this indicates that ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements described in bilateria organisms exhibit greater gpy/f motif variability than their ty3/gypsy counterparts of plants and fungi, and strongly suggests a number of transitions from the canonical motif toward other states during evolution. this scenario is not completely consistent with gag and pr perspectives; for instance, while micropia/mdg <dig> modules preserve the canonical motif, the different retroviridae genera belonging to class ii exhibit different motif polymorphisms. nevertheless, the gpy/f module relates the retroviridae class i with ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements of plants and fungi through the common preservation of the canonical motif, while classes ii and iii can be related with bilateria ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements by an increase of the motif variability. in fact, the whole module of class i ints appears to be more similar to those preserved by the ints of chromoviruses  and athila and tat clades  than to those of classes ii and iii. alignment between classes i and ii reveals a dramatic loss of sequence information by class ii during evolution . the module carried by spumaretroviral ints is similar to that of class i, but they greatly differ in the motif . that is, spumaretroviral modules lost the gpy/f motif, substituting it with a highly diverged kt/sp motif. again, this outlines an intriguing parallelism between spumaretroviruses and ty3/gypsy errantiviruses because the modules of these  <dig> ltr retroelement lineages are qualitatively similar . moreover, ty3/gypsy errantiviruses also lost their gpy/f motif during evolution. therefore, whatever the int function involving the gpy/f module coded by the retroviridae class i, this class appears to be a molecular fossil preserving gpy/f module phenotypes that were predominant among ty3/gypsy ancestors, predating the split between plants fungi and animals. in contrast, retroviridae classes ii and iii maintain a number of module isoforms more recently emerged during evolution.

discussion
retroviridae differentiation into the  <dig> classes i, ii and iii unravels phenotypic aspects of vertebrate retroviruses, which are probably related with their ancient ty3/gypsy origins
phylogenetic analysis inferred based on all concatenated gag and pol products coded by ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements shows the robustness of their phylogenetic signal regarding the clustering of otus  <cit> . we used the parsimony method to infer this phylogeny, but the clustering of otus is independent of the method of phylogenetic reconstruction used . the gag-pol analysis also divides ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements into  <dig> separate branches, as suggested by original approaches in this topic  <cit> . we do not disagree this classification for  <dig> reasons; first, the strong phylogenetic signal of rt, rnaseh, and int cannot be dismissed;and second, the retroviridae  can be distinguished from ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements by features such as the presence of accessory genes. nevertheless, thecurrent ty3/gypsy and retroviridae classification only exposes the modern evolutionary history of these  <dig> groups of retroelements . due to the wide distribution of ty3/gypsy elements in eukaryotes, the usual means of transference of a canonical ty3/gypsy ltr retrotransposon is probably vertical. however, the viral nature of a true ty3/gypsy or retroviridae exogenous retrovirus resides in its capability of horizontal transference from one host to another via infection. moreover, the incidence of mechanisms such as gene recruitment, genome rearrangement, recombination and chimerism in ltr retroelement evolution, presents difficulties in identifying the true natural history of ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements. this suggests that the most realistic  model for describing ty3/gypsy and retroviridae evolution alternates gradual and modular evolution, and combines vertical and horizontal means of transference.

the traditional argument supporting the ty3/gypsy origins of vertebrate retroviruses is shown by their similarity in sequence and genome structure  <cit> . the question is, however, what genetic material is more informative for exploring the relationships between these two  groupsof ltr retroelements, highl y variable traits such as gag and pr or strongly preserved substrates such as the rt, rnaseh and int? certainly, rt, rnaseh and int are an excellent means of classifying ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements into lineages. however, phylogenetic analyses based on rt, rnaseh and int are not exact enough to resolve the ancient evolutionary history of these  <dig> groups. this is because the inferred phylogeny based on these proteins does not necessarily coincide with the true natural history of the full-length retroelement genome. here, the advantage of using the gag-pol alignment to infer the phylogeny is the increase in statistical power of the analysis, allowing the opportunity to correct the single gene tree discrepancies. this analytical strategy is useful but has limitations for which solutions remain elusive; the inferred tree can accumulate systematic errors due to the use of concatenated information. we have shown how gag-pol tree suggests a ty3/gypsy root in the origins of vertebrate retroviruses that is close to the micropia/mdg <dig> clade. however, evaluation of gag and pol polyproteins separately yields discordant information. here, while pol phylogeny supports the traditional perspective , gag phylogeny describes a new scenario that appears to be informative with respect to the ancient patterns of diversity of ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements. certainly, the phylogenetic signal of the gag polyprotein has several limitations due to its fast evolution. to overcome these limitations we investigated other protein domains and used different methodologies to evaluate the significance of the new scenario. the most important feature here is that, for first time in the scientific literature, we have carried out a non-redundant study of three independent proteins that have rarely been attempted before because their difficulty.

our investigation conclusively reveals that the taxonomical differentiation into the  <dig> retroviridae classes i, ii and iii discloses  <dig> different gag and pr products, and that each product has one or more distant ty3/gypsy counterparts. the analysis of the gpy/f module reveals partial consistency and how the similarity of class i to ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements of plant and fungi, is significant. our results thus support an ancient scenario of polyphyly involving the  <dig> retroviridae classes and different ty3/gypsy lineages. here, we stress that the identification of the retroviridae classes is not a conclusion but an assumption based on previous studies  <cit> . notwithstanding, we cannot argue for the existence of a direct ancestor between each class and any particular ty3/gypsy lineage. classes i and ii are sufficiently similar to corroborate their accepted evolutionary relationship, and it can also be assumed that ty3/gypsy and retroviridae phylogeny is incomplete . despite this, the similarity of each class by simple convergence to different ty3/gypsy lineages based on  <dig> independent protein products is an implausible parsimonious explanation. moreover, while class iii spumaretroviruses are dissimilar to classes i and ii, our results reveal that they in turn display an intriguing domain similarity to errantiviruses that ought to be followed up. hence we think that the class differentiation probably unravels certain aspects of vertebrate retroviruses related to their ancient ty3/gypsy origins. instead of a single root to this new scenario, we show how an ancient evolutionary network between the  <dig> groups can exist, with its most interesting aspect being its polyphyly. . therefore, our approach strongly suggest that class i is a molecular fossil that emerged quite soon in ty3/gypsy evolution, while classes ii and iii emerged later, together with the ancestors of ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements described in protostomes.

introducing the three kings hypothesis: a new principle for debate and further evaluation about the subject of the ty3/gypsy origins of vertebrate retroviruses
the evolutionary network identified by classes i, ii, iii is inconsistent with the idea of a unique retroviridae ancestor. it follows that various scenarios may either support or disprove such a network. assuming this network exists, the most likely scenario relates ty3/gypsy elements of plants and fungi with the retroviridae class i. this scenario assumes the existence of a distant evolutionary relationship between the lineages or an ancient horizontal transfer of chromoviruses from fungi  to vertebrates. indeed, chromoviruses are the most ancient lineage of ty3/gypsy ltr retrotransposons. they are rich in genetic variability, and are also present in the genome of many vertebrates  <cit> . in both cases, the most likely explanation for the relationship between class i and athila/tat retroviruses and retrotransposons of plants is that chromoviruses and class i are related, an argument suggested by a previous study  <cit> . nevertheless, chromoviruses of vertebrate organisms are usually more similar to their chromoviral counterparts of fungi than to those of plants. therefore the chromoviral scenario does not explain why class i and athila/tat elements of plants are similar each other based on gag. on the other hand, chromoviruses have not yet been described in protostomes, echinoderms and urochordates; furthermore it remains unclear whether chromoviruses were inexorably driven to extinction in these organisms or were horizontally transmitted from plants/fungi to vertebrates. consequently, the chromoviral scenario does not clarify why classes ii and iii and the ty3/gypsy lineages of protostomes share sequence similarities and phenotypic features rarely found among the ty3/gypsy lineages of plants and fungi. with this in mind, a new theoretical principle is posited here for debate and further research. the simplest hypothesis is that classes i, ii and iii probably evolved from at least  <dig> ty3/gypsy ancestors and emerged at different evolutionary times prior to the split between protostomes and deuterostomes . several points involved in the background of this hypothesis should be emphasized. first, we include the words "at least" to acknowledge the three classes but do not dismiss the possibility of more ty3/gypsy ancestors in the evolutionary history of the retroviridae. second, "different times of emergence" suggests, but does not necessarily mean, independent origins. class ii may in fact be directly related to class i, but the emergence of class ii seems more recent and in parallel with the emergence of the ancestorsof several ty3/gypsy lineages, such as the micropia/mdg <dig> clade . class iii spumaretroviruses delineate identical perspective with ty3/gypsy errantiviruses. third, we use the term "polyphyletic" because the ty3/gypsy lineages related to each class do not constitute a monophyletic branch in any phylogeny. moreover, viral evolution is always a polyphyletic challenge involving ecological parameters such as host populations, environment, vectors, mechanisms of transmissions, etc.

the polyphyletic recurrence of vertebrate retroviruses into the evolutionary performance of ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements
we have described how the different gags, prs and gpy/f modules evaluated show a variability that is preserved, depending on the ty3/gypsy lineage and retroviridae class . while class i can be related to ty3/gypsy elements of plants and fungi, classes ii and iii preserve phenotypic features typically observed among ty3/gypsy elements of protostomes. that is the evolutionary perspective provided by the protein product of  <dig> independent coding regions. we have discussed this evidence but have not yet interpreted why the diversity and phylogeny of ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements are so different regarding the different gag or pol substrates. in general, the action of viruses and mobile genetic elements is important in host evolution  <cit>  because they are vectors of evolution and potential inducers of diseases and genetic disorders, such as chromosome rearrangements and inversions  <cit> . however, if the action of viruses and mobile genetic elements might somehow influence the host evolution, it is reasonable that host evolution could also constrain the evolution of these genetic agents. we thus speculate with the possibility of selective influences imposed on retroviridae genes such as the rt, rnase h and int  to optimize essential functions, such as retrotranscription and integration . this probably involves gradual evolution but also a number of molecular mechanisms, such as gene recruitment and recombination to generate variability and new effective genetic combinations. here, it is important to keep in mind that except gammaretroviruses and other exceptions, the retroviridae usually incorporate accessory genes, usually needed to adjust diverse aspects of their replication and infectivity . on the other hand, a prior study  <cit>  supports a putative chimeric origin of the retroviridae rnase h domain and the modular acquisition of the gpy/f module by ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ints  <cit> . moreover, d-type betaretroviruses probably are viral hybrids between a b-type betaretrovirus and a c-type gammaretrovirus  <cit> . finally, a number of studies reveal how recombination is a mechanism frequently embraced by hiv evolution to generate variability. two studies reveal for instance how recombination of m subtypes, has resulted in the generation of multiple circulating recombinant forms consisting of mosaic hiv- <dig> lineages  <cit> .

regarding coding regions such as gag, pr and gpy/f module, we think that these traits reveal features and aspects involving different evolutionary strategies, but which are intrinsic and taxonomically related with ancient events of retroelement speciation and divergence. this argument finds an important evolutionary marker in the variability in the number of cchc arrays at nc and the different pr and gpy/f module isoforms. indeed, the cchc array at nc is involved in virion assembly, rna packaging, reverse transcription and integration processes  <cit> . on the other hand, the flap lies over the pr active site and conveys specificity to the enzyme by carrying important substrate-binding functions . finally, while the gpy/f module is now under investigation, the c-terminal end of the int appears to be important in the integration of the retroelement into the host genome  <cit> . the variability of these three regions probably reveals different evolutionary strategies of speciation and divergence, which can be assumed older than previously supposed, since it does not only occur in the retroviridae group, but also in all ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements of plants, fungi and animals. here, the three kings hypothesis and its testing  does not affect the evidence we have presented. that is, class i, ii and iii taxonomically code for  <dig> gag, pr and gpy/f products that have one or more distant counterparts among ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements. however, the most interesting aspect of the gag-pr-gpy/f variability is that it appears to be constrained by the bio-distribution of ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements. in turn, the diversity patterns of the retroviridae based on these regions appear to be recurrent into the evolutionary performance of ty3/gypsy ltr retroelements, the most interesting aspect of which is that they seem polyphyletic. therefore the evolutionary network between ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements is informative regarding an ancestral history, which is in some respects similar to those models of evolution indistinctly described by population genetics and quasi-species theory . this means that further analysis of the evolutionary network we disclose in this study challenges the involvement of different parameters such as bio-distribution, host's populations, environment, vectors and mechanisms of transmissions, etc. with this aim, our hypothesis makes possible a first evaluation of this new scenario we present in a forthcoming manuscript . in this approach, we use the number of cchc arrays at nc and the different pr and gpy/f module isoforms as evolutionary markers to trace the network. this is by superimposing not only ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements, but also other ltr retroelement groups over their host bio-distribution.

CONCLUSIONS
retroviridae classes i, ii and iii exhibit phenotypic differences that delineate a network never before reported between ty3/gypsy and retroviridae ltr retroelements. this new scenario reveals how the diversity of vertebrate retroviruses is polyphyletically recurrent into the ty3/gypsy evolution, i.e. older than previously thought. the simplest hypothesis to explain this finding is that classes i, ii and iii trace back to at least  <dig> ty3/gypsy ancestors that emerged at different evolutionary times prior to protostomes-deuterostomes divergence. we have called this "the three kings hypothesis" concerning the origin of vertebrate retroviruses.

