BACKGROUND
molecular phylogenetics has made remarkable progress in recent decades toward the reconstruction of a largely resolved 'tree of life'  <cit> . in flowering plants, the relationships are now clear from the deepest branches through to the family level, with only a few exceptions  <cit> . however, developing strong phylogenetic hypotheses for more closely related plants at the interface of species level and population level has been, and still is, quite challenging. at this level, gene exchange and recombination is still possible, and low sequence divergence often limits phylogenetic resolution. as a result, multiple independent phylogenetic markers with sufficient sequence divergence are necessary, and analytical approaches from population genetics may in some cases be more appropriate than traditional phylogenetic methods  <cit> .

the most commonly used marker regions in plant phylogenetics are coding and non-coding sequences from the chloroplast genome and ribosomal gene regions located in the nucleus. recently, whole plastid genomes  have been used to address deep branching questions  in plants, and a rapid increase in plastome scale data is underway. mitochondrial genes are not as widely used because of typically very slow sequence evolution and some complexities such as extreme rate variation in some lineages and occurrences of horizontal gene transfer  <cit> , gene conversion and processed paralogy . nevertheless, these genes do play a substantial role for phylogenies of for instance parasitic plants  where plastid genomes can be highly modified  <cit> . however, some of the most extensive efforts to date to resolve the "deep branches" in flowering plant phylogenetics have involved large taxon samples with sequence data obtained from up to  <dig> genes representing all three genomic compartments  <cit> .

"the tortoise and the hare" series  <cit>  addressed the utility of nuclear and chloroplast loci for low level phylogenetics. these authors noticed an increased resolution for recent branching events with the nuclear gene adh, but the chloroplast markers required much less laboratory effort. subsequently, a number of promising chloroplast regions have been used to address questions at low taxonomic levels  <cit> . plastomes provide numerous genes, introns, and intergenic regions; amplification and direct sequencing of pcr product is easy as a single cell harbors  <dig> or more plastids with multiple  identical plastid genomes. plastomes provide an almost unmatched source of orthologous sequence that is not complicated by gene family duplication, and multiple genes can be concatenated to provide a very long sample of orthologous sequence. however, plastome markers are tightly linked on a single  non-recombining molecule that usually reflects only the maternal lineage in angiosperms, limiting the generality of plastid dna as the sole source of evolutionary markers at and below species level. in addition, plastomes are limited in their variability  and therefore their utility for low taxonomic level studies may be restricted  <cit> .

the intergenic spacer  regions of nrdna often provide higher variability, but their orthology usually remains an assumption not tested prior to their use in phylogenetic analysis. hundreds to thousands of copies of highly conserved nrdna gene regions located in the nucleus make those markers easy to amplify, but their evolution by tandem duplication events results in a gene array more accurately described as a gene family or large collection of paralogs  <cit> . the paralogous nature of nrdna can complicate the reconstruction of phylogenetic relationships, as it is impossible to determine orthologous copies from such a large copy number. as a consequence, divergent paralogs may be inadvertently sampled from different organisms in a study; when included in phylogenetic reconstruction, artifacts can appear .

nuclear markers  are essential for a broad range of evolutionary investigation, including systematics and character evolution , hybridization , polyploidization , biogeography  <cit> , origins of domestication , and speciation . occurring independently all over the nuclear genome in a virtually inexhaustible repertoire in terms of both number and variability, bi-parentally inherited nuclear loci are promising on different levels, especially when compared to organellar markers.

the first attempts to establish nuclear markers other than ribosomal genes yielded a substantial number of low copy nuclear genes   <cit> . lcng, such as the adh-genes  <cit> , pistillata  <cit> , gpat  <cit> , prk  <cit>  or leafy  <cit>  were applied in numerous studies. these genes are known to occur either in single copy in one or more focal species in the study group, or as members of small gene families  <cit>  and may not occur in any specific plant lineage. complete sampling of gene families often involves intense experimental efforts to clone and sequence all members of a family. thus, for practical reasons, single loci are mostly preferred.

many different approaches have been used to identify useful nuclear single copy loci in plants, with results varying widely in terms of both the general idea and computational effort. in recent years, the advent of next generation sequencing technologies , bioinformatic progress, and publicly available sequence data have greatly facilitated the identification of such loci . these rich sources of sequence information have been utilized by many research groups, who identified new nuclear markers for plant, animal and fungal phylogenetics to reveal relationships that could not be resolved with organelle or nuclear ribosomal dna markers  <cit> . all of them focus on genes that occur in the nucleus in single copy in a sample of organisms with sequenced genomes. the nucleus provides a vast repertoire of unlinked markers. however, since there are thousands of genes in the nucleus, marker selection is challenging and the majority of nuclear genes occur in small to large gene families. the present study is based on the approach published in duarte et al.  <cit> , where a global classification of plant protein coding sequences  was used to identify a collection of  <dig> genes that are represented by exactly one copy in each of four sequenced angiosperm genomes . "tribes" are collections of related genes in a specified set of genomes produced by the gene clustering program mcl-tribe  <cit> . while many planttribes approximate gene families  <cit> , the global classification also identifies genes that are members of highly distinctive clusters that lack closely related paralogs, including clusters with only a single gene in each taxon. the set of genes identified in the analysis was called apvo sscg . the agt <dig> gene, applied in the present study, is part of that set and the abbreviation nscg  that is used here refers to this approach. we use the term nscg operationally, referring to a gene that has been identified as single copy in global gene classification of a specified set of genomes, here apvo. this does not necessarily mean that the gene will be single copy in any given lineage, particularly in very recent polyploids  <cit> , where the entire gene set has been recently duplicated, and the process of duplicate gene loss is underway. however, as larger numbers of genomes are interrogated, genes that continue to be found in single copy in all but the most recent polyploids are more likely to be single copy in a given uncharacterized lineage.

hughes et al.  <cit>  proposed the exploration of nuclear loci other than nrdna for phylogenetic reconstruction, which would require the abandonment of 'universal thinking'. the enhanced variability of nuclear loci compared to other markers provides great potential, but limits the likelihood of identifying universal amplification primers that will function across a wide taxonomic range. in fact, it might be difficult to identify universal gene loci because polyploidy is prevalent and frequent in plants. duplicated genes are often lost by both random and selective processes in a short time, but that also means there is a chance to encounter multiple gene copies in a specific lineage  <cit> .

peperomia  ranks among the ten largest angiosperm genera, with approximately  <dig>  species  <cit> . the phylogenetics and classification of such species-rich clades has long been very challenging. in addition, morphological characters have been shown to be subject to parallel evolution and extreme reduction, resulting in a paucity of synapomorphies  <cit> . moreover, speciation within peperomia has likely happened comparatively recently  <cit> , and as a consequence, reconstructed phylogenies often lack resolution at the species and population level  <cit> . recent backbone phylogenies were based on over  <dig> molecular characters to overcome the lack of variability  <cit> . therefore, peperomia is an ideal candidate for testing the performance of a nscg region and comparing outcomes with variable chloroplast markers such as those suggested by shaw et al.  <cit> . within this study, we focus on closely related species belonging to peperomia subgenus tildenia where currently  <dig> species are recognized  <cit> .

RESULTS
the agt <dig> gene studied here is an ortholog of at2g <dig> in arabidopsis thaliana, where it is known to catalyze the alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase reaction located in peroxisomes  <cit> . it was identified to be shared between four angiosperm genomes  as a nscg  <cit> . we have chosen this region as an example to test the utility of a nscg for low-level phylogenies in comparison to eight widely studied chloroplast markers  <cit> . a single copy of this gene was identified in large est sets from multiple basal angiosperms  <cit> , making it a suitable candidate for our basal angiosperm test group tildenia. the agt <dig> region was amplified, sequenced, and aligned for  <dig> accessions covering  <dig> out of the  <dig> species of peperomia subgenus tildenia resulting in a dataset of  <dig> characters . a dataset with an identical sampling was generated for the trnk intron, the matk gene and the trnk-psba spacer resulting in an aligned dataset of  <dig> characters , as well as the ndhf-rpl32-trnl gene region, consisting of a partial sequence of the ndhf gene , the ndhf-rpl <dig> spacer , the rpl <dig> gene  and partial sequence of the rpl32-trnl spacer  . the ndhf-rpl <dig> spacer, rpl <dig> gene and rpl32-trnl spacer were co-amplified and yielded an aligned dataset of  <dig> bp. all markers are among the most variable loci for phylogenetic studies according to shaw et al.  <cit> .

an important feature of agt <dig> in peperomia is that pcr amplicons typically were resolved as a single sharp target sized band on agarose gels and, for most samples, could be sequenced directly without cloning. only a few  accessions required a cloning step. in those cases, a single band was detected in the agarose gel, but sequencing revealed short  indels.

structure and characterization of agt1
in peperomia, the agt <dig> gene comprises five coding regions  separated by four intronic sections with a total length of  <dig> to  <dig> bp. in comparison to agt <dig> in arabidopsis thaliana, the peperomia gene contains an additional intron, which is located in the second exon and has a length of 211- <dig> bp . this intron is also present in the genomic sequences of populus trichocarpa, medicago truncatula, solanum lycopersicon, oryza sativa, and carica papaya, as well as in all peperomia species generated in the present study. hence, it can be inferred that it was lost during the diversification of brassicales. we named this additional non-coding section that splits exon ii into two parts, intron x, and the two resulting exons that derive from exon ii were named exon iia and exon iib . in the peperomia accessions we studied, the agt <dig> exons are highly conserved in length and lack any indels. in contrast, intron x was the most variable in length among the respective four introns, showing a length range of 552- <dig> bp.

variability of agt <dig> versus the chloroplast regions
to characterize the markers in more detail, several variability parameters were estimated for both coding and non-coding regions and for the full as well as the reduced sampling datasets . in the agt <dig> full sampling dataset, introns and exons are roughly equally represented . coding parts possess 20% variable characters  and 11% parsimony informative characters , whereas non-coding parts contain 46% vc and 27% pic. thus, the content of pic varies largely among different sections of the gene and in non-coding parts it is twice as high as in coding parts. in total, one fifth of the characters in the agt <dig> gene are parsimony informative.

the trnk-matk-psba region does not vary significantly among coding and non-coding regions on this taxonomic level . compared to the agt <dig> with the identical sampling this region shows less than half of the ratio of vc and pic . thus, the agt <dig> is much more effective in yielding pic per sequenced bp than the widely applied trnk-matk-psba region. furthermore, the nuclear gene segments provide different amounts of variability, which make them useful for many taxonomic levels.

a similar pattern is visible in the reduced sampling of all utilized markers . in total, the percentages of both variable sites  and pic  of agt <dig> are much higher than those of the chloroplast markers. however, it has to be noted that the vc percentage of the reduced sampling is 7% lower than that of the full sampling and that there are only half of the pic in the reduced dataset. in contrast, the trnk-matk-psba does not possess large differences between reduced and full sampling datasets. the decrease of vc in the reduced sampling suggests that the potential of agt <dig> is not exhausted and deeper sampling would likely increase available variability and thus phylogenetic resolution.

the variabilities of the different gene regions are graphically displayed in figure  <dig>  it is remarkable that the chloroplast markers are very similar in their overall fractions of variable sites . thus, the number of pic is directly proportional to the number of sequenced bp and thus on this phylogenetic level marker selection does not seem to be crucial in terms of phylogenetic content. furthermore, non-coding regions of all chloroplast markers are just as informative as non-coding regions on this phylogenetic level. to look for potential saturation of the markers, the retention index  was calculated with and without indel-coded length mutations. generally, for the chloroplast markers the ri does not differ between the datasets that include indels and those without indels . the ri values of both trnk-matk-psba datasets  as well as ndhf-rps32-trnl dataset  indicate low homoplasy. the homoplasy of agt <dig> full sampling  is little homoplastic as well. only the ri values of psba-trnh  and agt <dig> reduced sampling datasets  datasets are a little lower, which suggests that they are more homoplastic and likely closer to saturation. considering the ri, both trnk-matk-psba and ndhf-rpl32-trnl can be regarded as little homoplastic. the ri of the different agt <dig> datasets differs and is lower in the reduced sampling. consequently, a smaller sampling is more homoplastic than a denser sampling with the same breadth. this fact is congruent with the phylogenies of the agt <dig> gene, resulting in less resolution and support in the reduced dataset. this leads to the conclusion that a high variability as detected for the agt <dig> gene requires a dense sampling to keep the risk for artifacts low.

to summarize, a quarter of the total agt <dig> dataset is parsimony informative, while having a low homoplasy level at the same time. all calculations were based on nucleotide substitutions only , as ris of all data sets revealed this to be less homoplastic than the data sets containing indels .

phylogenetic output
to obtain insights into agt1's phylogenetic performance in terms of topology, resolution and support, we performed identical phylogenetic analyses with identical sampling and a reduced sub-sampling for all markers . for those analyses, maximum likelihood  and bayesian inference  were used. for simplicity, the clades have been named with numbers based on the study of symmank et al.  <cit> .

by looking at the trees derived from different markers, here summarized at the clade level , it is obvious that agt <dig> and the chloroplast gene trees result in different topologies. although the majority of clades are recovered as monophyletic among all gene trees, a few clades are unresolved in the agt <dig> tree .

all phylogenetic trees obtained from the different markers show species from clade i and ii as the first diverging branches followed by a polytomy formed by the remaining clades. the nuclear trees all show four clades out of seven being monophyletic and statistically supported  . clade i is polyphyletic in the agt <dig> tree, but monophyletic with any of the chloroplast markers. a new clade is formed in the agt <dig> phylogeny, consisting of p. cerrateae, p. sp. pe <dig>  p. pugnicaudex, and p. chutanka. clade vi is sister to this clade, which is supported with  <dig>  posterior probability  in the full sampling. thus, clades iii and v are not monophyletic in the nuclear-based tree or in the tree resulting from ndhf-rps32-trnl. in the trnk-matk-psba tree, p. cerrateae was part of clade v, p. sp. pe <dig> and p. pugnicaudex formed clade iii and the position of p. chutanka could not be resolved. in summary, agt <dig> yields a deeper resolution compared to any individual or combined chloroplast dataset by forming a new clade that has clade vi as a sister. sampling density does not seem to influence the phylogenies obtained from the chloroplast markers as much as it affects the nuclear trees. denser sampling seems to improve resolution with agt <dig>  statistical evaluation of phylogenetic signals between datasets was done using sh tests  <cit> . these tests reveal a significant conflict between the chloroplast markers and the nuclear agt <dig> gene, expressed by the rejection of all respective topology/dataset combinations . the only exception to this pattern is the combination of the ndhf-rpl32-trnl topology and the agt <dig> dataset . the trnh-psba spacer was not used for this test due to insufficient phylogenetic resolution. in accordance with the result of shaw et al.  <cit> , this finding states the inappropriateness of this region for phylogenetic studies on a low taxonomic level.

to determine the source of conflict between the nuclear and chloroplast markers we tested  <dig> alternative hypotheses by changing the topologies of the reduced agt <dig> and trnk-matk-psba datasets. in most cases a single clade was replaced according to its phylogenetic position in the opposed topology. additionally, clades that appear polyphyletic in one topology were constrained to be monophyletic and placed at different positions. all alternative hypotheses resulted in significant rejection by the tested datasets. the alternative topologies and the sh-values of the accordant combinations are summarized in additional file 3: results from topology tests. the results indicate a general incongruence between the phylogenetic signal derived from the nuclear and chloroplast genome. the rejection of the alternative hypothesis clearly shows that the conflict is not caused by a single subset of species or clade, but is reflecting multiple inconsistencies between the nuclear versus the chloroplast gene regions at lower nodes of the tree. such a pattern might be expected if an early hybridization and chloroplast capture event had occurred early in the evolution of the subgenus. such an event can lead to incongruence between the histories of nuclear and plastid marker regions.

the combination of agt <dig>  trnk-matk-psba, ndhf-rpl32-trnl, and trnh-psba data set  yields a topology possessing all the monophyletic clades identified by trnk-matk-psba with maximal support. in addition, p. chutanka is resolved in the combined analysis as sister to clade iii . a phylogeny of trnh-psba alone did not yield any resolution .

the resolution of the two full sampling phylogenies  was measured using the normalized consensus fork index , which divides the number of nodes found in a strict consensus tree by the number of possible nodes  <cit> . to increase the information value of this index with respect to the resolution capacity of the respective molecular markers, we consider the nodes that appear in the trees inferred from bi and ml, where nodes below 50% were collapsed . according to this, the agt <dig> yields a considerably higher total resolution  than the trnk-matk-psba region . comparison of the phylograms show that the substitution rate in the agt <dig> data set is about twice as great as in the trnk-matk-psba dataset .

the phylograms also suggest that a sudden and fast radiation occurred that gave rise to clades iii-vii. this radiation has been linked directly to the formation of new habitats during the uplift of the inner andean valleys in peru and bolivia  <cit> . generally, the agt <dig> resolution is much higher within the clades and on population level, which is very obvious for p. peruviana, p. cerrateae, and p. radiadinervosa as well as within clade iv and vi . furthermore, the agt <dig> phylogeny suggests that p. cyclaminoides and p. verruculosa are not monophyletic and p. bracteata is polyphyletic on the agt <dig> tree. clade vii shows better resolution of the deeper branches with the chloroplast dataset , whereas the nuclear gene resolves relationships better in shallower parts of the tree. in the trnk-matk-psba phylogenetic tree, p. gracillima aff. is the first branch, followed by p. schizandra as sister to the rest of clade vii. the nuclear gene, however, reveals a well-resolved sub-clade comprising p. elatior as the first branch, followed by p. ovatopeltata aff., p. questionis and p. cavispicata. furthermore, in the nuclear phylogeny, p. exclamationis is resolved as sister to p. schizandra.

single copy vs. multicopy status of agt1
as described above, approximately 90% of the pcr amplicons could be directly sequenced from pcr product; only 10% required cloning to obtain distinct sequences. multiple copies were detected in at least one accession from every clade except clade i and iii. putative pseudogenes, e.g. ones with frameshift mutations, were removed from the analysis. a resulting phylogeny, which contained all detected copies excluding putative pseudogenes, and which did not comprise sequence data downstream from intron iii, revealed that the copies of eight accessions are monophyletic, and thus do not influence the final analysis . therefore, a cloned copy representing the particular accession could have been randomly chosen for the main phylogeny. however, agt <dig> copies sequenced from four of the accessions are not monophyletic. these copies cluster together with copies from other accessions of the respective species, indicating duplication during radiation of the respective species  . the only accessions for which the situation seems to be more complex are p. bracteata pe <dig> and pe <dig>  as well as p. cyclaminoides pe <dig> and p. verruculosa pe <dig>  both cases show a similar pattern: copies of a single accession are not monophyletic, but are sister to their orthologous copy from other accessions. thus, cloned sequences of such an accession are likely to be paralogous.

discussion
rapidly radiating genera and single copy nuclear genes
rapidly radiating taxa and species-rich groups have been, and remain, challenging for high resolution phylogenetic analyses with widely used chloroplast markers .

independent of the applied marker, most of these groups tend to share a well-resolved base with several long branches followed by several clades branching from a polytomy with rather short branches. this could indicate that some lineages within species-rich groups radiated over a comparatively short time span, possibly as a result of the availability of new habitat or some other opportunity. in the case of tildenia, this branching pattern can be seen in the phylograms  and has been linked to geological events during the uplift of the andes as well as the climatic oscillation during the period of diversification in the mid-miocene between 15- <dig> mya  <cit> . as we had expected, the agt <dig> gene resolves short and deep branches much better in tildenia, since substitution rates for the non-coding parts are much greater than for coding or for non-coding chloroplast markers. shaw et al.  <cit>  concluded that non-coding chloroplast regions are the most useful for resolving relationships of closely related species, but we found non-coding parts of all chloroplast markers employed in the present study to be very similar in terms of variability compared to the coding sections of the chloroplast genome at this very low taxonomic level. in contrast, non-coding parts of nuclear genes show a three-fold increased variability compared to non-coding chloroplast markers.

another reason why species rich genera are not as well studied as other groups is certainly because they are much more difficult to sample thoroughly and require both extensive field and herbarium work. this is the case for peperomia where highly reduced flower morphology makes correct species identification a significant challenge  <cit> . the study by wanke et al.  <cit>  was the first to apply molecular markers to peperomia. currently, tildenia is the best-studied subgenus of peperomia, since there were many new species from the andes and mexico described recently  and an extensive phylogeny was combined with a molecular dating approach to detect biogeographical migration patterns  <cit> . our current study is primarily focused on the phylogenetic performance of agt <dig> compared to chloroplast markers, and thus, we applied a broad taxon sampling rather than several nscg markers with a less dense sampling. for this reason, only limited conclusions can be drawn concerning the origin of the multiple copies as well as incongruent topologies of nuclear versus chloroplast trees. however, obtaining different signals from the nuclear gene in comparison to various chloroplast regions highlights how important it is to apply independent markers. in fact, many cases of incongruence between chloroplast and nuclear marker based topologies can be found in the literature . however, the potential sources of novel clades in the nuclear gene tree seem to be very complex. there are completely different relationships formed on an interspecific level, deriving from many different clades in the trnk-matk-psba tree. peperomia cerrateae, p. parvisagittata, p. ayacuchoana and p. pseudoverruculosa formed a clade in the chloroplast-based tree. in the nuclear-based tree however, the species themselves are still monophyletic, but the relationships among species are poorly resolved. the simplest explanation for this pattern is that the trnk-matk-psba tree lacks resolution at this level. this is because in the ndhf-rpl32-trnl tree a similar tendency is visible, in which p. cerrateae, p. parvisagittata, p. ayacuchoana and p. pseudoverruculosa are not a monophyletic clade and that p. chutanka might be related to clade iii with p. pugnicaudex.

in the nuclear-based phylogenetic tree some cases are found where duplicated, paraphyletic copies of agt <dig> occur in a particular accession. an example for this is clade vi, which is formed of p. radiatinervosa, p. cyclaminoides and p. verruculosa. since the four copies from p. radiatinervosa form a monophyletic clade, the duplication event could, for example, be due to alloploidy between the two other taxa. another scenario that would explain this pattern is a duplication event that occurred after the split from p. radiatinervosa, but prior to the diversification of p. cyclaminoides and p. verruculosa. under the latter scenario, duplicated copies in p. radiatinervosa and the other species evolved independently and are still retained in the respective accessions.

a second case of multiple agt <dig> copies in a species involves p. bracteata. agt <dig> copies from this species form three different clades within clade vii: in two clades the different copies of pe <dig> and pe <dig> cluster together, whereas pe <dig> and pe <dig> lack duplicates. incomplete lineage sorting could be an explanation for this pattern, since it is not shared with other species in this clade.

our results confirm the conclusion that it is essential to use several unlinked markers for phylogenetic reconstruction to improve phylogenetic resolution, and to identify and limit gene tree artifacts, which can be caused by hybridization, polyploidy, introgression or lineage sorting . however, to refine our understanding of the reasons for the observed conflicts between agt <dig> and chloroplast regions, additional nuclear loci would be required. the suite of avpo sscg loci identified by duarte et al.  <cit>  provide numerous candidates for further analysis.

to be or not to be single copy
the starting point for the present study was a tildenia phylogeny based on several chloroplast markers. in order to obtain a better resolution in tildenia, in particular below the species level, we investigated the phylogenetic performance of the non-coding parts of one of the apvo sscg  <cit> . among the large collection of  <dig> sscgs identified in arabidopsis, populus, vitis, and oryza, several were selected for further analysis of public est datasets, and a trial analysis of brassicaceae was performed using direct sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of a dozen of the genes using rt-pcr  amplicons  <cit> . in both analyses, results were generally consistent with a single gene being detected in the expressed gene sets across diverse angiosperms, though duplicates were indicated in some species, particularly in recent polyploid taxa  <cit> . thus, we reasoned that genes from among this collection were good candidates for further study in peperomia, a basal angiosperm without prior nuclear gene sequence data. by amplifying and sequencing through intronic as well as exonic regions using primers grounded in conserved exons, a large collection of highly variable sites was obtained that were especially valuable for phylogenetic at and below the species level.

an advantage of the approach developed here is that it should be possible to take any angiosperm group of interest and quickly identify whether sscg are likely to work well for species level phylogenetics. the only major requirement is a pair of unambiguous amplification primers that will work for the particular group of interest. in some cases, primers from duarte et al.  <cit>  or this study may serve as amplification or sequencing primers. however, additional steps can be taken to enhance the chances of success in any given study. publicly available est data can easily be queried to extract sequences from closely related taxa, perform alignments with genome and coding regions of the sequenced species obtained from the planttribes database  <cit> , and design primers that have an increased likelihood of success. given the large number of  <dig> apvo sscg  <cit> , successful primer pairs should be identified for at least a handful of genes for any angiosperm group. in our study, after one initial round of primer design for tildenia and the first sequencing run, agt <dig> was one of six genes that immediately yielded good results. this gene did prove to be low copy  in some tildenia accessions, which is not unexpected given that all angiosperms have a history of ancient polyploidy and both polyploidy and gene duplication is a frequent process in plants  <cit> .

the rapidly increasing number of sequenced plant genomes allows the identification of genes that are present in single copy across increasingly many species. the recently updated planttribes database  <dig>   <cit>  provides a publicly available tool that can be used for identifying such genes. if the database is queried  for tribes containing a single gene in each of the seven angiosperm genomes , this number decreases to  <dig> genes and if three non-angiosperm plant genomes are added ,  <dig> genes pass the criteria. we see that as new genomes are added to this approach, there is a decrease in the number of shared single copy genes. however, this set of genes is much more refined and thus may be more likely to be single copy throughout plants in general. in the case of agt <dig>  beside the apvo species, it occurs in a single copy in sorghum bicolor and carica papaya, but there are six copies in the medicago truncatula  genome. in the three non-angiosperm plant genomes, two annotated copies can be identified in selaginella moellendorfii, three in chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and five in physcomitrella patens.

the approach we develop here differs from another recent method to identify orthologous nuclear markers within a particular plant family or other relatively specific lineage . in a group that already has multiple genome-scale datasets, such as the large angiosperm families asteraceae, solanaceae, poaceae, and fabaceae, genomes and est datasets can be leveraged to identify genes that exist in single copy across the range of sampled taxa. in this case, larger numbers of shared single copy genes may be obtained within a family, but the marker set will include many genes that are multicopy in other lineages.

even if a number of 'nearly universal' nscgs are eventually identified in angiosperms, universal amplification and sequencing primers that can be used in an arbitrarily chosen lineage are perhaps less likely to exist than for chloroplast genes due to the relatively rapid underlying substitution rates for nuclear genes. nucleoribosomal markers, such as the intergenic transcribed spacer region , can often be amplified and sequenced with widely conserved primers because it is flanked by highly conserved nucleoribosomal gene sequence  <cit>  and do provide an independent estimate of phylogenetic history in comparison to chloroplast dna. however, because its regions form a large multicopy "family" where copies are  homogenized through concerted evolutionary processes, assessment of orthology in nuclear its sequences is very complex, even when multiple copies are cloned and sequenced  <cit> . we found that nscg amplification and primer design requires a little more lab effort compared to chloroplast markers, but on the other hand, unlinked loci from different genomic compartments are essential in order to reconstruct and fully interpret phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . it is comparably easy to generate a data set of several chloroplast markers, but those results need to be complemented and compared to unlinked nuclear markers.

CONCLUSIONS
considering topology, variability and homoplasy, we can conclude that agt <dig> is highly valuable for phylogenetics at a low taxonomic level such as species level and below. beyond that, agt <dig> was useful for identifying further evolutionary biological processes such as recent gene duplication. when combined with additional nuclear genes, numerous concurrent duplications would be indicative of recent polyploidization in a species or even in particular populations. in combination with uniparentally inherited loci, biparentally inherited nscgs can also provide evidence for hybridization and potentially for organelle capture. the nscg applied in the present study provides regions with different quantitative levels of variability deriving from coding and non-coding parts of different length. while the percentage of pic of the coding sections does not vary significantly among the chloroplast and nuclear markers, the non-coding sections of the agt <dig> in peperomia is three times higher than the most rapidly evolving chloroplast regions.

