BACKGROUND
cerebral ischemia triggers a cascade of pathophysiological events including excitotoxicity, ionic imbalance, oxidative and nitrosative stresses and apoptotic-like cell death mechanisms  <cit> . to date, the thrombolytic agent tpa is the only effective drug for acute ischemic stroke; however, only about 2% of ischemic stroke patients benefit from this treatment due to its limited therapeutic window  <cit> . there is a desperate need to develop additional neuroprotective strategies  <cit> . minocycline is a promising neuroprotectant because if is safe, easily penetrates the cns, and effective in various models of acute neurological injury.

cell death associated with the initial blood flow interruption and the immediately ensuing excitotoxity is abrupt, while inflammation occurs over a long period of time from stroke onset. accordingly, anti-inflammatory treatment is likely to extend the therapeutic window allowing improved intervention in stroke. indeed, minocycline, a common tetracycline antibiotic, has been demonstrated to provide neuroprotection against ischemic brain via the inhibition of the inflammatory cascade  <cit> . accumulating evidence indicates that minocycline exerts neuroprotective effects in neurodegenerative disease models, such as parkinson's disease, alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, and huntington's disease  <cit> . depending on the experimental injury paradigm  <cit> , minocycline may promote neuroprotection through inhibition of microglial activation via p <dig> against nmda excitotoxicity  <cit>  ischemic injury  <cit> , no  <cit> , glutamate  <cit>  and mptp excitotoxicity  <cit> , or through suppression of apoptotic cell death via bcl-2/cytochrome c against ischemia in kidney cells  <cit> , heat stress in testes  <cit> , and no excitotoxicity in vascular smooth muscle  <cit> , spinal cord injury  <cit>  and als  <cit> . in animal models of stroke, minocycline has been reported to reduce infarct volume and to attenuate behavioral deficits  <cit>  via the inhibition of microglial activity  <cit> . overall, the commonly postulated pathway of minocycline neuroprotection in stroke focuses on the modulation of microglial activity. however, because the acute stage of stroke involves abrupt neuronal injury prior to inflammatory reaction, the demonstration of minocycline protection against the primary ischemic cell death would be of high therapeutic interest. moreover, whereas the inhibition of microglial activity by minocycline against ischemia has been shown to highly correlate with the dose  <cit> , the possibility of neurotoxicity of minocycline at higher doses has only been recently recognized  <cit> .

in this study, we examined direct protective effects of minocycline on neurons and astrocytes, and also determined minocycline's toxicity profile in both in vitro and in vivo models of stroke. the overarching theme is to provide guidance on advancing minocycline therapy to the clinic by assuring the safety of the drug and further understanding the feasibility of a direct neuroprotective treatment in view of the acute cell death associated with ischemic stroke.

RESULTS
minocycline improves cell viability of neurons, but not astrocytes
based on atp activities , minocycline, at low doses, maintained cell viability of primary cultured neurons exposed to ogd  compared to vehicle treated group , but was toxic at high dose   . in contrast, minocycline, at all doses, did not exert neuroprotective effects on primary cultured astrocytes, and additionally was toxic at high dose  compared to vehicle-treated group   . similarly, trypan blue results mimicked those of mmt data, in that cell viability of neurons, but not astrocytes, was maintained by low doses of minocycline , while high dose minocycline was toxic to both neurons and astrocytes  compared to vehicle-treated group  .

minocycline alters ogd-induced apoptotic cell death
the cell death of neurons and astrocytes under ogd condition represents apoptotic-like cell damage as revealed by caspase 3/ <dig> assay   and tunel assay  . compared to normal, non-ogd conditions, ogd increased caspase activity levels by about  <dig> -fold. treatment with low dose minocycline prevented such apoptotic-like cell death in neurons characterized by reduced caspase 3/ <dig> activity    and decreased tunel positive cells   . however, protective effects of low dose minocycline were not detected in astrocytes  . moreover, minocycline, at a high dose, worsened apoptotic-like cell death in both neurons ,  and astrocytes  ,   .

under ogd condition, increased bcl- <dig> expression was induced by low dose minocycline in cultured neurons , but not at a high dose   . in contrast, bcl- <dig> expression was not altered by minocycline at all doses in astrocytes  . in parallel, the ogd-induced release of cytochrome c from mitochondria into cytosol was prevented by minocycline at a low dose in neurons.

minocycline ameliorates stroke-induced behavioral deficits
at three days post-stroke, the typical motor and neurological dysfunctions produced by mcao were significantly blocked by minocycline when intravenously administrated at a low dose  starting at  <dig> minutes after reperfusion, as revealed by ebst    and bederson test   . in contrast, mcao stroke animals treated with high dose minocycline  displayed neurological deficits  that were significantly worse and their motor deficits were slightly exacerbated  compared to stroke animals that received vehicle alone. in addition, these stroke animals treated with high dose minocycline performed significantly worse in both behavioral tests than those that received the low dose minocycline .

minocycline reduces cerebral infarcts
following behavioral testing at three days post-stroke, ttc staining revealed that the infarct volume was significantly reduced by low dose minocycline  relative to vehicle-treated stroke group   . in particular, the stroke damage within the striatum was significantly smaller in low dose minocycline-treated stroke animals than vehicle-treated stroke animals. in contrast, the infarct volume in high dose minocycline-treated stroke group was significantly larger than those of vehicle-treated stroke group  . indeed, in some high dose minocycline-treated stroke animals, cerebral infarcts were observed even in the hemisphere contralateral to the mcao side. posthoc analyses of hemorrhage revealed 20% incidence with an average size of  <dig> mm <dig>  which did significantly differ across treatment groups. similarly, measurements of edema found no significant differences across groups , indicating that our analysis of neuronal cell loss  was not affected by edema formation.

minocycline abrogates mcao-mediated apoptotic cell death
a new set of animals  underwent mcao, randomly assigned to similar minocycline treatment as described above, and euthanized at three days post-stroke for immunohistochemical analyses of apoptotic cell death. results revealed that bcl- <dig> immunoreactivity was significantly increased in the brains of stroke animals that were treated with low dose minocycline, especially within the striatum ipsilateral to the occluded mca  relative to vehicle-treated stroke animals   . in contrast, bcl- <dig> immunoreactivity in the same striatal area of high dose minocycline-treated stroke animals was not significantly differrent from vehicle-treated stroke animals  . to clarify which cell type expresses bcl- <dig>  we examined double-labeling of bcl- <dig> with map <dig> or gfap by immunohistochemistry in ischemic striatal peri-infact area of each group. bcl- <dig> was found co-localized with map <dig> in all groups . in contrast, gfap positive astrocytes did not express bcl- <dig> . these results suggest that low dose minocycline can exert anti-apoptotic effects via bcl- <dig> upregulation in ischemic neurons. a few cells in vehicle-treated stroke rats also expressed bcl- <dig> and map <dig> double-labeling, indicating that ischemia alone, without any treatment intervention, might slightly induce the expression of bcl- <dig> in neurons.

in addition, whereas tunel-positive cells with agglutinated nuclei highly populated the striatal peri-infarct area of high dose minocycline treated or vehicle treated animals, there were significantly fewer tunel-positive cells in animals treated with low dose minocycline  . similar dose dependent anti-apoptotic effects were obtained from bcl- <dig> immunohistochemistry, in that low dose minocycline significantly increased the number of bcl- <dig> positive cells within the striatal peri-infarct area compared to high dose minocycline or vehicle treatment.

minocycline rescues neurons in the peri-infarct area
to determine the effect of minocycline on neurons in vivo, we examined the number of nissl positive cells in ischemic peri-infarct area on consecutive brain sections. vehicle-treated mcao stroke rats exhibited neuronal cell loss in the peri-infarct area  relative to intact brain  . low dose minocycline  revealed significant protective effect relative to vehicle treated group   , as well as retained fundamental structure of striatum. in contrast, high dose minocycline  revealed significant neuronal cell loss  relative to vehicle treated group , in addition to dissolution of fundamental structure of striatum with severe edema .

discussion
the present study demonstrates that minocycline exerted direct protection on neurons, in the absence of astrocyte participation, against ischemic stroke. an equally important finding is that minocycline not only promoted dose-dependent neuroprotective effects, but also induced toxicity at a high dose for both neurons and astrocytes. both sets of in vitro and in vivo studies corroborated such neuroprotection and toxicity profile of minocycline. in addition, in vitro mechanistic studies revealed that a major therapeutic pathway, by which minocycline prevented the ischemic cell death, is via an anti-apoptotic mechanism. parallel in vivo data showed that low dose, but not high dose, minocycline attenuated stroke-induced behavioral deficits, decreased apoptotic cell death and reduced cerebral infarction. the intravenous route and the post-stroke delivery further advance the utility of minocycline in the clinic.

to date, the primary cns mechanism implicated in minocycline neuroprotection is the drug's highly potent inhibitory effect on microglial activation, which is achieved by blocking the phosphorylation of p <dig> and the translocation of 5-lipoxygenase into the nucleus, thereby preventing the release of cytokines and the induction of inflammation  <cit> . on the other hand, recent evidence has shown that minocycline in the periphery affords protective effects on kidney cells against ischemia via the apoptotic bcl-2/cytochrome c pathway  <cit> . we report here that minocycline also promoted protection against ischemia in the cns by arresting apoptotic bcl-2/cytochrome c pathway. in our in vitro ogd condition, cultured neurons and astrocytes underwent apoptosis-like cell death as revealed by induction of caspase 3/ <dig> activity and dna fragmentation . treatment with low, but not high dose minocycline abrogated apoptosis characterized by reduced caspase 3/ <dig> activity and decreased number of tunel positive cells. of note, such blockade of ogd-induced apoptosis by low dose minocycline only occurred in cultured neurons and was not evident in cultured astrocytes.

in stroke brains, increased chemokine mrna expression displays a biphasic profile, being found initially in neurons, then subsequently in astrocytes  <cit> . of interest, high levels of chemokines were found in areas of gliosis surrounding recent infarcts  <cit>  and correlated with the accumulation of macrophage/microglia in the ischemic lesion, suggesting chemokine's role in the recruitment of inflammatory cells into the brain in response to stroke  <cit> . based on the above observations, suppressing chemokine elevation during its initial onset in neurons, before astrocytes become involved in this inflammation-ischemia-triggered secondary cell death, may provide better therapeutic outcome than treatment regimen targeting astrocytes. although in recent years enhancing astrocyte survival has been suggested as an alternative protective approach against ischemic damage  <cit> , therapeutic strategies that confer direct neuronal protection are likely to improve clinical prognosis. the present results indicate that minocycline, in addition to its established anti-microglial activity, could directly protect neurons via an anti-apoptotic mechanism.

to further clarify the anti-apoptotic features of minocycline, we examined the alterations in expression of apoptosis-related components, specifically the cell survival-enhancing bcl-2/cytochrome c pathway. our results revealed that low dose minocycline protected again neurons, but not astrocytes against ogd by elevating bcl- <dig> expression and consequently strengthening the anchor of cytochrome c to the mitochondria. we extend here the participation of bcl-2/cytochrome c pathway in minocycline's direct protection of ogd-exposed neurons, previously shown in ischemic kidney cells  <cit> .

to reveal the possible toxic side effects of minocycline, we similarly examined cell survival and apoptosis in ogd-exposed cultured neurons and astrocytes treated with high dose  minocycline. minocycline at a high dose was toxic as revealed by markedly reduced cell survival of both ogd-exposed neurons and astrocytes compared to vehicle treated ogd-exposed cells. moreover, relative to vehicle treated ogd exposed cells, high dose minocycline did not elevate bcl- <dig> expression, but increased caspase 3/ <dig> activity, as well as the number of tunel positive cells in the ischemic striatum.

in parallel to the toxicity profile of minocycline observed in the in vitro ogd condition, high dose minocycline exacerbated both behavioral and histological deficits in stroke animals. in contrast, low dose minocycline increased bcl- <dig>  but decreased tunel positive cells in the ischemic peri-infarct area. moreover, low dose minocycline-treated animals exhibited a pattern of bcl- <dig> expression that was only found in neurons, but not in astrocytes, further supporting the neuroprotective mechanism whereby minocycline exerted anti-apoptotic effects directly on neurons.

in previous reports, therapeutic efficacy in different animal models of neurological disorders was consistently observed when minocycline was administered  <dig> mg/kg- <dig> mg/kg either intravenously or intraperitoneally  <cit> . recent studies have suggested that depending on the animal species , minocycline may confer neurotoxicity in experimental ischemia  <cit>  and parkinson's disease  <cit> . these reports and the present data, taken together, further clarified the toxicity profile of minocycline highlighting critical factors including type of cell line , experimental injury paradigm, and dosage, as well as delivery route of minocycline  <cit> .

the observed dose-dependent protection of neurons over astrocytes by low dose minocycline, and the neurotoxic effects of high dose minocycline provide guidance in designing the clinical protocol for stroke patients. because astrocytes play a crucial role in blood brain barrier maintenance, a perturbed astrocyte viability, as seen with high dose minocycline, may compromise the barrier that could allow inflammatory cells to penetrate the cns and exacerbate the stroke deficits. indeed, most of the animals that received high dose minocycline exhibited severe edema. the establishment of an effective dose range that confers protection on neurons, while not disrupting astrocytes, would perhaps lead to improved therapeutic outcome of minocycline.

minocycline's inability to protect astrocytes or to increase bcl- <dig> expression in these cells in vitro seems to be the most original finding of this study. our approach to use low doses and high doses to show minocycline's protection versus toxicity in the same in vitro and in vivo stroke models is clinically relevant since the drug is already in clinical trials. at first glance, the choice for the present high doses of minocycline  would seem extremely high, considering that in a clinical trial  <cit>  multiple sclerosis patients who received orally  <dig> mg minocycline daily dose  during a 6-month period exhibited no observable significant side effects. however, our recent study clearly demonstrates that a  <dig> mg/kg intravenous dose of minocycline is required to obtain serum levels in rats similar to that achieved in humans after a standard  <dig> mg dose  <cit> , suggesting differences in the drug metabolism between rats and humans. accordingly, the rationale for selecting the present doses of minocycline is based on our studies  <cit>  and those of others  <cit>  indicating that these doses correspond to the clinically relevant doses of minocycline in stroke rodent models. in addition, we extended the high dose range to reveal the toxicity profile of minocycline. indeed, a multiple high dose minocycline injection regimen, involving subcutaneous  <dig> mg/kg over  <dig> days followed by  <dig> mg/kg over the succeeding two days, was recently shown to exacerbate the striatal damage produced by hypoxic-ischemic injury in rats  <cit> . depending on the dose and route of delivery, discordant results and conclusions accompany the actions of minocycline in various stroke and neurodegeneration models. the present data underscore that the minocycline dose is critical as it might attenuate or worsen the stroke outcome. while many studies have pursued intraperitoneal or subcutaneous injections of high dose minocycline in order to promote neuroprotection, we show here that robust neuroprotective effects in acute stroke can be achieved with intravenous low dose minocycline, thereby circumventing the toxicity now increasingly being recognized with high dose minocycline. this neuroprotective action of low dose minocycline at a clinically suitable dosing regimen advances the entry of this drug for phase i human stroke trials. in view of a recent clinical trial showing that the relatively high dose of  <dig> mg/day for  <dig> months minocycline led to an accelerated deterioration in the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis functional rating scale, accompanied by gastrointestinal and neurological adverse events  <cit> , a more careful consideration of minocycline dose is indicated as similarly shown in the present study.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the safety and therapeutic efficacy of low dose minocycline and its robust neuroprotective effects during acute ischemic stroke make it an appealing drug candidate for stroke therapy. the implication of the present direct minocycline protection of neurons, as opposed to the reported inhibition of microglial activity, can be best appreciated by the fact that stroke triggers abrupt neuronal cell death that would require immediate intervention to rescue ischemic cells. a delay in abrogating the primary stroke-induced cell death could result in "fixed" or devastating histological and functional deficits that will be difficult to repair. coupled with the ability of minocycline to block the microglial activation occurring at later post-stroke periods, we now provide evidence that minocycline is also able to achieve an expedited direct neuroprotection against ischemia at early time points. to our knowledge, such two-pronged neuroprotective approach targeting both primary and secondary cell death processes associated with stroke has not been shown with monotherapy. minocycline stands as a multiple site of action therapeutic drug, which clinically should be effective in treating neurological diseases, like stroke, characterized by many facets of cell death cascades.

