BACKGROUND
the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and provide fuel security has increased the demand for oil-rich plants as raw materials for biodiesel production. although vegetable oils have long been used for food, the ideal crop source for biodiesel products should consider other ecological, environmental and ethical concerns. ideally, the entire process, from cultivation to fuel burning in engines, should favour carbon sequestration, reduce water needs and promote energy efficiency. moreover, the impact of oil crops for biodiesel production on the prices of food commodities is a matter of concern. ideally, such crops should be non-edible and grown on non-agricultural lands so that they do not compete for soil with food crops and do not affect the price of food commodities.

jatropha curcas l.  is a perennial, drought-resistant and non-food oilseed crop that has high oil content and fulfils many of the requirements for biodiesel production. jatropha is currently one the most promoted oilseed crops and its seeds have an oil content of up to 50%  <cit> . its major fatty acids are oleic acid , linoleic acid , palmitic acid  and stearic acid   <cit> . because jatropha seeds accumulate very high levels of protein in the endosperm, the residue obtained after oil extraction may potentially be used for animal feed, adding extra value to the crop.

despite the recent attention that jatropha has received as an oil source for biodiesel products, its potential has not yet been fully realised. unlike other oil crops such as soybean, maize, rapeseed and sunflower, there are no agronomically improved varieties of jatropha  <cit> . potential areas of improvement are increased oil yield and reduced seed toxicity. genomic and transcriptomic resources have been generated to accelerate the genetic improvement of many crops  <cit> . although a privately held company announced the completion of the j. curcas genome, the data have not been made publicly available, and transcript resources in public databases are scarce. to bridge this gap, we have sampled the transcriptome of developing and germinating jatropha seeds to unveil the gene repertoires of j. curcas related to the following:  oil accumulation during seed development and oil breakdown during germination; and  proteins possessing toxic, anti-nutritional or allergenic properties and enzymes involved in the biosynthetic pathway for phorbol esters, the major toxic components of jatropha seeds.

here, we have sequenced  <dig>  ests from two cdna libraries of j. curcas developing  and germinating  seeds. sequencing of transcripts from these two contrasting developmental phases has allowed us to assess differential expression and discover most genes that are related to lipid metabolism. we have used these sequences to reconstruct the main metabolic pathways related to lipid synthesis and breakdown in j. curcas.

the sequences presented in this work represent a considerable increase in the total number of j. curcas ests deposited in genbank. these results will be useful for further biotechnological interventions related to jatropha seeds.

RESULTS
jatropha seed est database
we have generated cdna libraries from pools of developing  and germinating endosperm  of jatropha curcas seeds. we have sequenced  <dig>  ests from the developing pool  and  <dig>  from the germinating pool , totalling  <dig>  high-quality ests. the lengths of the ests after trimming ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> bp, with an average size of  <dig>  bp. the ests from both libraries were assembled together into  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons, resulting in  <dig>  unisequences.

all unisequences were aligned against the non-redundant  protein database of genbank using blastx with an e-value cut-off of 1e- <dig>  we found matches for  <dig>  unisequences . the remaining  <dig>  unisequences with no matches in the nr database were subjected to gene prediction analysis using estscan. this approach resulted in orf predictions for  <dig>  unisequences. the combination of the nr matches with the estscan predictions resulted in  <dig>   putative protein-coding unisequences, of which  <dig> contain a complete orf . blast2go  <cit>  categorization was performed, as shown in figure  <dig> . it is noteworthy to highlight the oxidoreductase activity and auxin biosynthesis in this annotation, both of which are key processes in early plantlet establishment related to energy uptake from seed reserves and growth, respectively. important signal transduction elements were categorized such as putative serine/threonine protein kinases  and transcription factors . several predicted cellular components have been identified as membrane-associated proteins.

the detailed bioinformatic protocol is shown in figure  <dig>  all ests were deposited in the dbest division of genbank under accession numbers gt <dig> to gt <dig> .

categories of the most abundantly expressed ests in developing and germinating jatropha seeds
because our cdna libraries are not normalised, we were able to use the est abundance in the resulting contigs to estimate differential expression levels of transcripts in each cdna pool. among the top  <dig> most highly expressed transcripts in jd, there are three different transcripts coding for storage proteins belonging to the  <dig> s globulin family  and one transcript coding for an aspartyl protease , which is known to be involved in processing the precursors of storage proteins into mature proteins  <cit> .

annotation and expression levels of the  <dig> most highly expressed transcripts in the developing endosperm . the columns jd and jg shows the number of ests for each unisequence in developing and germinating endosperm, respectively. the p-value refers to the audic-claverie statistics for differential expression

these findings are consistent with the high levels of storage proteins in the endosperm of j. curcas seeds  <cit> . reflecting the intense catabolic activity within germinating seeds related to the mobilisation of protein reserves  <cit> , three of the most abundant transcripts code for proteinases of the cysteine proteinase family , which are known to be involved in protein mobilisation during seed germination  <cit> . another abundant transcript codes for a cysteine proteinase inhibitor , which is thought to be involved in spatial and temporal control of storage protein mobilisation by cysteine proteinases during seed germination  <cit> . transcripts related to breakdown of the oil and carbohydrate reserves, such as acetyl-coa c-acyltransferase, are also represented amongst the most abundant transcripts in the germinating library .

annotation and expression levels of the  <dig> most highly expressed transcripts in the germinating endosperm . the columns jg and jd shows the number of ests for each unisequence in germinating and developing endosperm, respectively. the p-value refers to the audic-claverie statistics for differential expression

transposable elements are highly active in developing jatropha seeds
the annotation revealed surprising differences between the number of transposable element  sequences in the jd and jg libraries, both in terms of the number of unisequences containing a te-related sequence  and in terms of their relative expression levels . suppression of transposon silencing in the endosperm during seed development has been described in arabidopsis  <cit> . this suppression was concluded to result from genome-wide demethylation of maternal alleles in the endosperm. arabidopsis uses this mechanism to imprint expression of maternal alleles in the endosperm. in that work, the authors suggest that temporally regulated transposon activation carries a moderately low cost to arabidopsis because it has few functional transposons and the endosperm genome is not transmitted to the next generation.

unlike arabidopsis, jatropha has many active transposons, as evidenced in our jd library . further investigation will be necessary to verify if the high number of te elements in jd is related to demethylation of the maternal alleles during development.

ests related to toxic components
the seeds of j. curcas are extremely toxic to a wide range of animals, but the biochemical basis for this toxicity is still under investigation  <cit> . curcin, a class i ribosome-inactivating protein , is present in j. curcas seeds but its toxicity is at least 1000-fold lower than that of ricin, a class ii rip from ricinus communis  <cit> . in our libraries we were unable to find transcripts coding for curcin homologues, but a preliminary proteomic analysis of developing and germinating seeds led us to identify five curcin isoforms . several transcripts coding for protein inhibitors of serine  and cysteine  proteinases were found in both libraries. although the presence of these protein inhibitors may raise biosafety concerns regarding use in animal feed, it is unlikely that they play a major role in toxicity because their effects are relatively mild .

uniquences assigned to enzymes related to toxicity in seeds. the columns jd and jg shows the number of ests for each unisequence in developing and germinating endosperm, respectively. the p-value refers to the audic-claverie statistics for differential expression. njd shows the number of ests in jd normalised to  <dig>  reads. njg shows the number of ests in jg normalised to  <dig>  reads.

the seeds of several euphorbiaceae are known to be a rich source of powerful allergens of the  <dig> s albumin family, rendering the cultivation, handling and consumption of seeds a serious health hazard. transcripts coding for  <dig> s albumins were found only in the jd library, which is consistent with the role of these methionine- and cysteine-rich storage proteins as a specialised reserve of sulphur for the growing seedling  <cit> . although the issue of allergenicity in connection with j. curcas seeds has not yet been raised, the presence of  <dig> s albumins in seeds may become an important health issue given the interest in the use of seedcake, which is the byproduct remaining after seeds are used as biodiesel source, as animal feed. therefore, the allergenicity of protein fractions from the seeds and other tissues merits investigation.

another important toxic component of the j. curcas seeds is a group of diterpene esters termed phorbol esters, which have structures based on a tetracyclic carbon skeleton known as tigliane . phorbol esters are thought to be the major toxic components of seeds. these compounds mimic the action of diacylglycerol , an activator of protein kinase c, which in turn regulates different signal transduction pathways and other cellular metabolic activities and thereby amplifying the efficacy of carcinogens . we have searched our libraries for transcripts that could increase our understanding of the phorbol ester biosynthesis pathway, and found several transcripts coding for enzymes involved in synthesis of the major subclasses of terpenoids. the terpenoids are synthesised from the basic five-carbon unit isopentenyl diphosphate  and the initial prenyl  diphosphate, dimethylallyl diphosphate , which is formed by the isomerisation of ipp. prenyltransferases catalyse alkylation of one or more molecules of ipp  with dmapp  to produce geranyl diphosphate , farnesyl diphosphate  and geranyl geranyl diphosphate . transcripts coding for farnesyl-diphosphate synthase  and geranylgeranyl-diphosphate synthase  were found in our libraries.

the identification of genes related to jatropha toxic components can accelerate the development of genetic strategies to produce varieties of j. curcas with low toxicity, increasing the possibility of using the seed as animal feed and obtaining a plant with improved agricultural handling characteristics.

reconstruction of metabolic pathways related to oil accumulation in seeds
we have used kaas  <cit>  and kobas  <cit>  to annotate automatically jatropha ests coding for orthologues to plant enzymes in the fatty acid biosynthesis, fatty acid degradation, triacylglycerol biosynthesis and triacylglycerol degradation pathways. ests related to plant lipid metabolism were also manually annotated using plantcyc  <cit>  and the arabidopsis lipid database  <cit>  . we have integrated and compiled these data to propose schematic metabolic pathways that lead to oil accumulation in jatropha seeds.

while most ests coding for fatty acid biosynthesis enzymes were found in jd, the fatty acid degradation pathway is enriched in jg ests, which is expected considering that these stages are dedicated to oil accumulation and breakdown, respectively. in the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway, we found a considerable number of ests coding for almost all enzymes . more specifically, we found ests coding for enzymes catalysing reactions that ultimately produce oleic and stearic , linoleic  and palmitic  acids, the main constituents of jatropha seed oil. additionally, we found  <dig> ests coding for oleoyl-acp desaturase , which catalyses the polyunsaturation of oleoyl-acp  to linoleoyl-acp . because oleic and linoleic acids are the major constituents of jatropha oil, this enzyme is a potential biotechnological target for modulation of jatropha oil composition.

number of unisequences assigned to enzymes of metabolic pathways related to oil accumulation and breakdown in the seeds. njd shows the number of ests in jd normalised to  <dig>  reads. njg shows the number of ests in jg normalised to  <dig>  reads. see additional file  <dig> for the unisequence names and ac statistics.

another important lipid class is the acylglycerols, which act as an energy reserve in many organisms and are the major components of seed storage oils. the most common acylglycerol in seed oils is triacylglycerol . upon arrival in the cytoplasm, free fas become esterified to coenzyme a  and serve as substrates for tag synthesis from sn-glycerol-3-phosphate . after synthesis of  <dig> -dag, the formation of tag can occur in two ways. in one pathway, diacylglycerol acyltransferase  transfers an acyl group from acyl-coa to sn- <dig> of dag to form tag. we found one est in jd and one est in jg coding for dgat. another pathway involves a phospholipid:diacylglycerol acyltransferase  that utilises phospholipid as the acyl donor in tag formation. the contribution of pdat to the formation of tags in jatropha oil is unknown, but its role in the castor bean has been identified as preferential incorporation of Δ-12-modified fatty acids.

after biosynthesis, pools of tag can be stored in the mature seed in the form of oil bodies surrounded by a single monolayer membrane that is most likely generated through budding of the outer er membrane. the membrane contains proteins known as oleosins, which are thought to stabilise the oil body during desiccation of the seed  <cit> . we found three ests coding for oleosins  similar to the arabidopsis oleosin at4g <dig> .

reconstruction of metabolic pathways related to oil breakdown in seeds
we have used the same method described above to propose pathways related to oil breakdown. during germination, the embryo uses tags accumulated during development as an energy source. to this end, tags must be metabolised to free fatty acids  and then to acetyl-coa.

specialised lipases named tag lipases appear to be induced during germination in most species  <cit> . the function of these lipases is to hydrolyse tag into fatty acids and the intermediate product: diacylglycerol or monoacylglycerol  <cit> . as expected, we identified a large number of triacylglycerol lipases in our jg library .

free fatty acids are metabolised into acetyl-coa in the endoplasmic reticulum. we have found ests coding for all enzymes in the fatty acid degradation pathway. we also found a large number of ests for an acetyl-coa c-acyltransferase, which catalyses acyltransferases reactions .

CONCLUSIONS
here we have sequenced and annotated a collection of ests from libraries of developing and germinating seeds of jatropha curcas. we identified ests related to transposable elements, toxic components and oil accumulation and breakdown in jatropha seeds. jatropha curcas is a species with agricultural relevance due to its oil-rich seeds, which can be used for biodiesel fuel production to help the world meet its energy needs in times of shrinking fossil fuel deposits. given this economic significance, jatropha plants require agronomic improvement. to achieve this goal, genomic information pertaining to the genes expressed in developing and germinating seeds, such as that described in this paper, is likely to be used. the need for such information is especially true for genes that are putatively involved in oil synthesis, accumulation and breakdown and those related to seed toxicity. for example, jatropha plants can be genetically engineered to produce transgenic plants with improved oil content and/or composition. methods can be applied to engineer the entire oil synthesis pathway, to increase expression of enzymes responsible for the synthesis of the sought-after fatty acids--oleic and linoleic acids--and to decrease expression of enzymes responsible for the breakdown of such energy-rich compounds. moreover, jatropha plants can be genetically improved using traditional or modern plant improvement methods to create varieties with reduced expression of potentially toxic compounds such as curcins,  <dig> s albumins and the enzymes involved in phorbol ester biosynthesis.

