BACKGROUND
complete viral genomes of large dna viruses  can be incorporated as bacterial artificial chromosomes . one method is the use of replicons based on the bacterial f plasmid  <cit> . since the initial report that described the bac cloning of a murine cytomegalovirus genome  <cit> , several additional herpesvirus genomes have been cloned as bacs  <cit> , including herpes simplex virus  <dig>  and herpes simplex  <dig>   <cit> .

bac technology created new possibilities for the targeted mutagenesis of the herpesvirus genome . since the viral genome can be carried as an episome in bacterial cells, prokaryotic genetic techniques can be employed for manipulation of the viral genome without the need for typical selective mechanisms required for mutagenesis and selection in eukaryotic cells. this allows for the generation of viral mutants that would be difficult to obtain otherwise, either because of the lack of a phenotypic effect due to mutation or because the mutation confers a disadvantage for selection and replication in eukaryotic cells. viral particles are obtained by transfection of bac-cloned viral dna into a permissive cell line. since the mutant virus is clonally derived, plaque purification of the recombinant virus is usually not needed. in addition, the bac and bac-derived virus can be easily shuttled back and forth between e. coli and eukaryotic cells, facilitating analysis of the effects of targeted mutation and subsequent sequential mutations. the power and versatility of bac mutagenesis for studying herpesviruses has been used in numerous ways, including studies on viral pathogenesis, the role of viral antigens in immunity . modified viral genomes have potential uses in other areas such as the construction and development of novel viral vectors and vaccines.

despite the power and the promise of bac technology, bac mutagenesis can be difficult and cumbersome. while the generation of a herpes virus bac is similar in all approaches through introduction of prokaryotic f-factor plasmid features into the viral genome using homologous recombination  <cit> , different approaches to bac mutagenesis have been described. in our past studies, we used the method published by horsburgh and co-workers  <cit>  that uses a gene replacement vector that features a temperature-sensitive origin of replication , a positive selection marker  and negative selection marker . other methods to mutagenize herpes bacs such as transposon mutagenesis  <cit>  and pcr-based approaches  <cit>  are efficient and do not require the construction of a special gene replacement vector for each mutation. however, these techniques do not easily allow the generation of certain types of manipulations such as point mutations. bac recombineering  <cit> , a bac mutagenensis method which uses lambda-mediated homologous recombination in escherichia coli, can be used to efficiently generate extensive mutations in any targeted allele but is an in vivo system requiring special e. coli strains and is a two step procedure that necessitates that the targeted allele be substituted and then replaced with the desired mutation.

the aim of the present study was to simplify bac mutagenesis, using approaches tailored to the final application. we believe this method can be used for a broad range of applications. here we describe two examples how the incorporation of a lambda phage recombination system can greatly simplify the construction of allele replacement vectors. in addition, we describe how egfp can be utilized for easy screening of positive clones throughout the process of in vivo allele replacement in e. coli when the allele replacement procedure is a gene deletion. finally, we describe the incorporation of the lambda phage recombination system directly into an hsv- <dig> bac so that gene transfer into a specific viral locus can be performed in a simple one-step in vitro reaction. these improvements to the techniques of hsv bac mutagenesis will facilitate the construction of recombinant herpes simplex virus genomes.

RESULTS
construction of an improved allele replacement plasmid vector containing lambda phage site specific recombination sites
an allele replacement strategy for mutagenesis of bacterial artificial chromosomes has been previously described  <cit> . this strategy utilizes plasmid replacement vector pko <dig>  containing the elements for positive selection of the integrated allele via a single cross-over event , and an element for negative selection to force recombination necessary for allele replacement . a simplified version of the allele replacement strategy is shown in figure  <dig> 

plasmids such as pko <dig> contain positive and negative selection markers making it extremely powerful for bac mutagenesis. however, plasmids derived from pko <dig> are difficult cloning vectors to use because of the limited number of restriction sites available for insertion and the low frequency of recombinant transformants obtained during the cloning procedure. as a means to address these limitations we inserted an ~ <dig>  kb dna fragment containing attr lambda phage recombination sites into pko <dig>  a schematic drawing of the constructed vector pko <dig> -c. <dig> is shown in figure  <dig>  phage lambda recombination is a highly specific, directional, and conservative recombination reaction, mediated by the lambda clonase enzyme, that occurs between two site-specific attachment sites . in addition to the lambda recombination sites, this gene cassette contains the ccdb gene  <cit>  which is a negative selection marker designed to minimize the number of non-recombinant transformants obtained during cloning. thus, any dna fragment containing attl recombination sites can be efficiently inserted into the attr sites in the pko <dig> -c. <dig> vector using phage lambda clonase , and the resultant recombinant plasmids are ready for the allele replacement reaction.

use of egfp to facilitate screening of bacs containing replaced alleles
as depicted in figure  <dig>  the allele replacement procedure includes a single cross over event that results in the generation of a bac intermediate that contains two copies of the targeted allele, one from the starting bac and one from the replacement vector. in theory, resolution of this intermediate should have an equal chance of generating the original bac or a new bac with the replaced allele. in practice, we have not found this to be the case, with the percentage of screened clones containing the replaced allele as low as 5%, but always much lower than the expected 50% . for example, in a previously reported study, we constructed an allele replacement vector using the improved vector pko <dig> -c. <dig> as described above, and used bac mutagenesis to generate an hsv- <dig> genome that was deleted for the essential gene encoding glycoprotein d  <cit> . while the construction of the allele replacement vector containing the flanking regions of the gd gene, but missing the coding sequences, was relatively straight-forward, a large number of colonies in the final step of the allele replacement procedure had to be screened in order to find the desired bac recombinant with the gd deletion. it is likely that the percentage of replaced allele to starting allele containing bacs is at least somewhat dependent upon the size of the flanking sequences used in the allele replacement vector, but construction of allele replacement vectors with exceptionally large flanking sequences is not always practical. consequently, we reasoned that for allele replacement reactions which are gene deletions, co-expression of egfp in the replacement vector would aid in the detection of the desired cross-over recombinant bacs.

to evaluate the feasibility of egfp co-detection for obtaining the desired resolved bac containing a targeted gene deletion, we designed a new hsv- <dig> gd-deletion replacement vector containing the egfp gene in place of the gd coding sequences and transferred this chimeric gene to the bac insertion shuttle vector pko <dig> -c. <dig> by the lr recombination reaction, resulting in pko <dig> -c.1-gd-egfp . the gd flanks with the inserted egfp were then transferred into the hsv- <dig> bac by transformation of hsv2-bac-containing rr <dig> electrocompetent cells and selection of bacterial colonies on chloramphenicol/zeocin  plates at 30°c. colonies at this stage contained both the hsv2-bac  and the allele insertion plasmid  but not necessarily a recombinant bac because both the bac and the plasmid will replicate at this temperature. the following day, multiple colonies were picked into  <dig> ml of lb broth and plated in serial dilutions onto cam/zeo plates at 43°c, conditions that require integration of the insertion plasmid into the hsv2-bac vector. individual colonies from the 43°c plate were re-plated onto sucrose/chloramphenicol  plates at 30°c to force resolution of the single cross-over co-integrate. six colonies, selected from each of  <dig> original 43°c colonies, were then transferred to chloramphenicol plates at 30°c and visualized for egfp expression . five of the  <dig> colonies we selected as a representative sample expressed the egfp indicator gene, and were shown by pcr analysis to contain the egfp gene replacing the gd gene . in addition, as previously described  <cit> , virus derived from the gd-deleted/egfp-inserted hsv2-bac was unable to grow on vero cells following transfection, whereas viable virus was recovered following transfection of vd <dig> cells . eukaryotic cells infected with the resulting recombinant virus did not express egfp, consistent with the fact that the inserted egfp gene is under control of a prokaryotic promoter. a schematic diagram of the bac-derived hsv- <dig> genome containing egfp inserted into the gd gene is shown in figure 3b. thus, expression of egfp is a suitable choice for screening of the bac recombinant containing insertions, especially when the percentage of allele replaced bacs is relatively low.

use of lambda phage site specific recombination sites in an hsv- <dig> bac vector for direct recombination of gene cassettes using the lr recombination reaction
although both procedures described above simplify certain aspects of the allele replacement reaction, the process still requires the construction of a plasmid replacement vector and is a multi-step selection procedure. consequently, we were interested in determining whether gene replacements could be performed directly in the bac using the efficient lambda phage recombination system.

we chose the ul <dig> gene for insertion of attr recombination sites into the hsv2-bac since it is known that the ul <dig> gene encodes the virion host shutoff  protein that is dispensable for virus replication in cell culture. toward this end, an insertion plasmid was constructed that contained ~ <dig> kb of dna sequences surrounding the ul <dig> gene. in place of the ul <dig> orf, we inserted the gene encoding egfp under control of a prokaryotic promoter flanked by the attr recombination sites. a schematic diagram of the pko <dig> -ul <dig> attr-egfp is shown in figure 4a. this insertion vector also contained the previously described selection markers, the attr recombination sites, and the egfp gene. screening of the recombinant hsv-bac containing attr-egfp in ul <dig> was aided by expression of the egfp in bacterial colonies and insertion was confirmed by pcr analysis using primer pairs in the egfp gene and the flanking ul <dig> sequences . the resulting hsv-bac, designated as dest-bac , was isolated to study its suitability as an in vitro destination vector for dna fragments flanked by attl sequences. this bac dna was infectious when transfected into vero cells .

unlike the allele plasmid replacement vectors containing attr recombination sites , the dest-bac does not contain a negative selection marker such as the ccdb gene. thus, following an in vitro recombination reaction with dest-bac and a fragment containing the attl sites, there is no suppression of the growth of bacterial transformants harboring either the original hsv-bac and/or the plasmid by-products of the lr reaction . nevertheless, dest-bac contains the egfp gene which is expressed in prokaryotic cells and thus screening of recombinant bacs into which insertion has occurred should be facilitated by loss of this marker. in order to evaluate direct recombination into dest-bac via the in vitro recombination reaction, we constructed several vectors, each containing a different dna fragment between attl recombination sites . one of the plasmid vectors contained the gene encoding dsred <dig> under control of a prokaryotic promoter to allow visualization of the various bac recombinants that might be generated following the recombination reaction. the other two vectors contained the genes encoding the vaccinia virus a33r and b5r glycoproteins under control of eukaryotic promoters to determine the ability of inserted genes to be expressed in the recombinant bac viruses. the a33r and b5r genes were each fused to an epitope tag from the influenza hemagglutinin gene for easy identification of the expressed gene product.

recombination between the high copy number pdsred <dig> vector and the low copy number gfp-expressing dest-bac was carried out in the standard in vitro reaction, followed by transformation of electrocompetent e. coli dh10b and plating onto lb plates containing either chloramphenicol or kanamycin. transformants arising on cam plates derived from the reaction with pdsred <dig>  showed four distinct phenotypes, bright red , weak green , bright green , and not glowing/weakly red  . the majority  of transformants were of the not glowing/weakly red  phenotype . these colonies were able to grow in the presence of chloramphenicol, but not kanamycin, suggesting the presence of the recombinant dsred2-inserted bac. transformants of the weak green  phenotype were also able to grow in the presence of chloramphenicol but not kanamycin, suggesting the presence of the starting egfp-expressing bac. in contrast, the bright red colonies  and the bright green colonies  were also able to grow on lb kan plates , suggesting that these types of colonies contained a kanamycin resistant plasmid  in addition to a chloramphenicol-resistant bac. further studies demonstrated that by reducing the concentration of dna used for transformation, the number of such double transformants could be reduced and also result in higher overall transformation efficiency .

the color and antibiotic sensitivity results suggested that the desired hsv bac containing the dsred <dig> insert would be contained in colonies with the not glowing/weakly emitting red phenotype due to the fact that the dsred <dig> indicator gene product is only barely visible in colonies. this phenotype, compared to the brighter green appearance of colonies expressing egfp protein, is presumably because of the low bac copy number and the slower maturation of the functional tetrameric dsred <dig> protein compared to the monomeric egfp protein. to determine whether the weakly emitting red colonies contained the desired hsv bac, individual colonies of this phenotype were analyzed by pcr using primer sets specific for dsred <dig>  the ul <dig> flanking sequences, egfp, and  <dig> hsv- <dig> genes well separated on the hsv- <dig> genome . figure 7a  shows the dsred <dig> pcr results for  <dig> of the colonies. the presence of the  <dig> bp product from the pcr using the dsred <dig> primer set indicates that each colony contained the dsred <dig> gene. these same colonies were negative for egfp by pcr using the primer set specific for that gene . in addition, the pcr using the ul <dig> primer set generated the expected  <dig> bp product consistent with elimination of the  <dig> bp containing the egfp gene from dest-bac and insertion of the  <dig> bp containing the dsred <dig> gene . finally, the presence of hsv- <dig> viral sequences in each clone was confirmed with the pcr using the hsv- <dig> primer sets . together, these results indicated that the pale glowing/weakly emitting red colonies contained the hsv bac with the inserted dsred <dig> gene. the recombinant bac dna was infectious as shown by formation of virus after transfection of the bac dna from  <dig> independent clones into vero cells . an additional  <dig> colonies, selected from the plate on the basis of weakly emitting red phenotype were analyzed in the same manner, and the results were identical to those of the first  <dig> colonies shown in figure  <dig> . therefore, direct recombination into the hsv-bac template is feasible for bac insertion mutagenesis, and that the lack of a negative selection  was not critical for the selection procedure. since colonies without color yielded the desired hsv bac, these results suggest that this technique would be applicable for the insertion of any fragment flanked by attl recombination sites, particularly if the starting bac template expressed an egfp gene.

similarly, we investigated the feasibility of direct in vitro recombination into dest-bac using the attl flanking b5r and a33r gene constructions . since there was no marker gene for visualization of the desired recombinant bac, transformants showed only three phenotypes on lb cam plates, bright green, slightly green, and non-glowing. as in the dsred <dig> example, very bright green colonies were viable on lb kan plates suggesting the presence of an egfp-containing plasmid by-product in addition to a bac. since slightly green colonies growing on chloramphenicol suggested the presence of the starting bac template, we analyzed colonies without color and that were unable to grow on lb kan plates for the presence of the desired b5r or a33r bac recombinant. four clones each from the b5r and a33r recombination reaction/transformation were screened for the presence of the transgene by pcr using sequence-specific primers for b5r or a33r . each colony without color from the b5r reaction had the expected  <dig> bp b5r pcr product  and each colony without color from the a33r reaction had the expected  <dig> bp a33r pcr product . absence of a pcr dna fragment when using egfp primers confirmed the loss of the egfp gene in all of these colonies . in addition, the pcr using the ul <dig> primer set revealed the expected sizes at the ul <dig> locus for both the b5r and a33r recombinant hsv-bacs,  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp, respectively .

to determine whether the recombinant a33r- and b5r-containing hsv bacs expressed the inserted proteins from the ul <dig> locus, western blot analysis was performed. infectious virus derived from bac-transfected vero cells was used to prepare a virus stock for subsequent infection experiments. lysates from infected vero cells were harvested and the proteins separated on a polyacrylamide gel and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes for immunoblotting with a monoclonal antibody against the ha epitope tag that is present on both recombinant proteins . in each case, an expressed protein of the predicted size was apparent.

recombinant viruses isolated through the bac mutagenesis procedure should be clonal, thus eliminating the need for further plaque purification following transfection of the bac dna into eukaryotic cells. to confirm this, we infected vero cell cultures with the a33r- and b5r-expressing recombinant viruses obtained from the bac insertion procedure. after plaques started to appear, cell monolayers were fixed and probed with the mouse anti-ha monoclonal antibody . in plates containing hundreds of virus plaques, every plaque was stained by the monoclonal to the epitope tag, indicating both the clonal nature of the virus derived by bac mutagenesis as well as the stability of the derived recombinant viruses.

we have shown that any dna fragment flanked by attl recombination sites can be inserted directly into dest-bac or any other hsv bac containing attr sites. this procedure is feasible even without a negative selection marker such as the ccdb gene. while there is no selective pressure against bacterial colonies harboring the original dest-bac, the majority of colony transformants obtained harbor the desired recombinant bac . this is likely due to the molar ratio of attr sites to attl sites in the in vitro recombination reaction. since the attr-containing bac is approximately  <dig> times as large as the attl-containing replacement vector, there will be a limiting number of attr sites and the in vitro recombination reaction will be driven towards insertion of the fragment from the allele replacement plasmid into the bac.

somewhat similar recombinase systems have recently been reported that describe the construction of recombinant herpesvirus bacs with inserts into icp <dig> rather than ul <dig>  <cit> . in these systems, the cre/lox recombinase system was used to insert a transgene into the icp <dig> gene of hsv, the same site that was engineered to harbor the bac replication sequences. a second recombination system  was used during transfection of mammalian cells to eliminate the bac sequences. the desired recombinant, missing the bac sequence but with the desired insert at the icp <dig> locus, was then plaque purified. these systems have the advantage of being able to yield a recombinant virus with an inserted transgene without remaining prokaryotic bac sequences. the procedure however, requiring more manipulations than the dest-bac procedure and plaque purification of the final virus product, is relatively lengthy. thus, each system has its advantages, and the most appropriate system to be used for construction of a recombinant herpes virus using a bac system will depend upon the desired characteristics of the recombinant virus that is being constructed.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, bac technology is an extremely powerful method for construction of complex recombinant herpes simplex viruses, particularly in instances when there is no selective mechanism for the desired recombinant. the improvements to the allele replacement procedure described in this report facilitate both complex and routine constructions. for any type of allele replacement, cloning into pko5-derived vectors is greatly simplified by use of the lambda recombination system. the clonase enzymes are commercially available and provide high lot-to-lot consistency for reliable results. in addition, there are a large number of vectors available that incorporate the attl recombination sites making it easy to integrate bac mutagenesis with projects involving expression studies of target proteins in different expression systems. for allele replacements which are gene deletions, selection of bacterial colonies containing the desired bac-deletion mutant is aided by the use of egfp visualization. finally, construction of series of viruses or vectors containing mutations or insertions into a single locus of the viral genome can be expedited by construction of a recipient bac containing the lambda recombination sites followed by direct recombination into the hsv-bac. taken together, these techniques provide improved methods for the construction of recombinant herpes simplex viruses and virus vectors.

