BACKGROUND
speciation, i.e. the origin of new species, is a complex evolutionary process which leads to the formation of barriers preventing gene flow between emerging species. defining the factors that generate such barriers is a central goal for evolutionary biologists. among animals, moths and butterflies  represent an ideal model group for the study of various aspects of speciation. this is mainly due to the immense diversity of lepidoptera, which include nearly  <dig>  species and belong to the most speciose groups of animals  <cit> . moreover, the study of moths and butterflies provides a number of practical advantages. many species can be easily collected in the field, reared and hybridized in laboratory conditions and experiments can be replicated fairly often due to the relatively short generation time of many species.

among traditional models, the heliconius butterflies have been the subject of a high number of evolutionary studies showing that various wing patterns, resulting from predator-induced selection through müllerian mimicry, ultimately lead to divergence and speciation . the shift in colour pattern mimicry also played a key role in generating pre-mating isolation as male mate preferences often led to strong assortative mating between individuals with similar wing pattern phenotypes  <cit> . swallowtail butterflies of the genus papilio are another diverse group of lepidoptera where the evolution of mimicry greatly contributed to their spectacular radiation . lepidoptera also include models for research of sex pheromone communication and its role as a pre-zygotic barrier  <cit> . a well-known example is the european corn borer, ostrinia nubilalis, which comprises two sympatric races that are prevented from mating by utilizing opposite sex pheromone isomers of the same compound  <cit> . the butterfly subgenus agrodiaetus is one of the few taxa where reinforcement of pre-zygotic isolation has been demonstrated  <cit> .

it is generally accepted that chromosomal rearrangements have the potential to limit introgression and thus facilitate the development and maintenance of reproductive isolation by means of suppressed recombination . reduced recombination enables the accumulation of genetic incompatibilities and leads to divergence and speciation. suppression of recombination is an intrinsic feature of sex chromosomes which were suggested to play a disproportionate role in lepidopteran speciation  <cit> . recent studies in geographic subspecies of wild silkworms, samia cynthia ssp. , suggest that chromosomal rearrangements resulting in multiple sex chromosomes may also contribute to the formation of reproductive barriers and thus promote divergence and eventually speciation  <cit> . moreover, the holokinetic nature of lepidopteran chromosomes, i.e. the lack of a distinct primary constriction , is expected to facilitate karyotype evolution mainly via chromosomal fusion and fission by reducing the risk of formation of dicentric and acentric chromosomes  <cit> . however, results of comparative genomics revealed a high degree of conserved synteny of genes between the silkworm bombyx mori  and several other lepidopteran species . the extensive conservation of chromosome print across lepidoptera suggests evolutionary stability of lepidopteran karyotypes, with most of haploid chromosome numbers ranging n = 28– <dig>  <cit>  and the most common and probably also ancestral number of n =  <dig>  <cit> .

the remarkably stable chromosome numbers and highly conserved synteny of genes between chromosomes of distant species contrast with the exceptional diversity of karyotypes found in some lepidopteran taxa. probably the greatest interspecific karyotype variation in the animal kingdom was found in blue butterflies  of the genus polyommatus with haploid chromosome numbers ranging from n =  <dig> to n =  <dig> . the latter, observed in the atlas blue, polyommatus atlantica, represents the highest chromosome number not only of lepidoptera but of all animals  <cit> . in addition, blue butterflies of the subgenus agrodiaetus represent the group with the largest difference in the number of chromosomes between sister species. karyotypes of polyommatus  biruni and p.  posthumus consist of n =  <dig> and n =  <dig> elements, respectively, with no intermediate karyomorphs. the similarity in genome size of these closely related species suggests that the karyotype variation is not caused by polyploidy but arose through chromosomal rearrangements such as fusion and fission  <cit> . however, recent comparative phylogenetic studies found little evidence supporting the role of chromosomal rearrangements in the speciation of agrodiaetus blues and rather stressed the importance of reinforcement of their pre-zygotic isolation  <cit> .

exceptional intraspecific variability of karyotypes was also found in wood white butterflies of the genus leptidea comprising several eurasian species  <cit> . in this genus, chromosome numbers vary greatly between and within species. while two species with predominantly eastern palaearctic distribution, l. morsei and l. amurensis, probably have a constant number of chromosomes , three cryptic species mainly from the western palaearctic have a variable number of chromosomes  <cit> . the most striking case is l. sinapis, which shows a gradual decrease in the diploid chromosome number from 2n =  <dig> in spain to 2n =  <dig> in eastern kazakhstan, resulting in a 6000 km wide chromosomal cline of recent origin  <cit> . excluding polyploidy, this is the widest known within-species chromosome number range for any animal or plant. moreover, a variable number of chromosomes was described in the other two cryptic species, l. reali  and l. juvernica   <cit> .

although the nature of dynamic evolution of leptidea karyotypes and its role in speciation is not yet known, the chromosomal cline found in l. sinapis provided strong evidence for rapid and extensive within-species accumulation of numerous chromosomal rearrangements  <cit> . while such clinal speciation is theoretically possible, it is difficult to document without further research. in this study, we integrated standard cytogenetic techniques and fish  mapping of major ribosomal rna  and h <dig> histone genes to study among- and within-species variability in the karyotypes of three cryptic leptidea species . we also determined the sex chromosome constitution using genomic in situ hybridization  and examined molecular differentiation of the sex chromosomes through comparative genomic hybridization . cytogenetic characteristics were compared with the aim of understanding karyotype and sex chromosome evolution in leptidea butterflies.

RESULTS
molecular identification of leptidea specimens
morphometric analysis of genitalia allowed us to identify only two groups, l. sinapis and the group consisting of l. reali and l. juvernica, whose genitalia cannot be reliably distinguished  <cit> . phylogenetic analyses based on two dna markers, the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit  <dig>  gene and the nuclear internal transcribed spacer  <dig>  sequence, revealed three supported major clades corresponding to l. juvernica, l. sinapis and l. reali . relationships among these clades coincide with previous results  <cit>  with l. juvernica being sister to the species pair l. sinapis and l. reali.fig.  <dig> neighbor-joining tree of mitochondrial coi haplotypes of l. sinapis , l. reali  and l. juvernica . specimens sequenced and analysed in this study are indicated by an asterisk and were combined with representatives of all available haplotypes of l. sinapis, l. reali and l. juvernica identified in a previous study  <cit> . leptidea amurensis, l. lactea, l. morsei and l. duponcheli were used as outgroup. for the origin of all specimens and genbank accession numbers, see additional file 5: table s <dig>  the scale represents  <dig>  substitutions per site. bootstrap supports  are shown next to the recovered nodes. representative male specimens and genitalia  are shown



karyotype differences in chromosome number and structure
chromosome numbers of all three leptidea species were counted from mitotic metaphase complements prepared from wing imaginal discs of the last instar larvae and stained by means of fish with n telomeric probes  to facilitate identification of individual chromosome elements. in each leptidea species, several tens of mitotic metaphases were analysed in the progeny of individual females.

based on repeated counts we found that chromosome numbers differ considerably in all three species studied. moreover, we observed differences in the number of chromosomes even among the offspring of individual females. we established that, in the population studied, the chromosome number is not fixed and ranges from 2n =  <dig> to  <dig> in l. juvernica and 2n =  <dig> to  <dig> in l. sinapis  to 2n =  <dig> to  <dig> in l. reali . mitotic complements of l. juvernica and l. sinapis also displayed a higher variability in chromosome size, having mostly middle- or small-sized chromosomes  or a mixture of large- and small-sized chromosomes , while in l. reali we observed larger chromosomes of a similar size .fig.  <dig> karyotype analysis of mitotic and meiotic chromosomes of leptidea species by fish with the n telomeric probe. hybridization signals of the cy3-dutp-labelled telomeric probe  indicate chromosome ends in . chromosomes were counterstained with dapi . white arrows indicate chromosome multivalents and asterisks show heterochromatic blocks. a mitotic metaphase of l. juvernica female with numerous middle- or small-sized chromosomes . b mitotic metaphase of l. reali female with large chromosomes of a similar size . c meiotic metaphase i of l. juvernica male showing several chromosome multivalents. d meiotic pachytene complement of l. juvernica female showing several chromosome multivalents and numerous blocks of dapi-highlighted heterochromatin. scale bars = 10 μm;  and  have the same scale

fig.  <dig> localization of rdna clusters in spread chromosome preparations of three leptidea species by fish with 18s rdna probe. chromosomes were counterstained with dapi . arrows show hybridization signals of the 18s rdna probe ; asterisks indicate dapi-positive blocks of heterochromatin. a mitotic metaphase of l. juvernica male ; the inset in the upper right corner shows the pachytene nor-bivalent with a large interstitial rdna cluster. b mitotic metaphase of l. reali female ; the inset in the upper right corner shows the pachytene nor-bivalent with a large terminal rdna cluster. c male mitotic metaphase  with a typical hybridization pattern found in the offspring of one l. sinapis female. figures  show a variable pattern in the offspring of another l. sinapis female:  mitotic metaphase of male offspring ;  hybridization signals on pachytene chromosomes of the same male offspring ;  mitotic metaphase of female offspring ;  hybridization signals on pachytene chromosomes of the same female offspring . scale bar = 10 μm



in male meiotic metaphase i  and pachytene complements of all studied species we observed complex chromosomal rearrangements  and conspicuous heterochromatin blocks highlighted with dapi . however, in female pachytene complements these dapi-positive blocks did not allow the identification of a sex chromosome bivalent according to the w chromosome, which is usually the only largely heterochromatic element present in lepidopteran karyotypes  <cit> .

chromosomal location of major rdna
fish with the biotin-labelled 18s ribosomal dna  probe combined with the digoxigenin-labelled n telomeric probe did not reveal any difference in the number of major rdna clusters in offspring of three l. juvernica and three l. reali females. in both species, the rdna probe mapped to two mitotic metaphase chromosomes of a similar size  and to a single bivalent in the pachytene stage . this clearly indicates the presence of a single pair of chromosomes, each carrying a cluster of rrna genes forming a nucleolar organizer region . however, we found a substantial interspecific difference in the location of rdna. while the nor-bivalent in pachytene nuclei of l. juvernica showed the cluster of rrna genes associated with a large interstitial block of dapi-positive heterochromatin , rdna occupied a large terminal segment of the nor-bivalent in l. reali. in the latter species, rdna was not associated with heterochromatin, which was observed at the opposite end of the nor-bivalent .

in l. sinapis, we found intraspecific variability in the number and position of rdna clusters both within and among the offspring of individual females . in mitotic metaphase complements from the offspring of one female the 18s rdna probe localized four rdna sites at the ends of four middle-sized chromosomes , thus indicating two pairs of nor-chromosomes. however, in mitotic metaphases from the offspring of another female we found either two terminal and one interstitial signal  or three terminal hybridization signals . the difference among siblings was confirmed in pachytene nuclei where we observed two hybridization signals in a trivalent and one in an element of a bivalent that was heterozygous for rdna  or a pair of signals in a small bivalent and one signal in a larger element of another bivalent , respectively.

chromosomal location of h <dig> histone genes
fish with the h <dig> histone probe combined with tel-fish showed constant results only in l. reali. in all examined larvae from progenies of three different females we found one interstitial cluster of h <dig> histone genes in a large pachytene bivalent and two clusters in mitotic metaphase complements . in the pachytene bivalent, the h <dig> cluster was localized next to a small block of dapi-positive heterochromatin .fig.  <dig> localization of h <dig> histone gene clusters in spread chromosome preparations of three leptidea species by fish with h <dig> gene probe. chromosomes were counterstained with dapi . arrows indicate hybridization signals of the h <dig> probe ; asterisks show dapi-positive blocks of heterochromatin. a mitotic metaphase of l. reali female; the inset in the upper right corner shows the pachytene h <dig> cluster-carrying bivalent. figures  show intraspecific variability in the location of h <dig> histone gene clusters in l. sinapis:  mitotic metaphase of male larva; the inset shows the pachytene bivalent carrying a cluster of h <dig> genes;  mitotic metaphase of another male from the same offspring; the inset shows the pachytene bivalent carrying a cluster of h <dig> genes;  pachytene trivalent observed in the female offspring of another female ;  female mitotic metaphase of the same individual. figures  show intraspecific variability in the location of h <dig> histone gene clusters in l. juvernica:  male mitotic metaphase with three hybridization signals, observed in the vast majority of l. juvernica larvae;  pachytene tetravalent of the same individual ;  mitotic metaphase with four hybridization signals found in one male offspring of another female;  pachytene tetravalent with three hybridization signals  and bivalent with the fourth hybridization signal located at the end of one homologue. scale bars = 10 μm; except for  all images have the same scale



in l. sinapis and l. juvernica, we observed intraspecific variability in the number and location of h <dig> histone gene clusters both within and among offspring of individual females . in some offspring of one l. sinapis female we observed an interstitial cluster of h <dig> histone genes in a long pachytene bivalent  corresponding to two hybridization signals in a pair of mitotic chromosomes  like in l. reali. however, in other offspring of the same female, a single h <dig> histone gene array mapped to a subterminal region of a short pachytene bivalent , corresponding to terminal hybridization signals in a pair of small mitotic chromosomes . in the offspring of another l. sinapis female, hybridization signals positioned two h <dig> gene clusters to a pachytene trivalent, one terminal in a short chromosome and the other interstitial in a long chromosome . in accordance with this hybridization pattern, the h <dig> probe identified two mitotic chromosomes, one small and one large . in pachytene nuclei of l. juvernica, the h <dig> probe hybridized most often to a tetravalent. we found three clusters of hybridization signals, one terminal in a short element and two interstitial in two long elements of the tetravalent . the hybridization pattern was confirmed in mitotic nuclei, where the probe mapped h <dig> gene arrays to the end of a small chromosome and to the middle of two larger chromosomes . the number and location of h <dig> gene clusters was characteristic for the offspring of four l. juvernica females. however, in the offspring of another female we found an additional  h <dig> gene cluster located at the end of one element of a pachytene bivalent , corresponding to a total number of four hybridization signals in mitotic nuclei .

sex chromosome constitution
we first examined the presence or absence of female specific sex chromatin in polyploid somatic nuclei of all three leptidea species. the sex chromatin consists of multiple copies of the w chromosome, which usually form one conspicuous heterochromatin body in somatic interphase nuclei of lepidopteran females  <cit> . in the majority of female larvae of all three species, we observed one larger, more intensely stained heterochromatin body and two tiny indistinct bodies . yet the larger body was much smaller in comparison to the sex chromatin typically observed in females of other lepidopteran species . in other females we found a variable number of tiny heterochromatin bodies ranging from none to four. similar findings were made in branched nuclei of adult females with a higher level of ploidy . in the majority of leptidea males, no sex chromatin was observed in polyploid cells . however, in a few male specimens we found a tiny heterochromatin body of uncertain origin . the small size and fragmentation of sex chromatin in leptidea females indicate the presence of interchromosomal rearrangements involving the w chromosome .

to identify the w chromosome we examined spread preparations of pachytene oocytes using a combination of gish and tel-fish. while gish differentiated the w chromosome thread in female pachytene nuclei, the telomeric probe helped us to determine chromosomal ends. the female-derived genomic probe also hybridized to heterochromatin blocks on autosomes, which made the identification of the w chromosome more difficult in pachytene nuclei and impossible in mitotic metaphases. nevertheless, the analysis revealed multiple sex chromosomes in all three leptidea species with 3–4 w and 3– <dig> z chromosomes . in l. juvernica, we observed a w1w2w3z1z2z3z <dig> sex chromosome constitution . while the female genomic dna  probe strongly bound to two w chromosomes, the third one was highlighted only partially . moreover, two of the three w chromosomes were partially differentiated by dapi-positive heterochromatin . we found only a small heterochromatin block at the very end of the third w chromosome . in l. sinapis, we found a w1w2w3z1z2z <dig> sex chromosome system  with an intensely stained block of heterochromatin on one of the w chromosomes . we also found a small heterochromatin block at the very end of the smallest w chromosome  while the third w chromosome was discernible only due to hybridization signals of the female gdna probe . in the third species, l. reali, the sex chromosome constitution was w1w2w3w4z1z2z3z <dig> . except for the smallest w, the w chromosomes were highlighted with the female gdna probe , but the staining pattern of dapi was indistinctive with only few small heterochromatin blocks of higher intensity .fig.  <dig> genomic in situ hybridization  in pachytene oocytes of leptidea juvernica , l. sinapis  and l. reali . female-derived genomic probes were labelled with fluorescein-12-dutp  and chromosomes were counterstained with dapi . figures ,  and  show detailed analyses of sex chromosome multivalents w1-nz1-n:  merged images of female genomic probes and dapi staining;  dapi images; arrows indicate dapi-positive w-chromosome segments and heterochromatic blocks at the end of the w chromosomes;  hybridization pattern of the female genomic probes; the asterisk indicates an undifferentiated segment of one of the w chromosomes;  schematic drawings of the sex chromosome multivalents. scale bar = 10 μm



the level of molecular differentiation of the w and z chromosomes was examined using cgh. in pachytene oocytes of the three leptidea species, the wz multivalent was discernible from autosomes due to stronger binding of both female- and male-derived probes to the w chromosomes . a detailed analysis of the wz multivalent at the pachytene stage of l. juvernica revealed a similar labelling pattern of both probes . in l. sinapis, the w chromosomes were decorated with strong but scattered hybridization signals of both genomic probes  with a slight preference for the female probe . the highest level of molecular differentiation of the w and z chromosomes was observed in l. reali , where three out of four w chromosomes were preferentially labelled by the female-derived probe . however, the smallest w chromosome was almost indistinguishable from the z chromosome . hybridization signals of the male-derived genomic probe were considerably weaker, except for a few intense heterochromatin blocks located on one w chromosome .fig.  <dig> comparative genomic hybridization  in pachytene oocytes of leptidea juvernica , l. sinapis  and l. reali . female-derived genomic probes were labelled with fluorescein-12-dutp , male-derived genomic probes were labelled with cy3-dutp  and chromosomes were counterstained with dapi . figures ,  and  show detailed analyses of sex chromosome multivalents w1-nz1-n:  merged images of both genomic probes and dapi staining;  dapi images;  female genomic probes; arrows indicate w-chromosome segments with female-specific hybridization pattern;  male genomic probes;  schematic drawings of the sex chromosome multivalents. scale bars = 10 μm



discussion
we performed a detailed karyotype analysis of three cryptic leptidea species  by means of standard and molecular cytogenetic techniques. previous studies showed both inter- and intraspecific variation in chromosome numbers in all three studied species. however, the results were based on chromosome counts from squash preparations of metaphase i spermatocytes  <cit> , which did not allow the analysis of complex meiotic figures such as multivalents. using fish with n telomeric probes, we confirmed the presence of numerous multivalents in female pachytene nuclei as well as in male pachytene and metaphase i complements in all three species. detailed analysis of male and female mitotic metaphases prepared from wing imaginal discs allowed us to determine more accurately the range of diploid chromosome numbers that were 2n = 51– <dig> in l. reali , 2n = 69– <dig> in l. sinapis and 2n = 85– <dig> in l. juvernica . these numbers are broadly in line with previous findings  <cit> . nevertheless, we further extended the range of chromosome numbers observed in l. juvernica and l. reali and provided data from new localities for l. juvernica and l. sinapis.

besides inter- and intraspecific karyotype variability, the analysis of mitotic chromosomes allowed us to identify differences in chromosome numbers even within offspring of individual females of all three species. although such intra-population variability could be caused by the presence of supernumerary chromosomes, i.e. b-chromosomes, this scenario was deemed unlikely in the case of leptidea species  <cit> . yet, we cannot totally exclude the involvement of b-chromosomes, especially as they were observed in related white butterflies from the family pieridae  <cit> . in wild silkworms , chromosomal polymorphism among geographical populations/subspecies was ascribed to repeated autosome-sex chromosome fusions resulting in neo-sex chromosomes and reduced chromosome numbers  <cit> . similar intraspecific variation resulting in reduced chromosome numbers was also reported in grasshoppers  and mammals , mainly as a result of robertsonian translocations. however, karyotype variation observed in the three leptidea species surpasses previous reports. our findings, namely the relatively low number of large chromosomes in l. reali, variability in chromosome size in the other two species and the occurrence of multivalents in meiotic nuclei of all three species, suggest that the leptidea karyotypes are differentiated by multiple chromosome fusions and fissions. in addition, our preliminary data showing a similar size of interphase nuclei in the leptidea species studied  suggest that their karyotypes did not differentiate through polyploidy. uneven chromosome segregation of multivalents during meiotic division is thus the most plausible explanation for the intraspecific and intra-population karyotype variations.

the karyotypes of leptidea species also differed in the number and location of two cytogenetic markers used in this study, clusters of rrna genes  and h <dig> histone genes. in l. reali, the species with the lowest chromosome number, all larvae showed consistent results with a single terminal rdna cluster and an interstitial cluster of h <dig> genes per haploid genome. the highest variability in the number and position of both cytogenetic markers was observed within and among the offspring of individual l. sinapis females. in l. juvernica, the number and location of h <dig> histone genes differed in the progeny of individual females, while one rdna cluster was always located in the middle of one pachytene bivalent. except for l. reali, both cytogenetic markers often marked multivalents. interspecific differences as well as intrapopulation variability in rdna distribution in l. sinapis are in agreement with the hypothesis on dynamic evolution of genes for major rnas in lepidoptera  <cit> . however, the differences in the number and location of h <dig> histone genes in l. sinapis and especially l. juvernica are rather surprising, since this marker shows a highly conserved pattern in the lepidopteran family tortricidae  <cit>  and other insect groups, such as the acrididae grasshoppers  <cit>  and scarabaeinae beetles  <cit> . our results thus support the previously reported intraspecific variability in the karyotype of l. sinapis  <cit>  and highlight the ongoing explosive karyotype evolution in all three leptidea species.

to further explore leptidea karyotypes and to identify their sex chromosomes we performed gish combined with tel-fish. in pachytene nuclei of lepidopteran females, the wz bivalent is usually easily discernible with gish by deep staining of the w chromosome thread with the fluorescently labelled female gdna probe  <cit> . in all three leptidea species, the analysis revealed unique sex chromosome systems with the following constitutions: w1w2w3z1z2z3z <dig> in l. juvernica, w1w2w3z1z2z <dig> in l. sinapis and w1w2w3w4z1z2z3z <dig> in l. reali. the constitution seemed to be stable in the progenies of individual females. multiple sex chromosome systems have been documented in mammals  <cit> , fish  <cit>  and spiders  <cit> . however, the majority of moths and butterflies show a wz/zz sex chromosome system. multiple sex chromosomes have so far been found only in seven genera and only in two different constitutions, either with w1w2z or wz1z <dig> trivalents in females  <cit> . thus, the sex chromosome constitutions observed in leptidea stand out for its complexity and the number of chromosomes involved in the multivalent in meiosis. in addition, this is the first case of multiple sex chromosomes in butterflies . besides sex chromosomes, the gdna probes also highlighted heterochromatin blocks abundantly present in the karyotypes of all three studied species. in lepidoptera, heterochromatin is usually confined to the nor containing rdna repeats  <cit>  and to the w chromosome  <cit> . so far, similar heterochromatin blocks have been found only in subtelomeric regions of the white butterfly pieris brassicae   <cit>  and on chromosome  <dig> of bombyx mori  <cit> . in leptidea, however, heterochromatin was evenly distributed throughout the whole genome. such distribution suggests the preponderance of tandemly arranged repetitive sequences in leptidea genomes in comparison with other lepidopteran species, which could ultimately contribute to the remarkable karyotype diversity in this group.

in addition to the different sex chromosome constitution, the three leptidea species also differed in their overall genomic hybridization pattern. in l. sinapis and l. juvernica, all w chromosomes were at least partially differentiated by strong binding of fluorescently labelled gdna probes with gish and cgh, indicating the accumulation of repetitive sequences and transposable elements in the w chromosomes . in l. reali, one of the w chromosomes was not highlighted by any gdna probe. this w chromosome probably represents an evolutionarily young element, which did not have sufficient time to differentiate. individual z chromosomes involved in multivalents thus probably correspond to the so-called evolutionary strata, which were also reported in mammals, birds and plants . moreover, similar hybridization patterns of male and female genomic probes in cgh experiments suggest a predominance of common repetitive sequences and transposons and a low amount of w-specific sequences on the w chromosomes of l. sinapis and l. juvernica. on the contrary, the preferential binding of the female-derived genomic probe to three of the four w chromosomes in l. reali suggest a relatively high proportion of w-specific sequences.

observed differences in chromosome numbers and location of the major rdna and h <dig> histone gene clusters as well as the existence of complex sex chromosome systems corroborate the role of chromosomal rearrangements in the speciation of the closely related leptidea species examined in this study. it has been shown that chromosomal rearrangements have a potential to limit gene flow and thus facilitate the development and maintenance of reproductive isolation by means of suppressed recombination . the majority of studies on the effects of chromosome fusion and fission on speciation have been done in organisms with monocentric chromosomes that exhibit robertsonian translocations, i.e. centric fusions . these studies confirmed the role of chromosomal fusions in reducing the frequency of recombination. the variation in chromosome size and number is explained as a result of frequent fusion and fission events also in taxa with holokinetic chromosomes  <cit> , in which kinetochores are distributed along most of the poleward facing chromosome surface  <cit> . in this case, fusion is likely to behave as a stable centric fusion and fission leads to viable chromosomal fragments that are normally inherited during meiosis  <cit> . a recent study stressed the effect of chromosome fusion on the recombination rate in holokinetics  <cit> . moreover, studies in sedges  proved that fusion and fission of holokinetic chromosomes also have the potential to restrict gene flow and lead to divergence and eventually speciation  <cit> .

the complex sex chromosome constitution revealed in this study is likely another factor involved in the speciation of leptidea butterflies. it has been proposed that the z sex chromosome could play a disproportionately larger role in adaptive evolution compared to autosomes . this so-called ‘large-z effect’ was reported in both birds  and lepidoptera .

CONCLUSIONS
to conclude, we confirmed significant differences in the number and structure of chromosomes within and among closely related wood white butterflies. we showed that the distribution of cytogenetic markers differs remarkably even in the offspring of individual females, probably due to irregular segregation of multivalents in meiosis. our results suggest rapid karyotype evolution in the examined leptidea species and stress the role of chromosomal rearrangements, especially multiple chromosome fusions and fissions, in their speciation. remarkably, all three leptidea species have complex sex chromosome systems with 3–4 w and 3– <dig> z chromosomes. such sex chromosome constitutions are unique among lepidoptera and should be counted as an additional factor potentially contributing to the speciation process in leptidea butterflies. taken together, these findings add to accumulating evidence on the important role of chromosomal rearrangements in speciation and also point to the relevance of multiple sex chromosomes in species divergence and the formation of reproductive barriers.

