BACKGROUND
with the availability of new and more powerful next generation sequencing technologies, massive amounts of molecular data can be generated from individual or pooled genomic dna samples. discovery and characterization of variants within and among individuals allows definition of the genetic dissimilarities that may underlie phenotypic variation. genome resequencing data from within-population pooled samples can be effectively used to characterize genetic variation within and between populations, and to accurately estimate allele frequencies  <cit> . there are multiple other advantages to pooling samples to generate data, including cost-effectiveness and accuracy  <cit> . pooled whole genome resequencing has been used to conduct association studies with phenotypes of interest and to identify signatures of selection  <cit> . genome resequencing data can also be used to evaluate evolutionary changes and define the phylogenetic relationships between divergent members of a species  <cit> .

since domestication, the selection for specific traits and directed evolution in livestock has led to the creation of different breeds or a “domestication phenotype” within a species  <cit> . the chicken breeds used to establish the experimental lines analyzed in the present study represent diverse selection histories. the fayoumi and leghorn breeds differ in many morphological features and phenotypes, and commercial relevance. under the “domestic phenotype” concept, the leghorn represents a specialized breed driven by artificial selection for improved egg production traits. the leghorn breed is native to italy and was selected for reproduction traits as early as the roman empire  <cit> . the fayoumi breed is native to egypt, where it was prized for its robustness in a harsh environment. the breed was imported to the usa because of it’s reported resistance to viral disease  <cit> . the lines used in this study differ in their response to marek’s disease  virus, in that fayoumis had significantly fewer tumors and clinical signs of md  <cit>  than leghorns. in addition, fayoumi chickens had lower mortality and lesion scores than leghorns after infection with eimeria tenella, a parasite that causes coccidosis  <cit> . for the purpose of the current study, the lines were characterized by the phenotype designation of “immune function based” traits for fayoumi and “reproduction based” traits for leghorn  <cit> . these traits are relative descriptors of the major phenotypes that contrast between the two lines, and reflect the original breeds’ known history of natural and artificial selection. these “breed phenotypes” serve as the anchor to inform how we interpret the results from variants analyzed in the fayoumi and leghorn populations. these analyses focus on fixed unique, line-specific alleles that are different than the red jungle fowl reference sequence. the objective of our study was to analyze variants that define the genomic architecture and line-specific differences of highly inbred leghorn and fayoumi chicken lines.

RESULTS
variant discovery
the fayoumi and leghorn pooled sequence data were each compared against the red jungle fowl  reference genome  to identify single nucleotide variants  and insertion/deletions  present in these populations . analysis versus the rjf revealed a total of about  <dig> million variants each for the fayoumi and leghorn lines. there were  <dig> , <dig> fayoumi and  <dig> , <dig> leghorn variants that were present in dbsnp, whereas  <dig> , <dig> fayoumi and  <dig> , <dig> leghorn variants were previously uncharacterized . the overall genome homozygosity percent for both inbred lines was approximately  <dig>  %. these extremely low levels of within-line variation support our expectation that most alleles would be fixed, given the stringent and long inbreeding of these two populations.table  <dig> variants discovered by breed type


total reads computed using gatk depthofcoverage. assembly coverage and sequence coverage calculated using samtools and gatk depthofcoverage. all other data calculated using snpeff. all data is pre-filter. afayoumi vs. leghorn only compared using snv data; indels were excluded along with chromosomes z and w. bts/tv is the ratio of transitions/transversions within each population




table  <dig> shows the variants for each line by variant type  and bird genotype . compared by type, the total number of variants within each population is very similar. however, fayoumis had more than twice the number of heterozygous variants than did leghorns. the effects of the variant on the populations are shown in table  <dig>  for both breeds, most of the variant’s effects were either intronic or intergenic . over 70 % of variants are silent or nonsense mutations across the genome of the fayoumi and leghorn populations, and both populations had similar missense/silent ratios . for the effects by type or functional consequence, there were significantly  more variants annotated as downstream, upstream, start_gained, and frame_shifts in leghorns than fayoumis.table  <dig> comparison of variant changes for each line

fayoumi vs. rjfb
 insc
 deld
fayoumi vs. leghorn: referencea
fayoumi and leghorn vs. rjf and fayoumi vs. the leghornized reference genome. afayoumi vs. the leghornized reference genome analysis done on snvs only


b
rjf red jungle fowl, c
ins insertion variants, d
del deletion variants


table shows variant annotations and counts for fayoumi and leghorn populations vs. rjf by effect type. the “effect type” is the sequence ontology meaning for example that the variant hits an intron or causes a frameshift. a pearson’s chi-square goodness-of-fit test was used for comparison 


the missense/silent ratio:  <dig>  for fayoumi and  <dig>  for leghorn populations respectively




there was no difference in the number of variants with exon effects, but there was a difference in those in intergenic regions , with more in leghorn than in fayoumi. there was also a significant  difference in the number of variants that had an effect either upstream or downstream of their location , with more in leghorn than in fayoumi.

snv validation
one hundred snvs were selected for wet-lab validation to ascertain the ability of the bioinformatics methods and the pooled-line resequencing data to correctly identify point mutations and provide allele frequency information. of these  <dig> snvs,  <dig> were specific to the fayoumi population,  <dig> were specific to leghorn, and  <dig> were in common between the two populations. sixty-one assays were usable for validation . of the  <dig> usable assays for validation of the presence of an snv, over half  showed evidence of duplication based on analysis of the kbiosciences kompetitive allele specific pcr genotyping system  klusterkaller software output  <cit> . duplication was also indicated by the number of reads that covered the snvs compared to the mean depth of coverage, with both populations having spikes in these regions in the mean number of reads mapped to a snv position . quantifying the allele frequencies of the variants showing duplication may have been complicated by the young age of the duplications, because more recent duplications would still be similar to each other. the variants in duplications tended to have with-in population allele frequencies that were close to 50/ <dig> and would often appear as all heterozygous calls in both the study and control populations. the primers designed for the variant and reference base may have amplified different binding sites, preferentially revealing segmental duplications or areas with high sequence homology. this phenomenon is supported by the presence of clusters that fall between homozygous and heterozygous clusters suggesting a 3: <dig> allele ratio . additionally, sequencing and mapping errors can reduce accuracy of variant calling. it is improbable that the snvs validated as heterozygous-only calls that also showed evidence of duplications were not actually duplications, but rather every bird was truly heterozygous for that allele. the validation results show more segregation within the inbred fayoumis, which agrees with the discovery software but may be an artifact of number of assays that passed validation. the results also suggest that the software programs used for discovery and annotation can be used to discover valid snvs, but will also identify duplications within the populations. the results from the validation were used to inform the use of a second level of strict filtering parameters applied to the variant discovery data. these parameters were used to support the results from the gene ontologies uncovered using the exploratory filtered data.table  <dig> classification of snvs used for validation

table shows the results of wet-lab validation of  <dig> uncharacterized snvs. the data from validation was used to inform the additional filtering steps used in downstream analysis  of the within-line variation




within-line variation
the lines used in this study have not undergone genetic selection since their establishment in  <dig>  with the exception of selection for adequate reproduction in both lines. the fixed or segregating variation should represent a combination of natural selection, genetic drift, and mutation in the fayoumi and leghorn lines. to categorize the potential impact of variations, the annotation program groups the functional impacts of variants as high, moderate, low and modifier. these impact categories were analyzed for fixed, unique  variants from either fayoumi or leghorn using gene ontology enrichment analysis. fixed unique variants for each line are assumed to represent either the alleles that were selected during domestication, breed selection, or those fixed during the over 60-year process of inbreeding. there were no statistically over-represented go terms in the analysis of the high and low impact variants. however, variants that were classified as moderate impact were statistically associated with go terms . some of these variants are shared but with differences between breeds as shown in the f
st analysis.table  <dig> overrepresented gene ontology terms for moderate impactb, line-specific variants in fayoumi and leghorn lines

p-valuea

fn3

ptpc
p-valuea
over-represented go terms for moderate impact variants  and unique for the inbred fayoumi and leghorn lines. abenjamini-hochberg corrected p-value cut-off α =  <dig> .
bmoderate impact variants: non_synonymous_coding, codon_change, codon_insertion, codon_change_plus_codon_insertion, codon_deletion, codon_change_plus_codon_deletion, utr_5_deleted, utr_3_deleted




within-line variation: fayoumi
for fayoumi, whose breed phenotype was considered to be immune-related, the go terms fibronectin type iii , and tyrosine-protein phosphatase  <dig>  were statistically significant . fibronectin type iii is a multidomain glycoprotein found in connective tissue and binds actin and dna along with other substances thereby aiding defense against pathologies. fibronectins enhance wound closure, cell adhesion, and blood coagulation  <cit> . the ubiquitously expressed domain has also been shown to involved in cytokine signaling and may play a role in the efficiency of the fayoumi innate immune system  <cit> .table  <dig> gene ontology terms from david for variant regions with greatest difference 


ligand-gated channel activity
functional categories from david representing the genes that had f
st value’s of  <dig>  go terms from david based on f
st values of  <dig> for comparison of variant position between populations. benjamini corrected p-value cut-off α =  <dig> 





the expression of genes related to cell adhesion signaling has been recently shown to play a role in viral immune responses  <cit> . fibronectins are reported as being “subject to high selective pressure”  <cit> , which is in agreement with their apparent fixation in the current study. genes annotated to the go term fn <dig> included the leptin receptor , a member of the cytokine receptor superfamily, adipocytokine, and jak-stat signaling pathways that promote inflammatory responses to pathogens, as well as angiogenesis and cellular repair processes. leptin receptor expression can also affect follicle formation in breeder hens  <cit> . after strict filtering of the variants based on the information from the validation and the exploratory run to collect information on genomic diversity, the variations associated with fibronectin type iii still remained statistically significant . however ptpc disappeared and was replaced with statistically significant go terms for cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions and natural killer cell . over-enriched terms from each analysis point to possible connections between breed-specific variants and their breed phenotypes.

the prolactin receptor  was represented in the fayoumi gene list under the go term fn <dig>  the prolactin receptor has a role in egg production in chickens  <cit>  and is also a member of the cytokine signaling superfamily, giving it some influence on immune functions  <cit> . the genes lepr and prlr both were present in the statistically significant go term lists based on the exploratory and strict variant filter lists. both genes showed a decrease in the number of variants associated with all functional impacts  based on filtering, but still remain associated to the over-enriched fn <dig> term.

within-line variation: leghorn
within-population analysis of the fixed and unique leghorn variants different from the rjf reference, revealed go terms related to reproductive phenotypes. gene set enrichment analysis of the moderate impact variants gave significant results  for the go terms of cell division, calcium ion binding, phospholipid activity and extracellular matrix annotations , all processes involved in egg production  <cit> . it is possible that variants in these gene clusters are tolerated and may represent sets of diversification/improvement genes. genes of interest within the extracellular matrix cluster include timp, metallopeptidase inhibitor  <dig> , an inhibitor of metalloproteineases that degrades the extracellular matrix and suppresses endothelial cell proliferation. highly conserved in multiple species, timp <dig> plays a role in chicken eggshell production and embryogenesis  <cit> . calcium ion binding and metal ion binding  are related to reproductive phenotypes for the leghorn as the genes within these categories are involved in mineral and ion transport in the chicken uterus  <cit> . another gene of interest involved in calcium ion binding is the gene epidermal growth factor  which affects multiple pathways including extracellular growth and differentiation, focal adhesion, and mapk signaling pathways  <cit> . along with calcium ion binding, there are also genes in the gene list that function as ion transporters and in the case of the aminophospholipids help form bilayers  <cit> .

there are many variants driving overlapping functions and genes between lines that appear as over-enriched. one such gene is prlr, which is essential for egg production and has impacts on immunological functions. the uniqueness in the number of variants, position, and effects suggests that the two lines evolved different uses for this gene. it is unknown if variants for genes grouped into functional classes such as calcium binding and phospholipid-translocating atpase activity for leghorn, or fn <dig> for fayoumi, actually convey an advantage or disadvantage to egg production or disease resistance. over time, the natural selection for survivability and reproduction may have contributed to differences or similarities in the genetic architecture of reproduction traits, leading to convergent phenotypes.

strict filtering of the variants for the leghorn  showed that calcium ion binding and extracellular matrix remained statistically significant but the gene timp <dig> associated with extracellular matrix is lost but was replaced by the go term metallopeptidase activity. the strict filtered gene list also picked up information on cadherins, glycerophospholipids, and proteoglycans shown to be involved in eggshell matrix, ca2+ mediated cell-cell adhesion, and egg lipid matrix generation during reproduction in hens  <cit> . additionally the genes timp <dig> and egf showed a decrease in the number of variants associated with all functional impacts, with the gene timp <dig> disappearing completely from the list  based on filtering.

between-line variation
the fayoumi and leghorn pooled sequence data were compared against the rjf reference to call possible snvs and indels present in the populations. of these variants,  <dig> , <dig>  have been previously deposited in dbsnp at the time of analysis, generating  <dig> , <dig>  previously uncharacterized variants called within the fayoumi experimental line. similar results were obtained in the analysis of the leghorn resequencing data vs. rjf reference assembly. a total of  <dig> , <dig> variants were discovered of which  <dig> , <dig>  were previously uncharacterized. we also examined the number of variants in each population using snpeff categories of “effects by type” and “effects by region”. a subset of  <dig> , <dig> variants was unique to fayoumi and  <dig> , <dig> unique to leghorn after removal of variants common to both groups.

to help characterize the differences and similarities between the inbred populations of fayoumi and leghorn chickens, a fixation index  analysis was conducted using the program popoolation <dig>  <cit> , which employs the karlsson f
st method  <cit> . the f
st value between the populations was calculated for each gene represented in the variant call file output based on the allele frequencies at every base for each gene. the f
st analysis generated a list of genes with f
st values of  <dig> in which the structure of the two lines showed the most differentiation. further analysis, using david, of the genes from this analysis indicated that the two lines mainly differed in nucleoside and nucleotide binding, catalytic activity, and atp usage . the david  output was further processed in revigo  to identify additional unique over-represented go terms. gene ontology annotations emerged for population-level differences in the variants that each breed may use to drive various processes. annotations for immune system processes, response to stimulus, and metabolic processes  were over-represented terms that emerged from the go analysis of the f
stoutput. the biological processes represented by ontology terms such as immune system process are consistent with the historical breed phenotype for the fayoumi and may be related to the reported phenotypic differences in pathogen resistance between the breeds  <cit> . other over-represented ontology terms identified by the f
st and go analyses included: biological adhesion, developmental process, and cellular protein modification process . it is possible that these terms may be associated with the leghorn breed’s historical breed phenotype of selection for egg production  <cit> . the terms highlighted by the go analysis are all facets of metabolic processes and indicate that, when each inbred population is characterized by the traits of immune response and reproductive/production ability, the two populations share limited genetic similarity based on these go annotations. the amount of overlap between the two lines was determined by examination of the variants that were unique or common, and those that were fixed or segregating, for each population . the variants “common” to the two lines were based on the same position and allele frequency of the variant in that position.table  <dig> gene ontology terms from revigo for variant regions with greatest difference 

revigo visualization showing the most unique go terms represented by the f
st list of genes for the comparison of the population structures of the fayoumi and leghorn. the list reveals terms such as immune system processes and sexual reproduction that represent the traits for which each breed is characterized



counts by region are based on snvs only. aalternate reference genome




the shared segregating alleles between fayoumi and leghorn indicates that variable changes in these genes may have fewer consequences on gene functions or that variability within these genes is necessary at this position and resists fixation to aid proper genomic integrity in chickens. there are also the shared fixed variants in which the position of the variant is fixed for the same alternative variant in both populations. the fixed variants most likely represent alleles present at the time of domestication  <cit> . in contrast to the “common” overlapping variants, there are snvs and indels that are unique to fayoumi or leghorn, but share the same genome base pair position. the difference in the called variants and their effects on the gene function in both breeds at similar positions may indicate that these alleles became fixed by positive selection after domestication and can be considered alleles in diversification or improvement genes. the grouping of genes identified by variants in the categories of fixed and unique  was used as our model to examine the within line variations of each inbred population of chicken to characterize genetic variation.

fayoumi vs. leghorn: alternate reference
to facilitate between-line analysis of variants and reduce bias related to choice of the reference sequence, the nucleotides in the rjf reference genome were replaced with the discovered leghorn variants to create an alternate genome assembly. the fayoumi was then realigned to this new reference for variant analysis. when compared for snvs against the leghorn, the fayoumi displayed a total of  <dig> , <dig> differences. of these differences,  <dig>  had high and  <dig>  had moderate impacts, numbers higher than the  <dig>  high and  <dig>  moderate impact variants called in fayoumi against the rjf sequence. in this comparison to the leghorn, the fayoumi had less 5’utr, and downstream annotated variants than were called against the rjf sequence . to further elucidate differences between the lines, a go analysis was done on the genes that contained exon variants that were fixed in the fayoumi. many of the moderate impact variants that were called for exon effects  were located in micro-rnas and small nuclear rnas e.g. gga-mir- <dig> and gga-mir- <dig>  which are related to chicken gastrulation and embryogenesis  <cit>  . the limited overlap between reproduction and immune related functions indicate a breed difference between fayoumi and leghorn in production/reproduction genotypes. a comparison of variant frequency across each chromosome of the fayoumi genome when aligned against the leghornized reference showed large areas of homology between the two lines for most chromosomes. on chromosome  <dig> , which harbors the chicken mhc complex, the two breeds show differences in the total number of changes across the chromosome. chromosome  <dig> was the third most variable chromosome in the leghorn population with a variant every  <dig> base pairs and the fifth most variable in the fayoumi population with a variant every  <dig> base pairs. the amount of variance within each population for chromosome  <dig> was less than 1 % , despite showing differences in the number of variants within the mhc-b region . the breed variation is represented by  <dig>  snvs that differ between fayoumi and leghorn, based upon alignment . the differences in snv counts may be responsible for the disparity between the immune response of the fayoumi and leghorn or represent a higher standing genetic variation, as seen in the difference in total number of heterozygous variants, which is higher in the fayoumi.fig.  <dig> chromosome  <dig> variants/ <dig> kilobase  in fayoumi/leghorn vs. rjf and fayoumi vs. leghornized reference. shape of the graph shows the amount of variability still present on chromosome  <dig> despite high levels of homozygosity for each population vs. the reference genome and for the fayoumi vs. leghorn alternate reference. the mhc regions are highlighted to show differences in variation possibly related to the difference in pathogen resistance between the two populations. the y-axis represents variants, x-axis position, and the dashed lines show peak heights for the first  <dig> kb of the chromosome. fayoumi vs. leghorn alternate reference is based on snv comparison only




CONCLUSIONS
the study elucidated variants indicative of a genetic foundation for characteristic breed phenotypes . the low levels of within-line variation were consistent with the lines’ extreme levels of inbreeding and the high between-line variation was concordant with the lines’ diverse backgrounds. the leghorn had more fixed variants and the fayoumi more heterozygous variants, compared to the rjf reference. greater fixation in the leghorn line may be a result of stringent historical selection for a limited number of traits in this breed, where as greater genomic heterozygosity may be an advantage for disease-resistance traits in the fayoumi. for both lines, most variants were in intergenic and intronic regions, limiting their impact on the survivability of the populations. the major genetic differences between breeds by f
st and subsequent gsea were consistent with the overarching phenotype ascribed to the lines; thus, the study’s data aligned well with the breed characteristics and supported a connection of breed-predominant phenotypes with the genomic variation in the lines. additionally, the gsea results from the strict filtered data reinforced the correspondence between the breed-predominant phenotypes and the biological processes, functions, and genes that were elucidated by original gsea and go analysis. the table generated by the stricter parameters does, however, give more specific terms related to immune functions and the structural components of eggs related to the breed phenotypes. the study lays the foundation to elucidate and verify differences in function caused by the unique variants found within the populations representing the two breeds.

