BACKGROUND
phenotypic differentiation among closely related taxa along environmental gradients is well documented . for example, across species there is a negative correlation between body size and environmental temperature  and an association in mammals between precipitation and high degree of hypsodonty in species inhabiting arid and grassy regions  <cit> . however, localized phenotypes may not necessarily be observed within a species, even if populations occur across steep environmental gradients and disparate ecosystems. depending on the relative fitness trade-offs between alternative phenotypes, degree of population isolation, and the constancy and/or spatial heterogeneity of the environment  <cit> , a geographically unstructured, generalist phenotype may be expressed throughout the species’ range that is capable of thriving in a wide variety of conditions.

tropical montane ecosystems represent an ideal system to uncover the role of the environment in shaping intraspecific phenotypic variation as species experience substantial and often drastic different environmental conditions across montane ecosystems  <cit> . temperature, air pressure, solar radiation, precipitation, area, cloud cover, soil quality, and productivity change considerably with elevation  <cit> . as a consequence, tropical mountains are characterized by a wide array of habitats with a highly patchy distribution given the high topographic heterogeneity of these mountains  <cit> . such disparity in environmental conditions, together with the temporal environmental stability of tropical mountains is expected to promote specialization to local conditions  <cit> , and hence, the expression of local phenotypes. such a mechanism might promote speciation, generating the hyperdiversity observed in tropical mountains. however, other factors might counter the prevalence of local phenotypes. for example, depending on the degree of population connectivity across ecosystems and the extent of climate-induced distributional shifts associated with paleoclimatic conditions , a generalist phenotype strategy might be favored  <cit> .

here we explicitly test for the existence of local phenotypes in the soft grass mouse, akodon mollis, a tropical species with a widespread distribution that makes it ideal for examining how phenotypic variability is structured in taxa facing disparate environmental conditions that are relevant to exploring what evolutionary strategies might be used by taxa to cope with the steep environmental gradients of tropical mountains. this species ranges from approximately  <dig> to 5500 m in the andes of ecuador and northwestern peru  <cit> , across disparate habitats and steep ecological transitions such as the one between the tree-dominated andean slopes and the grassland-dominated highlands . in contrast to many tropical andean rodents that are acknowledged to be fairly specialized  <cit> , the few ecological studies on this species suggest a. mollis is a widespread and an abundant generalist with relatively limited individual dispersal capabilities relative to other small terrestrial mammals  <cit> . its diet is comprised of varying proportions of plant and insect material, like other species of the genus  <cit> . yet, it remains unknown how a. mollis thrives in the broad range of environmental conditions encompassed by its distributional range, which is much broader than that of its close relatives  <cit> . specifically, its distribution might reflect a wide tolerance owing to a geographically unstructured, generalist phenotype that is adapted to a broad range of conditions . alternatively, the species may be characterized by local phenotypes, product of plasticity or local adaptation to local environmental conditions . to investigate this issue, we focus on skull morphological variation because of its fundamental role in food processing and perceiving sensory information that allows vertebrates to interact with its environment  <cit> , as evidenced by environmentally induced morphological changes in mice skulls  <cit> . for example, functional links between skull variation and environmental differences have been demonstrated by studies on the biomechanics of mastication under different diets  <cit>  or differing selective regimes  <cit> . in particular, differentiation across disparate environments might be evident in areas of the skull that serve for muscle attachment , influence bite force , or have been shown to covary with environmental gradients . morphological differentiation across environments might also arise as an indirect effect of changes in performance under different conditions .

using a geometric morphometric approach and ecomorphological analyses, we test for two contrasting patterns of phenotypic variation. specifically, we test for  a geographically unstructured, generalist phenotype strategy of limited morphological differentiation between populations across environments, or  a localized phenotype strategy with morphological differentiation between populations from different environments, with a strong association between skull morphology and local environmental conditions.

RESULTS
a visual examination of the extent of size and shape variation in the skulls of a. mollis individuals across environments indicates high intrapopulation variability, where size and shape variation was measured by the loge-transformed centroid size  <cit>  and by all non-zero-variance principal components of a pca on the covariance matrix of either the size-corrected , or uncorrected, symmetric component of the landmark configuration  <cit> , respectively. moreover, limited morphological differentiation among populations and ecosystems is also apparent, with the exception of those from the highest ecosystem of the central andes – the wet puna ; note that ecosystems correspond to biophysically defined regions .

individuals from the puna are distinguished from all those from other ecosystems by their smaller average size , which is significant based on an analysis of variance  with ecosystem as a fixed factor . a between group-pca , in which shape data averaged by ecosystem were used to construct the principal axes onto which individuals were then projected, was also conducted. this analysis shows similar, but more limited, patterns of morphological differentiation of puna individuals, as can be seen in a plot of the first and second bg-pca axes for the size-corrected and uncorrected shape data , which together account for around 70% of the between-group variance in both analyses . it is important to note that similar levels of morphological differentiation of the high-elevation puna individuals was observed when the bg-pca axes were constructed based on elevation groups, as opposed to ecosystems , which suggests the results are not an artifact of the a priori groupings used.

to statistically explore the degree of morphological and environmental covariation pls analyses were conducted . population averages were used in these and the sevm analyses  because of unequal sampling across ecosystems , which reflects natural differences in the abundance of a. mollis <cit> , but may nonetheless compromise statistical analyses based on individuals . the results of these analyses show that although size and shape variation significantly covaries with environment , the amount of morphological and environmental variance contained within the pls axes is limited. in fact, less than 7% of the environmental variance was explained in the pls analysis of size , which is the primary phenotypic feature that distinguishes the individuals from the puna from those of other ecosystems . moreover, in none of the analyses of shape data did the first two pls axes explain more than 36% or 18% of the morphological and environmental variance, respectively .

 <cit> : 0/5;
 <cit> : 2/2;
 <cit> : 1/1;
 <cit> : 4/2;
 <cit> : 1/1;
 <cit> : 0/1;
 <cit> : 0/2;
 <cit> : 0/2;
 <cit> : 0/1;
 <cit> : 2/4;
 <cit> : 0/1;  <cit> : 0/1;  <cit> : 1/0;  <cit> : 0/1;
 <cit> : 1/1;
 <cit> : 1/1;
 <cit> : 21/23;
 <cit> : 2/2;  <cit> : 1/2;
 <cit> : 2/ <dig>  <cit> : 6/2;
the number of males and females per population, the number of localities comprised by each ecosystem , and the mean and standard deviation of the number of individuals per locality are provided. localities with individuals available for genetic analyses are indicated in bold; locality number, between square brackets, follows appendix, follows appendix.

a scatterplot of the first set of pls components of the size analysis shows that the association of skull size with environment is mainly driven by the smaller size of the majority of puna individuals  . in contrast, scatterplots of the shape data for the first  <dig> sets of components show a linear pattern of covariation between morphological and environmental variation . in this latter analyses, the first morphological pls axis, which is significantly correlated with latitude , mostly reflects differences in the volume of the braincase  and presents no obvious association with ecosystem. the second morphological pls axis separates populations according to elevation  by differences associated with multiple regions of the skull that affect both the breadth of the braincase and the length of the rostrum . the morphological distinctiveness of puna populations does not correspond to latitudinal environmental variation , but instead to differentiation of mid- and high-elevation habitats . it is important to note that the fact that puna individuals appear as partially distinct only in the second set of pls axes is not necessarily unusual because pls axes are not expected to capture the main axis of morphological differentiation given that they do not maximize the within block variance  <cit> .

the robustness of the morphology-environment association to spatial autocorrelation of environments was verified by running spatial eigenvector mapping regressions . in these analyses, size variation is not significantly correlated with environmental variation after controlling for spatial autocorrelation , whereas overall shape variation  is significantly correlated with the environment, but only explains about 10% of the total shape variance . this relationship is robust after accounting for genetic relatedness . yet, after controlling for genetic contributions, the environment explains less than 6% of the total shape variance, with genetic relatedness explaining approximately 4% and 12% of the size and shape variance, respectively. the reduction in the environmental effect after accounting for spatial and genetic factors is in line with a significant effect of spatial isolation  on patterns of morphological and genetic differentiation , affirming the other analyses  that suggest the lack of a strong effect of the environment on morphology.

discussion
the analyses revealed limited support for local phenotypic structuring of the soft grass mouse, a. mollis, given the lack of consistent morphological differentiation of the skull across environments . although a significant covariation trend between environmental and size and shape variation is recovered , it explains limited amount of the phenotypic variance, and is on the same order as the exclusive contribution of genetic and spatial isolation . moreover, the association between the environment and size and shape variation would no doubt be  weakened if the extensive amount of local morphological variability was considered . these findings suggest that a. mollis’ skull morphological variation related to local environmental conditions have a significant, but limited, effect on overall skull shape and size. the primary exception to what appears to be a geographically unstructured generalist phenotype is the high-elevation puna andean ecosystem in the southern portion of a. mollis distribution. this group of individuals is consistently morphologically distinct from individuals from the other ecosystems across the majority of analyses – it even differs from populations from similar elevations but different ecosystem . taken together, these results suggest that the skull of this species fits neither a strict generalist phenotype strategy  nor a strict localized phenotype strategy .

limited morphological specialization in the skull?
the limited amount of geographically structured morphological differentiation observed throughout most of the broad environmental gradients a. mollis experience is noteworthy in light of previous studies that have shown that skulls commonly vary within species in response to environmental conditions  <cit> . not only have previous studies uncovered moderate to considerable levels of size and shape differences in vertebrate’s skulls due to diet, latitude, temperature, elevation, precipitation, seasonality, and/or productivity, or combinations of these variables  <cit> , but mice in particular have been shown to experience significant and rapid morphological changes in response to changes in temperature, precipitation, and human population density over the last 100 years  <cit> .

the weak environment-morphology association is not attributable to a general lack of morphological or genetic variation . to the contrary, the species is characterized by substantial morphological variability  and genetic variation, with relatively large average pairwise sequence divergence between individuals . in contrast to other mice with broad geographic ranges that do show localized morphological differentiation , the observed variation among individuals within populations suggests that the absence of local specialization may result from a relaxed association in a. mollis between skull morphology and ecological performance  , especially considering that the variation is present irrespective of whether individuals experience similar biotic and abiotic conditions . under this hypothesis, environmental canalization of skull morphology would be relaxed due to weakened effective selection against alternative phenotypes, possibly because of small effective population size or by recent or frequent environmental changes  <cit> , for instance, due to human-induced landscape changes or natural climatic events. alternatively, the variability might reflect a general ecological plasticity in the species  <cit> , which might be favored to increase the species’ ecological breadth  <cit> . in this case, the observed morphological variation among coexisting individuals could reflect a strategy to reduce intraspecific competition under high local abundances  and maintain high adaptability potential  <cit> , as suggested for some other generalist vertebrate species  <cit> , including some species of mice  <cit> . under this latter scenario, the microhabitat experienced by an individual throughout development may be more important in determining skull variation in ecological-plastic species than macro-environmental conditions . individual variation under this scenario could arise for instance from variation in individuals’ diet, as have been observed in feeding trials in deer mice  <cit> . testing of these alternatives  requires detailed eco-morphological studies of multiple cohorts through time, and hence, goes beyond this contribution. nevertheless, future studies on this topic might significantly add to our understanding of the role that environment plays in morphological evolution and ecological specialization.

it remains to be seen if similar patterns of morphological variation are observed in other tropical generalist species. it is possible that a. mollis may be exceptional among tropical species, especially considering the narrow elevation ranges and high species turnover typical of tropical mountains  <cit> . however, our results raise questions about the general expectation that locally adapted populations will necessarily predominate in the tropics  <cit> . moreover, our results pose the question of whether the general lack of strong geographically structured morphological variation observed in a. mollis  may be in part responsible for its exceptional environmental tolerance and broad geographic distribution , and highlight the contingency of eco-morphological patterns on the natural history and geographic setting of the species involved.

uniqueness of puna individuals
although a. mollis generally shows limited evidence for geographically structured morphological phenotypes , there is of course the exception of the morphological distinction between individuals from the puna ecosystem and the rest of populations. these distinct individuals are noticeably smaller and partially distinguishable both in uncorrected and size-corrected shape components of variation  – note that such distinction seems unlikely to be a sampling artifact given the magnitude of the size differences . however, why such a morphological break is observed here, but not between other ecological transitions over environmental gradients that are just as extreme  remains unexplained .

it is possible that this morphological distinctiveness may result from the particular type of ecological conditions associated with the puna ecosystem, and specifically, the transition from the treeline to the grassland, which has an important effect on microhabitat conditions that are not necessarily captured by the coarse-grained variables used here. the progressive disappearance of tree coverage at high elevations diminishes the buffering effect of vegetation on microclimatic conditions  <cit> . consequently, the physical conditions organisms have to cope with at high tropical elevations become harsher as average temperatures, atmospheric pressure, atmospheric concentration of oxygen, and water vapor pressure decrease, and daily temperature fluctuations and physiological aridity increase  <cit> . although similar challenges are experienced by individuals inhabiting high-elevation páramo environments, the more arid conditions of the puna ecosystem  and the average higher and more southern location of puna populations, may exacerbate the cold-desertification and hypoxia effects of high elevation environments. in line with this hypothesis, the first and second environmental pls axes in the size and shape analyses, respectively, along which puna populations are the most different , are strongly associated with the first environmental principal component, which in turn is highly correlated with precipitation variables .

loadings of the  <dig> environmental principal components  on the first set of pls axes for the analyses on size, uncorrected, and size-corrected shape. the main environmental information summarized by each component is presented in parenthesis .

all these environmental changes, which are also associated with a significant turnover of resources that likely impact the diet of a. mollis, may contribute to different biomechanical pressures on puna individuals cf.  <cit> . this possibility seems feasible when considering that a previous study of the diet of other species of akodon in southwestern peru revealed a significant relationship between the proportion of insects in the diet and elevation  <cit> . furthermore, similar changes in diet and associated morphological traits with elevation have also been observed in other cricetid mice  <cit> . thus, it is certainly plausible  that such interactions between direct physiological constraints imposed by the challenging environmental conditions of tropical highlands and indirect pressures imposed by dietary constraints might be partially responsible for the differences in skull morphology observed in the high-elevation populations of a. mollis, as in cricetid mice  <cit> .

alternatively, it is possible that the morphological distinctiveness of the puna individuals is caused by some degree of genetic isolation of these highland populations. as seen in other systems, where steep ecological transitions are present, genetic isolation and strong phenotypic differences can arise and be maintained even between populations in close proximity  <cit> . our preliminary exploration of levels of population genetic differentiation seems to partially support this possibility. however, unexplained patterns of genetic variation suggest that this alone cannot explain the morphological distinctiveness of puna populations. for example, the average cytochrome-b pairwise nucleotide differences between the populations for which we have genetic data showed that both puna and some high-elevation páramo populations differed markedly from the rest of populations . moreover, these high-elevation páramo populations are genetically distinct from populations that are geographically proximate to them  . yet, unlike the puna individuals, there is only limited morphological differentiation between these high-elevation páramo populations and all other populations. these observations make it unlikely that the morphological distinction of puna individuals is exclusively driven by their degree of genetic isolation. still, this question deserves further exploration given the claim that a. mollis may be a species complex has been made, albeit based on limited sampling  <cit> .

based on consideration of other genetically divergent populations, and in particular some populations from the páramo, it seems that the observed phenotypic distinctiveness of the puna individuals is not simply a function of the abiotic and biotic conditions unique to high elevation environments and their environmental isolation from lower environments  <cit> , which could prevent the dilution effect of gene flow from lower populations  <cit> . one possibility is that divergence of the puna populations reflects the interplay of stochastic and deterministic factors. for example, recent work demonstrates how species divergence may reflect an interaction of past demographic conditions  that accompanies climate-induced distributional shifts and the ecological attributes of species   <cit> . hypothetically, for instance, if puna populations have been unable to migrate out of the puna due to its environmental isolation, it is plausible that they have been forced into a more specialized morphology due to the marked cycles of aridification this ecosystem experienced during the pleistocene  <cit> . additional studies that specifically address the origin and phylogenetic relationships of these genetically distinct populations are required before a more definitive conclusion about the validity of this hypothesis is reached.

CONCLUSIONS
even though high levels of ecological specialization has been proposed as a principal mechanism for generating tropical diversity  <cit> , the ecomorphological analyses suggest that morphological specialization in the skull of a. mollis is limited, except for the localized phenotype of individuals from the puna. this finding suggests that a. mollis’ skull does not fit either a strict generalist or localized phenotype strategy, but a mix of the two, with limited geographically structured morphological variation thorough most of its broad geographic range. together these results offer insights into the processes that generate and maintain diversity in the tropical andes, a region that has been previously proposed to be an important center of differentiation and diversification  <cit> . aside from the morphological disjunction identified between puna populations and the rest of populations, the lack of consistent and strong morphological differentiation across environments, and wide geographic range of a. mollis suggest that additional mechanisms of diversification in tropical systems may deserve more attention than they have received. the geographic structure of phenotypic variation in the skull of a. mollis may be exceptional considering that other morphological structures of this species have not been studied in a. mollis and the wide ecological tolerance of this mouse compared to other tropical species. nevertheless, with these caveats in mind  our results also have important implications for understanding biological resilience to environmental change in tropical mountains. specifically, even though tropical mountain habitats are predicted to be disproportionally susceptible to ongoing environmental changes  <cit> , the apparent adaptability of a. mollis suggest that it may be able to accommodate a broad range of conditions, and hence, be more resilient. future studies that assess the generality of these findings and explore its mechanistic basis are expected to further advance our understanding of morphological evolution in one of the most diverse ecosystems on earth.

