BACKGROUND
several investigators  <cit>  have explored intercontinental patterns of ectomycorrhizal fungus species distributions in a phylogenetic context, but there is little information on the origin and patterns of speciation in these fungi. mushrooms in the genus cortinarius, section calochroi , with over  <dig> species, represent one of the most conspicuous ectomycorrhizal members of contemporary northern hemisphere forest ecosystems  <cit> . previous studies of species in calochroi show various patterns of geographic distributions, including local , clinal  or circumboreal  distributions. in most instances fungus species distributions correspond to that of their host trees within continents and often disjunct distributions across the northern hemisphere show a similar pattern  <cit> . overall, the patterns of species distribution in the calochroi roughly matches the range of genera of the host tree families fagaceae  and pinaceae   <cit> , however, a few calochroi species form ectotrophic associations with members of the betulaceae   <cit> , cistaceae   <cit>  and malvaceae   <cit> . host specificity of calochroi species may be restricted to a single host species, with host-switching events being less common and often restricted to closely related plant species  <cit> . interestingly, allopatric populations/species on an intercontinental scale display relatively high host fidelities at the host genus level, suggesting potential co-evolutionary/co-migratory trends  <cit> .

species with a broad distribution provide excellent models for examining their present patterns of spatial variation, especially where there is an obligate association as with an ectotrophic fungus. an evaluation of contemporary geographic patterns of these species can provide a better understanding of speciation and habitat requirement as well as determine host preference and host-switching events that have occurred over time. to date a major difficulty in many mushroom genera, including species of cortinarius, section calochroi is the difficulty of identifying species  <cit> , which historically has been a major impediment to understanding their patterns of geographical distribution, ecology, diversity and evolutionary relationships. there are a limited number of unique morphological features  <cit>  that can be used to construct robust evolutionary hypotheses within and between closely related species in section calochroi. based on similarities in basidiomata morphology and colour some widespread species with largely allopatric distributions in the old world  and the new world  , and c. olivellus) were treated as conspecific  <cit> . on the other hand, the discovery of certain phenotypic differences between european populations and their north american counterparts has led to the recognition of infraspecific taxa, for example c. elegantior var. americanus  <cit> . similarly, detailed observations of morphological variation between european collections of c. elegantior have resulted in a number of forms, subspecies and varieties  <cit> . in our recent phylogenetic study  <cit> , we confirmed close phylogenetic affinities between some disjunct populations/species, but we also found that several european species and their disjunct north american counterparts showed significant divergence from one another.

recently the use of dna sequence data have provided an independent tool for delineating species boundaries, and for revealing patterns of evolution history, identifying convergent morphological features and assessing/estimating species diversity. an evaluation of its rdna sequences published by us  <cit>  revealed distinct intra- and/or inter-continental phylogeographic structuring within some species, sometimes accompanied by relatively little morphological divergence. in contrast, we also found relatively low levels of genetic divergence within and between species with allopatric distributions in north america and europe that display substantial colour variation in major components of the basidiomata. while, considerable progress has been made in reconstructing interspecific relationships within the section calochroi through analyses of morphological features and dna sequences  <cit> , however, further studies are needed to examine how sequence divergence relates to the separation or divergence of species over time at continental and inter-continental levels.

differences in genetic structure among extant species can be used to infer their evolutionary histories. as previously stated, rapidly evolving its regions of rdna from disjunct species of section calochroi found in regions of europe and north america show different levels of sequence divergence. however, to date there has not been sufficient data to draw consistent conclusions concerning the genetic variation and divergence of these species. for example, maximum likelihood  analyses  <cit>  suggest a complex evolutionary history within c. arcuatorum, including divergence into four distinctive monophyletic groups with similar morphological features. in contrast, a close phylogenetic relationship was found between species considered to be morphologically separate from one another; european c. napus and north american c. albobrunnoides . to gain a more complete understanding of the evolutionary histories of calochroi species , we selected four species for study: 1) c. arcuatorum, 2) c. aureofulvus, 3) c. elegantior and 4) c. napus. our species concept is anchored in the morphology  of the basidiomata or mushrooms, which is the structure associated with sexual reproduction of basidiospores. morphological and molecular evidences show that the four species treated here are each clearly distinct from other known cortinarius species. the four selected species are somewhat rare to uncommon  across their known geographical range. they are mainly restricted to more calcareous soils, exhibit intercontinental distributions within boreo-nemoral areas, or in the case of c. arcuatorum extend into in the meridional zones  <cit> . across their known distributions, c. arcuatorum is associated with oak , beech , hornbeam  and tan oak  species, and with spruce  and douglas fir  in wyoming. the tree hosts grow from lowland regions to high elevations, up to  <dig> m in costa rica, and up to  <dig> m in wyoming. three species, c. aureofulvus, c. elegantior and c. napus are associated with conifers including spruce , fir , pine , douglas fir  and hemlock  species in subalpine regions or, less commonly, in mid- to low elevation forests ). although these host tree genera also occur in asia, so far there is no survey of these cortinarius species for this region for inclusion in our study.

here to infer historical events associated with speciation, we collected population samples within four species over geographical distributions spanning europe, north america and central america , used nested clade, demographic and coalescent-based approaches to analyse the fast-evolving its region of the nuclear ribosomal dna. coalescent-based analyses incorporate random fluctuations in mutation, genetic drift and sampling errors into the calculation of demographic parameters, whereas these variations are underestimated by phylogenetic approaches  <cit> . we used these analyses to address the following specific questions. what are the mechanisms responsible for the contemporary patterns of geographic distribution within the four species, including centres of origin and potential migration routes? and, are species with allopatric distributions sufficiently distinct from one another within and between continents to merit a specific designation? to address these questions, we compared dna sequence variation of species at continental and intercontinental scales. we also evaluated the phenotypical and ecological features of the calochroi species. special emphasis was placed on detecting highly labile traits and their patterns of geographic variation among population samples represented by individual collection containing one to several basidiomata from one group or cluster found growing in a relatively small patch .

our findings show that the comparison of population samples using phenotypical, ecological and genetic characteristics help to clarify questions concerning the historical events involved in the modern distributions of calochroi species as well as aspects related to host preferences and host-switching, and the use of a combined phylogenetic, morphological and ecological species definition. we also discuss the utility and limitations of its sequences and phenotypic characteristics as identification tools for cortinarius species with wide geographical distributions.

RESULTS
dna amplification, phylogenetic placement and relationship
more than  <dig> fungus population samples, including our own collections and those from other herbaria, were analysed in this study . we were unable to amplify the its region for many collections because they were either poorly conserved or too old, and the sequence quality was too low, or we amplified contaminant fungi that probably colonised the dried basidiomata. analysis of its sequences supported the phylogenetic placement of a total of  <dig> population samples identified as belonging to c. arcuatorum, c. aureofulvus, c. elegantior and c. napus lineages . each species was recovered as a monophyletic clade with high bootstrap support . the internal phylogeny of c. arcuatorum is composed of four major lineages: a clade including population samples from costa rica ; a clade comprising population samples from mendocino  ; a clade composed of samples from del norte co  ; and a large clade containing mostly european and two sample populations from wyoming , respectively. within c. elegantior, several population samples had unresolved positions , a portion of north american population samples are distributed into one well-supported subclade  and european population samples formed a well-supported subclade . the north american taxa c. albobrunnoides, c. albobrunnoides var. violaceus, and c. subpurpureophyllus var. sulphureovelatus and the european taxon c. napus formed a monophyletic group with not internal subclades. new world and old world population samples of c. aureofulvus clustered together with no significant genetic differentiation between them.

patterns of nucleotide variation in the its region
sequence divergence of the complete its region between intercontinental disjunct populations ranged from identical to  <dig> % in c. arcuatorum, from  <dig> % to  <dig> % in c. aureofulvus, from  <dig> % to  <dig> % in c. elegantior and from identical to  <dig> % in c. napus. after removing indels and recombination blocks, twenty-four distinct its haplotypes were identified among the  <dig> population samples from the four species analysed:  <dig> haplotypes in c. arcuatorum and c. aureofulvus,  <dig> in c. elegantior, and  <dig> in c. napus . nucleotide diversity  estimates for the whole population sample were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  × 10- <dig> in c. arcuatorum,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  × 10- <dig> in c. aureofulvus,  <dig>  × 10- <dig> ±  <dig>  × 10- <dig> in c. elegantior and  <dig>  × 10- <dig> ±  <dig>  × 10- <dig> in c. napus . when species were partitioned into sampled areas, population samples showed similar or lower estimates of nucleotide diversity. the average per-nucleotide expected heterogeneity, θw, for the whole sample of each species was identical or higher than partitioned sampled areas.

species/
li's d*
li's f*
all
all
all
all
l, nucleotide sequence length; n, sample size; s, number of segregating sites; h, haplotypes; hd, haplotype diversity; k, average number of nucleotide pair wise differences; π, number of nucleotide differences per site ; θw, watterson's estimate of θ per site; nd, not determined because no polymorphism was found; ns, non-significant; **, p <  <dig> .

tests of neutrality and population subdivision
the neutrality tests performed for the whole-species data sampling had non-significant values; therefore, the equilibrium model of neutral evolution could not be rejected. only in c. arcuatorum were significant values detected for fu and li's d*, and fu and li's f* tests, suggesting background selection for the whole sample . the geographical distributions and frequency of the haplotypes are given in additional file  <dig>  with regard to c. arcuatorum, haplotype h <dig>  was only found in those samples obtained from costa rica , while haplotypes h <dig>  and h <dig>  are specific to california . the most frequent haplotype  is distributed throughout the old world  and also occurs in the new world , see population samples ib <dig> and ib <dig>  the single haplotype h <dig>  is restricted to the old world. in c. aureofulvus, haplotypes h <dig> and h <dig> are restricted to the old world , whereas haplotypes h <dig> and h <dig> were found in the new world  population samples. haplotype h <dig> was found in population samples from the pacific northwest  and mountain usa . in c. elegantior, h <dig>  and haplotypes h <dig>  were predominant in the new world  and the old world , respectively. haplotypes h <dig>  h <dig> and h <dig> are restricted to old world and haplotypes h <dig>  h <dig> , h <dig>  h <dig>  h <dig> and h <dig> were observed only in those population samples obtained from old world. with regard to c. napus, the predominant haplotype h <dig> was shared by different taxa in the new world  and the old world . haplotype h <dig> was found in the wyoming populations and haplotype h <dig> is represented by a single population sample  from the pacific .

hudson's tests were carried out to estimate population genetic structures within and among population samples from each area . analyses of populations showed significant differentiation between costa rica/pacific usa  and mountain usa /europe population samples of c. arcuatorum ; between europe/pacific usa  and mountain usa  population samples of c. elegantior  and between europe/pacific usa  and mountain usa  population samples of c. aureofulvus . non-significant genetic differentiation between europe/pacific  and mountain usa  was found for c. napus population samples . alternatively, significant p values  for hudson's tests indicated that new world and old wold population samples of c. arcuatorum , c. aureofulvus  and c. elegantior  were genetically differentiated, while new world and old world macro-populations of c. napus  were not significantly differentiated from each other.

significance, including incompatible sites and recombination blocks, was evaluated by performing  <dig> permutations using snap map. ns, non-significant; * <dig>  ≤ p <  <dig> ; ** <dig>  ≤ p <  <dig> ; ***p <  <dig> .

network analyses
to clarify the phylogenetic relationship among haplotypes within each species, networks were constructed using haplotypes from its sequences with non-recombining blocks . nested clade analyses for c. arcuatorum resulted in one network with two connected old world haplotypes  and three single unconnected new world haplotypes  . analyses of c. aureofulvus  yielded a network comprising five haplotypes: haplotypes h <dig>  h <dig> and h <dig> were scattered throughout the new world, whereas haplotypes h <dig> and h <dig> were restricted to the old world. the haplotypes h <dig>  h <dig>  h <dig> and h <dig> were derived from haplotype h <dig>  similarly, in c. elegantior, haplotypes were contained in a single network where haplotype h <dig> has an ancestral position to the other haplotypes and the old world haplotypes h <dig>  h <dig>  h <dig> and h <dig> grouped together . the old world haplotypes h <dig>  h <dig>  h <dig> and h <dig> appear to be more related to the pacific haplotypes h <dig>  and h <dig> . in c. napus, haplotype h <dig> is ancestral to the other haplotypes and was shared by both new world and old world populations, whereas the haplotypes h <dig> and h <dig> were restricted to mountain usa  and pacific  in the new world, respectively .

migration analyses
the four species showed different histories of recombination: two distinct recombination blocks were detected in c. arcuatorum, four in c. aureofulvus, nine in c. elegantior and one in c. napus, respectively. there was no evidence of recombination within each of these blocks. migration parameter estimates, including population mutation rate, time of divergence and direction of migration estimates between new world and old world macro-population samples, are shown in additional file  <dig>  these analyses showed that migrations between new world and old world macro-population samples within c. arcuatorum and c. aureofulvus were approximately equal in both directions and that these have occurred at low rates. while gene flow estimates in c. elegantior indicate that migration appeared to be slightly higher  from the new world to the old world  rather than vice versa .

genealogical analyses
coalescent genealogies for c. arcuatorum and c. elegantior showed that two ancestral lineages gave rise to the extant new and old world haplotypes . genealogies inferred for c. aureofulvus  and c. napus  did not have enough genetic polymorphisms to resolve transoceanic disjunction events. in c. arcuatorum, a widely distributed  - old world ) ancestral macro-population could be the origin of extant haplotypes. in c. elegantior, an ancestral macro-population diverged at  <dig>  into two distinct lineages in the new world, whereas old world haplotypes diverged at  <dig> , respectively. the oldest mutations of both new world and old world macro-populations of c. arcuatorum have a mean age of  <dig> , while the c. elegantior macro-populations have a mean age of approximately  <dig> . in c. arcuatorum, extant old world haplotypes are younger than new world haplotypes, t <  <dig>  and t >  <dig> , respectively. in c. elegantior, new world haplotype deep divergence was older  than new world haplotypes , but extant new world haplotypes are descendents from more recent lineages.

basidioma phenotypical features
detailed descriptions of the macro- and microscopical structures for each species are given in additional file  <dig>  the most relevant phenotypical features are summarised below.

 basidioma colour
there was little or no detectable variation of basidiomata colour within c. arcuatorum, c. aureofulvus and c. elegantior . however, population samples of c. napus, showed considerable variation in colour of both lamellae and veil .

 basidioma size
some variation in basidioma size was observed within c. arcuatorum, where populations from costa rica and some from europe presented somewhat slender basidiomata in comparison with other population samples .

 colour reaction of dried specimens
a pink to pinkish orange colour reaction with 40% koh on both pileus surface and mycelia at the stipe base characterised the basidiomata of c. arcuatorum populations. population samples of c. napus yielded a greyish to dark red brown colour reaction on the pileus surface, whereas the mycelia showed a pale pink to intense pink colour reaction. all population samples in c. aureofulvus had a black reaction on both pileus surface and mycelia on the stipe bulb, while in c. elegantior, both the pileus surface and mycelia turned wine red .

discussion
the markedly high species diversity within the genus cortinarius together with their obligate ectomycorrhizal status makes the factors that have driven their speciation of particular interest to a broad spectrum of biologists. in addition, the occurrence of widespread taxa within cortinarius raises intriguing questions about the origins of transoceanic disjunct species and the influence of the historical events that have created contemporary geographical distributions.

phylogeographical structure and historical demography of calochroi species
while it is difficult to determine the origin and migration routes of ectomycorrhizal fungi between north america, europe and asia, one can gain some insight into the question by looking at host migration patterns and assuming co-migration of plant and fungus. genetic data reveal considerable divergence between populations across the core range of distribution of c. arcuatorum and c. elegantior in the new world . since the divergent ancestral lineages were found in the new world, we postulate this area as the centre of origin for c. arcuatorum and c. elegantior, and that old world populations are the result of relatively recent demographic expansion . migration with host plants  <cit>  through beringia is one of the most plausible hypotheses to explain the disjunct population distributions between the new world and old world, but migrations through the north atlantic land bridge  <cit>  or via long-distance dispersal  <cit> , though a less likely explanation cannot be completely ruled out. genetic breaks between c. arcuatorum populations within the new world have probably been triggered by paleogeographic and paleoclimatic events, e.g. the rise of the sierra nevada and other mountains followed by desertification of the great basin, or other events such as pliestocene glaciation  <cit> . the european populations of c. arcuatorum and most of the north american populations occur mainly with trees of the family fagaceae, with the exception of the population samples in wyoming, where this species occurs with conifers. these known population locations are currently geographically isolated from members of the fagaceae; however, it is likely that picea and/or tsuga were sympatric with quercus in the past  <cit> , allowing for the possibility of a host switch from quercus to a conifer host.

the coalescent-based analysis suggests that extant populations diverged from a quite recent common ancestor early in the evolution of c. elegantior with little gene flow among disjunt populations . despite this, very little morphological change has evolved between new world and old world lineages. hence, the close relatedness of pacific and european haplotypes of c. elegantior could indicate an expansion northward along the western side of the mountains through the bering land bridge, which resulted in the extant populations in new world . this evolutionary scenario is compatible with the migration of tricholoma  between western north america and eastern asia, as postulated by chapela & garbelotto  <cit> . the phylogeographical patterns observed in c. elegantior support the hypothesis that the current distributions of populations are closely associated with the historical events of their host plants. similarly, conifers are the primary hosts for populations of c. aureofulvus and for c. napus. in most parts of their ranges, these cortinarius species are sympatric or allopatric, although their frequency of occurrence varies, with c. aureofulvus being the least commonly encountered, c. napus being moderately frequent, and c. elegantior populations being the most frequently encountered, especially at higher elevations with picea. populations of c. elegantior and c. napus are most frequently encountered in subalpine conifer forests; however, they also occur in more mesic mid-elevations and coastal sites. picea is currently a main host plant genus for c. aureofulvus, c. elegantior and c. napus in western north america; this has probably been the case for an extended period of time, with a shift in abundance of picea from eastern to western north america several times over the last  <dig>  years  <cit> ; however, abies, pinus and tsuga are also potential hosts for these species. douglas fir, another possible host for these species, appeared in western north america in the mid-pleistocene  <cit> . recent phylogenetic studies of picea indicate that it originated in north america  and that the present distribution of picea could be a result of two dispersal events, one from north america to asia by the bering land bridge  <cit> , and a second from asia to europe. most of the northeastern asian species and the european p. abies could have arisen from a recent radiation  <cit> . the literature also notes that the earliest  fossil of picea is from montana and that it is well represented in the eocene in western north america, but was not common in asia until the oligocene and not present in europe until the pliocene. therefore, it is fully possible that populations within c. aureofulvus, c. elegantior and c. napus have long been associated with picea and could have migrated with this and possible other host plants during glacial and interglacial periods for millions of years. the findings presented here, in conjunction with those of dentinger et al.  <cit>  and wu et al.  <cit>  strongly support the key role of beringia in the phylogeographic processes leading to speciation and intraspecific population structures in the northern hemisphere. subsequently, the comigration with their associated phanerogams  <cit>  through e.g. short-distance spore dispersal may be an important means explaining the expansion of these fungi from asia to europe.

we cannot estimate times for the divergence of disjunct populations of calochroi with certainty, owing to a lack of fossil records. however, it is plausible to hypothesise that they co-migrated with their host plants, and that the lineages may have subsequently diverged as a result of fragmentation and geographic isolation of ancestral populations due to geologic and subsequent climatic changes. however, each species has a somewhat different biogeographical history that likely has been influenced by different biotic and abiotic factors, such as dispersal potential and host  history. the occurrence of these taxa in asia has not been documented to date. consequently further sampling across this region is necessary in order to better understand their historical distributions across the northern hemisphere. the recent work on porcini mushrooms  <cit>  supports the idea of a potential link between european, asian and north american species in the section calochroi.

its sequences and phenotype as identification tools for cortinarius species with wider ranges of geographical distribution; utility and limitations
nested clade, demographic and coalescent-based analyses based on the its region of c. arcuatorum, c. aureofulvus, c. elegantior and c. napus allowed us to infer their evolutionary histories. overall, c. arcuatorum and c. elegantior exhibited geographically structured haplotypes, with evidence for a more ancient population expansion. these findings agree with those of geml et al.  <cit> , who observed a similar population structure in the widespread fly agaric amanita muscaria. interestingly, geographically structured populations within c. arcuatorum and c. elegantior were often accompanied by some divergence in basidioma colouration and size in the absence of any described species . by contrast, some populations within c. arcuatorum and c. aureofulvus with disjunct distributions in north america and europe exhibited little morphological differentiation and had identical to relatively low levels of its sequence divergence  divergence). two hypotheses might explain this low degree of nucleotide variation. first, these taxa might be relatively young, having recently spread across their ranges, and, accordingly, having had insufficient time to accumulate its sequence divergence. an alternative hypothesis is that these results could be a consequence of low mutation rates at the locus studied. although some differences in colouration of the basidiomata were found between western populations of c. albobrunnoides var. albobrunnoides, c. albobrunnoides var. violaceovelatus and c. subpurpureophyllus var. sulphureovelatus and european populations of c. napus, these differences were not sufficient to consider them as separate taxa. this suggests that variation in colouration alone might not necessarily reflect different species or subspecies. for example, violet pigments in the basidiomata are highly labile because they are sensitive to solar radiation and the age of the basidiomata. therefore, it is evident that it is important to do careful fieldwork and to consider the variation of macroscopical and ecological features before they are used for taxonomic purposes, especially characters related to colouration. according to our analyses, colour reactions with koh are relatively stable among populations, whereas its sequences, in certain instances, provide several genetic markers to distinguish species as well as population structure within the section calochroi.

CONCLUSIONS
based on variations in its dna polymorphism, this study revealed different evolutionary histories for new world and old world populations within cortinarius arcuatorum, c. aureofulvus, c. elegantior and c. napus. nested clade, demographic and coalescent-based analyses provide powerful tools for assessing the effect of historical and contemporary events of the geographic distributions of these species, proposed as follows:  an ancestral population of c. arcuatorum putatively with a wyoming-europe distribution evolved into at least three distinct lineages in association with a variety of fagaceous and coniferous trees in the new world;  two divergent lineages in c. elegantior gave rise to new world and old world haplotypes that occur almost exclusively in association with picea ;  low genetic diversity among new world and old world populations of c. aureofulvus; iv) low genetic diversity among new world and old world populations of c. napus. the results for c. aureofulvus and c. napus could be due to recent demographic expansion, but the origin of such transoceanic disjunct distributions remains unclear. the scenario of a spatial expansion through the bering land bridge appears to be the most probable explanation for modern transoceanic disjunct distributions; however, it does not represent a complete explanation for the remarkably low degree of genetic differentiation between populations of these two species. our study reveals patterns of species diversification restricted to the new world within c. acuatorum and c. elegantior, however, the relatively few morphological innovations found among allopatric populations suggest that diversification events may have been driven by ecological opportunities afforded by the shift to new host species, edaphic and climate conditions. the morphological and genetic data described here support a single species c. napus  with transoceanic distribution. similarly, c. aureofulvus shows disjunct distributions in new world and old world. colour reactions with koh represent a powerful tool for recognising these calochroi species, whereas features related mainly to veil and lamellae colouration displayed high levels of homoplasy and phenotypic plasticity. interpretations of the population structures suggest that host tree history as influenced by past events , was one of the driving forces that shaped the modern distributions of calochroi species. finally, our work shows the need for further studies that focus on careful fieldwork in the context of the variation of both morphology and ecology, as well as the use of more genetic information, to draw more complete models of population histories in these and other species of cortinarius.

taxonomic implications
see additional file  <dig> for information of the following taxonomic novelties:

cortinarius elegantio-montanus garnica & ammirati  fr. var. americanus m.m. moser & mcknight, 1995), new synonym and new status.

cortinarius elegantio-occidentalis garnica & ammirati, new species - allied to cortinarius elegantior  fr.,  <dig> 

cortinarius fulvo-arcuatorum garnica & ammirati, new species - allied to cortinarius arcuatorum rob. henry,  <dig> 

cortinarius jardinensis garnica, ammirati & halling, new species - allied to cortinarius arcuatorum rob. henry,  <dig> 

cortinarius lilaciotinctus garnica & ammirati, new species - allied to cortinarius arcuatorum rob. henry,  <dig> 

cortinarius napus fr.  <dig> , new synonym.

the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

