BACKGROUND
the discovery of genetic variants that increase susceptibility to disease represents one of the greatest challenges for epidemiology and genomics  <cit> . detailed knowledge about the etiology of many diseases keeps accumulating and in the near future it will help to improve disease management  <cit> . after decades of research in genetic epidemiology, more than  <dig>  different association studies for human diseases have been published and  <dig>  genes have been described to be associated to disease, as recorded up to december  <dig> in the hugenet browser  <cit> . moreover, thanks to last technological advances, we have recently escalated into a flurry of genome-wide association studies  that simultaneously study hundreds of thousands of snps over the whole genome  <cit> . for instance, most gwas recorded in the hugenet browser have been published recently, from  <dig> on .

in spite of their success, genetic association studies for common complex diseases usually suffer from a problem of lack of reproducibility of results. only a very low number of risk variants have been shown to present a consistent pattern of positive replication through independent studies  <cit> . different confounding factors may constitute the source of these inconsistencies. two well-known sources of lack of replicability are reduced statistical power due to small  experimental samples sizes  <cit> ; and population stratification  <cit> . other potential sources of lack of replicability include disease heterogeneity, since some complex diseases might include similar entities with shared symptoms but different genetic architectures  <cit> ; hidden age-varying effects  <cit> ; biased ascertainment of genetic markers  <cit>  and publication bias  <cit> . to overcome these confounding factors, the nci-nhgri working group on replication in association studies published a set of recommendations to achieve essential credibility of true positive disease-associated genetic variants  <cit> . one of their crucial recommendations is that the replication of results in an independent sample of individuals is required to make an association statistically trustable.

however, a true association could fail to be replicated due to heterogeneity in the genetic architecture of the disease under study, particularly when replicas are carried out in populations with different evolutionary histories. indeed, many common snps present significantly different frequencies among human populations or even appear to be polymorphic just in certain populations   <cit> . for instance, the six possible pairwise comparisons of the allele frequencies of  <dig>  genic snps among  <dig> different populations  show that, although most snps  are present in the two compared populations, only 44% to 72% of these shared variants are found to have allelic frequencies >10%  in both populations  <cit> . furthermore, a resequencing survey in a sample of  <dig> individuals from  <dig> world-wide populations showed that only 56% of common snps were already present in the hapmap database  <cit> . finally,  <dig> out of  <dig> meta-analysis of complex disease-associated variants showed heterogeneity in allelic frequency among human populations  <cit> .

it is thus reasonable to hypothesize that differences in the evolutionary history of loci associated to disease could have led to a non-homogeneous world-wide distribution of genetic risk variants. in this scenario, replication studies of risk alleles would frequently fail because of a true heterogeneity in the genetic architecture of common diseases. previous studies have partially addressed the role of heterogeneity of the genetic ancestry in association studies, without positive results. lohmueller et al.  <cit>  analyzed population differentiation patterns between populations of european and african ancestry in  <dig> highly replicated disease-associated snps. also, myles et al.  <cit>  analyzed the world-wide allelic distribution of  <dig> disease-associated snps from the wtccc genome-wide scan  <cit> . finally, adeyemo et al.  <cit>  checked for the differences in allele frequencies among  <dig> hapmap populations for  <dig> snps that had been associated to disease in gwas performed with peoples from european ancestry. in all three studies, with the exception of some extreme differences in a few variants, disease-associated snps presented levels of differentiation among populations that were equivalent to the genome-wide average.

to date, however, no general study has tested whether inter-population genetic heterogeneity has affected the replication rates of association studies. here, we aim to evaluate such a hypothesis. ideally, the study should be carried-out by means of a comprehensive meta-analysis of gwas data. however, there is still a bias in the populations that are chosen to perform these kind of association studies, since the great majority of them  has been carried out upon individuals of european ancestry  <cit> . in addition, most of these gwas use mixed panels of individuals from different regions in europe, making it impossible to assign the status of replication of disease variants through populations within europe.

in contrast, classical association studies based on candidate genes have been performed in great numbers all over the world and their results are publicly available. the genetic association database   <cit> , is one of the largest repositories of the association studies carried out during the last  <dig> years. analyzing that dataset, we find that risk variants from genes that diverged most between human populations present lower rates of replication. in contrast, world-wide distributed risk alleles appear to be located in loci that do not show population-specific patterns of genetic variability. these results point towards a role of the recent evolutionary history of human populations in shaping genetic risk for complex diseases and suggest that part of the disease variants that have not been replicated might be true risk alleles, at least in some populations.

RESULTS
two different sets of associations between genes and diseases were obtained from the genetic association database  <cit> . the first set, named the global set, contained associations that had been replicated many times , regardless of which human population had been tested in each study. the second set, the continental set, contained those associations that had been widely studied in both european and east asian samples . a summary of the main steps and filters to ascertain the global and continental sets is available in figure  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  both sets are listed in additional file  <dig> and  <dig>  along with their main features, such as the global replicability, continental-specific replicabilities and the degree of population differentiation corresponding to each association.

analyses of the global set - global vs. pairwise fst
a first analysis showed that the disease-associated genes contained on the global set  present significantly lower inter-population genetic differentiation than equivalent sets of autosomic genes .

next, we analyzed the relationship between levels of population differentiation and the replicability of disease associations. we detected a tendency towards negative correlations between fst and replicability. the tendency is only visible when testing the most reliable associations, the ones with many studies or with longer genes  and it maintains regardless of the method used to compute fst . thus, although there was a trend towards lower replicability of associations between disease and genes with high global fst, most correlations were non-significant and the correlations between replicability and global fst lacked consistency.

we performed a similar analysis focusing on pairwise fst values. when values involved african individuals  there was no clear pattern . in contrast, our replicability measures consistently showed significant negative correlations with fst values between european and east asian populations . moreover, this pattern became more apparent after filtering out those associations that had been studied fewer times, that is, when using more reliable data . these results fit a well-known continental bias in the origin of samples: most of the associations reported in the gad  had been performed with individuals of european or east asian ancestry. thus, replicability indexes for the associations in the global set mostly reflect the outcome of studies upon these two continental populations, and it makes sense that they are related to pairwise fst values between europeans and east asians and not to global fst values, that include african individuals.

analyses of the continental set
given the continental bias in the origin of studies, the continental set is more adequate to test our hypothesis since it includes only studies performed upon cohorts of european or east asian ancestry. for the  <dig> associations in the continental set, the discordance in continental replicability measured by ϕ  showed a consistent pattern of positive correlation with fst values between europeans and asians . in other words, genes with lower fst formed associations with higher consistency of replicabilities between continents. this trend was detected under a diversity of approaches. first, a significant and positive correlation was detected when using average genic fst values . second, the result maintained when performing a snp-centered analysis in which each snp was assigned the ϕ value corresponding to the gene in which it lay . moreover, because almost 80% of snps studied belonged to only two associations with very large genes  a third analysis removing these two genes was performed and the same correlation between fst and ϕ was detected . in addition, fst values obtained using only tagsnps from the studied genes also showed a positive correlation to ϕ , which maintained after removing the two largest genes. finally, the positive correlation between fst and discordance in continental replicabilities became even stronger when using the conservative strategy of keeping for analysis only the most reliable associations .

a pooling by gene tests average genic fst, while in pooling independently each snp has been assigned the replicability from the association it belongs to

b variable indicates which parameter  has been tested versus ϕ

c conservative set contains those associations that have a replicability of ≥50% in at least one continent

these results suggest that differences in the continental replicabilities of disease associations  tend to occur in disease-associated genes that show an increased amount of genetic differentiation between human populations. still, different confounding factors could be shaping this correlation. for instance, a recent study based on hapmap data has shown that the degree of differentiation in the frequency of snps in different human populations depend on the functional role of the snps  <cit> . within genes, for instance, non-synonymous snps show the lowest amount of genetic differentiation among populations while snps located in 3'-utr, 5'-utr and intronic regions show an increased level of population differentiation. this trend was also observed in our data: intronic snps have a mean fst of  <dig>   while exonic  snps have a mean fst of  <dig>  . therefore, variable contributions of different snp classes to high and low replicabilities may be driving the correlations between fst and ϕ. moreover, the fact that the gad database pools association studies performed during a wide range of years and under many different conditions  constitutes another potential source of confounding factors.

to try to control for these potential sources of bias, we performed a multiple forward stepwise regression analysis to determine which variable or combination of variables best explained variance in ϕ. we introduced eight possible predictors in the model, the average genic fst together with seven potential confounding factors:  total number of snps in the gene ;  the percentage of intronic snps;  total number of studies in the association;  total number of studies performed in europe;  total number of studies performed in east asia;  the average sample size of studies; and  the average year of study publication for each association. in total,  <dig> association studies were surveyed .

our analysis unveiled a significant model  with two significant predictor variables: the total number of snps in a gene  and the genetic differentiation between populations as measured by fst . values of tolerance were high, so we could confirm that these two predictors were independent . since, as we saw above, nrg <dig> and park <dig> genes stood out because of their large number of snps , we carried out another multiple forward stepwise regression analyses without these two genes . in this case, a significant model emerged  with fst as the sole predictor variable  explaining ϕ. correlations become even stronger when using only the  <dig> associations from the more conservative set that includes associations with at least 50% replicability in each continent . these results highlight the role of fst explaining the consistency of replicabilities in different continents

a  <dig> excluded non-significant variables: a) percentage of intronic snps in the gene from each association, b) total number of studies of each association, c) total number of studies performed in europe, d) total number of studies performed in east asia, e) average study sample size of each association, and f) average year of study performance in each association

b conservative set contains those associations that at least in one continent have a replicability index of 50%

c tol = tolerance

it is still possible that this correlation could have arisen due to pure lack of statistical power. for instance, an association study in east asians could have failed to replicate a previous association found in europeans if, with similar sample size, the tested genes harbored markers with lower allele frequencies in the replica population. we calculated the percentage of snps per gene from the continental set that happened to be very rare in a given continent while being common in the other, that is, the percentage of snps that are common in just a continent . this percentage of extreme-frequency snps was not correlated with ϕ , but it was positively correlated with fst . additionally, we performed an additional multiple forward stepwise regression with the addition of this statistic as another explanatory variable for. however, the same models as above arose , this statistic being discarded as an explanatory variable of the ϕ. thus, we can exclude the possibility that fst explains the differences in replicability between europe and east asia just as a by-product of lack of statistical power.

finally, to further validate the correlation between ϕ and fst, we performed a marker-based analysis in which we studied the associated variants themselves and not the genes that contain them. after manual scrutiny of the  <dig> papers that reported the  <dig> associations in the continental set, we established the genetic marker had been analyzed in each study, and ascertained that  <dig> different snps that where associated in these studies where available for fst analysis . again, we found a positive correlation between the discordance in continental replicabilities measured by ϕ and the fst from the selected markers .

ancestral and derived alleles
the correlation between lack of replicability and larger genetic differentiation of human populations that we report here may reflect differences in the evolutionary history of genes affecting complex disease. such differences may have arisen under different evolutionary scenarios since the ancestors of human populations left africa. these scenarios range from neutral evolution governed by pure genetic drift to processes of population-specific adaptation to new environments. an excess of high-frequency derived alleles may be indicative of a shift in allele frequencies, pointing towards an active role of population-specific phenomena. thus, we compared the amount of high-frequency derived alleles among genes from the global set, according to their replicability . we defined high-replicability associations as those whose replicability was above the median . in all populations, high replicability genes presented increased levels of high-frequency derived snps . this trend was stronger in non-african populations. in europeans, the derived allele was the major one for  <dig> % of snps from the high-replicability associations . also, high-replicability associations carried an excess of high-frequency derived alleles  compared to low-replicability associations  in east asian populations. finally, although less pronounced, this pattern held in africans . gene-specific values are available at additional file  <dig> 

a ceu = north americans  of northern european ancestry; chb = chinese from beijing; jpt = japanese from tokyo; yri = yorubans from ibadan 

b anc = snps with an ancestral major allele ; der = snps with a derived major allele 

discussion
we have analyzed the role of genetic heterogeneity among human populations in the replicability of genetic association studies. to address this question, we have measured the degree of population differentiation in loci that have shown differential patterns of association to disease, as reported in the genetic association database  <cit> . we report three main results. first, snps harbored in genes associated with complex disease present lower fst values than the rest of genic snps in the genome; second, there is a negative correlation between the replicability of studies associating genes to disease and the fst values of the associated genes in european and east asian populations; and, third, in the same populations, high replicability genes present increased levels of high-frequency derived alleles. these findings would confirm the importance of the recent evolutionary history of our species in the current patterns of susceptibility to complex diseases.

given the large number of false positives reported in association studies  <cit>  a relevant starting issue is the adequacy of the gad to perform our analysis. in that respect, two points must be noted. first, it is important to see that replication studies, which are the center of our manuscript, are in fact a way to assess how likely previous associations are false positives. a good part of our study would be unnecessary if every association ever reported had been a true positive. in that sense, the known presence of both false and true positives in the database prompted the particular series of analysis that we presented here. the approach will be different when enough gwas data are available, since, given current standards in the field; it is false negatives that dominate in these studies  <cit> . secondly, even if the "low replicability" category contains a mixture of false and true positives, it is clear that the studies with highest replication rates will correspond to true positives. indeed, it has been known for quite some time that a considerable number of genetic variants have been consistently associated to complex diseases. for example, a review of  <dig> associations by lohmueller et al.  <cit>  found an excess of replications in classical association studies that cannot be explained by false positives. moreover, a recent paper by siontis et al.  <cit>  shows that a good number of the associations detected in non-gwas classical association studies  have been replicated in recent gwas . neither of these results would have been obtained if highly replicated associations would have been false positives.

our first observation of lower fst values in genes associated to complex disease is relevant to the adaptive history of these genes. it is well-known that purifying selection is the main force driving the evolution of genes related to mendelian disorders, as they tend to harbor lower levels of polymorphism. in contrast, complex-disease associated genes seem to be under different pressures, with mixed evolutionary signals  <cit> . overall, our observation of lower levels of population is suggestive of purifying selection. these findings contradict results from other authors that did not detect differences in fst values of disease-associated variants relative to genome-wide levels  <cit> . however, these previous studies focused in variants instead of genes and, therefore, could only muster small sample sizes. myles et al.  <cit>  and lohmueller et al.  <cit>  studied, respectively,  <dig> and  <dig> snps, with the resulting lack in statistical power. more recently, the study by adeyemo and rotimi  <cit>  was able to collect  <dig> disease-associated snps. as expected, they found both snps with very large and very low fst values through populations. however, they focused on average fst values per disease and did not test their global average fst of  <dig> .

anyhow, our finding of low average fst values in  <dig> genes that have been associated to disease is still inconclusive. since our data mainly come from classical  association studies, our observation may have different causes, some of them spurious. of course, a true extensive role of purifying selection governing the evolution of these genes is a possibility; but it is also possible that certain classes of genes with particular average selective pressures tend to be involved in complex diseases; or that there has been a human bias towards the inclusion of certain categories of genes in association studies  <cit> . indeed, when tested for functional enrichment of panther biological process categories , complex-disease genes from the global set showed an enrichment for the category "immunity and defense"  and an array of "signaling"- related categories, such as "signal transduction", "cell surface receptor mediated signal transduction" and "cell communication" , but these results can be the consequence of anyone of the causes mentioned above, or of several of them.

in a previous analysis of the genetic association database, amato et al.  <cit>  found a trend that seems opposite to the one we report here. namely, they detected increased levels of population differentiation in disease-associated genes when compared to genome-wide base levels. however, a careful analysis shows that our results are consistent with amato et al.'s and that the apparent contradiction is due to their analysis criteria differing from ours in two key aspects. first, their set of "disease genes" was composed by genes positively associated to disease at least once while, to avoid noise, we only included associations that had been studied four or more times . second, amato et al.  <cit>  used as the fst value representative of each gene the maximum fst value of any of the snp within that gene. in contrast, we averaged the fst values of all the snps in a gene. this second difference is crucial: when we repeat our analysis using the "maximum fst" method we do find marginally significant increased levels of population differentiation in disease genes . the reverse is also true, when we analyze the gene set from amato et al.  <cit>  with our "average fst" approach, we detect significantly lower population differentiation than genome-wide autosomic levels .

the fact that using either "maximum fst" or "average fst" leads to different results, raises the question of which approach is more accurate. we believe our method to be more precise, due to the larger average length of "disease genes". as such, they tend to harbor more snps than the average gene . and, in fact, there is a strong positive correlation between the number of snps a gene harbors and the maximum fst value these snps can reach , while the correlation is much weaker with the gene-specific average fst . as a result, the maximum fst is more biased by gene length than the average fst. therefore, an approach based on the average fst in our data seems to be more accurate, in the sense that the average fst of a gene is a better proxy of the amount of genetic differentiation at a given locus.

our second main observation is that genetic heterogeneity through human populations varies greatly amongst loci associated to complex diseases. these loci present different degrees of population differentiation if we attend to their replicability and the consistency of replicabilities between europeans and east asians. these two populations are more similar for loci that contain variants which have been similarly associated to disease over and over again in different studies, while greater genetic differences are found in loci whose disease variants have not been consistently replicated. these observations can have at least three sources. first, it is possible that different statistical power in different populations is contributing to the correlation between continental replicability and fst. for this to happen, it should be the case that genetic variants that have been associated to disease in a given population tend to be rare other parts of the world. however, we found no evidence of loci with low consistency of replicability having more snps with extreme frequencies . alternatively, recent theoretical studies demonstrate that rare variants may create spurious or synthetic associations at certain common alleles  <cit> . if rare causal variants make a substantial contribution to disease risk and if different populations present different genealogies, the spurious associations detected in each population would differ and replicability patterns may differ. this scenario would point to an important role for rare variants in the etiology of complex diseases. however it is difficult to see how highly replicated associations could be spurious and we did observe a stronger correlation between fst and consistency of replicability for associations that have been replicated in at least 50% of the studies. the final explanation would be that certain variants are contributing to the risk for the disease in some populations but not in others. the range of factors underlying this possibility is not limited to purely genetic causes. for instance, some gene-environment interactions that have appreciable joint effects in complex diseases have been described  <cit>  and environmental conditions vary widely across the planet. thus, environmental variability among populations could have a role in the differential effect of genetic variants through populations that we have detected. in any case, the evolutionary history of humans would be such that some of the variants associated to disease would increase susceptibility differently in different populations.

our study points at the heterogeneous genetic architecture of complex diseases, which even if modulated by similar cellular and molecular pathways in all humans, may present intricate population differences regarding causal variants and loci. although in most cases the behavior of susceptibility or protective risk variants are shared through populations  <cit> , some differential effects for the same alleles in different populations have been established, like the european-specific protective effects to hiv <dig> infection progression by the 32-bp deletion allele of the ccr <dig> gene  <cit>  or the presence of two different haplotype blocks in the nrg <dig> gene that give susceptibility to schizophrenia in european and east asian populations, respectively  <cit> . these differences could eventually lead to systematic differences among human populations in susceptibility to, and may underlie well-known cases, such as the differential susceptibility and prevalence of asthma between individuals of mexican or puerto rican ancestry  <cit> .

usually, lack of replication of association mapping methods is thought to be due to the presence of confounding factors such as population stratification, lack of statistical power or publication bias. therefore, stringent replication criteria are necessary to avoid false positives and to ultimately confirm that a certain genetic variant confers susceptibility to disease  <cit> . however, the fact that the allelic architecture of disease may be different through human populations raises the issue of revisiting some genetic association studies for complex diseases, since some putatively false positives might hint at diseases whose etiology is geographically heterogeneous.

as to the causes of these differences, it has been previously shown that there is variation in the disease-susceptibility variants that are present in different populations. these differences have been attributed to changes in selective pressures over standing variation  <cit>  or to population-specific selective processes  <cit> . our results showing that, when compared against low replicability genes, high replicability genes present lower fst values between european and asians, but high fst values between either of these populations and africans; together with the fact that derived alleles are more frequent in these high replicability genes in asian and european populations, suggest that replicability has been higher in loci whose allele frequencies changed in the ancestors of europeans and asians after they left africa. it is tempting to speculate about a role of natural selection in shaping this pattern, which would fit into suggestions about selection leading, in some cases, to disease as a side-effect consequence of adaptation  <cit> . however, our results could be just due to the action of genetic drift relaxing purifying selection in non-african populations. in fact, it has been shown that the bottleneck due to the out-of-africa event induced a decreased ability of purifying selection to purge deleterious alleles  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our results not only show that the evolutionary history of disease-associated loci  plays a role in the genetic susceptibility to disease in eurasians; but they also cast doubts about the status of false positives of many associations that have not been widely replicated. obtaining this picture has only been possible by analyzing more than  <dig> years worth of classical association studies. we hope that the extension of gwas to populations of non-european ancestry will allow, in time, to perform systematic research on the world-wide distribution of genetic risk variants.

