BACKGROUND
here we describe promi, a system to discover group-specific conservation characteristics in the amino acid distribution of profiles. for this we understand the sequences forming a general profile to be associated with a user-defined biological classification label, where the number of labels should be much smaller than the number of rows in the profile. in detail relations between profile columns and the applied group affiliation of the sequences forming the profile shall be investigated. the relations will be apparent by constituting significant amino-acid conservations, leading either to distinct amino acid consensus patterns in the analyzed groups or to knowledge about affinity between the groups  <cit> .

to tackle this aim the mutual information  is used as an interdependence measure of random variables xi and y  <cit> . the interdependence between xi  and y  is understood as the knowledge one gains about y if xi is known and vice versa  <cit> . small values imply small gain of knowledge between the variables, whereas high values point out a higher gain. the calculated mi-profile of the whole alignment consisting of all k groups as well as all  pairwise profiles together with computed sequence logos finally allow conclusions regarding group-specific amino acid-positions where the distribution differ significantly and thus a group-discrimination on the basis of one profile-position is possible. moreover the mean value of each pairwise mi-profile leads to formation of an elementary distance matrix d, where low mi-profile-mean-values state that the molecular similarity between groups of sequences is high opposed to higher mi-profile-mean-values with a higher molecular distance in the underlying groups. further, by applying hierarchical clustering to d, a phylogenetic tree reflecting the distance between its constituents can be constructed.

in the following we use "class" and "classification" synonymously with "group" and "group affiliation".

implementation
promi is implemented in perl as a web based service running on an apache web server and available for free use. depicted in figure  <dig> the selecting of matches relating to consensus sequences in prosite format  <cit>  or given as a regular expression is performed by using the expasy scanprosite tool  <cit> , a perl reference implementation for dealing with prosite motifs. the chosen instances of the motif were aligned using scanprosite as well and the organism-specific origin was assigned by splitting up the ncbi none redundant protein database file  <cit>  into species-specific "proteome" flatfiles. by upload of user-prepared sequences in fasta format any other user-defined classification, alternative to the classification by organism identifier, can be applied. all calculations are implemented in the r environment  <cit> . to fulfil this, the rsperl  <cit>  and rsvgdevice  <cit>  packages were used to embed r inside of perl and to offer high order output in svg-format rather than the default png-format . the computation of the sequence logos is done on the server-side by local utilisation of the berkeley weblogo software. the bioperl  <cit>  module bio::seqio is used to handle files of protein sequences.

RESULTS
sliding a window from column  <dig> to n of the profile, as can be seen in figure  <dig>  leads to a mi-profile for the motif where low mi-values correspond to positions with a high degree of conservation among their constituent groups, whereas high mi-values correspond to positions with good discriminatory power in terms of the applied group affiliation. for evaluation of significance a label permutation test giving a p-value for each mean and deviation is performed. therefore the mi-profile resulting from the given  multiple alignment is compared against histograms of  <dig> profiles derived by shuffling each column of the underling multiple alignment. by observing separation of shuffled and unshuffeld values in both histograms  a positive supporting factor for significance is given.

visualisation of mutual information profiles
phylogenetic tree
in case of k given groups   pairwise mi-profiles can be constructed. the resulting mi-average of each pair provides a distance matrix interpretable as a species-specific distance measure , which is sensitive enough to reflect relations in the underlying profiles. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  the resulting phylogenetic tree for the c2h2-domain of comprised species arabidopsis thaliana, homo sapiens, mus musculus, oryza sativa, rattus norvegicus and saccharomyces cerevisiae reveals the known phylogenetic relationship of the zinc finger domains of the observed organisms on the basis of group-and motif-specific differences. of particular interest is the fact that s. cerevisiae is clustered with animals rather than with plants.

seemingly a very naive and rough approach disregarding protein steric structures as well as amino acid proximities the method is coherent. mi as a distance measure satisfies the four axioms of a metric: non-negativity, identity of indiscernibles, symmetry and triangle inequality  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
as aforementioned the method we have outlined may not only be applied in a species-specific context, but may also be understood in terms of a phylogenetic identifier, gene expression values or any other desired classification by the user. influence of potential negative thresholds, as for example false positive matches using prosite motifs for sequence search, or a possible bias because of highly differing amounts of matching sequence fragments per group, could be decreased with little extra effort. for this the inclusion of a user-prepared multiple alignment, derived by blast and clustal is conveniently possible. the number of selected instances per group can be balanced by limiting the fragments to a suitable number. regardless of the abovementioned issues, the proposed method is a fast and convenient approach for the motif-specific analysis of hundreds of sequences derived by homology of ortholog or paralog gene and protein domain families.

