BACKGROUND
the biotechnological industry is facing substantial pressure to achieve global process optimization. concomitantly, the exploitation of high-throughput cellular data to support metabolic engineering has intensified in recent years  <cit> . at the top of the various "omic" layers, the metabolic fluxome resides as their integrated functional output, which in turn closely determines the phenotypic portrait of the cell, particularily productivity  <cit> . therefore, the estimation of intracellular fluxes in stoichiometric models is essential  <cit> .

with the emergence of increasingly extensive genome annotations for several organisms, optimization algorithms for genome-wide fluxome estimations have become well popularized. such estimations are based on flux balance analysis , which assumes a "metabolic objective" driving the behaviour of the cell . a set of derived frameworks have since been developed aiming to probe for genomic alterations  expected to yield better performances than the wild-type  <cit> , and examples of successful fba-driven predictions are available  <cit> . however, because fluxes are estimated in a landscape in which the amount of data is not enough to simply use metabolite balancing, as in small-scale metabolic flux analysis , the need for additional mathematical assumptions when searching for high yielding genetic alterations may render such predictions less dependable.

in spite of their value, and regardless of size, currently available stoichiometric models by-pass a multi-layered web of regulatory and fundamentally complex cellular events, thus constituting a simplification of cellular function  <cit> . given the obvious gap between genome and fluxome, mutants "created" in silico by linear optimization/inspection may not exhibit the expected metabolic behaviour in vivo. while methods for integration of regulatory and metabolic networks have been reported  <cit> , still fragmentary knowledge of kinetic and regulatory phenomena , together with their cumbersome biological specificity  <cit> , may preclude their full applicability in metabolic engineering. this is especially relevant when attempting to engineer complex, multi-genic phenotypes, such as improving the yields of recombinant proteins derived from animal cell cultures, for which reason stoichiometric models have been mostly confined to microbial systems producing small molecules  <cit> . in this respect, an additional important pitfall is the lack of mechanistic knowledge of processing pathways associated with the formation of proteins or viruses; simply lumping the necessary precursors in a set of synthesis reactions has proven a fruitless task since the stoichiometric requirements for these recombinant products are several orders of magnitude below those for host biomass formation, thus making their distinction practically impossible  <cit> . as a result, the application of stoichiometric models to complex product formation has been restricted to the evaluation of optimal conditions for cell growth and metabolic efficiency rather than explicitly defining productivity in the model  <cit> .

these issues are herein addressed by proposing a hybrid stoichiometric/statistical framework to make sense of fluxome data either from small-scale or genome-scale metabolic models. as intended for rapid bioprocess optimization, a scenario is presented where mfa is employed to reliably estimate intracellular flux distributions in a small-scale network comprising the main pathways of carbon and nitrogen flow, substantially reducing data acquisition efforts in the early stages. then, projection to latent structures   <cit>  is used to search for correlations between a measured productivity target and the estimated metabolic state, whereby the inclusion of a statistical model allows filling the gaps in our knowledge of global regulation of anabolic processes.

in order to illustrate this approach, the metabolic behaviour of the baculovirus-insect cells system is explored. the superior versatility and safety of baculoviruses has been exploited for a wide range of applications, from recombinant protein manufacture  <cit>  to gene expression in mammalian cells, including pharmaceutical screening and in vivo gene therapy  <cit> . our group has developed rational strategies for baculovirus production optimization in insect cell cultures. these works were based on classical mfa  <cit> , from which hypotheses on how to impact metabolism towards a higher productive state were tested and analyzed  <cit> . here, these results are combined with new data to demonstrate the ability of hybrid mfa to assign individual fluxes/pathways of central metabolism to cell-specific functions that cannot be completely defined in a stoichiometric description.

RESULTS
 <dig>  limitations of classical metabolic flux analysis
supposing the composition of a recombinant product of interest is known , a lumped reaction system comprising all metabolic precursors in stoichiometric quantities to synthesize a unit amount of product can be formulated. if the number of measured flux constraints is high enough to yield a determined or overdetermined system, then an estimation of the rate of product synthesis can be obtained . however, this estimation will generally be inaccurate, often lying outside feasible biological boundaries, even for a consistent, overdetermined system with carbon and nitrogen balances closed within experimental error. the problem of the ill-definition of protein/virus formation in a metabolic network is mathematically expressed by the extremely large sensitivity of such estimation to the measured fluxes. as a corollary, it is only possible to accurately estimate such a rate if all measurements are precisely known, that is, devoid of experimental error. to illustrate this, a comprehensive metabolic model of spodoptera frugiperda cells  comprising a well-defined central carbon and nitrogen metabolism  was combined with a set of biosynthesis reactions for recombinant baculovirus synthesis . this network contains  <dig> independent material balances  and  <dig> fluxes, resulting in  <dig> degrees of freedom. since a total of  <dig> fluxes are measured or defined, the final system is overdetermined with  <dig> redundant measurements. then, the relative sensitivity of the rate of product formation in this metabolic network was compared to that of the cell growth rate . as presented in figure  <dig>  the existence of measurement errors is significantly dampened when estimating the rate of biomass formation , having sensitivity values lower than  <dig> . however, they are enormously amplified when estimating the flux of baculovirus formation , often by several orders of magnitude.

if a representative scenario is chosen, the impact of individually omitting the measurements of μ or vbac, or of deleting the complete set of biomass or product synthesis reactions, can be assessed in terms of overall fluxome variation in relation to that estimated by the complete model . as shown, leaving out μ has a small effect in the fluxome estimation; moreover, the respective estimated μ corresponds roughly to the measurement in the complete model, indicating that the assumed stoichiometry is consistent with experimental data. on the other hand, leaving out vbac has a more profound effect in the intracellular flux distribution, evidenced by the considerably higher total fluxome variation. as expected, the estimated viral replication rate is completely unrealistic, even though the model remained consistent, evidencing that viral replication cannot be directly inferred from the nutrients uptake and metabolites production rates affected by experimental error. this is a result of the negligible requirement of anabolic precursors for viral synthesis as compared to biomass formation. therefore, it is essentially impossible to accurately estimate how much complex product is being synthesized, per cell and unit time, for a given metabolic state. finally, taking out reactions associated with virus biosynthesis has a virtually null effect on the remaining fluxes, which contrasts with the massive fluxome variation obtained after deleting reactions for biomass formation. it is important to note that model consistency is independent of incorporating the stoichiometry of virus formation. this clearly shows that the mechanisms of complex product synthesis are ill-defined in a purely stoichiometric description.

afluxome variation , calculated as the average relative variation of all intracellular fluxes estimated by the model, excluding biosynthetic reactions for biomass or virus formation.

badjusted  or estimated specific biomass formation rate .

cadjusted  or estimated specific viral synthesis rate -1).

dthe number of redundancies in an overdetermined model corresponds to flux measurements in excess of the degrees of freedom of the system .

ea consistency index  that is lower than the corresponding χ <dig>  value indicates consistency between flux measurements and the assumed network stoichiometry in each case .

 <dig>  hybrid metabolic flux analysis
in the absence of sufficient mechanistic detail, the unknown or ill-defined part of a metabolic network can be substituted by an empirical  sub-model bridging the well-defined stoichiometry with a given cellular function, such as the synthesis of a complex recombinant product ). the herein proposed hybrid mfa takes advantage of using pls to find a regression model between input fluxes, ve , and a vector of target productivity, vt, which is not directly linked with the known part of the network ). the result is a vector of regression coefficients  representing how strongly each flux correlates with the target. this statistical association can be used to derive hypothesis on how to perturb the metabolic network towards increased productivity .

to assess the performance of this methodology, original and published experimental data were pooled together, comprising a diverse set of  <dig> independent infection cultures . included are infections performed with a recombinant baculovirus, at different cell densities, in different culture systems and subject to various supplementation and treatment schemes . in all experiments, the sf <dig> insect cell line was infected at a low multiplicity of infection  in serum-free medium. overall, a matrix of  <dig> ×  <dig> fluxes estimated by mfa was used as predictor data for the pls model . in all cases, the pseudo-steady state hypothesis on intracellular metabolites was assumed, since extracellular metabolite profiles were approximately linear during the initial 48h to 72h productive phase after infection. data from the end of infection cultures were not taken into account to avoid confounding effects due to cell lysis. the number of measured fluxes was in excess of the degrees of freedom of the system, resulting in an overdetermined model with  <dig> redundant measurements. on average, nitrogen and carbon balances closed to 70% and 88%, respectively, and experimental data were consistent with the assumed biochemistry and the pseudo-steady state hypothesis . as target, specific baculovirus productivities were measured as described in methods, covering on the whole  <dig> orders of magnitude.

in every case, cells were grown to the appropriate cell density in sf900ii serum-free medium and infected with  <dig>  infectious particles per cell.

acell concentration at infection ; "1" and "3" stand for 1- <dig>  and 3- <dig> ×  <dig> cells × ml- <dig>  respectively.

bnutrients supplementation and culture treatment were performed as described in methods . ims - complete insect medium supplement.

cmeasured specific viral synthesis rate -1).

our pls model was able to capture most of the variance in the target productivity, despite using only  <dig> latent variables to describe the input data ). because in latent variable models, such as pls, there is no direct relationship between predictor and target variables, the calculation of reliable confidence intervals for the regression coefficients is not straightforward, limiting their interpretability. namely, regression coefficients in pls models have been found to reflect primarily the underlying latent structure of the data, rather than accounting for the error variances of the predictor variables  <cit> . to circumvent this problem, monte carlo sampling was used to generate  <dig> data matrices based on the error variances of all  <dig> metabolic fluxes and specific baculovirus productivity. pls models were then built on the generated data, allowing the estimation of confidence intervals associated with each regression coefficient. the procedure revealed that  <dig> out of  <dig> regression coefficients were not statistically meaningful, having strengths of association  lower than  <dig> ). it should be underlined that the flux discrimination criterion includes both observed correlations with the target and precision of measurement/estimation.

the reduced list of meaningful fluxes was then hierarchically clustered in the regression coefficient/confidence interval space in order to highlight groups that share a common strength of association with the target ,). overall, the generated cluster tree preserved distance measurements between pairs of data objects, having a cophenetic correlation coefficient of  <dig> . to evaluate natural divisions in the dataset, a preliminary analysis was performed by calculating an inconsistency coefficient for each link in the cluster tree . essentially, two clusters stand out, one having α values close to  <dig> corresponding to the tricarboxylic acids  cycle and respiration reactions, and another, with lighter association strengths, comprising the uptake fluxes of phenylalanine, methionine and histidine. remarkably, this selected group of amino acids sharing a positive correlation with productivity had on average higher ratios of catabolization  than the rest of the essential amino acids, which were primarily used for biomass synthesis; the interpretation of these selections can in principle be based on their contribution to oxidative metabolism as well.

in view of these results, engineering strategies aiming to increase carbon flow through central oxidative pathways, possibly by rearranging flux partitioning at key metabolic nodes or feeding energy-generating metabolites, could potentially be beneficial for virus replication. to this respect, it is possible to find in table  <dig> a group of cultures that, based on previous empirical inspection, were purposefully designed to increase productivity by the addition of energy-generating metabolites   <cit> . metabolic node rearrangement was not an issue since sf <dig> cells naturally possess a highly efficient oxidative metabolism  <cit> . additionally, in face of preliminary simulations, we thought of some treatment to simulate a depressed energetic state and negatively impact productivity, namely through the addition of aicar , a cell permeable amp mimetic that strongly binds amp-activated protein kinase, inducing downstream effects typical of atp starvation such as inhibition of protein synthesis  <cit> . this experiment, together with the substitution of half the culture medium by pbs , comprised the lower segment in the baculovirus productivity range.

 <dig>  predictive power
to validate an empirical model it is mandatory to test its predictive power with new independent experiments not used in the calibration step. we selected the above mentioned subset of experiments  to be used for validation. in a second validation strategy, the three experiments with the highest productivities  were left aside as a means to prevent data interpolation. in both strategies, the number of latent variables was chosen based on maximum total variance explained  and constrained by a limit of  <dig>  as presented in figure  <dig>  the productivities of experiments  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were reasonably predicted, considering the challenging partition of the data , while the results for validation  <dig> were considerably sounder. more importantly, the hybrid mfa-pls structure clearly outperformed classical mfa in modeling baculovirus production, as demonstrated by comparing the predicted productivities obtained in both validation data sets with the corresponding values predicted by mfa .

ameasured specific viral synthesis rate -1).

bvalidation strategy  <dig> 

cvalidation strategy  <dig> 

in terms of metabolic decomposition, these models corroborate our previous conclusions. indeed, the most important pathways for viral replication previously discriminated, namely tca cycle and respiration, showed a significant correlation with productivity for both validation strategies ). also for validation strategy  <dig>  the catabolism of phenylalanine, methionine and histidine had again α values higher than  <dig>  though other fluxes with lighter correlations were also selected. overall, despite the somewhat limited collection of data, these results indicate the hybrid mfa framework should prove a valuable tool in designing metabolic optimization strategies for complex products, with potential applicability to a range of cellular systems.

discussion
in this work, a cost-effective hybrid methodology is reported to make sense of accessible fluxome data for rapid optimization of complex productivity phenotypes. pls modelling is used in tandem with classical metabolic flux analysis to establish a link between an estimated metabolic state and system productivity, therefore providing a predictive in silico platform to assist genetic/environmental metabolic engineering when a well-defined stoichiometric description of product formation is not available. an important feature of pls is that it decomposes complex data sets into subsets of uncorrelated vectors, called latent variables, while eliminating redundant information. this permits to address biological problems where the number of variables assessed largely exceeds the number of observations, reason why this method has gathered significance in interpreting "omic" data sets  <cit> . as reviewed in teixeira et al.  <cit> , combining such data-mining tools with mechanistic models gives rise to hybrid parametric-nonparametric systems, which enable cost-effective analysis of complex problems with fragmentary knowledge.

our method is conceived to perform on the basis of an informative, yet not exhaustive, preliminary set of experiments easily available at laboratory scale. it is especially suited to deal with complex products whose synthesis mechanisms are ill-defined by considering a simple stoichiometric description as part of a global metabolic model, or whose composition is unknown. productivity enhancement in the case of simpler molecules, for instance amino acids or tca cycle intermediaries, has been previously achieved by stoichiometric analysis of their respective synthesis pathways  <cit> . here, the main output is the global identification of fluxes strongly correlated with a highly productive state, which are discriminated from a background of less significant metabolic reactions contributing to product synthesis. thus, as opposed to classical mfa, our approach enables predicting the productivity in independent experiments based on a previous calibration, and the identification of metabolic targets for production optimization. in this respect, the estimation of reliable confidence intervals for the flux regression coefficients is crucial to remove a large portion of uncertainty in the selection of metabolic targets, considerably improving the odds of successful experimental validation. methods that assure a higher precision in fluxome estimations, such as isotopic tracer experiments  <cit> , could in principle expose other targets for manipulation.

it should be noted that the predictive capacity for the phenotypic change does not necessarily translate in the ability to predict the means to deliver this change. specifically, finding a strong statistical correlation between a given metabolic route and productivity does not translate into a direct cause-effect relationship. while this may often be the case for the synthesis of single molecules, production of correctly formed proteins or viruses depends on a complex series of steps ranging from gene transcription to protein secretion or virus assembly, along with their regulation through even less understood signalling events . therefore, the identification of genetic targets may at times be beyond the domain of central metabolic fluxes, which themselves are upstream regulated along with the productivity phenotype. on this issue, the methodology herein presented could at least allow to hypothesize how different cell pathways/functions are commonly regulated.

besides providing a list of prospective metabolic targets to be exploited for engineering, the proposed framework adds a functional dimension to previous metabolic decomposition studies based solely on structural properties of the underlying network, namely connectivity  <cit>  or pathway feasibility  <cit> . here, clusters of fluxes are defined by sharing the same relationship with a given cellular output. as a main drawback, our method is constrained by data availability on cellular fluxome and target phenotype, thus demanding some experimental effort.

as mentioned earlier, when used to handle flux distributions estimated by fba in genome-scale models, this approach represents an alternative hybrid framework to linear optimization techniques during metabolic target selection, which could significantly surpass existing limitations in modeling complex phenotypes. a recent paper by melzer et al.  also explores the use of multivariate statistics to correlate stoichiometrically-derived elementary modes in complex networks with stoichiometrically-defined productivity targets, as opposed to common search algorithms for strain improvement  <cit> . however, our approach differs conceptually to the cited work in that we define a statistical bridge between a well-defined stoichiometry and a complex phenotype, therefore substituting for a metabolic link that may be ill-defined in a purely stoichiometric representation and otherwise hampered by insufficient kinetic and regulatory information. this should prove an advantage in predicting non-obvious metabolic targets associated with the synthesis of more complex recombinant products in animal cells, particularly multimeric proteins, multi-protein particles and viruses, the later adding an additional degree of complexity due to the virus-coded regulation of cellular machinery.

finally, from a practical point of view, several issues are worth considering before opting for a genome-scale model. in one respect, the availability of a well sequenced and annotated genome may constitute a major limitation: while accurate metabolic reconstructions are available for un-mutated, standard microorganisms such as e. coli and s. cerevisiae, in an industrial setting a larger diversity of organisms are used, particularly animal cell systems for which cellular data is much scarcer  <cit> . another consideration is the cost and time associated with the creation of these models. even if a comprehensive genome-scale stoichiometric model is already at disposal, a considerable experimental effort is necessary to overlay high-throughput metabolomic and isotopomer flux data for better constraining fluxome estimations  <cit> . in particular, the computational power required for 13c flux analysis may become prohibitive for very complex networks by today's standards. overall, our framework could potentially be more useful to steer rapid development of a broad range of organisms on the basis of a representative small-scale metabolic network. as such, it would significantly enhance the quality of information extracted from exploratory experiments compared to traditional metabolic flux analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
the need to understand and manipulate cellular systems for increased biosynthesis of target products has been a consistent focus of research, now supported by the huge flows of data being obtained at different cellular levels. however, the increasingly available knowledge is still not sufficient for the construction of global metabolic models able to accurately predict cell behaviour in response to perturbations. to this end, multivariate statistical tools will keep proving useful in functionally connecting different layers of cellular information, filling the gaps in our understanding of kinetic and regulatory phenomena. at this point, we believe that combining both frameworks into a hybrid metabolic flux analysis framework constitutes a valuable and straightforward complement to purely stoichiometric models in optimizing industrially relevant complex productivity phenotypes.

