BACKGROUND
ependymin , a glycoprotein that is found in high concentrations within the cerebrospinal fluid of teleost fishes was originally associated with learning processes in fishes  <cit> . although the original protein sequence was obtained in the 1980's by classical methods of protein purification, with the advent of molecular biology the epd genes of many fish species were sequenced  <cit> . epd sequences have been determined to be a useful tool for studying the phylogeny of teleost fishes  <cit> , based on high conservation of piscine sequences in certain regions  and high divergence at others  while retaining enough phylogenetic signal to resolve with confidence the relationship among distantly related taxa.

more recently ependymin-related proteins  have been identified in other vertebrates including amphibians and mammals  <cit> . since epds and epdrs had been found only in vertebrate species, this protein family was considered unique to this group  <cit> . however, the discovery by our group of an epdr gene in echinoderms showed that the family extends to non-vertebrate deuterostomes and questioned whether epds could be a deuterostome specific protein family  <cit> .

differences in sequence and tissue expression between fishes and mammals also surfaced in our previous work. whereas in fishes the known epd proteins are brain-specific  <cit> , in mammals the epd protein is expressed in several different tissues  <cit> . moreover, according to our initial phylogenetic analyses, the echinoderm sequences clustered with those from mammals and the epd transcript showed a broad pattern of expression in echinoderm tissues  <cit> .

the availability of new sequence data from piscine expressed sequence tags  projects, allowed us to identify additional epd members that interestingly were isolated from non-brain tissue. some of these "new" epd sequences came from fishes such as zebrafish, whose brain-specific epd gene had been well characterized  <cit> . zebrafish non-brain derived epd ests showed significant differences  from the previously known brain associated epd. this fact suggested that the epd protein family was larger and more complex than previously thought, and encouraged us to undertake a systematic search in multiple databases for new members of this protein family in different metazoans. our focus was twofold. first, we investigated if the non-brain specific piscine epd proteins were evolutionarily more related to the previously known brain-specific piscine sequences, or if, as suggested by their broader expression pattern, they were closer to mammal and echinoderm epds. second, we looked for the presence of epd domain-containing proteins in protostomes.

new epd proteins were identified in our survey from multiple metazoan ests and genome databases. using these sequences and all the previously well-known epds, we assembled the most comprehensive epd dataset to date for phylogenetic analyses and assessment of natural selection pressure. it was in this context that we attempted to determine what relationship, if any, exists between the evolutionary history of this gene family and tissue-specific patterns of gene expression.

our findings clearly demonstrate that epd domain-containing proteins are present in vertebrates, invertebrate deuterostomes, and protostomes. in addition, our phylogenetic analyses suggest that two fish-specific genome duplications shaped the evolution of the epds. the resulting gene duplicates have undergone functional divergence either by positive selection or relaxed purifying selection, as indicated by an increased rate of nonsynonymous substitution. based on our evolutionary analyses we classified epds into four protein groups. the absence in tetrapods of two of these groups provides further support for fish-specific genome duplications  <cit>  that resulted in the appearance of teleost-specific duplicate genes. our data suggest that a combination of the duplication-degeneration-complementation  model  <cit>  and adaptive evolution in the coding regions  <cit>  contributed to evolution of both teleost-specific gene copies and a deuterostome-specific epd protein group. our analyses identify several codon/amino acid sites that appear to account for the escape from pseudogenization of these genes and their gaining of rapid functional divergence  <cit> .

the results presented here provide some important clues to the functional differences of epds. while the originally described brain-specific epds have been associated with neuroplasticity and optic nerve regeneration in fishes  <cit> , the mammalian epds are expressed in a variety of tissues and specifically the human epd have been shown to be overexpressed in colon cancer  <cit>  and in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells just before the onset of proliferation and differentiation  <cit> . moreover, our own studies  <cit>  demonstrated that the echinoderm epds are expressed in several tissues and its overexpression suggested its involvement in intestinal regeneration. thus, it seems likely that the structural differences shown here to occur among epds, that serve to group them in evolutionary terms, can also be used to identify their particular functions in the tissues, organs and species where they are expressed.

RESULTS
identification of new members of the ependymin protein family
the interpro  <cit>  epd protein family  is composed of protein sequences bearing only the epd domain. the architecture and signatures defining this domain are very distinctive  <cit> . the fact that there are no domains/families known to be related to  means that a protein can be assigned to the epd family if it displays the sequence patterns established for the domain.

taking advantage of recently sequenced genomes and ongoing est projects, we were able to find  <dig> new members of the epd protein family . the assignment of each sequence to this family was corroborated by searches in the conserved protein domains  database  <cit> , detection of potential n-glycosylation sites  <cit> , comparison of hydropathic profiles  <cit> , prediction of cysteines participating in disulfide bond formation  <cit> , and the presence of certain amino acids in conserved positions as compared to previously well-known epd proteins. most of the sequences passed every one of these tests. cases where candidate ests possessed an n-terminal sequence were also verified by signal peptide screening  <cit> . all the newly identified epd sequences had significant similarity only with other epd proteins as determined by position-specific iterated blast  and standard blastp searches .

interestingly, four of the new epd sequences found during this study were from protostomes : the mollusks crassostrea gigas , crassostrea virginica ,aplysia californica , and biomphalaria glabrata . the working names used here are given in parenthesis. the finding of epd proteins in mollusks is remarkable since the epd proteins were once thought to be chordate specific  <cit>  and later deuterostome-specific  <cit> . the presence of epd in mollusks clearly indicates that this family is older than previously thought and its origin can be traced at least to the origin of the protostomes. we failed to find epd domain-containing proteins in other protostomes for which genome and est data is available, such us drosophila and caenorhabditis elegans, but this does not rule out the possibility of finding additional family members in other protostomes once more metazoan species are sequenced. in addition, it has recently been proposed that model species such as drosophila and c. elegans have suffered extensive gene loss during their natural history and that this hinders their utility in big scale genome comparisons  <cit> . an alternative explanation is that the epd protein family is restricted to the deuterostomes and lophotrochozoans while absent from the ecdysozoans.

additional new members of the epd protein family were found in the taxonomic groups: echinodermata, urochordata, cephalochordata, amphibia, aves, elasmobranchii, and fishes . in the latter group, it is notable that this gene was previously known to be only expressed in the brain of teleost fishes  <cit> . however, we found several new members of the protein family expressed in other fish tissues that appear to be duplications of the previously described brain genes. thus, besides the genes known to be expressed in brain, we found three additional epd genes in zebrafish and fugu; two additional copies in tetraodon, medaka, and salmon; and an additional copy in the catfish ictalurus punctatus. all these new genes have a broader expression pattern , as can be inferred from the tissue source information deposited by the authors in the corresponding ests databases.

the  <dig> newly identified epd proteins  were combined with the  <dig> previously recognized members  to produce an alignment of  <dig> members of the family which served as the basis for our molecular evolutionary analyses.

the protein sequence logo  <cit>  representing the alignment of all the  <dig> epd sequences  confirmed that amino  and carboxyl  ends are not well conserved, increasing similarity in the epd domain region as pointed out in previous studies  <cit> . inside the domain, several amino acids provided a hallmark of epd molecules. the most relevant were four cysteines within the molecule primary sequence at positions  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . these residues have also been predicted by the disulfind server  <cit>  to participate in disulfide bond formation, pointing to a key role in protein folding and/or dimeric interactions and ultimately to the biological function of the epds  <cit> . two proteins  were found to lack one of these cys but this was probably due to sequencing errors on these ests. pro residues were usually found one to three residues from the cys, particularly next to the first and fourth cys. in addition, all epds showed an asp about  <dig> residues down from the initial cys . a tyr residue  was found to precede the common asp in all species except for echinoderms which showed a phe at this position. other residues common to epds included:  the gly  at about  <dig> residues from the second cys,  the pro  at a halfway distance between the second cys and the common gly, and  the trp , 11– <dig> residues after the common gly. only  <dig> species lack this trp . also notable was the high conservation of the residues p <dig>  p <dig>  g <dig>  r <dig>  k <dig>  l <dig>  t <dig>  f <dig>  and p <dig>  in view of their high positional conservation, and the yet to be determined tridimensional structures of epd proteins, we can only suggest that these amino acids are especially important to the overall epd function.

the epd protein family members can show highly divergent amino acid sequences but still maintain very similar hydropathy profiles, suggesting that the overall functional properties of the proteins are conserved  <cit> . these hydropathic profiles have been used to link epd amino acid similarity with their properties as secreted glycoproteins  <cit> . as shown in figure  <dig>  the hydropathic profiles of epd proteins are very similar. thus, this family of proteins is mainly hydrophilic without transmembrane domains, but possesses a small, highly hydrophobic, region corresponding to the n-terminal signal peptide typical of secreted proteins.

virtual mapping
four epd sequences were found in the zebrafish genome, all of which mapped to different linkage groups  in the zebrafish assembly zv <dig>  the first sequence was the previously well-known zebrafish epd gene danio_bra . the other zebrafish epd genes analyzed were: danio_tj , dan_lvitem  and danio_merp  . two of the zebrafish protein sequences  had higher similarity to other vertebrate epd sequences such as the goldfish and the human epd protein than to the other zebrafish sequences . for instance, the amino acid similarity between the danio_bra and the goldfish epd  expressed in brain was  <dig> %, the similarity between the danio_merp and the human epd protein  expressed in several tissues was  <dig> %, while the similarity between danio_bra and danio_merp was only  <dig> %.

using genome and ests information from tetraodon, we found that three different epd genes  mapped to different genomic locations . pairwise comparisons of the three tetraodon protein sequences yielded percentages of similarity ranging between 35% and 43%, much less than the similarity expected if they were the same gene. since the tetraod_br and tetraod_tj genes were predicted from genome sequence and are not well supported by tetraodon cdnas , we have proposed that they are expressed by different tissues , according to their location in the preliminary gene trees that we generated from the gathered data.

we found four fugu epd sequences  localized to different scaffolds of the current fugu genome assembly . amino acid similarity in pairwise comparisons among them ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> %.

three different medaka epd sequences  were found and mapped to different scaffolds in the draft assembly of the medaka  hdrr genome . medaka_lw <dig> and medaka_lw <dig> epd proteins were 80% similar and only  <dig> % identical, and each one of them differed from medak_merp by  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively.

two ciona epd domain-containing genes  were predicted from the ciona intestinalis genome assembly . although the two ciona epds were located on the same chromosome , they were mapped to different regions and each one was encoded by several non-overlapping ests. the identity between the ciona epds was only 33%, providing further support for being different genes.

we were able to map only one epd gene for the frog , chicken, human, mouse, rat, and chimpanzee genomes . although two different mouse epd proteins were available on the databases, our analyses indicated that they may not be two different genes . we doubt that the epdr1_mus  is a mouse gene, but we included this sequence as well as the reliable mouse sequence epdr2_mus  in subsequent analyses since they are both currently acknowledged in genbank as separate mouse epd genes.

phylogenetic distribution and relationships of ependymins
since previously published phylogenies included only  <dig> sequences expressed in fish brain  <cit> , a few sequences from mammals, one from an amphibian  <cit> , and three from echinoderms  <cit> , our dataset of  <dig> family members represents a substantially more comprehensive sample of epd diversity. our results using various methods for phylogenetic inference  showed essentially the same topology . the sole difference was that with maximum parsimony, several unresolved polytomies were obtained in the more derived branches within each main clade . we note that bootstrap values and posterior probabilities were low for certain branches. however, an assumption for the bootstrapping method is even distribution of the phylogenetic signal throughout the data set  <cit> . in gene families like epd, with complete conservation of some sites and large divergence in others across the phylogeny, this assumption is not met. thus, high bootstrap values are not always expected to be obtained for many nodes, because the sites supporting the existence of the main clades may differ from the sites that are useful for resolving the relationships among more derived groups  <cit> .

four clade groups could be inferred from our phylogenetic analyses : a first group that we have called "fishbrain" is composed of epd proteins specifically expressed in teleost fish brain. the original epd sequences were located in this group which has been the best studied group with more than  <dig> member sequences. in fact, most of the available epd sequences from fishes came from an extensive study  <cit>  which used brain tissue to clone orthologues of goldfish epd in other teleost fishes.

a second group that we named "fishtj" has remained unnoticed until now. this group is only present in fishes, but unlike the fishbrain group, its expression is not restricted to the brain. this group was represented by twelve epd sequences that we placed as a putative sister clade to the fishbrain group . the fishtj group was composed of complete genes obtained from genome and ests sequencing projects in which the tissue was not brain derived. in fact, recently the est sequences salmo_tj from salmo salar and medaka_lw <dig> from the medaka fish oryzias latipes were shown to be upregulated in immunologically challenged liver: in the case of the salmonid sequence, after being exposed to the pathogen aeromonas salmonicida  <cit> , and in the case of medaka, after being exposed to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonist tcdd  <cit> . thus, from the response displayed by these animals under toxic stress, we suggest that these fishtj epds might be involved in repair following hepatic injury.

all the teleost fish species that have an epd gene in the fishtj group also have an unlinked epd copy in the fishbrain group . the only exception to this observation is the medaka where no brain-specific epd protein was found, probably due to incomplete sequencing or assembling. in our results, the bootstrap value and posterior probability that support the fishtj group as a monophyletic clade are low, but the cohesion among the fishtj proteins is graphically strong. we predict that as more piscine epd sequences isolated from tissues other than brain become available, the support value for this group will raise dramatically.

it is interesting to note the position of the shark epd sequence  . with the current information, this sequence was placed as the putative root of a big clade containing sequences only present in fishes that became divided into the fishbrain and fishtj paralog groups. since this part of the tree resembles the duplication topology described by meyer and colleagues  <cit> , it could reflect the whole genome duplication postulated to have occurred during the natural history of teleost fishes  <cit> . thus, it will be important to determine if the shark position remains unchanged after the addition of more sequences.

the monophyly of the third group that can be recognized from the tree  was highly supported. this group was composed of protein sequences isolated from echinoderms, amphibians, birds, mammals, an elasmobranchii , and four sequences from teleost fishes . since the first acknowledged member of this group was the human gene epdr <dig> formerly called merp <dig>  <cit> , we have named this clade the "merps" group. according to published experimental evidence  <cit> , and to information deposited in the databases, these sequences were isolated from a variety of tissue sources, including but not restricted to brain, heart, skeletal muscle, prostate, kidney, liver, small intestine, colon, spleen and gonads in human and mouse, and in intestine, esophagus, mesenteries, gonads, respiratory trees, and tentacles in echinoderms. clearly, the expression pattern of the epd proteins in the merps group is not tissue-specific.

although statistical support was poor , we also postulate the existence of a fourth epd group that includes the evolutionary more basal species. this group, that we named "basal", clusters epd genes from protostomes  and deuterostomes . since all basal group epds are from invertebrates, we expected echinoderm sequences to fall within this group as well. therefore, we performed the sh  <cit> , kh and rell  <cit>  tests to compare the expected placement of echinoderm sequences within the basal group as opposed to their placement inside the merps group observed in the inferred tree topology . however, all tests indicated significantly better support  for their assignment to the merps group. a notable misplacement in the basal group was the location of the epd gene from oysters as sister to the amphioxus epd gene; instead of being sister group of the other mollusks: aplysia californica  and biomphalaria glabrata . this misplacement  did not fit the data significantly better than the expected phylogenetic placement of the oysters as sisters of the other mollusks .

interestingly, the epd sequence isolated from the oyster crassostrea gigas  has been recently shown to be up-regulated in the digestive gland of these animals after a week of exposure to hydrocarbon contamination  <cit> . since the digestive gland, similar to the liver, is known to plays major roles in metabolism and detoxification, this may imply that epds in mollusks and vertebrates have conserved functions.

we expected that within each epd paralog group, the species gene tree would be obtained after phylogenetic reconstruction. this was achieved for the fishbrain group where the branching pattern agreed considerably with previous studies focused on the phylogenetic relationship of teleost fishes  <cit> . in spite of the awkward, but statistically well supported positioning of the epd sequences from echinoderms, the overall branching pattern inside the merps group also agreed satisfactorily with the expected species tree. however sampling bias against the metazoan groups that may carry genes belonging to any of the previously unidentified epd groups  appears to be the main impediment to obtain good statistical support for their monophyly and resolve the species relationships among the proteins inside each group. thus, our reconstruction of the epd phylogeny strongly agrees with the 2r hypothesis  <cit> , providing a good example for the two rounds of genome duplications proposed to have occurred early in the vertebrate lineage; all exceptions found in the inferred topology are highlighted by low support values.

descriptive analysis of the ependymin protein family subgroups
to analyze the particular characteristics of each epd group we selected only complete sequences with the initial methionine and the final stop codon. these included  <dig> epds from the fishbrain group,  <dig> from the merps,  <dig> from the fishtj, and  <dig> from the basal. table  <dig> shows the major findings of these comparisons. if we use the basal group to represent the putative original molecule it serves as a point of comparison on how the other group molecules have diverged. we are conscious that this basal group contains species from three different phyla that might be quite distant from one another. nonetheless, if we do the same analysis using only the two mollusk complete sequences, the variability they show between them is similar to that when compared with the other two phyla, thus essentially the same results are obtained.

a number of amino acid residues

b pi, theoretical isoelectric point

c a, number of acidic residues

d b, number of basic residues

e a/b, ratio of acidic to basic residues

f ai, aliphatic index

g number of residues in the proteins

when compared to the basal group, epds from the other three groups show an increase in size. this increase is particularly evident in the merps with an average increase in size of  <dig> residues  over the basal group. our sequence comparisons show that it is in terms of the amino acid composition that the groups show highly significant differences. the predicted isoelectric point of the basal group varies from  <dig> to  <dig> . however, the fishbrain epds show an acidic isoelectric point of around  <dig> , while the isoelectric point of merps and fishtj epds is around  <dig> . the different isoelectric points are mainly due to a larger number of acidic residues and a decrease in basic residues found in fishbrain epds, making the ratio of acidic to basic residues almost double that of other epds.

other differences among the epd groups are noticeable. fishtj epds have a significantly higher aliphatic index than the other groups. however, at the amino acid level, it is surprising that the number of phe residues is almost halved in the merps in comparison to other groups. similarly, the number of trp residues in the molecules shows significant differences among the groups. the basal species and the fishbrain molecules have an average of  <dig> trps in their sequences, which increases to  <dig>  in fishtj and to  <dig>  in merps; this latter change is astonishing given that trp is the largest and rarest amino acid. a similar trend is observed with the number of pro residues, although the number only increases 50% between the basal group and the merps. an additional comparative analysis of the predicted amino acid modifications in epd proteins, including n-myristoylation, n-glycosylation and phosphorylation sites is available .

apart from the amino acid residues that characterize the protein family ; there are several amino acid features that typify each one epd subgroup. these group-specific signatures were revealed using sequence logos generated from sub-alignments containing only the members of each group  . this analysis clearly shows a divergent pattern of amino acid usage and conservation among the epd family subgroups. this pattern suggests differences in selective constraints, likely arising from divergence in structural and functional aspects of the proteins phenotype.

analysis of selective pressures acting over the ependymin protein family
the fact that some basal group sequences were found in protostomes , lead us to suggest that this group represents the evolutionary origin of the epd molecules. alternatively, it may indicate that the epd protein evolved in an ancestor of the protostomes and deuterostomes, but expanded into a gene family only within the deuterostomes. under either scenario, the merps, fishbrain and fishtj groups represent the more derived members of the epd protein family.

different selective pressures acting over each epd paralog group could have favored fixation of different sequences in each metazoan genome. to investigate the divergence of epd groups, we used the rate of nonsynonymous  and synonymous  nucleotide substitution ratio , as implemented in codon models of molecular evolution  <cit> . in this statistical approach, an ω <  <dig> indicates the action of purifying selection ; ω =  <dig> is consistent with neutral evolution, and ω >  <dig> indicates positive darwinian selection   <cit> .

we used the likelihood ratio test  statistic to determine if the selective pressure is significantly different between postduplication  and postspeciation  branches in the epd phylogeny . we fitted two different pd-ps models to our data  and contrasted each pd-ps model against a one-ratio model  that assumed that pd branches as well as ps branches were subjected to the same selective pressure. the lrts gave significantly higher support  to all the tested pd-ps models over the m <dig> model . estimates of pd-ps model parameters suggest that  just after the duplication events, the fixation of amino acid changes increased in pd branches, and  the rate of amino acid evolution decreased in ps branches, presumably due to more stringent levels of purifying selection. for instance, estimates under the mps <dig> model were: ω =  <dig> , ω =  <dig>  and background ωb ratio =  <dig> . in both tested pd-ps models dn values averaged  <dig>  and ds values averaged  <dig> .

furthermore, our branch based analyses suggest that each epd paralog group has been subjected to a different selective pressure during their natural history. the paralog models  that allow for paralog-specific differences in selection pressure provided a significantly better explanation of the data  than did the one-ratio model  assuming no differences in selection pressure among epd paralog groups.

since each epd group has particular amino acid features that differentiate it from other paralogs ; we also expected the selective pressure to vary among sites and among epd paralog groups. therefore, we applied site-models of codon evolution to evaluate this scenario using each of the epd groups  as separate data sets. when we applied the one-ratio site-model  to each sub-dataset, the estimates of the ω ratio averaged over all sites for each paralog group  were all consistent with the ω estimates previously obtained under the mp <dig> paralog model . however, a lrt contrasting these separate analyses under m <dig> to m <dig>  which allows among-site variation in the selective pressure, revealed significant heterogeneity in selective pressures within each member of the epd family . we note that this is not an unexpected result, as genes encoding functional protein products typically exhibit significant variation in selection pressure among sites. in addition, all epd paralogs had a class of sites subjected to a rather strong purifying selection  but the fraction of such sites varies widely among paralogs .

signature residues for the entire epd family , such as the four strictly conserved cys, are predicted to be critical for the common biological function of all epd genes. in this context, we expected such residues to be localized in codon sites subjected to very strong purifying selection against nonsynonymous changes. when we applied the codon site models to the data set comprised of  <dig> epd proteins , we found that a lrt contrasting the site-models m <dig> and m <dig> was highly significant , providing support for considerable variability in the selective pressures acting within the member genes of the epd family. when we plotted the approximate posterior mean of the ω ratio at each codon site of the whole epd protein family , the amino acids present in the most evolutionarily constrained positions with a ω ≤  <dig>  were: c <dig>  p <dig>  g <dig>  y <dig>  d <dig>  e <dig>  i <dig>  f <dig>  t <dig>  c <dig>  k <dig>  p <dig>  s <dig>  g <dig>  w <dig>  c <dig>  f <dig>  p <dig> and c <dig>  for all these residues except for e <dig>  the finding of strong evolutionary constraint is corroborated by our previous comparative analysis of sequence logos . the e <dig> site appears to be evolutionarily selected for acid residues in the more derived members of the epd protein family; since this site is occupied by a glu in all the members of the merps group, by an asp in all the members of the fishbrain and fishtj groups. but in the basal group this position is occupied by the aliphatic amino acid leu.

the analysis of selective pressure acting in average over all sites of the entire data set and sub-datasets , suggest that purifying selection  has been the main influence on the evolution of the entire epd protein family  and their sub-groups . moreover, none of the site-specific codon models  implemented to the datasets, suggested the action of positive selection when the appropriate lrts were performed . however, these site models averaged the selective pressure over all sites of the whole phylogeny or subgroups, and might have failed to detect short episodes of positive selection taking place over a few amino acid sites after a duplication event. therefore, we implemented the branch-site models a and b  <cit>  to detect if positive selection was driving the evolution of some sites along specific branches of the epd phylogeny. these models let the ω ratio vary among sites and among lineages. we performed the test  <dig> or "branch-site test of positive selection"  <cit>   contrasting the model a against itself with ω <dig> fixed to  <dig> for each pd branch as defined in figure  <dig> . we found evidence of episodic adaptive evolution acting along the merps branch . five sites  had a high posterior probability  of being positively selected considering the bayes empirical bayes  method as implemented on model a  <cit> . the site  <dig> is occupied in the merps group by basic amino acids with positively charged side chains . in the fishbrain group this position is occupied only by polar amino acids being the more common asn, asp and ser. quite the opposite is observed for this position in the fishtj group, in which this site is occupied only by hydrophobic amino acids. however, in the basal group this site is very variable and can be occupied by either polar or hydrophobic amino acids. the site  <dig> is strictly occupied by the aromatic amino acid trp in all members of the merps group; it is preferentially occupied by aromatic residues  in the fishtj and basal groups. in contrast, in the fishbrain group this site is highly variable and usually occupied by arg and lys. the same analysis can be done for the sites  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> that are preferentially occupied in the merps group by the hydroxylic amino acids thr  and ser ; while these sites are highly variable in the other paralog groups, being occupied mostly by non-hydroxylic polar residues.

along the fishtj branch, we also obtained significant evidence for positive selection according to the test  <dig> , but only the amino acid site  <dig> was predicted with the beb method under model a. in the fishtj group, this site is occupied by an aliphatic amino acid . in contrast, in the fishbrain group an aromatic residue  is usually present, except in the fugu_brain and the tetraod_br sequences that have a ser. interestingly, in the merps group, all the mammalian sequences have a ser at position  <dig>  but all other taxa within this group  have aromatic residues. position  <dig> is highly variable in the basal group and shows no clear pattern of amino acid replacement.

in contrast to the merps and fishtj groups, the evidence for positive selection affecting the fishbrain lineage was not as clear , and can be considered only to be marginal support for adaptive selection or relaxed selective constraints at three sites . in the fishbrain group, the residue in position  <dig> is almost always occupied by the hydroxylic amino acid thr, except in the sequences rhamphicht and 2carassius which have ile in this site. this position is occupied by non-polar amino acids in all other groups, and is always trp in the merps group. the site  <dig> in the fishbrain group can be occupied by polar  and non-polar amino acids ; but in the merps group this position is only occupied by polar amino acids such as gln, and specially the acidic amino acids glu and asp. the amino acid composition of this site for the fishtj and basal groups is highly variable, without a clear pattern. position  <dig> is one of four contiguous amino acids conserved in all fishbrain and fishtj groups , and in the sequences sea_cucumb and ciona_tun <dig>  these amino acids appear to be specifically inserted in fishbrain and fishtj sequences and later on by convergence, the sequences from echinoderms and one of the ciona epd genes might have acquired it. alternatively, these four amino acids could have been lost specifically in the ancestral merp sequence and also in certain basal groups, with exception of the echinoderms and one of the ciona sequences.

almost all the available sequences from the fishbrain group have a cys in position  <dig>  which is one amino acid before the third common cys . only in percomorpha and salmoniformes is this cys substituted by gly. these cysteines, which are very close together in the epd linear structure, are predicted by the disulfind server  <cit>  to form disulfide bonds. the consistent occurrence of gly, a small amino acid with a very high conformational flexibility, between the c <dig> and c <dig> would permit a disulfide bridge between them, since gly does not present a steric obstacle. alternatively, although with a lower confidence of connectivity, c <dig> may participate in shuffling reactions forming potentially an array of disulfide intermediate species as result of its binding with other cysteines  <cit> . only when the crystallographic structure of proteins belonging to the different epd protein subgroups is obtained and careful functional assays are performed, we will be able to test if the different possible transition stages of disulfide bonding are having an impact on the functional divergence among epds paralogs.

detection of functional divergence among ependymin paralogs
detectable differences in the site-rate of amino acid replacement between epd paralog groups can give us an idea of the grade of functional divergence generated since the duplicated genes diverged, splitting ancestral functions or generating new ones, and consequently succeeded avoiding pseudogenization. the coefficient of evolutionary functional divergence  obtained for each epd paralog pair comparison was significantly greater than zero , indicating that there is significant heterogeneity in the amino acid site-specific rate of evolution among epd paralogs. this result further supports the estimates obtained at the codon level by applying paralog models and site-models to separate datasets of the paralogs . that is, that each epd group has been subjected to different functional constraints in specific amino acid sites and therefore, functional divergence among them can be inferred.

a the number of sequences considered in each gene cluster for the program diverge v <dig>   <cit>  was: fishbrain , fishtj , merps , and basal . the shark ependymin was not included neither in the fishbrain nor fishtj gene clusters.

b se, standard error.

c lrt, likelihood ratio test.

d α, gamma shape parameter of rate variation among sites.

the six possible pairwise comparisons among epd paralog groups were performed . the comparison between the fishbrain and merps groups showed the highest value for θ , suggesting that these two groups have diverged considerably more at the functional level. this estimate is supported by the fact that the expression pattern of these proteins is the more dissimilar, being the proteins belonging to the fishbrain group expressed exclusively in brain tissue  <cit> , and the ones from the merps group expressed in several tissues including brain  <cit> . high θ values are also found for each one of the pairwise comparisons that can be done against the basal group, suggesting that if the proteins belonging to the basal group are in fact the root of the epd gene tree, the derived groups have significantly diverged functionally from the ancestral gene function, expression pattern or both. this measure of functional divergence among the groups  that were contrasted with the basal group was not equidistant: the predicted functional divergence between the fishtj group and the basal group  is higher than that for fishbrain vs. basal  or merps vs. basal . as could be expected from the gene tree , the smallest θ value  was obtained for the fishbrain vs. fishtj comparison . the inferred phylogenetic gene tree suggests us that the duplication that gave rise to the fishbrain and fishtj paralog epd genes was posterior to the appearance of the merps group. thus, the fishtj and fishbrain shared more time together and although the fishbrain group already has a very restricted pattern of expression that contrasts with the ample array of tissues from which fishtj genes have been isolated, we might suppose that some functional overlap may remain. of course, it will be interesting to corroborate this assumption with experimental data where knocking out one of the genes is compensated  by the other. interestingly, the estimated coefficient of functional divergence between the fishtj and the merps group  is not as high as we could suppose from the gene tree, although this would suggest different functional roles it can not exclude that some of these functions overlap.

posterior bayesian analysis predicted several amino acid positions that may account for the inferred functional divergence among the epd paralog groups . even though, sites with an estimated posterior probability  <  <dig>  have been experimentally proved to be important for the observed functional divergence between the two major caspase subfamilies  <cit> ; the cutoff value for residue selection is an empirical decision and is expected to depend on the intrinsic properties of the protein family being analyzed. thus, while in  <cit>  they obtained  <dig> candidate functional divergence-related sites using  <dig>  as cutoff value, the same cutoff value predicts  <dig> sites for the epd data. since no 3d structure of any epd protein is yet available, we lack a way to verify where these sites would be located nor how the rate-shift in these sites contributed to structural and functional divergence among the epd paralogs. nonetheless, we can further narrow our criteria for site prediction expecting that in the case of the epd data, sites predicted with a more stringent pp  be in fact functional divergence-related sites that can serve as a discrete starting point for future functional characterization of the epd proteins. twenty-three rate-shifted amino acid sites  were predicted with a pp >  <dig>  of being functional divergence-related sites for any of the six possible pairwise comparisons among epd paralog groups . the rate-shifted site  <dig> , for example, is predicted with a pp =  <dig>  to be able to functionally distinguish the members of the fishbrain from the members of the merps group, with a pp =  <dig>  to distinguish the fishtj from the merps group, and with intermediate pps to distinguish fishbrain from basal , fishtj from basal  and merps from basal ; but this same site only has a pp =  <dig>  to discriminate fishbrain from fishtj proteins. when this site was localized in the subgroups alignments , it is clear that being highly variable, the site is not useful for discriminating between fishbrain and fishtj proteins. in contrast, the merps epd proteins have a ser fixed in this position which is within the stretches of amino acids diagnostic of this group . in addition, in the basal group site  <dig> is occupied with almost equal occurrence by ser, asn, his, tyr, or arg. consequently, once the 3d structure of epd proteins from the differences subgroups are available, and site-directed functional experiments can be done, we expect to be able to corroborate that the rate-shifted site  <dig> is somehow important to the particular function of the merps epds.

a similar analysis can be performed for all the other  <dig> rate-shifted predicted sites. it is worth noting that sites  <dig> and  <dig>  predicted to be under positive selection in the merps and fishtj lineages respectively by using branch-site codon models , were also predicted to be functional divergence-related sites using this very different approach. as previously noted, the site  <dig> is preferentially occupied by aromatic residues in the fishtj, basal and merps groups, being always occupied by a trp in the latter; but in the fishbrain group this site is very variable. this explains why this site has a pp =  <dig>  of being related with the type  <dig> functional divergence between the merps and fishbrain groups, and has intermediate pps for the other possible comparisons: fishbrain vs. fishtj , fishbrain vs. basal , fishtj vs. basal , merps vs. basal  and fishtj vs. merps . it is also noteworthy that the presence of aromatic amino acids at this site can distinguish the epd proteins that are exclusively expressed in the brain, from the proteins that have a wider expression pattern. additionally, the presence of a trp at this site appears to be important for the function of the epds belonging to the merps group as suggested by the convergent results obtained using codon models and the search for type  <dig> functional divergence related sites .

position  <dig> was predicted to be under positive selection and additionally to be related to functional divergence. this site has a pp =  <dig>  for discriminating between the fishbrain and the merps groups and with less confidence can distinguish between other groups: fishtj vs. basal , fishtj vs. brain , fishbrain vs. basal , merps vs. basal  and fishtj vs. merps . contrary to what occurs with site  <dig>  the relationship of aromatic amino acids and tissue specific expression appears to be inverse in site  <dig>  thus, the preferential occurrence of aromatic amino acids in the fishbrain group  appears to be important for the functional divergence of fishbrain group as compared with the others.

CONCLUSIONS
the epd protein family is not deuterostome-specific as previously thought. we provide evidence that epds are also present in protostomes. our results suggest that fish-specific gene and/or genome duplications triggered diversification of the epd protein family into four groups. two of these groups  are unique to fishes; a third appears to be deuterostome-specific , and the fourth  has been only found in invertebrate deuterostomes and protostomes. statistical analyses of selective pressures indicate that episodic positive selection and relaxed selective constraints have shaped the evolution of the epd proteins. however, purifying selection  appears to be the main influence on the evolution of each subgroup within the family. we detected functional divergence among the epd groups and amino acid sites that account for it. taken as a whole, our phylogenetic results and the tissue-specific patterns of expression of the different epd proteins, suggest that this protein family is a suitable target to experimentally test subfunctionalization in gene copies resulting from duplication events  <cit> . we reiterate that protein structural information and more experimental data including functional knocking out assays remains to be obtained from representative members of the four epd protein groups described here. thus, we hope that our findings encourage and serve as useful guidelines to further research on how evolution shaped the epd protein family, their conserved and divergent gene functions.

