BACKGROUND
identifying and understanding cellular subsystems  responsible for the expression of a phenotype can assist genetic engineers with determining which genes to introduce or modify  <cit>  in order to aid  the phenotype expression in an organism. identification of such subsystems  is often performed as a computational search for specific network structures, or network motifs, in network models of biological data  <cit> .

a type of network model, called protein functional association network, lends itself to the identification of functional modules. in protein functional association networks, a pair of vertices representing proteins is connected by an edge if the genes that encode these proteins are functionally associated, i.e, needed for the same function  <cit> . genes required for the same function may co-occur in the same operon, co-express under similar conditions, or be involved in gene fusion events  <cit> . evidence of these phenomena can be empirically observed and used to predict the functional association of two genes.

functional modules, in which all pairs of proteins are functionally associated, can be modeled as maximal cliques in the context of protein functional association networks  <cit> . maximal cliques have been recognized for:  finding biologically more relevant protein complexes, with more than 10% improvement in their functional homogeneity when compared to clusters  <cit> ; and  reducing the noise in the data  <cit> . among all maximal cliques, we are only interested in those that potentially help an organism express a particular phenotype, and this requires additional signals.

one signal that can be observed in biological networks is the evolutionary conservation of a functional module. a module that is phenotype-related is more likely to be conserved in phenotype-expressing organisms than phenotype-non-expressing organisms  <cit> .

with the nave approach , identifying maximal cliques that are statistically biased towards being present in the networks of phenotype-expressing organisms requires at a minimum comparision of all maximal cliques across all the organismal networks considered. for any given network, the number of maximal cliques can be exponential in terms of the network size. thus, a multi-way comparison for such exponential spaces is impractical.

this paper describes an approach to make this problem tractable. the approach  introduces a novel network model called the two-typed, divided network. it then enumerates all of the maximal cliques in the constructed network that satisfy the introduced -criteria. the maximal clique enumeration in the constructed network then translates to identification of the functional modules  that are conserved across at least α phenotype expressing organisms and at most β phenotype non-expressing organisms, thus avoiding the need to perform multi-way clique comparisons . it is hypothesized that this approach will move the problem of identifying the phenotype-related modules from the intractable space to the tractable space because the number of -cliques will be much fewer than the total number of maximal cliques across all the organismal networks. the enumerated -cliques are shown to be capable of modeling known phenotype-related functional modules  through experiments with different target phenotypes.

RESULTS
experimental setup
five experiments, each with a different target phenotype, were set up. the phenotypes used were hydrogen-production, acid tolerance, tricarboxylic acid  cycle expression, aerobic respiration, and motility . the organisms for the aerobic respiration and motility experiments come from slonim et al.  <cit>  and for all the other phenotypes, the organisms were identified through extensive literature search. functional association networks for the organisms for all the experiments were downloaded from the string database  <cit> . table  <dig> gives the statistics of the networks considered in the five experiments. in order to easily determine protein orthology, the proteins in an organism were replaced by their corresponding cluster of orthologous genes group . cogs present in an organism were determined by information from the string database. intra-organismal edges were defined by the functional association edges present in each organism. string database assigns a weight to each edge on the basis of the evidence that supports the functional association between the nodes at the two ends of the edges  <cit> . hence, a threshold was applied to determine which intra-organismal edges were included in the network . the inter-organismal edges were defined in the manner described in the methods section. in the string network, a threshold of above  <dig> is termed as "high confidence,'' so we only chose thresholds above  <dig> 

in this section, the biological relevance of -cliques is demonstrated by comparing the sets of genes predicted to be phenotype-related functional modules to known phenotype-related functional modules.

network edge threshold selection
our network edge threshold selection strategy aims to optimize the method performance on a small validation set of cogs that are known to be associated with the target phenotype. this prior knowledge is derived from published literature. starting with the most conservative value  of the edge threshold for the cog-cog organismal network in string database, we generate a set of networks till we reach a threshold of  <dig> with a  <dig> step difference. for each network, we calculate the accuracy of identifying known phenotype-related cogs from the validation set. we select the first threshold that ensures at least 75% accuracy. additionally, we check the distribution of the number of unique cogs obtained per a given edge threshold and find the threshold that shows the maximum change in the number of cogs from the previous threshold and then analyze a few thresholds above and below that value using the prior knowledge information. see additional file  <dig> for the details of the edge threshold experiment for the motility phenotype. the prior knowledge, or the validation set, for the motility phenotype was obtained from liu et al  <cit>  with p-value ≤  <dig> .

organism selection
to identify phenotype-related functional modules for each of the  <dig> phenotypes , phylogenetically diverse  microorganisms representative of each phenotype were identified. each phenotype was treated separately, and so the sets of organisms vary in each dataset . in some cases, for example, dark fermentative biohydrogen production and acid-tolerance, individual organisms were present across multiple datasets. selection of organisms was based solely on the ability of each organism to express at least one phenotype discussed in the paper and not on the ability of each organism to express all phenotypes discussed in the paper. the organisms were chosen by reviewing the existing literature. the aerobic respiration and motility phenotypes were selected due to the availability of a number of completely sequenced and annotated genomes for the organisms exhibiting the phenotypes. in addition, to predict and distinguish between phenotypes that are highly similar, we selected the tca expression phenotype.

in recent years, focus has shifted towards development of metabolically engineered organisms capable of expressing desired phenotypic traits. for the case of biohydrogen production using wastewater, this concept could be applied to create a mixed microbial community that is "ideal'' for enhancing hydrogen production. this is particularly important, since multiple phenotypes are necessary to optimize overall hydrogen yields, and not a single hydrogen-producing microorganism has been identified that is capable of expressing all these phenotypes. thus, phenotypes important for hydrogen production using wastewater and waste materials were analyzed. therefore, phenotypes selected for the study related to biohydrogen production using wastewater include:

• hydrogen production: in order to understand metabolic and cellular processes involved in expression and regulation of the hydrogen production phenotype, microorganisms, representative of all three types  of hydrogen production are selected to identify phenotype-related functional modules.

• acid-tolerance : acid-tolerant organisms are those capable of growing in slightly acidic and acidic conditions . similar to acidophiles, acid-tolerant organisms have developed metabolic and cellular acid tolerance response  systems to protect themselves when exposed to acid environments  <cit> . for hydrogen producers, the presence of atr systems is extremely important, particularly, with respect to acidogenesis. during acidogenesis, organic acids  are produced, thus lowering the ph level in the medium. in solventogenic organisms, such as clastridium acetobutylicum, the change in ph results in a metabolic shift from acidogenesis to solventogenesis. as a result, the organism will stop producing acetate and butyrate and will generate solvents . to prevent metabolic shifts and maintain conversion of glucose  to hydrogen at maximum yields, organisms need to be able to tolerate acidic ph conditions.

for acid-tolerence phenotype, we selected a subset of species, since a diverse, large set of completely sequenced acid-tolerant microorganisms was not available at the time of the study. prior to the experiment a number of acid-tolerant organisms were identified through literature review. however, many of the organisms' genome sequences were not completely sequenced. to ensure the best predictions, a criterion for organism selection was the presence of their sequenced and annotated genomes. unfortunately, the organisms we identified are only representative of a small group of acid-tolerant bacteria consisting of nine firmicutes and one proteobacteria. as such, results obtained are somewhat biased towards acid-tolerant firmicutes.

hydrogen production
the set of -cliques was enumerated for three different statistically significant  α, β-values:  ,  , and  . the enumerated -cliques were able to identify sets of cogs that were known to be associated with hydrogen production.

four types of cogs for maturation of -hydrogenase as present in hydrogen producing organisms and absent in hydrogen non-producing organisms were identified. proteins associated with these cog groups are hypc , hypd , hype , and hypf  . in model organisms such as, escherichia coli, hypcdef proteins are described as regulators for maturation of uptake hydrogenase through participation in development of the active center  <cit> . regulation is conducted through the requirement of insertion of fe, ni, and diatomic ligands by hypa-f proteins into the hydrogenase center for activation and maturation  <cit> . in this process, hype and hypf are responsible for synthesis and insertion of fe cyanide ligands into the hydrogenase's metal center. however, to carry out this process, hypc and hypd must form a complex for construction of the cyanide ligands to occur  <cit> .

based on published studies of crystal structures for hydrogenase maturation proteins, the presence and coordinated interaction between the proteins are essential for synthesis of -hydrogenase. in this study, we found similar evidence of functional associations between hypcdef proteins. this is shown in one of the modules identified as associated with hydrogenase. while associations between maturation proteins have been well characterized in model organisms  <cit> , detailed molecular analysis of -hydrogenase structures and their associated proteins has not been conducted across all phenotype-expressing organisms. based on results obtained, it can be hypothesized that hypcdef proteins are related to hydrogen producing organisms and will not be present in hydrogen non-producing organisms.

in addition to hydrogen maturation proteins, the -motif finder was able to identify a module consisting of cog groups  whose functions were associated with expression of the nitrogen iron protein  and the molybdenum iron protein    <cit> . together these proteins comprise two essential components of nitrogenase, a key enzyme in nitrogen-fixation  <cit> . during nitrogen-fixation, nitrogenase catalyzes the conversion of nitrogen gas to ammonia and inadvertently results in the production of hydrogen gas as a byproduct  <cit> . to carry out this process, nifd serves as the binding site for substrates, while nifh assists in biosynthesis of co-factors for nifd  <cit> . while these proteins are associated with the nitrogen fixation phenotype, results from our algorithm suggest that these proteins are highly conserved across various hydrogen producing organisms, thus they may play an indirect role in hydrogen production.

although the presence of these two proteins is essential for nitrogen-fixation and biological hydrogen production, association of other genes may play an important role regulating nif genes. examples include proteins such as cysteine sulfinate desulfinase  and nitrogen regulatory protein pii , which are involved in synthesis of the fe-s cluster and regulation of proteins responsible for nitrogen metabolism  <cit> , respectively. for both glnk and nifs, the -motif finder predicted associations between each cog group and nif proteins. specifically, we noted the association of nifh with the regulatory protein pii . in nitrogen fixing organisms, glnk is described as a key signal transducer in nifa in some organisms and regulatory protein in the transcription of the nitrogenase protein nifh in other organisms  <cit> . in this study, the association between cog groups related to nifh and glnk supports experimental evidence that pii proteins are involved in inactivation of nitrogenase across a number of nitrogen-fixing species. in addition, identification of this cog-cog associations suggests that pii proteins may play a vital role in hydrogen production via nitrogenase.

acid tolerence
when a set of acid-tolerant microorganisms  were used by the -motif finder , the two main mechanisms, lysine/arginine decarboxylase and arginine deaminase, associated with acid-tolerance were not identified. however, eleven types of cogs associated with amino acid transporters were identified, suggesting that amino acid transport is highly related to the set of phenotype-expressing organisms in this study. within microorganisms, amino acid transporters can participate in a number of metabolic and cellular processes, such as energy metabolism and protein synthesis. in organisms exposed to acid stress, decarboxylation of the two amino acids, lysine and arginine, is reported as two mechanisms for neutralization of internal ph  <cit> . during the neutralization process via arginine decarboxylation, antiporters responsible for replacing the argmatine generated from arginine with another arginine brought in from the surrounding environment  <cit> . in another system, arginine deaminase, ammonia is generated to help protect against acid stress  <cit> . from our knowledge of these systems, production or uptake of amino acids by microorganisms may play an important role in regulating intracellular ph levels.

in this study, eleven cog groups for amino acid transport were predicted as present across  <dig> acid-tolerant microorganisms. proteins associated with these cog groups include argininosuccinate lyase  and the amino acid transporter lysp  . argininosuccinate lyase is responsible for degrading argininosuccinate to form arginine and fumarate. lysp amino acid transporter is a permease system used by some microorganisms to transport lysine into cells  <cit> . similar to arginine, decarboxylation of lysine has been linked to acid response by some bacteria  <cit> . while the transport of lysine by the lysp amino acid transporter system is not inhibited by arginine, arginine has been reported to regulate utilization of lysine by the lysine decarboxylation pathways  <cit> . while the direct interaction between lysine transport and lysine production is not clear, results suggest that there is some regulatory control occurring between these two systems.

tca cycle
the tricarboxylic acid  cycle is a metabolic pathway involving eight different enzymes related to energy production in aerobic organisms. therefore, it could be modeled by -cliques in both the experiment comparing tca expressing organisms to reverse tca  expressing organisms  and the experiment comparing aerobic to anaerobic organisms . the set of cogs that contain enzymes known to be involved in the tca cycle are given in table  <dig>  since some of the enzymes involved in the tca cycle are not specific to organisms that express the tca cycle  <cit> , comparative in silico methods have difficulty identifying all of the enzymes involved in the pathway.

to determine if this functional module could be modeled as an -clique, the set of -cliques with significant α, β-values were enumerated in both networks. in the tvrt_ <dig> network, this was defined as any α, β-value that had a p-value less than  <dig> . in the avan_ <dig>  this was determined as any α, β-value that had a p-value less than  <dig> * 10- <dig> 

the statistically significant -cliques enumerated in the tvrt_ <dig> network  contained cogs that represented all eight of the tca enzymes, while those enumerated in the avan_ <dig> network  contained cogs representing seven of the eight tca enzymes. one of the -cliques in the tvrt_ <dig> network contained cogs representing seven of the eight enzymes in the tca cycle . it is significant to note that in the -clique identified in table  <dig>  only one of the cogs has an individual distribution that is significantly biased towards tca expressing organisms. in the avan_ <dig> network, the cogs representing the tca enzymes were less likely to be included in the same -clique. this is likely due to the higher edge threshold used in this network.

the number of positive and negative organisms each cog is present in is given in the rightmost two columns. the complete -clique is present in  <dig> positive organisms and  <dig> negative organisms.

motility
the motility phenotype was examined to observe how both the -clique model and the enumeration algorithm performed when a large number of organisms were used. the two-typed, divided network used in this experiment  was constructed using  <dig> functional association networks from motile organisms and  <dig> functional association networks from non-motile organisms. the -cliques were enumerated in the phylogenetic functional association network for all α, β-values that had a p-value of less than  <dig> * 10- <dig>  this resulted in  <dig> unique -cliques .

the enumerated set of -cliques contained  <dig> -cliques that consisted entirely of flagella-related proteins. additionally, five -cliques were enumerated that contained chemotaxis-related proteins. flagella are cellular structures that enable the movement of microorganisms, while chemotaxis is a chemical process that determines how the microorganism moves in response to its environment  <cit> . these immediate results suggest that at least some of the remaining  <dig> -cliques include cogs that are motility-related.

effects of phylogenetic diversity
in addition to introducing the phylogenetic diversity scoring function sp() , we performed an experimental study to test the robustness of our scoring method. for the hydrogen production phenotype, we grouped our input set of  <dig> organisms into  <dig> groups based on their genus. for each experiment, we randomly selected one organism from each genus, then chose a random subset  of these organisms, and finally ran the -motif finder algorithm on each subset. we then compared the results of these experiments and found that based on both the module's significance score and the module's phylogenetic score, the top  <dig> most significant modules identified remained unchanged. the organisms used in the experiments and the results for various experiments are avaliable in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.

effect of -criterion on the number of maximal cliques
the results in this section describe the effect that different values of α and β have on the number of maximal cliques output when the algorithm is run on a given two-typed, divided network. the -cliques corresponding to all possible values of α and β from two-typed, divided network of two phenotypes, hydrogen production and tca cycle expression were enumerated  to analyze the effect.

intuitively, the number of -cliques decreased as the α-value increased and the β-value decreased. thus, as shown in figure  <dig>  the maximum number of -cliques occurs when the α-value equals zero and the β-value equals the number of negative divisions. this is because this criteria are equivalent to the enumeration of all the maximal cliques in the network. alternatively, the minimum number of -cliques get enumerated when the α-value equals the number of positive divisions and the β-value equals zero. large α and small β is the problem space required for identifying -cliques that may represent phenotype-related functional modules. thus, as hypothesized, the introduction of the -criterion moves the problem into a tractable space, because there are fewer -cliques to enumerate for statistically significant values of α and β.

effect of search bounds on algorithm runtime
this section presents results on the effectiveness of two search bounds intended to reduce the search space and runtime of the algorithm as the number of -cliques is reduced . three implementations of algorithm  <dig> were designed and their resulting runtimes were compared to demonstrate the effectiveness of the bounds. the first implementation, referred to as no-bound-ab-clique, only used the output check on line  <dig> of algorithm  <dig> to ensure only -cliques were enumerated. the second implementation, referred to as beta-bound-ab-clique, added the bound on line  <dig> of algorithm  <dig> to bound the search space. the third algorithm, alpha-beta-bound-ab-clique used all of the bounds in algorithm  <dig> to bound the search space. figure  <dig> demonstrates the effectiveness of the bounds for various values of α and β when enumerating -cliques in the phylogenetic functional association network constructed from hydrogen-producing and hydrogen non-producing organisms . the lack of any variation in the runtimes of the no-bound-ab-clique implementation for the various α, β-values is due to its lack of bounds . the runtime of beta-bound-ab-clique is also invariant as the α-value changes . however, the reduction in its runtime correlates well with the reduction in the number of -cliques as β decreases. this property holds for the alpha-beta-bound-ab-clique implementation as well . however, the reduction in the number of cliques as the α-value increases does not correlate as well with the reduction in the runtime of the alpha-beta-bound-ab-clique implementation.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we proposed a methodology that can identify evolutionarily conserved functional modules that are likely associated with the expression of a target phenotype. the structure of the functional modules considered in the paper is a maximal clique. the task of enumerating the maximal cliques in a network and comparing maximal cliques across multiple networks to identify those biased towards phenotype-expressing organisms can be computationally intractable for large networks. in this paper, we have introduced a novel type of network model called the two-typed, divided network and the -criterion that together help move the problem to a tractable space with the modules known to be related to the target phenotypes considered. additional files  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> provide additional information about the -cliques identified for the five target phenotypes.

