BACKGROUND
statement of problem
innumerable biological investigations require comparing different members of a collection of entities with respect to one or more properties. the conclusions to be drawn from such studies are based on an analysis of the degree of similarity or dissimilarity among the different members. for example, one might compare the activity of different isoforms or fragments of a protein of interest, or compare wild type protein with various mutant versions of a protein that causes a disease state. many additional examples come from comparisons of data sets derived from microarray and proteomics studies, as well as population genetics. given the technical advances of recombinant dna technology and the explosion in genomics over the past few years, it is a certainty that the number of these sorts of comparative studies, and the number of entities to be compared within each study, will increase dramatically in the near future. unfortunately, the vast majority of such comparative studies are currently performed manually, with investigators searching for similarities and dissimilarities among different test entities "by eye". this is especially difficult when each member of the collection is being characterized by multiple criteria. the analytical process is time consuming, likely to miss subtleties and is susceptible to inadvertent bias and human errors. development and application of computer-assisted modeling and visualization can provide extraordinarily valuable data analyses and interpretive tools for assessing relationships among different members in a study.

microtubules and microtubule dynamics
microtubules represent one of the three main components of the eukaryotic cellular cytoskeleton  <cit> . they are hollow, unbranched cylinders, formed by the non-covalent association of αβ tubulin dimer subunits. microtubules serve a wide variety of essential structural and transport functions, including the segregation of chromosomes during cell division and the transport of vesicular cargo up and down long axonal processes in neurons.

microtubules are highly dynamic structures, gaining and losing tubulin dimer subunits by a stochastic process known as dynamic instability  <cit> . a large body of data, both pharmacological and somatic cell genetics, has led to the conclusion that proper regulation of microtubule dynamics is essential in order for microtubules to perform their many critical cellular functions . for example, the effectiveness of the anti-cancer drug taxol derives from its ability to suppress microtubule dynamics, thereby interfering with the ability of cancer cells to proliferate  <cit> . given the importance of properly regulated microtubule dynamics, it is not surprising that cells have evolved a host of regulatory proteins that finely tune microtubule dynamics, including tau, map <dig>  map <dig>  scg <dig> and stathmin.

the microtubule associated protein tau
the microtubule associated protein tau is essential for the normal development and maintenance of the nervous system  <cit> . it binds directly to microtubules  <cit> , and its ability to regulate microtubule dynamics  <cit>  is itself tightly regulated by both alternative rna splicing  <cit>  and phosphorylation . alternative rna splicing leads to the synthesis of two classes of tau, known as 3-repeat tau and 4-repeat tau . whereas normal human fetal brain expresses only 3-repeat tau, adult human brain expresses approximately equal amounts of 3-repeat and 4-repeat tau. despite this dramatic developmental shift in expression profiles, the functional and mechanistic differences between 3-repeat and 4-repeat tau remain poorly understood. while it is well-established that 4-repeat tau is a more potent regulator of microtubule dynamics than 3-repeat tau, there have been indications over the years that the two classes of tau isoforms may also have inherent qualitative differences as well  <cit> .

abnormal tau action has long been correlated with neurodegeneration. indeed, the classic neurofibrillary tangle pathology of alzheimers and many related dementias are composed primarily of aberrant tau . in  <dig>  a direct cause and effect relationship between errors in tau action and/or regulation and neurodegeneration was established by the genetic linkage between mutations in the tau gene and ftdp- <dig>  a fronto-temporal dementia with many similarities to alzheimers disease  <cit> . two classes of tau mutations have been described. the first collection of mutations are structural in nature, caused by various amino acid substitutions in tau. the second class of mutations are especially subtle and provocative – they are caused by errors in alternative tau rna splicing that alter the expression ratio of otherwise normal 4-repeat and 3-repeat tau molecules. specifically, rather than a ~50/ <dig> ratio in adult human brain, the mutant ratio is closer to ~75/ <dig>  in both the structural and regulatory mutations, the result is early onset of neuronal cell death and dementia.

unfortunately, the molecular mechanisms underlying tau-mediated neuronal cell death remain unclear. one widely held model suggests that errors in tau action lead to the aggregation of tau into neurofibrillary tangles, which are in turn cytotoxic  <cit> . an alternative model suggests that tau-mediated neuronal cell death results from the inability of tau to properly maintain microtubule dynamics within a narrow range of activities required for cell viability  <cit> . additional models have also been proposed .

computational perspectives
to quantitatively investigate the regulation of microtubule dynamics under varying conditions , cell biologists employ video microscopy to visualize and record images of dynamic microtubules in real time. for each condition being assessed, many different individual microtubules must be imaged, tracked and analyzed  <cit> . from the resulting microtubule "life history plots" , the dynamic behaviors of similarly treated microtubules can be determined, such as average growth or shortening rates. subsequently, the behavior of microtubules under different conditions can be compared.

computer-assisted methods are especially attractive for time series investigations of this sort. in the specific case of analyzing the regulation of microtubule dynamics, inadvertent bias and non-reproducibility in data interpretation among different labs and different investigators when defining the beginning and end points of individual growth, shortening or attenuation events could become significant. despite the fact that these events are explicitly defined, investigators must make many judgment calls. in contrast, computer-assisted methods offer a faster and more objective assessment of the data. more importantly, these methods can also provide analytical tools as much as determine the fit of the data to various statistical models, thereby testing various conceptual representations of the underlying molecular mechanisms of action of the system under study. modeling can also generate testable mechanistic predictions for subsequent investigations. in a general sense, sophisticated computational tools have the potential to make major contributions to many areas of biological research.

RESULTS
the main goal of this work is to develop general computational tools to quantitatively assess the differences among samples of interest and to visualize those differences in a manner that facilitates their comparison. the data being analyzed is derived from an earlier work in which video microscopy was used to visualize and assess the abilities of 3-repeat and 4-repeat tau to regulate various parameters of microtubule dynamics in in vitro reactions   <cit> . samples contained purified tubulin dimers and purified recombinant human tau. the two primary variables were  the presence of 3-repeat tau, 4-repeat tau or no tau, and  the molar ratio of tau to tubulin. in vivo, the molar ratio of tau:tubulin varies from cell to cell. further, the ratio can vary even among different regions within single cells, such as cell body versus axon versus growth cone. the different ratios examined are likely to span the range of biologically meaningful values  <cit> .

automated life history plot analysis
we first developed an automated method to identify the different events – growth, shortening, and attenuation  – on microtubule life-history plots, using a set of pre-defined rules . we then compared the ability of this automated method to determine average microtubule growth rates with standard manual analysis, using data sets assessing the ability of tau to regulate microtubule dynamics from  <cit> . in this earlier work, microtubule dynamics were assayed under nine different experimental conditions. as seen in table  <dig>  the deviation between automatic and manually determined rates ranges from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, with an average deviation of  <dig> %. statistically, the differences between the manually determined values and the automatically measured values are not significant , except for one condition. the p-value is computed by performing a t-test of the manually determined growth rates against the automatically computed ones for each condition . more importantly, the relative order of the conditions do not change, and the degrees of separation are well maintained. table  <dig> shows the comparison for the same set of conditions using a different tubulin preparation from  <cit> . again, our automated method accurately recapitulates manual analysis with increased objectivity. additionally, it markedly reduces the time required to conduct these investigations.

the manual data is reproduced from table iii of   <cit> . the third column shows growth rates  automatically computed from the manually tracked tips of the microtubules using an objective set of rules with no human interference. the relative ranks of the conditions remain the same.

the manual data is reproduced from table ii of   <cit> . the third column shows growth rates  automatically computed from the manually tracked tips of the microtubules using an objective set of rules with no human interference. the relative ranks of the conditions remain the same.

it is also important to note that inherent biological variability exists in the microtubule growth rate data. this likely results from biochemical variations between different tubulin preparations, such as different tubulin isoform expression ratios and/or varying degrees of post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation, acetylation or tyrosination. for example, assuming each growth rate determination is within a variation of ±  <dig>  μm/min, the rank order of the conditions for each of the two data sets is quite similar, although the 4r-1: <dig> and 3r-1: <dig> conditions are reversed . this inherent biological variability could limit the utility of some sophisticated and highly sensitive statistical models to make testable predictions regarding mechanisms underlying the regulation of microtubule dynamics. at the minimum, multiple data sets might be necessary and all predictions would need to be considered tentative until tested directly by other biological means.

the ranks of the conditions remain almost the same across the two samples  except that the 4r-1: <dig> and the 3r-1: <dig> conditions are reversed.

modeling and embedding strategy
next, we sought to develop mathematical and statistical models to capture different dynamic aspects of microtubule behavior and to embed them in a two-dimensional space for visualization and easy comparison of different conditions. we used the sammon projection method  <cit>  for embedding and visualization. in short, the embedding process displays each experimental condition with an  position; the relative distance between the  positions of any pair of experimental conditions corresponds to their relative degree of relatedness . the conditions of interest can be compared based on numerous parameters and the computational method is applicable to all kinds of numerical parameters.

the outline of our method is as follows. first, the experimental measurements are analyzed based on an appropriate mathematical model. then, an appropriate dissimilarity function is applied to calculate the relative distances between the models of each pair of conditions. finally, the conditions are embedded on a two-dimensional space such that the inherent structure of the data is approximately preserved. this is achieved by assigning points  to the models such that the euclidean distance between any pair of points in this space is as close to the original dissimilarity measure between their models as possible. unlike principal component analysis   <cit> , this method works with any distance matrix. the quality of the embedding is measured by distortion. for ideal embeddings, where all dissimilarity values are maintained exactly as euclidean distances in the embedded space, the distortion is  <dig>  the details of the models, the dissimilarity functions, the embedding algorithm, and the distortion computations are presented in the methods section.

two-dimensional embedding analysis
microtubule growth rate
as a proof-of-principle exercise, we used the automatically measured values from table  <dig> and applied our embedding strategy to compare the abilities of each tau isoform to regulate the growth rate of microtubules. since these growth rate data are one-dimensional, the distortion is  <dig>  and the embedding procedure should yield a straight line. figure  <dig> shows the two-dimensional embedding of the conditions. the requirement for the distances are fulfilled and the points are on a straight line. additionally, consistent with  <cit> , we observe that very low ratios of 3-repeat and 4-repeat tau:tubulin have opposite effects on the dynamic behavior of microtubules. more specifically, while 1: <dig> and 1: <dig> 3-repeat tau and 1: <dig> 4-repeat tau are all relatively close to the control  point, the two 3-repeat tau conditions decrease the microtubule growth rate while the 1: <dig> 4-repeat tau condition increases it as compared to the no-tau condition. additionally, any increase in the tau:tubulin ratio beyond these low levels causes a relatively large increase in growth rate, since the distance between the no-tau point and all other tau points is relatively large. thus, there are two clusters of growth rates rather than a simple linear relationship, consistent with a threshold effect. further, as the tau:tubulin ratio increases , the difference with the no-tau point increases. finally, for any given tau:tubulin ratio, 4-repeat tau is always more distant from the no-tau point than 3-repeat tau is; this demonstrates that 4-repeat tau is a more potent regulator of microtubule dynamics than 3-repeat tau. thus, these data establish the validity of our automated life history analytical method and the two-dimensional embedding method.

microtubule growth rate distribution histogram
next, we used two-dimensional embedding to compare the effects of 3-repeat tau and 4-repeat tau upon the distribution of growth rates within the growing population of microtubules. as demonstrated in  <cit> , a histogram analysis of control populations of growing microtubules yields two pools – a more abundant and slower growing pool and a less abundant and faster growing pool. based on fitting mixture of two gaussians to the histograms, the authors concluded that both tau isoforms cause an increase in the abundance of the faster growing pool and a decrease in the abundance of the slower growing pool, with 4-repeat causing the population change at lower tau:tubulin ratios than 3-repeat tau. other than these conclusions, there was no other comparison possible between the histograms.

we subjected the growth rate distribution data to our two-dimensional embedding analysis method . each distribution histogram had  <dig> bins , and the dissimilarities among the histograms were computed by the match distance  <cit> . conceptually, the match distance takes into account both the height of a histogram bin and the spatial position of the bin in the histogram; two histograms that differ in far-off bins are more distant than histograms that differ in adjacent bins. the details of the procedure are presented in the methods section. as was true for the growth rates , the histogram distribution data reveals that there are only minor differences among the control  sample and low levels of tau . moreover, in a manner parallel to the growth rates, 3-repeat and 4-repeat tau regulate microtubule dynamics in different directions, as indicated by the fact that the 4-repeat tau  is closer to the no-tau point than it is to either of the 3-repeat tau  samples.

additionally, it is also clear that 4-repeat tau is more potent than 3-repeat tau at any given tau:tubulin ratio . finally, similar to the growth rate analysis in figure  <dig>  there are two clusters of behaviors rather than a continuum. one cluster contains the no-tau point and the lower tau:tubulin ratio samples and the other cluster contains the higher tau:tubulin ratio samples. such non-linearity coupled with different functional effects could have significant mechanistic effects in the alternative rna splicing class of tau ftdp- <dig> mutations in which relatively subtle increases in the 4-repeat tau concentration have dramatic consequences. by assessing the histogram landscape of the conditions, the two-dimensional embedding procedure complements the previous analyses using gaussian mixture models  <cit> . the two-dimensional embedding plot is more sensitive in picking out the differences between a pair of conditions or among multiple conditions; on the other hand, it shows distances that lack physical meaning.

additional file  <dig> shows the effect of the number of bins on the embedding plots. histograms were generated by varying the number of bins from  <dig> to  <dig> in variations of  <dig>  the plots show only minor differences. in all of them, the lower tau:tubulin ratios  and the control  point are far away from the higher tau:tubulin ratios.

microtubule dynamics and haar wavelets
finally, we compared the two-dimensional embeddings of the haar wavelet features  <cit>  to 3-repeat tau, 4-repeat tau and the control  samples. wavelets  <cit>  are powerful statistical tools that are used for a wide range of applications, including signal description and data compression. one of the main advantages of wavelets is that they offer a simultaneous localization in both time and frequency domains. further, they can provide a multi-resolution view of the original time-series by changing the width of the "window" over which the coefficients are computed. haar wavelets  <cit>  are the simplest and the fastest to calculate among all the different types of wavelet functions. the specific window sizes and the details of how the dissimilarities among the conditions are computed are described in the methods section. additional file  <dig> shows the plots for the two different samples. the disparity in the two plots likely arises from the inherent variability in the biological data. the first plot  suggests two distinct clusters, one corresponding to the 3-repeat tau conditions and the other to the 4-repeat tau conditions, consistent with the notion that 3-repeat and 4-repeat tau might interact with microtubules in qualitatively distinct manners. the lack of similar behavior for the second data set  makes the conclusions from the plots tentative, requiring independent corroboration.

we also used two-dimensional embedding to compare the effects of 3-repeat and 4-repeat tau with respect to the markov chain models. a markov chain   <cit>  captures the underlying dynamics of the physical phenomena or entity by a generative model that emits a sequence of symbols. the primary advantage of markov chains over other models of time-series data is their ability to characterize an entire family of sequences. mcs are fairly easy to build, require a small set of sequences and allow very fast searching and comparison. there was no obvious clustering of points with respect to either the tau:tubulin ratio or 3-repeat tau versus 4-repeat tau . we used other time-series models as well, like the lomb-scargle periodograms  <cit>  that can assess periodic behaviors  even in the presence of missing data and unequal sampling frequencies. unfortunately, the embedding plot did not reveal any clear patterns, with the exception that the control  point was on a distant corner of the plot and the tau samples with lower molar ratios of tau:tubulin are closer to the no-tau point than the samples with higher ratios . another class of models – the auto-regressive moving average  models  <cit>  – has often been used in analyzing time-series data. these models assume that the data is stationary, i.e., both the mean and the variance is fixed. since the microtubules are clearly growing, we did not consider these models.

discussion
this work addresses the need of the biological research community for rigorously quantitative and generally applicable computational tools to compare the complex behaviors of individual members of groups of molecules, cells or even organisms. presently, the vast majority of such comparisons are performed manually, or "by eye". as such, they are time-consuming, susceptible to inadvertent bias and errors and can be insensitive to subtleties. using the regulatory effects of the microtubule associated protein tau upon the dynamic behavior of microtubules as a system of study, we have developed a novel modeling and visualization strategy allowing investigators  to assess the relative degree of similarity/dissimilarity among individual tau isoforms with respect to numerous parameters of interest under varying experimental conditions, and  to visualize all the conditions with respect to each other. more importantly, the same computational strategy should be generally applicable to a great many other applications.

the validity of the two-dimensional embedding strategy presented in this paper is established by comparing the plot presented in figure  <dig> with the growth rate data in table  <dig>  the relative positions of all points in figure  <dig> are in complete agreement with the quantitative growth rate data determined both automatically and manually. additionally, the semi-quantitative analysis of the histograms shown in figure  <dig> of  <cit>  are confirmed and extended by the more rigorous quantitative analysis leading to the two-dimensional embedding plot shown in figure  <dig>  in this case,  <dig> different bins of microtubule growth rates were integrated into the analysis for each of the nine experimental conditions tested. the resulting two-dimensional plot in figure  <dig> presents the investigator with novel perspectives on the data set, including the existence of two clusters of histogram distributions based on growth rate as well as the distinct behavior of low ratios of 3-repeat tau:tubulin relative to all other tested reactions.

finally, although the molecular mechanisms underlying behaviors suggested by various statistical models may not be clear, these models could suggest mechanisms that could not be drawn using the standard manual analytical methods generally utilized in biological investigations. indeed, one of the most important and generally applicable features of our computational strategy is the ability to detect subtle relationships between different molecules or conditions that might escape manual investigation.

CONCLUSIONS
in this manuscript, we present  an automated method for quantitatively characterizing microtubule dynamics as a function of time, and  a novel and generally applicable computational tool for two-dimensional visualization and modeling of entities of interest for comparative studies. comparison of our automated tracking method with manually acquired data demonstrates its accuracy. this tool greatly increases the rate at which microtubule tracking data can be acquired as well as improve upon its objectivity and accuracy. our embedding strategy accurately recapitulates and extends previous biological observations that were collected and analyzed manually. importantly, our methods facilitate the integration of sophisticated statistical modeling with biological investigations, which should promote novel and deeper mechanistic insights into biological phenomena as well as the development of testable hypotheses for subsequent investigation. in the future, we anticipate applying these methods to compare wild-type tau action versus various tau mutants causing neurodegeneration and dementia, seeking to identify novel mechanistic effects. additionally, we envision using new models and embedding strategies.

