BACKGROUND
living organisms utilize many mechanisms to ensure fidelity of replication and to reduce the mutation rate. however, in some circumstances, an increased mutation rate can be beneficial. in particular, pathogenic organisms are often subjected to selection for diversity to overcome host defenses and/or increase host range. for example, mutator mutants lose the mismatch repair system
 <cit> , which affects the entire genome. alternatively, changes in the copy number of simple repeats at bacterial contingency loci can generate high frequencies of mutations in particular genes
 <cit> , but result in a limited range of potential mutations. diversity generating retroelements  can generate a much greater range of localized diversity. the first dgr was discovered in a bordetella phage, where it affects tail fibers and, thus, host range
 <cit> . since then, dgrs have been discovered in a variety of phage and bacterial systems
 <cit> .

dgrs include a gene encoding a reverse transcriptase  as well as a template repeat  and a variable repeat  . the vr is expected to lie within a protein coding region, so that mutagenesis results in an altered protein sequence . in the known dgrs, the tr/vr repeats are about  <dig> bp long. the sequence of the tr can be copied in an error-prone fashion to the vr resulting in the generation of diversity. a hallmark of dgrs is the exclusive mutation of sites that correspond to adenine residues in the respective template repeat. there is convincing experimental evidence that mutagenesis occurs through reverse transcription of a cdna from a transcript containing the tr
 <cit> . this process is thought to resemble the target-primed reverse transcription mechanism also employed by group ii introns and non-ltr retrotransposons. however, instead of the “copy and paste” mechanism of these classical retroelements, dgrs use a “copy and replace” strategy. since the system does not self-inactivate, it is able to generate continuous localized mutagenesis. although recently a specific structure in the dna close to the vr has been identified as a crucial targeting determinant
 <cit> , the exact steps of the exchange of the genomic dna for the newly generated cdna are still unclear. the reason for the a-specific nature of the base changes is also unknown. the rts associated with dgrs seem to belong to a unique clade most closely related to group ii intron rts
 <cit> . the best investigated dgr includes a second small protein encoded by the atd gene, which is important for mutagenesis. however, the function of the protein and whether such a protein is required for all dgrs is unclear. dgrs occur in a taxonomically diverse range of bacteria and phages
 <cit> . little is known of their evolution, including whether they have evolved via horizontal gene transfer  and how they acquire new target proteins.

the dgr characteristics described above have been mainly derived from investigation of a single element, the bordetella phage dgr, and supported by sequence comparison with a small number of related elements. however, a systematic and comprehensive assessment of the prevalence, distribution, and structure of these retroelements has been lacking. in this paper, we present a perl program that identified  <dig> potential dgrs in public dna sequence databases, the largest set described so far. having subjected this dataset to careful quality control, we used it to examine several aspects of dgr mechanism and evolution. we found that dgr cassettes have a rather homogenous length of 2– <dig> kb, but are highly tolerant to permutations of their components and expansion with up to three additional vrs. tr and vr can even be on a different dna strand to the corresponding rt gene. thus, unlike in group ii introns and retrotransposons, the rt mrna and the template rna are not necessarily the same molecule. dgr rts, though highly divergent, form a phylogenetic clade that is characterized by a gxxxsq motif in rt domain  <dig>  this motif seems largely necessary and sufficient to predict dgr association and may explain the observed restriction of mutagenesis to adenine bases. dgrs can be found in all major classes of bacteria, but exhibit sporadic phylogenetic distribution. several lines of evidence point to horizontal gene transfer as the main propagation mechanism of dgrs. however, dgrs do not use a single vector for their dispersal, but “hitchhike” with various mobile elements, e.g. phages, transposons and plasmids.

RESULTS
digref reliably identifies potential dgrs
the sequences in the ncbi nr protein database were subjected to a psi-blast search to identify sequences that potentially encode rt enzymes. there were  <dig> hits. dna sequences  <dig> bp up- and downstream of each rt were extracted and subjected to analysis by the dgr-finder program digref . this algorithm uses a sliding window , which is used to search the complete extracted sequence for repeats of its sequence. to account for the characteristics of dgrs, all non-a bases in the window have to match exactly, but the adenines in the window do not have to match. when such a hit is found, it is extended to yield the maximum length sequence in which all non-a bases match. the program designates the sequence derived from the search window as the template repeat , and the mutated repeat as the variable region .

to eliminate artifact hits such as low complexity repeats or sequences that are a result of recent gene duplication events, only repeats with at least  <dig> adenines in the tr and at least  <dig> a → b substitutions in the vr  were considered. tr sequences with less than  <dig> potential mutation sites would only be able to provide a diversity of <  <dig>  x  <dig> possible vr sequences. due to the logarithmic correlation between repertoire size and the probability of finding a protein of the desired properties in a repertoire
 <cit> , repeats with low diversification potential are more likely artifacts  than efficient dgrs. manual inspection of samples confirmed this assumption.

with these criteria,  <dig> of the  <dig> rt hits could be identified as containing dgr-like repeat structures,  <dig> of which had not been previously described . vr/tr hits were overwhelmingly found associated with rts that have a high homology to known dgr rts. to explore more distantly related rt sequences, we performed further iterations of psi-blast with newly found dgr rts that were more dissimilar to the “standard” dgr rts. however, we did not detect additional dgrs, and we are thus confident that we have reached saturation and that our dataset is comprehensive. this strategy also served as a test to assess the possibility that vr/tr-like repeats are widely abundant in genomic sequences and thus also often found in the vicinity of rt genes by chance. using a cut-off of seven a substitutions, we did not find such fortuitous repeats. however, lowering the cut-off to five a exchanges resulted in  <dig> additional hits which upon manual inspection seemed mostly false positives . still, six of these hits match the known characteristics of dgrs, but are lost in the higher cut-off setting. depending on the objective of the user, it is thus possible to emphasize detection sensitivity or stringency of the digref program by adjusting the cut-off values. in this paper, we wanted to avoid as many false positive hits as possible and thus carried out further analyses with a cut-off of seven a substitutions. the few false positives and false negatives that remained are discussed later in the text.

in addition to the coordinates and sequences of the vr/tr pairs, the program also delivers an alignment of the repeats, statistical data on the adenine exchanges, and an annotation file that can be opened in a sequence viewer such as artemis
 <cit>  to visualize the dgr structure . due to its modular nature, the software can be easily adapted and expanded to address other questions that might arise while dgrs are being studied in more detail.

dgrs are ubiquitous among prokaryotes
it has been reported previously that diversity-generating retroelements are found in all major prokaryotic classes
 <cit> . our data corroborate and significantly expand this finding. even in the systematic search covering the complete non-redundant ncbi database, dgrs were never associated with eukaryotes or archaea. we identified dgrs in some phages and all but the smallest prokaryotic ncbi taxonomic classes, with the majority associated with the bacteroidetes and firmicutes classes . due to the low number of sequenced organisms in the minor classes , it is possible that further sequencing efforts may reveal dgrs here as well. also, a sampling bias may cause an apparent overrepresentation in a certain genus, such as many similar bacteroides entries that stem from different patient isolates. therefore, a reliable quantitative assessment of dgr distribution across prokaryotic phyla is not possible at the moment. however, several qualitative conclusions can be drawn from these data: dgrs are widespread or even ubiquitous among prokaryotes. still, their prevalence is rather low . moreover, their distribution is clearly paraphyletic, i.e. they are not ubiquitous in any bacterial group. this may be due to repeated independent losses of dgrs in related species, or due to horizontal gene transfer  by mobile genetic elements. to distinguish between these two possibilities, phylogenetic trees were constructed using the amino acid sequences of rts from dgrs . in most cases, the phylogenetic trees of rts were compatible with those of their host organisms . however, in some cases, rt clades contained distantly related host organisms, strongly arguing in favor of hgt. below, the genomic context of several such cases is analyzed in more detail.
 <dig> 

dgrs use different mechanisms to transfer between species
since dgrs were first identified in a bacteriophage
 <cit> , phages are obvious candidates for hgt vectors of dgrs. however, we found surprisingly few additional examples of dgrs in phage genomes, despite the abundance of sequenced phages  in the database. attempts to test association of dgrs with prophages using the program prophage finder
 <cit>  were not successful. however, we found a striking example of phage-mediated dgr transfer in vibrio cholerae he- <dig>  the reverse transcriptase of v. cholerae he- <dig> shares a clade with the dgr rt from bordetella phage bpp- <dig>  the neighbouring genes encode proteins similar in sequence to atd and mtd . when the  <dig> kb contig containing the v. cholerae he- <dig> rt was used for a blastn search, it showed extensive homology to the kappa prophage of v. cholerae b <dig>  about  <dig>  kb of the kappa sequence is replaced by  <dig>  kb containing the dgr, resulting in a fusion between the putative kappa tail fiber protein gene and the mtd gene . this structure was most likely formed by recombination of bip- <dig> or a related phage with a kappa phage, which then in turn integrated into the v. cholerae he- <dig> genome. the  <dig>  kb region comprising rt, atd, tr, vr, and part of the mtd thus constitutes the smallest functional dgr unit with evidence of direct physical transfer between species. the target orf seems to be a preferred target of recombination since we found three other instances of fused target genes in hgt events .

a different transfer strategy was used in the case of the dgrs from vibrio sp. rc <dig>  and shewanella baltica os <dig> . these dgr cassettes show an overall sequence identity of 93%. in shewanella, the element is located on plasmid psbal <dig>  which itself can potentially be exchanged between organisms. moreover, the dgr is close to a transposase/integrase gene, which may be responsible for mobilization of the whole element. in vibrio sp. rc <dig>  the dgr is located in the vicinity of tn7-type sequences, exactly at the position where tn <dig> usually carries antibiotic resistance genes. dgrs therefore may be mobilized by transposons and might even co-opt the same integron system that appears to exchange resistance markers in complex transposons
 <cit> .

we could also observe transfer events encompassing dgrs in bacteroides species. these human gut bacteria are known to have a very plastic genome and a plethora of autonomous and non-autonomous mobile elements that are transferred mostly by conjugation
 <cit> . they also carry numerous dgrs that cluster in two separate clades according to the rt phylogeny . for example, bacteroides sp. 1_1_ <dig> harbors two dgrs, one each from the two bacteroidetes clusters in the phylogenetic tree . one of these dgrs is located on a  <dig>  kb fragment that is 99% identical to a b. ovatus 3_8_47faa sequence, but the flanking sequences display 95–99% identity with the genome from b. thetaiotaomicron vpi- <dig>  the nature of the  <dig>  kb fragment is not clear. a direct blastn query does not result in significant hits, but one of the encoded proteins is homologous to transposition proteins, thus suggesting a conjugative transposon or a transposable phage as shuttle for the dgr element.

these examples suggest that dgrs do not have a dominant mode of interspecies transmission. they can use bacteriophages, plasmids and transposons for dispersal. the selective advantage they provide to the host should help them to stay maintained in those gene transfer vectors.

dgr reverse transcriptases form a distinct and well-defined clade characterized by an sq dipeptide
using the set of potential dgrs identified by digref, we next examined the corresponding rts in further detail. their size ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> aa. we found a few shorter sequences, but upon manual inspection, these entries proved to be rt genes that had been truncated by a mutation event . it is possible that the apparent point mutations arise because of sequencing errors and that the dgrs are actually intact. however, it seems unlikely that all apparent inactivation events  can be explained in this way. the inactivation of the rts must have happened very recently, since the corresponding vr/tr pairs harbored only a-mutations, not additional random mutations as would be expected to accumulate in an inactivated dgr.

the average length of  <dig> aa was in line with the  <dig> aa reported as average dgr rt length by
 <cit> . an alignment of all identified dgr rts showed the clear organization into seven conserved domains  that had been described before for a smaller subset
 <cit> . following region  <dig>  we noticed a patch of  <dig> amino acids that is highly positively charged  although there is no distinct pattern discernible in the arrangement of charged residues, this positively charged region appears to be unique to dgr rts. this c-terminal region likely is involved in nucleic acid binding, for example in template recognition.

one of the most prominent features of dgr rts is the characteristic gxxxsq motif in region  <dig>  subsequently referred to as sq motif in this text . it is highly conserved and differs from the qgxxxsp motif found in most retroviral and non-ltr-retrotransposon rts and group ii intron maturases 
 <cit> . the sq motif had been associated with dgrs before
 <cit> , but due to the small sample size, it was not clear whether it was common to all dgr rts. our systematic screen revealed that the sq motif is conserved in  <dig> % of the identified dgrs . in fact, in the gxxxsq motif, the underlined portion is almost invariant, while the last two residues vary in only  <dig> of  <dig> elements  . despite these variations, the associated dgrs display adenine exchanges in their respective vrs and contain a target orf, suggesting that they are functional. therefore, the sq dipeptide may not be absolutely necessary for dgr activity; however, as in the case of the truncated rts discussed above, the apparent mutations might be sequencing errors or very recent inactivations.
 <cit> . numbers  <dig> to  <dig> on the x-axis indicate the relative position in the substring. the height of the symbols denotes the relative frequency of each amino acid at the respective position, while the overall height of the stack represents the degree of conservation measured in bits.

apparent exceptions from the dgr rt clade are often artifacts
twenty-eight sequences of the input sequences that include the sq motif did not produce hits with digref . apart from six rts that are clearly truncated and thus not functional, they are most likely false negatives. they are apparently intact, featuring sq and yxdd motifs, but are not associated with obvious tr/vr repeats. many are located on short contigs of less than  <dig> kb, or very close to the end of a contig. thus, the complete dgr sequence is not included in the program input, making it impossible to identify vr/tr repeats. in at least two of the remaining sequences , we could manually identify repeats that include several non-a mutations and therefore cannot be identified by digref. they may be “sloppy” elements that are still active with a reduced a-specificity, but the high number of non-a mutations could also suggest that these hits represent dgr elements that are no longer functional. selective pressure for high dgr activity might decrease once the target protein is well adapted to its function, thus fixing it in the genome with a normal mutation rate. decreasing the window size for repeat scanning would allow detection of such “sloppy” repeats, but would also lead to more false positive hits.

the sq motif may be responsible for rt mediated mutagenesis
our comprehensive search showed that dgrs are only found within the subset of rts that cluster with already known dgr rts. considering that dgr cassettes are otherwise highly diverse in structural organization, accessory proteins and vr-orfs , this monophyletic origin means that the rt function in dgrs cannot easily be replaced by another bacterial  or viral rt, arguing for the involvement of the rt in diversification. if host factors were responsible for editing the rna or cdna, the high plasticity of bacterial genomes would make rt swaps quite likely. the exclusive association with the sq-clade of rts prompted us to analyze the most highly conserved regions  <dig> and  <dig> for possible structure/function relationships.

the catalytically essential aspartate residues of reverse transcriptases are located in domain  <dig>  in dgr rts, they are part of a yxdd motif. while the two aspartates are 100% conserved, the tyrosine is replaced by phenylalanine in 14% of the cases. the second position is not that highly conserved. 53% of the dgr rts have an m at this position, 33% a v, and the remaining entries feature the small non-polar amino acids a or c . in hiv rt, the corresponding m184v mutation has a strong influence on the fidelity of the reverse transcriptase
 <cit> . therefore we analyzed whether dgrs that carried a v instead of an m in domain  <dig> displayed an altered mutation pattern, but we did not find significant differences either in the overall mutation rate  or in the distribution of mutated nucleotides .

the almost exclusive appearance of the sq motif in region  <dig> of dgr rts suggests a mechanistic connection between these amino acid residues and the function of dgrs. since the unique feature of dgrs is adenine-specific mutagenesis, we hypothesize that the sq motif plays a vital role in defining rt fidelity. the crystal structure of hiv rt in complex with a dna template:primer and a dntp has suggested that domain  <dig>  participates in binding and selection of the incoming nucleotide as well as template coordination near the active site
 <cit> . in hiv rt, mutation of q <dig> changes the discrimination between rntps, dntps and ddntps, the activity on dna and rna templates, and the fidelity of the polymerase
 <cit> . p <dig>  which corresponds to the q in region  <dig> of dgr rts, is considered part of the template grip; mutations in this residue also affect nucleotide incorporation patterns
 <cit> . thus mutations in motif  <dig>  coordinating both template and incoming dntps, seem ideally poised to modify rt fidelity. as dgr rts only have relaxed fidelity at as, changes in the binding pocket may specifically modify the interaction with adenine residues. for example, flipping out the template bases in the active site, a process that has been observed in many polymerases
 <cit>  may be disturbed in dgr rts. the geometry of template adenine coordination may be altered to make the enzyme more welcoming for non-complementary incoming nucleotides. thus, region  <dig> may be responsible for misincorporations in the resulting cdna which could lead to the observed a → b mutations on the vr coding strand.

nucleotide substitutions are essentially random
to further analyze the pattern of misincorporations, we determined the frequency of each of the four bases at the variable positions in the vrs of all identified  <dig> elements . usually, the majority of the a-residues present in the tr are unchanged in the vr, but this fraction is highly variable . it is inherently impossible to distinguish a residues that were generated by exact base pairing from a residues that were included through random incorporation of any nucleotide at that position. at the mutated positions, transitions to guanine were most common, followed by the transversions, with c substitutions being rarest . individual vrs had widely varying ratios of substituted nucleotides.

it seems likely that host factors or different selectivity of individual rts might influence the choice of substituted nucleotides. if there were no such selectivity, the average number of changes to each nucleotide in a vr would be proportional to the number of a-residues in the tr. the observed results were compared with these predictions using χ <dig> tests. significant differences were found for g-residues  and t-residues , but not for c-residues . this suggested some influence of host factors or rt specificity on exchange preferences. to investigate this further, we selected a group of  <dig> dgrs that carry closely related rts and are found in one genus, the bacteroides . we analyzed whether these dgrs exhibit a stronger or more homogenous substitution bias. however, we found comparable distribution patterns with equally high variability as in the complete dataset . even individual vrs within a dgr containing multiple vrs  can have drastically different exchange patterns . thus, our data argue against a strong structural or enzymatic bias for nucleotide selection opposite as in the rna template. however, the genomic sequences are a snapshot of dgr mutagenesis biased by selective pressure. it is possible that in addition to functional selection bias, differences in %g + c-content and thus, in codon usage, could lead to different biases in different classes of organism. such questions might be partly addressed by examining the effects of the mutations on the codon affected. however, to truly understand the underlying mechanism, individual dgrs will have to be studied experimentally in more detail.

repeat length is limited to ~  <dig> bp
by providing automated retrieval of sequence information and assignment of vrs and trs, digref allows for comprehensive analyses of structural features of dgrs. for example, comparison of vr lengths showed that most vrs lie in the range of  <dig> ±  <dig> bp. upon manual inspection, the shorter tr/vr pairs are often flanked by a non-a mismatch and can usually be extended further, but they never exceed  <dig> bp . the relatively short repeat length is in line with recent experimental evidence which showed that although dgrs tolerate some extra sequence in their tr and can transfer it to the vr, longer additional dna sequences are quickly purged
 <cit> . the observed restriction of the repeat length could be due to low processivity of the rt or a specific recombination mechanism that favors exchanges of shorter dna stretches. however, it is also possible that the process is not limited mechanistically, but functionally: if the resulting protein loses activity when larger patches of its sequence are hypermutated, there would be a strong selective pressure to keep the vrs short.

dgr structure is highly variable
previous investigations of dgrs had noted considerable variation in the relative order of cassette components
 <cit> . therefore, we implemented a module in digref that converts the results into a graphical output, and analyzed all dgrs in our final dataset for their cassette architecture. the arrangement of the cassette components shows no strict requirement for a certain order. the majority of dgrs  follows the pattern described for the prototypical bordetella phage dgr 
 <cit> . we classified the structures based on the relative position of tr and rt . group  <dig> carries the tr upstream of the rt, in group  <dig> the tr is located downstream of the rt, and in group  <dig>  the tr overlaps with the 5’- or the 3’-end of the annotated rt orf. a previously unknown cassette structure, where the tr and rt are located on different strands , was classified as group  <dig>  within those groups, we observed a large variety of arrangements. using the number and position of the target orfs as secondary classification criteria, we established subgroups indicated by small roman letters . this system allows for accommodation of additional structure types that may be identified through future sequencing efforts.

dgr structure does not seem to be tightly correlated with rt phylogeny. for example, structural group  <dig> consists mostly of cyanobacterial sequences with similar rts, but also includes other elements, e.g. from haliscomenobacter, which have highly divergent rts . also, we observed that different structural dgr types can persist in parallel within one class of bacteria and sometime within one organism, e.g. in candidatus accumulibacter. the absence of a strict order in the cassette components implies that the spatial arrangement is irrelevant to the dgr mechanism. the rt- and tr-rnas are most likely separately transcribed, and homing is an independent process.

a significant fraction of dgrs includes multiple vrs
while most dgrs had the described standard structure comprising one vr, a tr and the rt
 <cit> , we found  <dig> instances of dgrs with two vrs, two examples with three vrs, and, after extending the analyzed region, even three examples with four vrs . thus, roughly a seventh of the dgrs from our dataset were identified to comprise multiple vrs. to make sure that the additional vrs in multiple repeat dgrs were not merely random hits created by chance, we confirmed that most vr sequences were indeed part of an orf. in only two instances, a clear assignment of a vr to an orf was not possible. in pelodictyon phaeoclathratiforme bu- <dig>  one of the four vrs is not part of an identifiable coding region, whereas in marichromatium purpuratum  <dig>  all three vrs belong to a single  <dig> bp orf that consists of three tandemly arranged fge-sulfatase paralogs . it is unclear whether this highly unusual orf is a sequencing artifact, a pseudogene, or whether it is actually expressed.

organisms marked with § do not feature additional paralogous orfs independent of the dgr.

within each dgr, multiple target orfs show high protein sequence homology to each other. also at the nucleotide level, the orfs fulfill the criteria of paralogy  so that gene duplication is the likely mechanism of multiple vr-dgr formation. notably, even the most distant target orfs display the hallmarks of continuing and independent diversification .

duplication of genes is not an uncommon event in nature. in most cases, there is no significant increase in fitness and one of the copies becomes inactive and is finally deleted again
 <cit> . if duplication proves to be advantageous to the host, both open reading frames are kept as paralogs. the paralogous gene can increase host fitness simply be raising the expression level of the encoded protein, but most often it is associated with neofunctionalization or subfunctionalization
 <cit> . this process can be significantly accelerated by combining gene duplication with dgr activity, leading to parallel diversification of a whole protein family and thus a superior means to adapt to environmental demands. however, if all members of a gene family are mutated simultaneously, essential functions might be lost. consequently, we checked for the presence of additional paralogs in organisms featuring multiple vrs by using one of the respective target proteins as a query for a blastp search. in all but three cases, we found at least one additional paralog without a vr. thus the diversified genes in multiple vr dgrs are usually part of a bigger gene family and co-exist with more stable counterparts of similar function which act as conserved “ancestor” genes.

interestingly, our search for paralogous target genes in the complete genomes of the host organisms also unearthed additional orfs that include perfect variable repeats differing exclusively in a-positions from their corresponding tr. the maximum distance between a dgr rt and additional target orfs was observed in pseudogulbenkiania sp. nh8b with >  <dig> kb. further examination revealed the presence of a strongly mutated rt gene in the vicinity of these distal target orfs, suggesting that a dgr underwent duplication and lost one of the rts because the remaining enzyme was sufficient to support diversification of all vrs. generally, these additional target orfs were found on different contigs or further than  <dig> kb from the rt, so that our program could not automatically identify them. however, the program’s ability to identify dgrs per se does not seem affected by this limitation. this is due to the fact that all dgrs that we have found so far contain a “core” dgr cassette comprising 2– <dig> kb, which is easily covered by the ~  <dig> kb input sequence. in order to obtain a quantitative assessment of dgrs with multiple vrs, it would be necessary to run the program on whole genome data. while the length of the analyzed sequence can be increased in digref, this significantly increases the computation time and was therefore not done in this initial study.

a new structural dgr type features inversions
during our studies, we identified three rts  that represent a previously unknown structural dgr type. these “inverted” dgrs  consist of an rt orf on one dna strand, and tr, vr and target orf on the other dna strand. except for the separation of the cassette components on two strands, these elements show all standard features of dgrs such as long repeats  and a high mutation rate . since our program only analyzes the dna strand coding for the rt, repeats of these “inverted” dgrs cannot be recognized by a standard digref search looking for a-specific mutations. we incidentally found them when we were investigating whether dgrs can only mutate adenine residues. we changed the program to search for repeats with c, g, or t substitutions in the vicinity of rt sequences. for cs and gs, we did not find a single hit that matched the search criteria, but for ts, we found three hits representing the complementary strands of inverted dgrs. phylogenetically, their rt sequences cluster in one group , suggesting that the inversion was a one-time event that subsequently got distributed to different species via hgt. though a rare event, the inversion proves that unlike for example retrotransposons, the rt mrna and the template rna are not required to form a single transcriptional unit. theoretically, it might even be possible that tr and vr lie on opposite strands. indeed, the dgr of pseudogulbenkiania sp. nh8b has four associated vrs, two on the same strand as rt and tr, and two in further distance and on the opposite strand. thus, the analysis of dgr structures has uncovered two mechanistic aspects of dgr-mediated mutagenesis: transcriptional separation of rt and tr expression, and spatial uncoupling of dgr expression and vr targeting.

CONCLUSIONS
the program digref is designed to easily and automatically search for dgrs. with this program, we were able to reliably identify all previously described dgr sequences, but in addition, we found over  <dig> new cassette structures that show the typical features of dgrs. changing the search parameters allowed us to identify new structural dgr types. currently, the program is mainly limited by incomplete or misassembled sequence data, but allows facile constant surveillance of newly sequenced genomes for dgrs.

moreover, the modular nature of digref and its flexible output  greatly facilitate the downstream analysis of various aspects of dgrs. in this work we have analyzed repeat length, nucleotide substitution patterns, rt phylogenetics, cassette structure and interspecies transfer of dgrs, but the program output also offers the possibility to address other questions pertaining to dgr function. for example, the program can be adapted to extract the target orfs of dgrs. although the crucial role of dgrs in phage tropism switching is well understood, the function of these elements in bacteria is still unclear. many target orfs are located in the membrane, belong to the fge-sulfatase superfamily and assume a clec-type fold
 <cit> , but their exact function is unknown. a systematic large scale comparison of the target proteins may provide insights into which proteins are good targets for dgrs and help to define their biological role. similarly, digref facilitates the search for accessory proteins and allows detailed analysis of integration determinants such as the imh region  or the hairpin/cruciform structure downstream of the vr that is required for target site recognition in a subset of dgrs
 <cit> . thus the software will be a valuable tool for obtaining deeper insights into the function of these unique intriguing retroelements.

