BACKGROUND
cerebral malaria  is a major cause of global morbidity and mortality. the molecular basis of this syndrome remains incompletely defined  <cit> ; however, the development, severity and ultimate outcome of malaria infections are known to be influenced by genetic factors in both the host and the parasite  <cit> . murine models have been informative in clarifying the molecular mechanisms underlying cm. plasmodium berghei anka  infection of mice simulates many of the features of human cm  <cit>  and infection of genetically defined inbred mice provides an opportunity to dissect the host response to infection. c57bl/ <dig>  and other susceptible mice  <cit>  infected with pba develop malaria-associated encephalopathy similar to cm in humans. in contrast, balb/c mice do not develop encephalopathy, although they become infected and achieve similar levels of parasite density  <cit> . host factors, including differential intensity and timing of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine responses to infection, have been implicated in susceptibility to cm in this model  <cit> .

parasite-dependent factors also influence disease outcome. pba infection of b <dig> mice results in cm, while infection of the same host with the closely related parasite line p. berghei k <dig> does not  <cit> . by comparing these models, it has been postulated that parasite-dependent modulation of host immune responses may contribute to the pathogenesis of cm  <cit> .

genome-wide expression profiling is being increasingly applied to dissect the complex details of the host response to malaria infection  <cit> . delahaye et al. identified candidate mouse resistance genes to pba by profiling brain gene expression in resistant and susceptible mice  <cit> . sexton et al. examined transcriptional responses in the spleens of b <dig> mice infected with pba and reported gene expression patterns suggestive of suppressed erythropoiesis, up-regulated host glycolysis and an interferon-inducible target response  <cit> . several studies have also analyzed parasite expression patterns in vitro and in vivo  <cit> ; however, concurrent examination of the host-parasite interaction has only been used to analyze the vector-parasite relationship between anopheles stephensi and p. berghei  <cit> .

malaria infections result in diverse clinical outcomes presumably because of the dynamic relationship between parasite-expressed virulence factors and individual host response to these determinants. the objective of this study was to simultaneously examine both sides of the parasite-host interface to identify corresponding pba and murine organ-specific expression profiles associated with resistance or susceptibility to cm. we used custom-designed "combination" microarrays containing both murine and plasmodial genes to define host and parasite transcriptional programs in target organs during pba infection of cm-susceptible  and resistant  mice. malaria gene expression was readily detected within host tissue, and differential expression of parasite and murine genes discriminated infection in resistant from susceptible mice, identifying both host and parasite transcriptional programs which may contribute to cm.

RESULTS
a combination murine/p. berghei anka microarray
we designed and tested a microarray  composed of  <dig>  sixty-mer probes designed to detect over  <dig>  known and predicted mouse transcripts  <cit>  as well as  <dig>  known or predicted p. berghei genes and ests. because both the mouse and malaria genomes are still being annotated, and the statistical analyses employed are sensitive to artefacts that can arise from duplicated genes, and inclusion of pseudogenes and unverified genes, we only considered probes in our computational analyses that uniquely target  <dig>  single-copy mouse genes and  <dig>  independent p. berghei genes or ests  annotated in current genome databases.

to test the specificity of our combination array, we hybridized one microarray with cy3-labelled cdna from uninfected b <dig> brain and cy5-labelled cdna from pba infected b <dig> blood, containing approximately 20% parasitized red blood cells. in uninfected brain, the spot intensity distribution from malaria probes was indistinguishable from that of random-sequence negative control probes on the array, while 20% of the mouse probes exceeded the 99th percentile of negative control probe intensities , presumably representing the fraction of genes expressed in brain. in contrast, 25% of the malaria probes exceeded the 99th percentile of negative control probe intensities in infected blood. this indicates that the malaria probes were functional under our standard hybridization conditions and had minimal cross-hybridization to mouse cdnas. therefore, the combination array was able to specifically detect parasite and host gene expression.

host and parasite tissue-specific expression patterns
we next hybridized combination arrays with cdna from four malaria target organs  from b <dig>  and balb/c  mice over a time-course of infection . in total, we detected  <dig>  mouse genes with expression above the 99th percentile of negative-control probes in at least one tissue, among which  <dig>  were detected at least 6-fold higher in at least one tissue relative to the gene median expression across all tissues . we confirmed that these transcripts displayed tissue-specific gene expression patterns similar to those previously described  <cit> , including enrichment of expected gene ontology biological process  categories  <cit>  among the genes expressed in different tissues . for example, genes highly expressed in the spleen were significantly associated with the go-bp categories of 'immune response' and 'response to biotic stimulus'.

we detected  <dig>  malaria genes with expression above the 99th percentile of negative-control probes in at least one tissue, among which  <dig>  were detected at least 15-fold higher in at least one infected tissue relative to uninfected tissue. this indicated that they were unlikely to represent cross-hybridization to mouse transcripts in the same samples and were roughly consistent with the number of malaria genes previously found to be expressed in infected blood  <cit> . pba transcripts also displayed an organ-specific "signature" of gene expression that was modulated over the course of infection .

strikingly, the majority of pba transcripts with detected expression were present in the lung . although information about the pba genes is sparse, the lung-expressed genes encoded apparent heat shock proteins, ribosomal proteins, and proteasome components, and the cluster is significantly enriched with go-bp annotations of nucleic acid metabolism, entry into host, and metabolism . further analysis of the lung-expressed genes, using p. falciparum protein-protein interaction  sub-networks identified by lacount et al.  <cit> , showed that a number of gene pairs in the ppi network were significantly over-represented in the group of pba genes expressed in the lung , including some associated with cell invasion  . these findings suggest that the lung may be a preferential site of pba biosynthesis, metabolism and proliferation. although this intriguing observation may reflect, at least in part, pulmonary blood volume, models using pba in mice  <cit>  and p. falciparum in rats  <cit>  indicate that parasites do sequester in the lung. examination of parasite transcription profiles shows that parasites are undergoing replication and metabolic functions in the lung and are displaying activity other than simple adhesion. parasite sequestration and replication in the lung would be expected to induce the release of parasite products, cytokine production, and recruitment of immune cells, thereby causing pulmonary inflammation and/or injury. indeed pulmonary pathology has been reported in previous studies of pba infection, including increased pulmonary vascular permeability and edema  <cit> . additionally, respiratory distress is associated with severe malaria due to p. falciparum  <cit> , and pulmonary edema often occurs in individuals who develop cm  <cit> .

baseline differences and unique temporal responses to pba infection in cm-resistant  versus cm-susceptible  mice are predominantly associated with immune function
different clinical outcomes to malaria may be attributable to the differential immunological resting state of resistant  and susceptible  hosts – that is, differences in transcriptional status at baseline may influence the subsequent course of infection. additionally, host response during infection is likely to contribute to outcome. to test these hypotheses, a linear model was employed to compare expression profiles in specific tissues of both mouse strains at baseline  and between baseline and post-infection . six hundred and eight  mouse genes were expressed differentially at baseline , and  <dig> genes showed a significant differential response to infection  between resistant and susceptible mice. two hundred and sixty-six  genes were differentially expressed both at baseline and over infection, and  <dig> genes were differentially expressed at baseline and/or during the course of infection. to further characterize these  <dig> genes, we performed clustering analysis of gene expression at each time point in all tissues . this revealed several groups of genes with distinctive profiles over the time course, many of which are enriched for immunological go-bp categories.

the expression of one group of  <dig> genes was consistently greater in resistant mice at baseline and over infection . functional categories significantly enriched in this group included 'defence response', 'immune response', 'complement activation' and 'humoral immune response'. immune-related genes within these groups included interferon-inducible guanylate nucleotide binding protein  <dig>  and chemokine  receptor  <dig> .

of interest was a cluster of  <dig> genes with significant enrichment in immune related go categories. this cluster was highly expressed at baseline in livers of resistant animals, up-regulated in livers of susceptible mice over the course of infection, as well as being upregulated in lungs and spleens of resistant mice during infection . functional annotations associated with this cluster included 'cell adhesion', 'cell communication', 'response to stimulus', 'external stimulus and biotic stimulus', and 'defence, immune and humoral immune response'. several immunologic cell surface molecules were clustered within this group , as were numerous genes containing immunoglobulin  domains. additionally,  <dig> transcripts encoded or putatively encoded ig family member genes. other potentially important transcripts figure included cytokine receptors,  <dig> subcomponents of complement component 1q, at least  <dig> interferon-inducible genes and several signalling molecule transcripts.

a third gene cluster of interest , significantly associated with the go annotations of 'signal transduction', 'cell communication', 'cell surface receptor linked signal transduction' and 'g-protein coupled receptor signalling pathway', was up-regulated in susceptible mice at baseline and in response to infection. genes encoding proteins likely involved in cell communication included platelet-derived growth factor receptor-like  and members of the upar/ly6/cd <dig> family. c-reative protein  was also highly up-regulated in the lungs of resistant mice at baseline, decreasing over infection.

additional analysis of the genes selected by the linear model, using the ingenuity pathways analysis program, identified pathways and gene networks enriched in the expression data and therefore likely to be important in cm pathogenesis. pathways significantly associated with all genes selected by the linear model  include pyruvate metabolism, p <dig> mapk signalling and platelet-derived growth factor  signalling . pyruvate kinase deficiency has been shown to protect animals from severe disease in another murine malaria model, p. chabaudi chabaudi  <cit> . in vitro studies have demonstrated that p. falciparum glycosylphosphatidylinositol  moities stimulate macrophages to produce the proinflammatory cytokines il- <dig> and il- <dig> via a p <dig> mapk-dependent pathway  <cit> . although no studies have directly linked pdgf signaling with malaria infection, pdgf is known to stimulate proliferation and chemotaxis in many cell types, including leukocytes; moreover, platelets are a source of pdgf and may be important in pba pathogenesis  <cit> .

analysis of genes differentially expressed in the liver at day  <dig> identified a network involving several immune-related transcripts, including signal transducer and activator of transcription  <dig> , a transcription factor involved in several inflammatory signaling processes . many genes in this network were highly expressed in resistant mice at baseline and became up-regulated in susceptible mice over the course of infection . therefore, stat1-mediated signaling, which includes the interferon-α/β and interferon-γ signaling pathways, may moderate survival early in pba infection. our analysis shows that resistant balb/c mice are primed for this response at baseline, while b <dig> mice show a delayed response, which may contribute to poor outcome. both interferon-α/β and interferon-γ signaling have previously been associated with malaria infection. development of cm in pba infection requires both ifnγ and ifnγ receptor  <cit> . however, early production of ifnγ, as observed in the k <dig> murine model of non-cerebral malaria may protect against subsequent progression to cerebral malaria  <cit> . moreover, ifnα and ifnγ receptor polymorphisms have been linked to protection from severe and cerebral malaria in humans  <cit> . recent work comparing transcriptional responses in presymptomatic versus clinically apparent p. falciparum infection identified ifnγ signalling pathway members, including stat <dig>  to be induced early in infection  <cit> , lending further support to the role of this signalling pathway. since the differential response appears to involve a temporal sequence , enhancement of this pathway at appropriate times during the course of infection could improve the outcome of susceptible animals. further experiments in a broader range of mouse strains will be required to examine how stat1-mediated signalling, including early interferon-α/β and/or-γ mediated responses, modulates the progression of plasmodial infections and whether it could be used as a biomarker to predict resistance to cm.

malaria gene expression is modified by host genetic background and tissue microenvironment
we hypothesized that malaria gene expression would differ depending on the susceptibility status of the mammalian host. therefore, we examined differential pba gene expression between mouse strains. using a linear model,  <dig> malaria genes were identified as differentially expressed . of note, when clustered, these genes showed striking differences, not only between resistant and susceptible hosts, but also between the target tissues examined .

an initial group of  <dig> genes, expressed in the lung and liver of susceptible  mice  was over-represented in the go category of 'cell communication'. one major cluster defined a set of  <dig> co-expressed genes highly up-regulated in the lungs and livers of susceptible  mice and spleens of resistant  mice . go categories significantly enriched in this cluster included 'response to stimulus and temperature', 'glucose, amino acid, hypusine and pigment metabolism' and the four predominant go categories of 'biosynthesis', 'cellular process', 'metabolism' and 'physiological process'. the cluster representing  <dig> highly expressed genes in spleens of susceptible mice  had limited functional annotations, but was significantly represented in the go categories of 'response to stimulus' and 'drug transport'. a smaller cluster of  <dig> genes, which was up-regulated in the lungs of resistant mice and to a lesser extent in the livers of susceptible animals, was associated with regulation of enzyme activity and mitotic interphase . lastly, a prominent cluster containing predominantly putative genes lacking go annotations appeared in the brains of resistant mice .

although it was anticipated that parasites might respond differently in resistant versus susceptible hosts, the unique transcriptional signature that the parasite displayed in each of the four organs examined provides in vivo evidence that malaria parasites are profoundly influenced by the host genetic background and tissue microenvironment in which they replicate or sequester. the systematic transcriptional profiling of the same parasite isolate in multiple organs identified differential expression of a number of enzymes involved with energy pathways, cell signalling molecules, and genes encoding heat-shock proteins, some of which may constitute the parasites' own response to host defence. however, many of the transcripts remain annotated as hypothetical proteins and several evident gene clusters, especially those transcribed in the brains, have no gene ontology or protein information associated with them. regardless, further investigation of these differentially expressed clusters may yield new potential targets for drug development and provide further insights into the regulation of plasmodial virulence determinants in vivo.

verification of expression analysis using quantitative real-time rt-pcr
quantitative real-time rt-pcr  was performed to analyze the expression of a number of representative mouse genes  and pba genes, which were either identified by our statistical analysis or previously shown to be important in other studies but not identified by our analysis . qrt-pcr results correlated well with normalized intensity data in each organ at each time point, yielding a median overall correlation of  <dig>  with the microarray data, and thereby confirming the validity of observed gene expression patterns .

analysis of mouse and malaria gene groups previously associated with malaria disease pathogenesis
previous studies in various experimental models of malaria have demonstrated that specific host responses may influence clinical outcome  <cit>  and that certain malaria genes may contribute to parasite virulence or disease pathogenesis. based on the results from these previous studies, we chose to examine expression patterns of genes represented on the array in specific categories associated with malaria infection. for mouse genes, functional categories included 'cell adhesion', 'toll-like receptors', 'immune response' , 'interferon responsive genes', 'acute phase proteins', 'erythroid-associated transcripts', 'complement activation', 'glycolysis' and 'hemostasis' . pba transcripts examined included the bir family of genes, orthologues of the p. falciparum rif/stevor genes  <cit>  which encode for variant surface antigens  <cit> ; an orthologue of sequestrin and the go-bp category of 'invasion' . while many of the pba transcripts were in the top quartile of expressed genes, especially in the lungs, none of the chosen groups showed a significant enrichment of genes selected by the linear model  and only two were differentially expressed between resistant and susceptible animals. this finding suggests that while parasite surface molecules and invasion-associated genes may be important in infection, they are not associated with a parasite phenotype that promotes the development of cm.

however, in several host gene groups, there was a significant enrichment of differentially expressed genes selected by the linear model . this emphasizes the role of toll-like receptors; cytokines, chemokines and their receptors; interferon responsive genes; acute phase proteins and complement activation groups in the pba cm model. in our analysis, many ifn-inducible genes were identified as differentially expressed , lending further support for the importance of the timing and magnitude of interferon responses in mediating outcomes in pba infection. with this and other microarray studies  <cit>  identifying the expression of interferon-inducible genes in response to p. berghei, it could be argued that differences in constitutive and early innate immune responses by ifn-regulated genes, could contribute to innate resistance in balb/c mice, and may be prognostic of outcome.

this analysis also identified complement-related genes as a group likely to be important to pba susceptibility . epidemiological evidence links decreased complement receptor  <dig>  expression with reduced malaria incidence and disease severity  <cit> . additionally, increased expression of c1qbeta is found in the brains of susceptible mice, compared to resistant ones, in pba infection  <cit> . as with unregulated cytokines, a defective or deregulated complement response may also contribute to the pathophysiology of malaria.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we designed and applied a combination oligonucleotide microarray to simultaneously interrogate organ-specific transcriptional responses on both sides of the pathogen-host interface in experimental murine malaria. the use of this and other host and/or plasmodium microarrays to examine parasite transcriptional profiles in vivo  <cit> , demonstrates important features of how both host and pathogen respond during infection. a host/parasite combination array not only offers the advantage of providing concurrent information about both organisms, but is also more time- and cost-effective, and does not provide additional challenges for data analysis than using separate platforms.

the combination microarray data generated by this study provide an initial understanding of the dynamic tissue-specific bi-directional interaction between pathogen and host in malaria. several unique insights emerged from this study. from the pathogen perspective, the lung is an important site of parasite metabolism and proliferation and that parasite transcriptional differences occurred not only between different hosts, but also within different organ environments. the differential response between resistant and susceptible mice was primarily associated with immune function and our analysis provides evidence for the importance of interferon signalling, interferon-responsive genes and complement-related genes in cm pathogenesis. ultimately, when combined with complementary genetic strategies including targeted gene disruption, or extended to other host-pathogen pairs including humans and p. falciparum, such work may provide further insights into the pathogenesis of cm and facilitate the design of novel interventions targeting both host and parasite gene networks to improve clinical outcome in malaria.

