BACKGROUND
transcriptome analysis is the key of functional genomics research, and is often the hub of integrative analysis of -omics data. high-throughput expression profiling techniques such as dna microarray  <cit>  and rna-seq  <cit>  have resulted in thousands of gene expression data sets, each containing dozens to hundreds of experiments, being deposited into public databases such as the ncbi gene expression omnibus   <cit> . to effectively exploit this wealth of data, however, there is an urgent call for systematic methods to integrate data across multiple experiments.

recently, there has been a surging interest in producing gene co-expression networks from microarray data, which have been shown as an important and useful technique in discovering knowledge from gene expression microarray data, with many interesting results being reported  <cit> . in a co-expression network, the nodes are genes and the edges indicate similar expression patterns between genes, according to some similarity metric. co-expression is often correlated with functional relationships, such as physical interaction between the encoded proteins, or logical interaction in related biochemical and signaling pathways  <cit> . it has also been shown that gene co-expression networks have scale-free topology and community structure, similar to other biological networks  <cit> . furthermore, it appears that genes with more co-expression links tend to be more evolutionarily conserved and essential  <cit> . co-expression networks can be constructed in a number of ways, most of which involve some ad hoc parameters. the majority of the existing methods for constructing co-expression networks are based on some similarity threshold: two genes are connected by an edge whenever the similarity  between their expression levels is above a certain value  <cit> . this threshold is usually dataset dependent, although a few ideas have been proposed to help in the automatic selection of the threshold  <cit> . a problem with such threshold-based approachs is that different biological processes may show different levels of co-expression. therefore, it is unlikely that a single threshold can be used to define all co-expression links. recently, we and others proposed an asymmetric k-nearest-neighbor -based approach to construct gene co-expression networks  <cit> . basically, for each gene g, we connect it to k other genes whose similarity to g is ranked the top k among all the genes. the advantage of this approach is that two genes sharing only weak expression similarity may be linked. we showed that a small k is needed to keep the whole network connected, and partitioning the network can result in higher module prediction accuracy than conventional clustering algorithms  <cit> . a problem with this approach, however, is that the microarray data needs to be preprocessed so that genes unrelated to the process of interest are removed before the construction of the network, to prevent them from being accidentally included in the network.

in this study, we propose a mutual k-nearest neighbor  approach, which solves the problem of unspecific connections in the aknn network, and is robust to random noise and scatter genes. we also propose a strategy to automatically determine the optimal k for constructing gene co-expression networks based on network topologies. we then apply a parameter-free modular discovery algorithm that we have developed previously  <cit>  to partition the network into relatively dense subnetworks as candidates of functional modules. we also propose a cis-regulatory element finding algorithm that is suitable for consensus scanning without prior knowledge of the allowed extent of degeneracy of the motif. we applied the method to construct and analyze a whole-genome gene co-expression network for arabidopsis  using more than one thousand microarray experiments. prom the network we identified many interesting modules that are functionally coherent and potentially co-regulated. remarkably, the functional modules we predicted are statistically much more significant than those reported by previous studies on similar data sets. in addition, we have predicted cis-regulatory elements for many of the functional modules, and the relationship between the cis-regulatory elements and the functional modules can often be confirmed by published results. our results lead to the discovery of the largest number of arabidopsis functional modules in the literature. given the high statistical significance of gene ontology enrichment and the agreement between cis-regulatory and functional annotations of these genes modules, we believe that the results can be utilized to predict the functions of unknown genes in arabidopsis, and to understand the regulatory mechanisms of many genes. as a proof of concept, we used the co-expression network to dissect the promoters of gibberellin metabolism and signaling genes, with some promising results that reveal new insight into the biosynthesis and signaling of the important plant hormone gibberellin.

RESULTS
we used a large collection of arabidopsis gene expression microarray data that include  <dig> microarrays for various growth conditions, developmental stages, and tissues of arabidopsis  <cit> . the high quality of this collection of microarray data and diverse experimental conditions allow us to construct a global gene co-expression network that captures true functional relationship between pairs of genes.

overall network properties
applying the automated network construction method, we obtained a gene co-expression network with k =  <dig>  determined automatically by two topological measures . the network contained  <dig> edges, and a giant connected component  that included  <dig>  of the  <dig> genes assayed by the microarray. the next largest connected component had only  <dig> genes, while  <dig> genes had no connections at all, which we omitted from further analysis. the mean and median vertex degree of the gcc is  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.

to compare, we randomized the gene expression data set and applied the same network construction method  to obtain a random network. it is important to note that this random network is not a random rewiring of the real network. in general, random rewiring would completely destroy the local modular structure of real networks, while a network constructed from randomized data would still have some modularity, because of the transitivity of most similarity measurement . we found that the real network and the random network had very different statistics. the largest connected component in the random network only contained  <dig> genes, and  <dig> genes has zero connections. overall, this random network only contained  <dig> edges; therefore, we estimated that our co-expression network had ~94% of accuracy.

as shown in figure  <dig>  the real network seems to follow a power-law degree distribution, with an exponential truncation, which is common for many real-world networks. note that the frequency of nodes with degree of  <dig> is artificially inflated, because the maximum degree allowed by the method is  <dig>  the random network also appears to have a power-law degree distribution, but the network contains much fewer nodes of maximum degree. this shows that the requirement for two vertices to confirm their ranks eliminated most of the noise connections.

furthermore, the real network has a much higher clustering coefficient than the random network . to show that the difference between the clustering coefficients of the two networks is not due to their sizes, we randomly sampled a subnetwork of size  <dig> from the real network, and determined that its clustering coefficient is  <dig>  ±  <dig> . therefore, the real network has strong modularity that cannot be explained by the transitivity of the similarity measure. also, after randomly rewiring, the clustering coefficients of both networks approaches zero.

finally, it is worth mentioning that both the real network and the random network have similarly high degree correlations . this is different from asymmetric nearest neighbor networks  <cit> , which typically has a negative degree correlation . this may be an important property to consider when designing algorithms for analyzing these two types of networks.

enriched gene ontology terms
using hqcut, we find  <dig> modules from the largest component of the network, with sizes from  <dig> to  <dig>  many of them have small sizes. module sizes follow a power-law distribution for the region between  <dig> and  <dig> ). overall, there are ~ <dig> modules of size at least  <dig>  and ~ <dig> modules of size at least  <dig>  gene ontology analysis revealed that many of the modules have significantly enriched functions. among the ~ <dig>  modules whose sizes are at least  <dig> ,  <dig> %  of them have at least one enriched function, with a bonferroni corrected p-value <  <dig> .

enriched cis-regulatory elements
we annotated each module with a list of known cis-regulatory elements  from the place database that are over-represented in the promoter sequences of the genes in the module . overall,  <dig> % of the modules with size >  <dig> have at least one over-represented cis-regulatory element with a nominal p-value <  <dig> .

overall, a total of  <dig> unique motifs were found to be statistically significant in  <dig> modules, with a false discovery rate  ≤  <dig> . figure  <dig> shows the final transcriptional regulatory network in arabidopsis, where a circle represents a gene module, and a triangle represents a motif. the size of a node is proportional to its module size or number of modules it regulates. the motif clusters in the center of the left subnetwork contain many abre and gibberellin -related motifs, which is understandable as aba and gibberellin regulate many biological processes in plants. several other interesting cis-regulatory elements such as auxin response element , low temperature response elements , and drought response elements  are loosely connected to the center, indicating the cross-talk among these stimulus response processes.

comparison with previous studies
several previous studies have attempted to predict functional modules in arabidopsis, using essentially the same microarray data compendium, based on co-expression networks or clustering methods  <cit> . it is worth noting that the previous co-expression networks were all constructed by some variants of the threshold-based methods . remarkably, the enrichment of go terms in our functional modules is much more significant than in all previous studies, to the best of our knowledge. for example, horan et al. applied hierarchical clustering directly to the microarray data and obtained  <dig> clusters  <cit> . the most significant go terms in their clusters are photosynthesis , ribosome , and proteasome complex . mao et al. constructed a co-expression network using a pearson correlation coefficient cutoff  <dig>   <cit> . using the markov clustering algorithm   <cit> , they identified  <dig> clusters. the five most significant clusters contain genes in photosynthesis , protein biosynthesis , dna metabolism , starch metabolism , and response to heat .

ma et al.  <cit>  and vandepoele et al.  <cit>  have also used co-expression networks for predicting functional modules, but the overall goals/strategies of their studies are different from ours. ma et al. attempted to find co-expressed neighbors of known guide genes. the five most significant go terms found by ma et al. are response to heat , chromatin , response to auxin , proteasome complex , and starch metabolism . the work of vandepoele et al. combines co-expression with sequence-level conservation between arabidopsis and poplar. the most significant go terms they found are photosynthesis , ribosome biogenesis and assembly , and dna replication .

finally it is worth noting that our network  is much sparser than the network of mao et al. , and that of vandepoele et al. . our network is more sparse, making it easier for analysis and visualization. at the same time, our network covers about 95% of the arabidopsis genes, whereas the networks by ma et al. and mao et al. only cover about 30% of arabidopsis genes. as a result, we are able to identify more functional modules than in these previous studies.

application: gene-centric analysis
as an application, we used the co-expression network to study a set of gibberellin  metabolism and signaling genes. the gas are a group of plant hormones that singly or in combination with other hormones regulate many aspects of plant growth and development including germination, stem elongation and flowering  <cit> . we compiled  <dig> arabidopsis genes that encode three small families of 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase  enzymes in the ga metabolic pathway , and  <dig> genes that encode ga receptors . the amount of bioactive ga which binds to the receptor to transduce a biological response must be closely regulated by fine tuning ga biosynthesis and deactivation  <cit> . for each of the genes, we are interested in obtaining their cis-regulatory elements. we first obtained the co-expression neighbors for each gene. for each gene, we then combined itself and its co-expressed neighbors into a single list. we then searched for motifs that are not only over-represented in the list, but appeared in the promoter of the gene of interest . figure  <dig> shows the network with the ga metabolism and signaling genes and their putative cis-regulatory elements. the width of an edge is proportional to the significance of enrichment. we predicted cis-regulatory elements for  <dig> out of  <dig> ga 2odd genes and  <dig> out of  <dig> ga receptor genes. abscisic acid  response elements  play important roles in regulating several of these genes. it is well known that the balance between ga and aba is an important factor regulating the development and growth of many plants  <cit> . it can also be seen that ga20ox and ga3ox families, both critical in the biosynthesis of bioactive ga, share more common cis-regulatory elements with each other than with members of the ga2ox family, which are responsible for ga deactivation  <cit> . the ryrepeatbnnapa motif is also important for aba responses  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have proposed a novel network-based method for identifying gene functional modules and cis-regulatory elements from a large microarray data set of arabidopsis. the method included a mutual k-nearest-neighbor network construction method with automatic parameter selection, a modularity-based parameter-free module detection algorithm, and a cis-regulatory element finding algorithm that is suitable for consensus scanning without prior knowledge of the allowed extent of degeneracy of the motif. since the method is completely parameter free, it is especially useful to be applied to analyzing microarray data sets that are of very large scale or are assaying poorly understood biological processes, where the appropriate network parameters and number of modules are difficult to estimate.

applying our method to a large collection of arabidopsis microarray data, we have significantly improved the prediction accuracy of functional modules compared to several previous studies. our application leads to the discovery of the largest number of arabidopsis functional modules in the literature; for many modules, we are able to annotate them with functional terms and cis-regulatory elements. together, the high statistical significance of gene ontology enrichment and the agreement between cis-regulatory and functional annotations of these genes modules in arabidopsis show that our arabidopsis gene modules are excellent candidates of functional modules. therefore, we believe that the results can be utilized to predict the functions of unknown genes in arabidopsis, and to understand the regulatory mechanisms of many genes. as a proof of concept, we have used the co-expression network to dissect the promoters of gibberellin metabolism and signaling genes, with some promising results that reveal new insight into the biosynthesis and signaling of the important plant hormone gibberellin. we are constructing a database and web interface for querying the arabidopsis gene co-expression network, the predicted functional modules and associated cis-regulatory elements.

