BACKGROUND
cyanobacteria produce a high number of chemically diverse oligopeptides exhibiting various types of bioactivities ranging from mild enzyme inhibition to initiation of acute toxic effects in pro- or eukaryotes  <cit> . more than  <dig> individual compounds have been described and probably many peptides have remained undiscovered. most oligopeptides can be assigned to chemical classes, of which aeruginosins, anabaenopeptins, cyanopeptolins, microcystins, microginins, and microviridins are among the most recognized ones  <cit> . some classes have well characterized biosynthetic pathways  <cit> , while for others, hardly anything is known. the biological functions of cyanobacterial oligopeptides are unknown, despite knockout studies for microcystins and cyanopeptolins  <cit> . however, gene knockouts in the relevant cyanobacterial strains have turned out to be difficult. thus, the link between a given oligopeptide and the gene cluster has generally been difficult to establish. since the precise functions of the peptides are unknown, the reasons for the vast structural peptide diversity  remain obscure.

several of the oligopeptides classes are produced by nonribosomal peptide synthetases . nrps pathways have been verified for microcystins  <cit> , cyanopeptolins  <cit>  and aeruginosins  <cit> . nrpss have a modular structure with distinct activation domains , thiolation domains , and condensation domains  that are easily identified due to signature sequences  <cit> . conserved sequence motifs also allow identification of additional modules and domains that often are present in nrps enzyme complexes, including metyltransferases , epimerases , thioesterase , halogenases, and abc transporters. the oligopeptide products of nrps gene clusters may be predicted in silico based on binding pocket analyses of a-domains  <cit> , phylogeny and the co-linearity rule, i.e. the order of a-domains is co-linear with the amino acid sequence of the finished peptide  <cit> . similar predictions of secondary metabolites from nrps gene clusters have been performed successfully previously in streptomyces . some oligopeptides are, however, synthesized ribosomally  <cit> , and it is at present unknown if this is the case also for other classes. due to insufficient genomic information this question has been hard to address.

evolutionary and phylogenetic studies of individual nrps gene clusters have revealed frequent horizontal gene transfer  between related strains  <cit> . this is likely to generate new or recurrent variants of the enzymatic modules, leading to a change in oligopeptide profiles. in addition to hgt , recombination between sequences within the same genome  may occur even between different classes of nrps clusters due to a general high genetic similarity  among the building blocks   <cit>  of nrps gene clusters. recombination events and point mutations may be reinforced by positive selection for the new variant, indicating that the new oligopeptide variant may have biological significance  <cit> .

welker et al,  <dig>  <cit>  indicated that production of oligopeptides is concentrated within certain genera of cyanobacteria. why do most strains belonging to in the nrps producing genera produce several classes of oligopeptides and multiple variants of the same oligopeptide class? further, what is the biological significance of the many recombination events within the nrps gene clusters? so far, most studies have investigated single nrps operons  or compared variants of the same class of operons in different strains. it is likely that all the different oligopeptides within a strain contribute to its survival and fitness, therefore the most relevant approach to take is to examine the entire genome of a strain for nrps genes. such an approach should establish relationship between each oligopeptide and operon, and consequently reduce the need for knock-out mutants. furthermore, the possibility of ribosomal synthesis of some oligopeptide classes can be addressed. in addition, it will be possible to investigate whether exchange of modules between different classes of nrps gene clusters within the same genome occurs.

here, we have selected a planktothrix rubescens strain, niva cya  <dig>  that produces all major classes of oligopeptides according to welker et al  <cit>  and shotgun sequenced the genome by massive parallel pyrosequencing  to high depth . we have characterized the oligopeptides of this strain in detail by lc-ms-ms. this has enabled a correlation of nrps gene clusters found within the genome with the identified oligopetides. a putative gene cluster could be identified for all structurally characterized oligopeptides. however, for two nrps gene clusters no oligopeptide were detected. overall, the data show that the combined lc-ms-ms and  <dig> genome sequencing is a very powerful approach for finding putative secondary metabolite genes.

RESULTS
oligopeptides produced by planktothrix niva cya 98
prior to 454-genome sequencing we performed a lc-ms-ms mass spectroscopic fragmentation analysis of planktothrix niva cya  <dig>  this analysis revealed thirteen oligopeptides representing all major oligopeptide classes . aeruginosins, anabaenopeptins, microcystins, and microginins were found to occur with at least two variants each, typically differing by one amino acid or, as for microginins, by the presence/absence of cl in the molecule . an aeruginosin with a previously unreported molecular mass of  <dig>  da + was detected, but not fully elucidated. the oligopeptide nature of a second unknown compound with a mass of  <dig>  da + could not be verified due to the production of immonium ions in ms fragmentation experiments. the molecular mass suggested that the oligopeptide might be a microviridin, which is the only known cyanobacterial oligopeptide class within this size range. a full structural elucidation was not attempted.

the genome of planktothrix niva cya  <dig> and detection of nrps gene clusters
the  <dig> pyrosequencing-generated genomic sequence dataset consisted of  <dig> reads, with the average read length at  <dig> bp, totaling  <dig> mb . an assembly produced  <dig> contigs larger than  <dig> bp. the average contig size was  <dig> bp and the largest contig was  <dig> bp. the genome size was estimated at  <dig>  mb with an average gc content of  <dig> %. an average sequencing depth of  <dig> × was obtained, and the gaps between contigs were no larger than  <dig> bp within the nrps gene clusters regions . in this work, we were able to detect all nrps gene clusters by performing blast  <cit>  comparisons of the entire genome assembly with a relevant selection of nrps domains. we have focused our assembly on the putative nrps sequences. for these sequences we have performed closing of gaps  and confirmation of correct assembly with pcr and sanger sequencing .

gene clusters for all structurally determined oligopeptides detected by lc-ms/ms were found among the contigs. these were identified utilizing blast searches with characterized a- and c-domains as query sequences. a blastn search identified  <dig> distinct regions with high similarity to previously characterized a-domains . other regions were similar to known a-domains , but lacked typical a-domain characteristics. twenty-eight regions similar to known nrps c-domains  were also identified using blastn search. in addition, a number of other domains and genes connected to nrpss were found, including those encoding abc-transporters.

seven distinct nrps gene clusters present in planktothrix niva cya 98
the annotation of the genome uncovered seven distinct nrps clusters  distributed on twelve contigs. three nrps gene clusters – aer, oci, and mcy – were highly similar in domain structure and sequence to clusters previously associated with the production of aeruginosins   <cit> , cyanopeptolins   <cit> , and microcystins   <cit> , respectively. the oligopeptide structures predicted by gene identity and order were in agreement with the structural data obtained in ms fragmentation experiments . we are therefore confident that the nrps encoded by clusters mcy, oci, and aer are responsible for the synthesis of two demethylated microcystins , the cyanopeptolin oscillapeptin g , and two aeruginosins  by niva cya  <dig> 

a large nrps gene cluster was situated in close proximity to the cyanopeptolin gene cluster , but transcribed in the opposite direction on the same contig . the novel gene cluster  encodes six basic nrps modules, including an epimerase and a methyltransferase domain, and an abc transporter . the size, organization and amino acid specificity of a-domains predicted a link between this gene cluster and production of anabaenopeptins. a reliable prediction of amino acid specificity in the anaa-a <dig> and anaa-a <dig> domains was not possible. however, the occurrence of lysine in all anabaenopeptins suggested that the protein complex named anaabcde was responsible for production of all four anabaenopeptin variants – with anaa-a <dig> domain activating lys and relaxed amino acid specificity of the anaa-a <dig>  and anab-a <dig> .

the planktothrix cya  <dig> genome also contains another new nrps polyketide hybrid gene cluster . the gene cluster encodes three basic nrps modules, a polyketide module and an aminotransferase. in silico analyses of the novel micacde suggested that the gene cluster corresponded to the microginin oscillaginin b produced by niva cya  <dig>  oscillaginin a is chlorinated and thus a halogenase is predicted to be part of the biosynthetic pathway. however, blast searches could not identify a complete halogenase in the gene cluster or in the entire genome.

the products of the two remaining nrps gene clusters could not be assigned to oligopeptides detected by lc-ms-ms. nrps-like gene cluster  <dig> did not contain an abc transporter and the assembly of contig  <dig>  and  <dig>  into a single contig displayed low sequence depth in the contig breakpoint. non-nrps genes flanked nrps-like gene cluster  <dig>  the comparison of oligopeptides detected by mass spectroscopy and predicted by genetic analysis did not identify any nrps gene clusters associated to the production of oscillatorin and the putative microviridin.

multi copy nrps gene clusters
to assess the quality of the contigs containing nrps gene clusters, sequence depth per base were analyzed . contig  <dig>  containing the  <dig> kb microginin gene cluster and the contig containing nrps-like gene cluster  <dig> displayed higher sequence depth than the average sequence depth of the genome. higher sequence depth per base is expected to be observed when reads from repeats and duplicated regions are collapsed into a single contig during the assembly process. the sequence depth per base of the microginin contig  indicated three copies and the read-alignment also showed about  <dig> sites to be variable among the reads , were each read variant was represented by approximately 1/ <dig> of the reads covering that site. the 3x copy number of the microginin gene cluster was confirmed by real-time pcr in an independent study .

pcr and sanger sequencing showed that contig  <dig> was present in two repeats within the cyanopeptolin gene cluster. this contig  also showed two-fold higher sequence depth per base  and which is in agreement with the sequence depth per base/number of gene copy relationship as shown by nederbragt aj, rounge tb, jakobsen ks: identification and quantification of genomic repeats and sample contamination in assemblies of  <dig> pyrosequencing reads, submitted.

altogether, the nrps gene clusters accounted for  <dig> %  of the entire planktothrix genome when considering the putative duplication of contigs  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  the typical gc content of nrps clusters ranged from  <dig> to 42% .

ribosomal synthesis of microviridin and oscillatorin
since nrps gene cluster candidates for microviridin and oscillatorin synthesis could not be found, putative ribosomal synthesized precursor genes were searched for and found in the genes mdna and osca, respectively. blast identified a gene cluster mdnacbdef , in close proximity to the anabaenopeptin and cyanopeptolin gene clusters, with high similarities to microviridin biosynthesis genes from microcystis  <cit> . a putative microviridin precursor mdna included a leader and core peptide region with conserved motives . based on in silico analyses of the mdna core peptide and comparison to the microviridin biosynthetic pathway in microcystis, a microviridin biosynthesis pathway in planktothrix niva cya  <dig> can be suggested. the pathway includes cleavage, ligation, acetylation and possible metylation and results in an in silico predicted microviridin with an unknown side chain. the genomic island, constituting the microviridin gene cluster and the two nrps gene clusters ana and oci, we term an oligopeptide island. interestingly, it includes both putative ribosomal and nrps biosynthetic pathways.

tblastn search identified an  <dig> bp open reading frame in the planktothrix genome that encoded an eight amino acid sequence identical to pro-asn-glu-arg-gly-tyr-gly-leu sequence of oscillatorin. the protein, here named osca , has unknown function. the ninth amino acid flanking leu is tryptophan suggested by sano and kaya  <cit>  to be modified to oscillatoric acid , another part of oscillatorin. the probability of a coincidental occurrence of the nine amino acid sequence is  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  and we therefore suggest that the main part of oscillatorin is produced ribosomally as an integral part of this protein. similar schemes have been shown for other oligopeptides  <cit> . thus, we propose a biosynthetic pathway for oscillatorin involving ribosomally encoded amino acids , plus a valine of unknown origin, and cyclization of the oligopeptide by a modifying enzyme possibly encoded by the putative formyltetrahydropholate cycloligase found in the osc gene cluster . a blast search showed similarity to a hypothetical protein l8106_ <dig> from lyngbya sp. pcc  <dig> . interproscan  <cit>  identified motifs similar to pectate lyases .

intra-genomic evolutionary processes unveiled by phylogeny
phylogenetic analyses of a-, c-, m-, e-domains  and nrps-abc-transporter genes  including the planktothrix cya  <dig> nrps sequences, supplemented with other nrps sequences, showed clustering according to gene cluster type rather than strain or genera. a- and c- domains also showed functional clustering according to amino acid specificity and position in the gene cluster, respectively . the phylogenetic analyses including only planktothrix cya <dig> domains indicated the same clustering according to gene cluster and position. however, due to the low number of sequences and few variable sites, the topology did not receive sufficient support . split decomposition analyses were used to identify conflicting phylogenies, which represent recombination events . splits analyses did not indicate any conflicting phylogenies between domains of the nrps gene clusters that were determined to be statistic significant by the phi test analyses , indicating no recombination events.

discussion
metabolomics and the genome-wide approach
here, we show that combining information about all oligopeptides  with whole genome sequencing of a planktothrix strain is a powerful method to deduce the relations between oligopeptides and the corresponding nrps gene clusters identification of putative ribosomal pathways of oscillatorin and microviridin further demonstrates the power of the genome-wide approach. all sequence information needed to identify and characterize the oligopeptide gene clusters was derived from de novo shotgun sequencing of a previously unsequenced cyanobacterial genus, planktothrix. the gene clusters were assembled to completion by sanger-sequencing only a few short pcr fragments. the planktothrix strain was not axenic, but in silico analyses of the 454-sequences solved this potential problem . the gene clusters were identified without making an effort to assemble the complete genome. this is the most complete oligopeptide investigation in a single cyanobacterial strain to date, and we demonstrate here that the genome-wide approach using high-throughput sequencing combined with structural determination of the metabolites has the potential to accelerate oligopeptide research and increase our understanding of secondary metabolite synthesis in general.

link between nrps gene clusters and oligopeptides
in silico analyses of the microcystin, cyanopeptolin and aeruginosin gene clusters correlate with the produced microcystin , oscillapeptin g  and aeruginosin a and a new aeruginosin variant detected by the ms analyses.

the link between the novel ana gene cluster, situated in close proximity to the cyanopeptolin gene cluster, and the anabaenopeptins is highly likely due to the correlation between the bioinformatic predictions and the lc-ms-ms deduction of the anabaenopeptins. it is likely that anaabcde produce all four anabaenopeptin variants due to relaxed specificity of the anaa <dig> and anaa <dig> domain. the epimerase domain suggests a d-amino acid in the a <dig> position, corresponding to the conserved lysine in the oligopeptide, in agreement with structural analyses of anabaenopeptins  <cit> . however, the mass spectrometry analysis cannot differentiate between the d-and l-configurations of amino acids.

in silico analyses of micacde show that this gene cluster corresponds to the oscillaginin b produced by the strain. the chlorinated oscillaginin a requires an additional halogenase, but we were unable to detect a complete oligopeptide halogenase in the genome. the chlorine atom is attached to the polyketide part of the molecule, so a potential different halogenase outside the contig or in trans may be involved.

the microcystin, cyanopeptolin, and aeruginosin and the newly discovered anabaenopeptin and microginin gene clusters all share many features including abc transporter genes. the function of nrps abc-transporters has not been determined, but it has been suggested that they are involved in the export of oligopeptides from the cells. additionaly, the abc transporter mcyj is shown to be essential for microcystin production  <cit> . all five nrps gene clusters are co-linear and consist of very similar nrps and pks modules. compared to previously characterized gene clusters, we observed small changes in aeruginosin gene cluster architecture  <cit> , new tailoring genes/domains  and an additional nrps module in the cyanopeptolin gene clusters  and a mcya gene without a methyltransferase in the mcy gene cluster  <cit> . nrps-like gene cluster  <dig>  lacking an abc transporter and therefore believed to be incomplete and nrps-like gene cluster  <dig>  containing only one nrps encoding module, could not be linked to oligopeptides.

an almost three-fold higher sequencing depth per base and abundance in real-time pcr analysis suggested three copies of the microginin and the nrps-like  <dig> gene clusters . the variations  in the reads detected in the microginin gene clusters point towards some sequence variation between the copies.

independent nrps gene cluster evolution and finding of an oligopeptide island support similar, but discrete, oligopeptide functions
the phylogenetic analyses showed individual functional domains within a nrps class to be more closely related, compared to nrps modules from other nrps classes within the same strain. this indicates independent evolution of each gene cluster, in line with data from single nrps studies  <cit> . our results therefore indicate that nrps domain evolution is influenced more by functional constraints acting on the domains, than by the evolutionary relationships between strains. abc transporters genes were shown to evolve together with their respective gene clusters as sign of a functional unit. consequently, they are useful for studying nrps gene cluster evolution. while the general module architecture was conserved within a gene cluster type, frequent tailoring domain rearrangements were shown resulting in new features like the g-domain, and ocih of the cyanopeptolin and partial halogenases in ocig and aerb. a module rearrangement by intra-gene cluster recombination  seems likely in the cyanopeptolin gene cluster.

an oligopeptide island – a parallel to pathogenicity islands including the three closely located oligopeptide gene clusters oci, ana and mdn  was observed. co-localization of cyanobacterial oligopeptide gene clusters has not been reported previously and may indicate a common target or class of targets for the peptides. there were no further signs of closely linked nrps gene clusters. however, a completely assembled genome is needed to determine the relative positions of the nrps gene clusters to each other.

dual origin of oligopetides through nrps and ribosomal pathways
if oscillatorin and microviridin were produced by nrpss, the corresponding gene clusters would be large and thus easily detected in the genome by this method. these oligopeptides contain only l-amino acids suggesting a possible ribosomal pathway with subsequent modification and cyclization. it is therefore not unexpected that we have identified genes that a likely to ribosomally encode the precursor of oscillatorin and microviridin. the high similarity between the microviridin  gene cluster presented here and in two microcystis strains  <cit>  strongly suggest that the mdn gene cluster produce microviridin. however the length of the side chain, modifications of amino acids and occurrence of additional functional groups are unknown. ribosomal pathways through the activity of a set of processing enzymes have been shown for microviridins  <cit>  microcyclamide  <cit>  and patellamides  <cit> , demonstrating that at least two fundamentally different biosynthetic pathways are used by cyanobacteria to produce oligopeptides.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study suggests that nrps gene clusters encoding the synthesis of aeruginosins, anabaenopeptins, cyanopeptolins, and microginins evolve independently of one another. using phylogenetic methods we showed that there are low levels of recombination between similar modules in functionally different nrps gene clusters within one and the same strain. the recombination levels have not been possible to assess without this genome-wide sequencing approach. in addition, the strain niva cya  <dig> features a likely ribosomal production of oscillatorin and microviridin. all of these six oligopeptide classes are known as potent inhibitors of different types of proteolytic enzymes, including serine proteases, metallo-proteases, and carboxypeptidases  <cit> . this strongly suggests dual pathway of evolution of protease inhibitors in planktothrix niva cya  <dig>  allowing different rates of evolution for each nrps and ribosomal oligopeptide gene clusters. elucidation of evolutionary rates between the different oligopeptide gene clusters, in particular nrps- and ribosomal derived, requires further studies. it is tempting, however, to attribute the dual evolution and high diversity of protease inhibitors in niva cya  <dig> to an "arms-race" between unknown pathogens, competitors or grazers in cyanobacteria  <cit> .

