BACKGROUND
dna methylation patterns vary widely across the genome by developmental stage and by tissue type  <cit> , making study design a challenge when the most relevant tissue is not accessible from living humans. this is particularly true for studies of neurologic or psychiatric traits. although the most relevant tissues, like brain, may be obtained from non-human subjects, animal models often fail to adequately reflect the range of symptoms seen in humans. as a result, peripheral tissues are commonly used to identify biomarkers due to their ready availability.

a recent report characterized methylation patterns extensively in dna derived from brain and blood samples taken from the same individuals  <cit> . the study confirmed that genome-wide dna methylation is highly tissue-specific; however, the authors also noted a striking similarity between dna methylation differences in the blood and brain  from the same individual, prompting the hypothesis that between-individual dna methylation differences may be mediated by dna sequence variation, which does not vary across tissues. nevertheless, the study had only a limited number of subjects and was not designed to address this hypothesis directly.

over the past few years, multiple studies  <cit>  have revealed that dna methylation at specific loci can be influenced by sequence variations, such that individual genotypes at a given locus may result in different patterns of dna methylation due to allele-specific methylation. these sites are called methylation quantitative trait loci  and can influence the methylation pattern across an extended genomic region  <cit> . numerous studies have found meqtls in blood leukocytes, buccal cells, brain tissue, and lymphoblast cell lines  <cit> , though there is only modest overlap between the snp-cpg relationships identified in each study.

the ability to detect an meqtl is influenced by statistical power, which may depend on snp allele frequency and linkage disequilibrium  structure, which vary based on ancestry, or the variance of methylation at a specific cpg site, which may differ across stages of development or tissue type. these snp-cpg relationships have wide-reaching biological relevance and likely contribute to inter-individual variation in gene regulation. the relationship between sequence variants and dna methylation patterns in different sets of individuals may also provide insight into complex traits in which a particular environmental exposure associates with a trait only if incurred at a particular developmental window. delineating sets of potential regulatory snps across different ancestries, developmental stages, and tissue types will help us assess the extent to which meqtls can be used for large-scale studies of a wide range of human traits. this study marks an initial step in that process.

RESULTS
meqtl detection
we assessed genome-wide genotypes and dna methylation in seven cohorts   <dig>  snps and  <dig>  cpg sites that passed quality control  in all seven cohorts were eligible for analysis. we tested a total of  <dig>  unique snp-cpg combinations where the snp was within 50 kb of the cpg site. numerous meqtls were identified in each cohort after a conservative holm adjustment for multiple testing . to make comparisons between meqtl detection, we limited to only the snp-cpg combinations that were present in every cohort . on average, the distance between associated snps and cpg sites was ~15 kb  and did not differ substantially between cohorts. in each of the cohorts, the majority of meqtls mapped to intronic regions , though a limited number appeared to occur in synonymous  or nonsynonymous coding  snps. there was substantial overlap between the set of snps identified as meqtls in this study and meqtls  or eqtls  identified in previous reports  <cit> . we used an empirical sampling strategy  to examine whether this overlap was significant: in  <dig>  randomly chosen sets of snp with similar maf, we found  <dig> instances of overlap as great as the overlap in the original data, indicating that the observed overlap is significantly greater than expected by chance .

bold numbers are the total meqtls identified in each cohort and serve as the denominator for calculation of percentages.

upper triangle: number  of meqtls identified in top dataset  that were also identified in left-hand dataset .

lower triangle: number  of meqtls identified in left-hand dataset  that were also identified in top dataset .

abbreviations: cb b cord blood b, tctx temporal cortex, fctx frontal cortex, pons pons, crblm cerebellum, cb a cord blood a, and pb peripheral blood.

comparison of meqtls by cohort
of the meqtls identified in each cohort,  <dig> - <dig> % were unique to that cohort. note that the number of meqtls identified varied substantially across cohorts, in part due to differences in power across cohorts. for example,  <dig> meqtls were found in umbilical cord blood from caucasian neonates  compared to  <dig> in umbilical cord blood from african american neonates . although these two groups had the same sample size, linkage disequilibrium between markers is substantially lower in african americans than in caucasians  <cit> , so snps in cb a are less likely to tag untyped meqtls. despite the between-cohort differences in power, a number of snp-cpg associations were common across cohorts. to determine whether the observed overlap between any two cohorts was significantly different from that expected by chance, we used fisher’s exact test as described in methods. there was significant overlap in meqtl detection between cb a and cb b . further, comparisons of meqtls detected in african american samples at birth  and adult peripheral blood  had similar agreement . finally, comparisons between caucasian blood samples  and brain tissues  also demonstrated greater overlap in detected meqtls than would be expected by chance . however, the highest proportions of overlap occurred between brain regions . there is  <dig> - <dig> % overlap between pb and the four brain regions, even though the cohorts differ by both ancestral group and tissue type. all of the overlap between pairs of cohorts mentioned above was highly significant ; however, a caveat of this analysis is that the four brain regions were sampled from the same set of individuals. to investigate whether the higher levels of overlap between brain tissues are due to the sampling of brain tissue from a common set of subjects, we also calculated overlap from pairs of brain samples after randomly partitioning the subjects into two non-overlapping groups. additional file  <dig> shows that for each pairwise comparison, the overlap between detected meqtls is only slightly smaller in cross-tissue comparisons when comparing tissue sampled from non-overlapping groups  vs. sampled from the same group . for a vs. b comparisons, we again observed a significantly larger number of overlapping meqtls than expected by chance  despite having much lower power in these partitioned analyses, suggesting that the observed overlap between brain tissues is not an artifact caused by the sampling of brain tissue from a common set of subjects.

to verify that the overlap observed in table  <dig> is robust to differences in linkage disequilibrium  patterns among snps, we also performed secondary analyses where we examined only a set of roughly independent snps. although fewer meqtls were detected overall because fewer comparisons were made, we observed similarly large proportions of overlap in meqtl detection across cohorts when working with this pruned set of snps . to verify that our observed associations are robust to how methylation was modeled, we re-performed select analyses where we modeled methylation using m-values  rather than modeling β-values directly. resulting test statistics for β-values vs. m-values were extremely similar; a representative example is shown in additional file  <dig> 

to visually evaluate the similarities and differences between cohorts, a hierarchical clustering analysis was performed on the t-statistics from the meqtl association tests . only the  <dig> snp-cpg combinations that were holm-significant in at least one cohort were included in this analysis. the heatmap in figure  <dig> shows that many of the meqtls were consistent across the seven cohorts , while others varied considerably between tissues . among these snp-cpg combinations,  <dig> % had t-statistics with the same sign  for all seven cohorts, compared to the  <dig> % expected by chance , where p
i
 represents the proportion of positive t-statistics in cohort i and ranges from . <dig> to . <dig> in our seven cohorts). similarly,  <dig> % of snp-cpg combinations had the same sign for at least six of the seven cohorts, compared to  <dig> % expected by chance. although in many cases the associations were non-significant, this pattern is consistent with variable power to detect these meqtls across cohorts. the hierarchical clustering tree in figure  <dig> shows that the cohorts cluster primarily by ancestral group, likely reflecting differential power due to allele frequency differences between african american and caucasian populations. the tree again demonstrates that the pattern of meqtl direction and significance is most similar between the different brain regions, particularly fctx and tctx. however, there are many similarities across tissue types. for example, in the comparisons between cerebellum  and cord blood ,  <dig> % showed test statistics in the same direction, as opposed to the  <dig> % expected by chance. all of the above differences were highly significant according to binomial tests .

sixty-seven snp-cpg associations were identified as holm-significant in all cohorts, independent of ancestry, age, or tissue type; these snp-cpg pairs tended to be in or near  <dig> genes, many of which are involved in common biological processes, such as cell cycle progression . for example, a snp  approximately  <dig> base pairs upstream of the seventh exon of psmd <dig> associates with multiple cpg sites  in the psmd <dig> promoter in all cohorts examined . note that while a similar association between genotype and methylation is observed in all tissues, the range of methylation proportions varies considerably across tissues.

differences in meqtls by tissue, developmental stage, and ancestral group
examining the differences between these patterns may provide insight into snp associations relevant to a specific tissue , developmental stage , or ancestral group . specifically, we found that genetic variation in and near apoe  was associated with methylation patterns  in fctx, tctx, and pons , but not even nominally associated in crblm or pb . similarly, snps in or near aplnr  associated with methylation of a probe  in cb a , but not in adult pb . finally, snps near cftr  demonstrated holm-significant genotype-dependent methylation patterns  in cb b  but not cb a . interestingly, this cannot be attributed to differences in the minor allele frequencies between cb a  and cb b .

gwas enrichment
to compare our findings with earlier results demonstrating that meqtls in cerebellum tissue were enriched in gwas results for complex traits  <cit> , we investigated whether our brain meqtls were more likely to be represented among the top snp associations from the wtccc bipolar disorder study . we found that the holm-significant meqtls identified in pons were enriched  for snp associations from the gwas. when we performed a similar analysis using a looser definition of meqtls , we saw enrichment in fctx , tctx , and pons , though not crblm, as observed in  <cit> .

mirna enrichment
the meqtls identified in this study were more likely to occur in mirna binding sites  than snps that were not meqtls  in multiple cohorts: fctx , tctx , crblm , pons , pb , and cb a . for example, rs <dig> associates with the proportion of dna methylation at cg <dig>  in the fctx , tctx , crblm , pons , cb a , cb b , and pb . interestingly, rs <dig> also lies on a binding site for hsa-mir- <dig> in all brain tissues examined.

discussion
this study compared meqtls in seven cohorts of similar size and coverage. although the number of meqtls identified varied, those detected were often specific to a single cohort. despite this, we saw a highly significant degree of overlap between cohorts made up of subjects from different developmental stages and ancestral groups, as well as between samples obtained from different tissues. exploring the nature of the similarities and differences from this study will give us insight into the use of meqtls for the interpretation of large-scale studies.

dna methylation patterns vary substantially between different tissues  <cit> , but the sequence variants influencing methylation patterns may be consistent across tissues, as exemplified in figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  this study uncovered a correlation between meqtls identified in umbilical cord blood and those identified in several brain regions in an independent set of adult samples. some of these meqtls are located in genes with common functions in the blood and brain. for example, in cb b and each of the brain cohorts, we saw multiple meqtls across a region of up to  <dig> -kb that associated with a cpg site near atp-binding cassette, sub-family c . this gene encodes a drug transporter that functions at the blood–brain barrier  <cit> . still other genes have functions that are exclusive in the brain. for example, in cb b and each of the brain cohorts, meqtls associated with a cpg site near 5-hydroxytryptamine  receptor  <dig> , which is expressed on in many brain regions and plays a role in cognition  <cit> . recently, lambe and colleagues characterized htr <dig> expression levels in postmortem tissue over time  <cit> . htr <dig> expression varies substantially over the lifespan suggesting that there may be particular ages at which one is more susceptible to psychiatric illnesses. thus, examination of genotype-dependent dna methylation of htr <dig> in peripheral blood may yield new information about the dynamic regulatory processes occurring in the brain. in contrast, genetic variation in and near apoe associates with methylation patterns of a cpg site in the first intron of that gene in fctx, tctx, and pons, but not in crblm or pb. apoe is linked to alzheimer’s disease  <cit> , and this study suggests that there may be limited insight to be gained from studies of apoe regulation that are not conducted in specific brain regions.

when comparing meqtls detected in the blood of neonates  versus an adult population , we again noted substantial  though not complete overlap. this is not particularly surprising since dna methylation patterns differentiate by developmental stage as well as by tissue type  <cit> . thus, if a gene involved in growth and development is less active in adulthood, meqtls could be less detectable in adults based on the variability in dna methylation levels of that gene. for example, in this study, we found associations between several snps and a cpg site in the promoter of the apelin receptor  that were observable in blood from neonates but not adults. apelin and its receptor help to stimulate hematopoiesis in embryonic stem cells, and dysregulation of these genes is linked to numerous disorders related to blood flow problems and hypertension  <cit> . because fetal development is a period of extensive cellular replication and growth, epigenetic changes may establish long-term patterns among exposed individuals  <cit> . extrapolating from this, genetic variation may be more influential during specific periods across the lifespan. indeed, a recent study of meqtls suggests that, in some cases, dna methylation may be the mechanism by which genetic and environmental risk factors contribute to age-related phenotypes, including ldl, lung function, and longevity  <cit> .

the power to detect meqtls may be influenced by variations in allele frequencies and ld structure between cohorts, meaning we would expect to see differences in cohorts in which the length of expected ld blocks vary. consistent with this, there were  <dig>  times more meqtls detected in the caucasian cord blood cohort  compared to the african american cord blood cohort . we saw significant, albeit incomplete, overlap between meqtls identified in both cohorts. in fact,  <dig> - <dig> % were specific to either cb a or cb b. for example, snps near cftr  associate with methylation of a cpg site in the promoter region of cftr in umbilical cord blood samples from caucasian but not african american neonates. genetic variants in cftr cause cystic fibrosis, a mendelian condition that is more prevalent in caucasians  <cit> . methylation-associated snps may be in ld with functional mutations that are more common in caucasians than in african americans, but the difference in genotype-dependent methylation patterns cannot be attributed to differences in the minor allele frequencies between the two cohorts. dna methylation patterns vary significantly by ancestry  <cit> , prompting several to suggest that epigenetic differences may contribute to the increased risk of african americans for a variety of health conditions  <cit> . studies of epigenetic differences may provide insight into health disparities  <cit> , and meqtls can help distinguish between genetic and epigenetic effects in such studies.

because of their regulatory potential, identification of meqtls may also be useful to harness the power of gwas more efficiently  <cit> . the majority of meqtls from this study localized to intronic regions. despite this, we still saw significant enrichment of the meqtls from fctx, tctx, and pons in a gwas study of bipolar disorder   <cit> . a recent study suggests that the top associations from a gwas of bpd are enriched for meqtls in a cerebellum dataset; when only the snps that associated with dna methylation patterns were examined for association with bpd, associations that met bonferroni criteria were identified in multiple cohorts  <cit> . in addition, the results of this study suggest enrichment of mirna binding sites among meqtls, indicating these snps may promote a more complex degree of epigenetic regulation.

though we attempted to present results from similarly powered cohorts, this study has several limitations. we would expect to identify more meqtls if the cohorts were larger or if dna methylation were assessed more densely. due to study design and cohort availability, between-ancestry comparisons were limited to neonates. while dna methylation was assessed in distinct tissues, those tissues contain multiple cell types. thus, pb included the full range of leukocyte subpopulations, and the brain regions contained both a variety of neuronal phenotypes and glial cells. the corrections for multiple comparisons were conservative, and we have every confidence that the sets of meqtls we identified are robust. we would expect, however, to have greater power to detect meqtls in a study of homogenous cell types. in addition, bisulfite conversion does not distinguish between methylcytosine and hydroxymethylcytosine, which may be present in varying proportions in the seven cohorts used for this study.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings reveal similarities in genotype-dependent dna methylation across a diverse range of subject characteristics and tissues. though dna methylation patterns can be highly tissue specific, the contribution of inter-individual variation in gene regulation remains understudied. we need to further explore and characterize such regions of the genome to facilitate population-based studies of disease and for biomarker development. more specifically, these data support the utility of studying peripheral blood when the ideal tissue is unavailable and provide scope for interpreting those results.

