BACKGROUND
thermotolerant campylobacter is a zoonotic bacteria and one of the main causes of gastroenteritis worldwide, including both developed and developing countries  <cit> . during  <dig> campylobacter jejuni was the second cause of sporadic gastroenteritis in the usa, with an incidence of  <dig>  cases per  <dig>  inhabitants  <cit> . it has also been reported that 80% of all campylobacter related illnesses are transmitted through food and are responsible for no less than 5% of food-related deaths  <cit> . the two species commonly associated with enteric diseases are campylobacter jejuni and campylobacter coli, with c. jejuni being more frequent   <cit> .

campylobacter may be transferred to humans indirectly through the ingestion of contaminated water or food  <cit>  and to a minor extent by direct contact with contaminated animals or animal carcasses. despite the identification of numerous natural and artificial reservoirs for campylobacter  <cit> , most case-control studies seeking to identify the index source of infection, have identified poultry handling, processing, cooking, and/or preparation outside the home as significant contributing risk factors for disease  <cit> . c. jejuni infection typically results in an acute, self-limited gastrointestinal illness characterized by diarrhea, fever, and abdominal pain. the most significant post-infectious sequelae of c. jejuni infection is guillain-barre's syndrome . occurrence data on campylobacter positive chicken in chilean processing plants is limited. the frequent presence of thermotolerant campylobacter, and more specifically c. jejuni in broiler chickens, moved public health and international trade organizations to incorporate its control in the hazard analysis critical control point  system  <cit> . this strategy is aimed at identifying and controlling the presence of enteric pathogens in all stages of the food chain; particularly in the transport to and in the slaughterhouse processing  <cit> . fsis recently proposed a new "risk-based inspection" approach supported by scientific risk assessment to provide the poultry industry with better options to control contamination in order to produce safe, unadulterated product  <cit> . to achieve these food safety objectives, more information of local origin about the epidemiology, physiology, and ecology of campylobacter is urgently required.

this study was aimed to, a) identify thermotolerant campylobacter contamination in broiler carcasses collected during poultry processing; b) identify thermotolerant campylobacter contamination within poultry processing plants, c) compare the isolation rates of thermotolerant campylobacter following the evisceration and chilling processes during commercial poultry preparation.

our goals were to generate information to facilitate microbiological risk assessment studies necessary to reduce and control contamination by campylobacter within the chilean poultry industry and the development of interventional strategies in the approved haccp plans.

RESULTS
of the  <dig> samples analyzed , thermotolerant campylobacter were cultured in  <dig> . this includes both poultry processing plants . the overall occurrence of thermotolerant campylobacter contamination was significantly higher  in plant a  than in plant b .

thermotolerant campylobacter in chicken carcasses during processing
the data obtained from both plants are shown in table  <dig>  the whole chicken contamination rate with thermotolerant campylobacter at plant a was 80%. this rate was significantly lower in the plant b . the greatest contamination rate in both plants was after evisceration  .

n째 of sample positive/n째 examined .

within each row, letters indicates statistically significantly different 

the overall contamination rate  with thermotolerant campylobacter in the chicken carcasses following evisceration was 72%; this rate decreased significantly  after the carcasses were chilled in the water tanks . the detection of thermotolerant campylobacter after evisceration was 90% in plant a. this rate decreased significantly after chilling  . in contrast, there was no decrease in plant b.

in an attempt to ascertain the pre-processing baseline thermotolerant campylobacter microbial status, the caecal content of  <dig> chickens were analyzed. this analysis identified campylobacter jejuni in 85%  and 25%  in plants a and b, respectively.

occurrence of thermotolerant campylobacter contamination in processing plant environment samples
as shown in table  <dig>  the rates of thermotolerant campylobacter present in chicken in each processing environment sample analyzed as a whole varied between 35% and 22% for plants a and b respectively. otherwise, in both plants, the highest isolation rate of thermotolerant campylobacter was found in the evisceration machine. this coincides with the greatest contamination rates observed after evisceration, as described earlier. thermotolerant campylobacter was isolated in only one sample of chilling water from a total of  <dig> samples analyzed .

n째 of sample positive/n째 examined 

enumeration of thermotolerant campylobacter
to perform the bacterial counts only the positive samples were taken into account. the thermotolerant campylobacter contamination found in carcasses collected after evisceration and after chilling is shown in table  <dig>  overall, c. jejuni contamination, ranged from  <dig>  log <dig> up to  <dig>  log <dig> cfu/carcass. as expected, the plant that had carcasses with the highest numbers after evisceration also had carcasses with the highest numbers after chilling. the decreased of thermotolerant campylobacter contamination following the chilling process was significant,  <dig> and  <dig>  log <dig> for plants a and b respectively . despite this, samples collected after chilling with counts as high as  <dig>  log <dig> cfu/carcass were observed in both plants.

within each row, letters indicates statistically significantly different 

thermotolerant campylobacter species and biotypes
discussion
in this study, as showed in table  <dig> and  <dig> thermotolerant campylobacter contamination is widespread in caecal contents, processing plant environment and the poultry carcasses that reach the retailers stores. in pioneering initial studies conducted in  <dig>  figueroa et al.  <cit> , found that the c. jejuni bacterial load in the cloacal contents of  <dig> chickens  was fairly high:  <dig> specimens ;  <dig>  in live birds and  <dig>  in processed birds. recent studies  revealed much lower prevalence rates  in some processed birds analyzed with a similar methodology, suggesting that carcasses decontamination can be reached. despite this c. jejuni is sought as the most frequent pathogen isolated from poultry meats in chile  <cit> .

microbiological analysis during poultry processing in slaughterhouses confirmed previous reports by stern et al.  <cit>  and arsenault et al.  <cit>  who observed a positive correlation between the contamination of carcasses and the high positivity rates for campylobacter of flocks at the farm level. the recovery rates of campylobacter in plant b represent lower contamination rates in both cloacal swabs and caecal content samples at plant a. this disparity in the intestinal tract colonization in live birds may explain the differences in the positive rates found in poultry carcasses and the environment samples between both plants resulting in an increased cross contamination risk during slaughter and processing.

the proportion of carcasses contaminated with campylobacter increase during evisceration steps. this findings was corroborated by the fact that the number of positive carcasses increased significantly  after evisceration. rosenquist et al.  <cit>  observed that as an average the evisceration process led to a significant increase in the numbers of campylobacter by  <dig>  log <dig> cfu/g of neck skin. the increase in contaminated carcasses is a result of viscera rupture, inevitably leading to the contamination of equipment, working surfaces, process water, and air and increasing the opportunities for cross contamination of campylobacter-free carcasses during processing  <cit> . as the machinery used cannot adapt to the natural variation in the size of the carcasses being processed, the rupture of the intestines and the leak of fecal material is not uncommon in the slaughter plants  <cit> . based on the results presented here, we may conclude as previously reported, that evisceration is a critical step in carcass contamination  <cit> .

the immersion chilling procedure has been identified as a critical control point  in a generic hazard analysis critical control points  study of poultry contamination by all pathogens  <cit> . in both plants, the chilling process with water containing  <dig>  to  <dig>  ppm of free chlorine was significantly  associated with an important reduction in campylobacter counts in broilers carcasses. both, the washing process and the application of chlorinated water during carcass chilling must contribute to these results. decreases in campylobacter counts associated with chilling operations have also been reported previously, indicating that it is possible to achieve reductions of up to  <dig> log <dig> cfu of campylobacter on carcasses during processing with chlorinated water  <cit> . the results presented here agree with these findings when comparing the median cfu counts per carcass before and after chiller treatment in both plants. like in the data reported by stern et al.  <cit> , we found a significant reduction  not only in the number of campylobacter-positive carcasses but also in the bacterial counts per carcasses, underlining the benefits of an effective washing process of appropriate chlorine concentrations and low temperatures used on a continuous basis in the chiller tanks. the use of chlorinated water during carcass chilling reduced the populations of campylobacter, but this practice, as confirmed in this study, has limited effect in the final magnitude of the campylobacter contamination, because the poultry enter the slaughter processing with a high counts of contamination that the chilling stage is not capable of reducing.

the data presented here confirmed that in our setting a high percentage of commercial chickens are positive for campylobacter at the time of slaughter. as a result, there is a high incidence of campylobacter spp. in retail establishments, this constitute a serious hazard for public health  <cit> . in chile, figueroa et al.  <cit>  reported a prevalence of 45%  of campylobacter contamination in fresh poultry meats. therefore, reducing the incidence and numbers of campylobacter contamination during the processing of broilers is needed to achieve a safer final product.

CONCLUSIONS
this study has generated data on the high frequency rate of campylobacter contamination in live broiler. this phenomenon derives in high contamination of carcasses and the processing equipment in two chilean poultry slaughterhouses. according to the data obtained the high rates of cecal carriage at the time of slaughtering is a key factor in the occurrence of campylobacter on both, chicken carcasses and the processing environments. special attention should be given to the identification of critical control points of potential contamination at the grange level. also in the processing, such as the plucking and evisceration steps in order to reduce cross contamination with fecal contents during subsequent processes. the data obtained have also shown that the chilling step is a critical control point to reduce carcass contamination but also to reduce the total counts per carcass. with regard to the international importance of the chilean poultry industry, specially now when chicken exports have experimented strong growth, reaching highly demanding markets such as mexico, the european union, china and japan, among others, information generated by this study may be used as a reference when setting food safety targets, in evaluating individual producers and food safety programs "from the farm to the fork", when haccp program needs to be scientifically validated and applied more consistently at all stages of poultry production or when designing risk assessment actions. emphasis should be given to the consumers to cook chicken thoroughly and handle this product carefully as a potential source of campylobacter spp. in order to avoid illness and cross contamination to other food items.

