BACKGROUND
considering that fossil fuel resources are limited, the importance of conserving energy and saving the environment is gaining increased interest. microalgae biodiesel, a crucial renewable biomass energy that uses solar energy to fix co <dig> into biomass, is the most promising alternative to fossil fuels. however, studies on lipid metabolism in eukaryotic, single-celled, photosynthetic microalgae are limited compared with those on oil crops. basic knowledge on microalgae is less than that of crops, such as rice, wheat, and corn. with the intensification of microalgae-derived biodiesel research at the global scale, more researchers are focusing on the mechanism underlying the formation of high lipid production and high cell-density cultures. these processes are crucial in genetic strain improvement, as well as in the future cultivation of commercial and industrial microalgae.

the substrate competition hypothesis was proposed by sugimoto et al. and chen et al.  <cit> . according to this hypothesis, the lipids and proteins of seeds compete for the same substrate, i.e., pyruvate, which is a product of glycolysis. phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase  catalyzes the formation of oxaloacetate  from phosphoenolpyruvate , and then enters the tricarboxylic  cycle to provide the substrate and energy needed for protein synthesis. meanwhile, acetyl–coa carboxylase  catalyzes the formation of acetyl coenzyme a from pyruvate, and then enters the fatty acid synthesis pathway. hence, photosynthetic carbon flux tends to synthesize proteins or lipids depending on the relative activity of pepc and accase. using antisense rna technology to suppress pepc activity, they obtained stable, high-oil rape seed lines and high-oil soybean lines whose lipid contents increased by  <dig> % to 18%. citrate synthase  is common within various organisms. cis isozymes exhibit diverse subcellular localization patterns, and are involved in crucial physiological metabolic pathways. cis, which is located in the mitochondria, is a rate-limiting enzyme during the first step of the tca cycle. through this step, cis forms citroyl–coa by catalyzing the reaction of acetyl–coa. currently, biological, functional, and applied research regarding cis in plants mainly focus on the following aspects. first, crops are stimulated to secrete citric acids through cis gene overexpression, which can activate hard-soluble p in soil to increase soil phosphorus utilization. in this context, tong et al. cloned a cis gene from rape and detected the gene expression under stressful conditions  <cit> . correspondingly, hu et al. bred a low-phosphorus resistant stain by overexpressing cis gene into rice; the rice exhibited rapid root growth and high secretion of citric acid  <cit> . second, cis may increase cell resistance to aluminum toxicity. citric acid forms a complex with al3+. this complex exhibits either low toxicity or non-toxicity. the overexpression of cis in alfalfa evidently strengthens the tolerance of the plant to acidic soil and aluminum toxicity  <cit> . third, cis expression is related to organic acid accumulation during fruit ripening  <cit> . under this aspect, zhang et al. provided evidence that the citric acid content of pineapple fruit is positively correlated with cis activity during pineapple maturation  <cit> . studies on cis in microalgae are rarely reported compared with those in vascular plants and animals. as early as the 1970s, barrie et al. published a study on cis in microalgae. they detected cis activity in four kinds of cyanophyta, whose activity is inhibited by factors such as α-ketoglutaric acid, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, and atp; this inhibition is speculated to lead fixed carbon flux to lipid synthesis  <cit> .

we have confirmed that existing studies have not demonstrated any evidence that cis gene expression and regulation are related to cellular lipid accumulation. accordingly, this study aimed to determine whether such relationship exists. the mrna abundances of crcis and lipid accumulation were detected under plus/minus nitrogen conditions in chlamydomonas reinhardtii cc <dig>  knockdown by rnai and overexpression of crcis gene were then performed in chlamydomonas to determine the effect of overexpression or inhibition of crcis on cellular carbon flux and lipid accumulation. furthermore, the results of this study can contribute in establishing the relationship of lipid accumulation with carbon flux distribution.

RESULTS
cloning of crcis gene and bioinformatics analysis
an approximately 1500 bp dna fragment of crcis gene full-length cds was amplified, cloned, and sequenced, exhibiting 100% homology with chlamydomonas cis gene . using the blast programs and the chlamydomonas cis gene as entries, we obtained the crcis orthologous genes from the ncbi database. the amino acid sequence alignment of the cis orthologous genes was created using clustalw . the phylogenetic tree of the cis orthologous genes is presented in figure  <dig>  all listed cis orthologous genes contained the citrate synthase function domain. the predicted subcellular location of crcis  was within the mitochondrion .

mrna level of crcis under n sufficient and n limited conditions
to determine the mrna levels of the crcis under n-sufficient and n-limited conditions, 50 ml of cultivated chlamydomonas  was collected through centrifugation. after washing with hsm-n medium, the cells were suspended and half of them were transferred to a new 50 ml of hsm and hsm-n medium for further cultivation. algal cells harvested at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  or 96 h were used for rna extraction. we quantitatively determined the expression of crcis gene in these samples through reverse transcription followed by real-time polymerase chain reaction . results presented in figure  <dig> exhibit the difference in lipid accumulation of cells in the two conditions; cells accumulated three to six times more lipids under the n-limited condition than under the n-sufficient condition. interestingly, crcis mrna was undetectable under the n-limited condition. thus, we further determined whether the decline in the mrna of crcis levels influenced the increase in lipid accumulation.

silencing of crcis gene increases triacylglycerol  content in c. reinhardtii
to determine the relationship between crcis expression and lipid accumulation, we examined the effects of the artificial silencing of crcis gene on the lipid content of c. reinhardtii. based on the crcis  sequences of the gene retrieved from the jgi c. reinhardtii v <dig>  database, we designed primers  to amplify the fragment of the coding region of crcis. the dna fragments were subcloned and then used to generate crcis rnai constructs pmaa7ir/crcis ir. more than  <dig> positive transformants were obtained after transforming the silencing construct into c. reinhardtii cc <dig>  three transgenic algae were selected to measure the lipid content and mrna levels of the targeted gene. strains transformed with the vector pmaa7ir/xir were used as controls. in cells harboring the crcis construct, analysis of the transgenic lines through the nile red fluorescence method indicated the increase of the lipid content by  <dig> % to  <dig> %  after six days of cultivation. the tag level of the transgenic strain cis-rnai- <dig> increased by  <dig> % compared with the control . to evaluate the effectiveness of the rnai construct, the abundance of target gene-specific mrna through real-time pcr in transgenic algae was analyzed. the crcis mrna abundance decreased by  <dig> % to  <dig> % , indicating high-efficiency silencing by these constructs.

the enzyme activities of crcis of transgenic strains were tested. compared with that of the wild strains, the crcis activity of crcis rnai transgenic strains decreased by  <dig> % to  <dig> % . subsequently, the mrna levels of dgat <dig>   and pap <dig>  genes are directly related to lipid synthesis, and were measured in crcis rnai transgenic strains. this result showed that the mrna levels of dgat <dig> and pap <dig> genes increased in both transgenic strains . these outcomes indicated the decrease in enzyme activities caused by the silencing of crcis gene, thereby slowing down cellular tca. the silencing of the crcis gene indirectly partitioned photosynthetic carbon into fatty acid and lipid synthesis by increasing dgat <dig> and pap <dig> gene expression.

similar results were obtained in nile red staining. more oil droplets were found in crcis rnai transgenic algae compared with those in pmaa7ir/xir transgenic algae as determined by microscopic analysis  and counting the number of oil droplets of transgenic strains . these data indicated the increase in cell lipid content through the regulation of crcis gene expression despite different metabolic pathways.

overexpression of crcis reduced the lipid content of c. reinhardtii
the increase in lipid content caused by rnai silencing of crcis suggested the effect of the expression of these genes on the biosynthesis of triglycerides in c. reinhardtii. thus, we determined whether crcis overexpression can reduce the lipid content of c. reinhardtii. vector pcamcis, which expressed crcis gene from the camv 35s promoter, was introduced into c. reinhardtii. the lipid contents and growth rate of three randomly selected transgenic algae were detected in each transgenic algae line. overexpression of crcis gene increased growth rate in the early stages from day two to day five. moreover, overexpression of crcis decreased the lipid content compared with that of the control pcambia <dig> transgenic algae lines. for example, after six days of growth in hsm medium, the lipid contents of crcis overexpressing transgenic lines determined by the nile red fluorescence method decreased by  <dig> % to  <dig> % . the tag level of the transgenic strain pcamcis- <dig> decreased by 45% compared with the control . compared with pcambia <dig> transgenic stains, the mrna levels of crcis increased by 1003% to 1419%, whereas the enzyme activities of crcis increased by 209% to 266% . in summary, the overexpression of crcis gene encodes a key enzyme in the tca cycle and causes photosynthetic carbon flux without fatty acid synthesis, thereby decreasing lipid synthesis in cells. the enhancement of crcis activity accelerated tca and increased atp synthesis, as demonstrated in the increased early growth rates of transgenic algae strains. decreased lipid content was also observed using nile red dye staining  and oil droplet counting . fewer oil droplets were found in crcis overexpression transgenic algae than in the control.

expression of crcis in e. coli bl <dig> and detection of in vitro enzyme activities
plasmids of pgex-6p-1-cis were constructed to express crcis in e. coli and verify enzyme activities. the recombinant vector was transformed into e. coli bl <dig> strain. transformants were grown in lb medium and induced with 1 mm of isopropylthiogalactoside. the supernatant fraction of the denatured cells was loaded onto a 15% sds-page gel. a gst-crcis protein band of  <dig> kd was observed . the fusion protein was purified with columns followed by enzyme activity assay . compared with the control, the enzyme activity of cis increased 56-fold to 100-fold . these behaviors indicated that the cloned gene of crcis exhibited biological activities.

discussion
metabolic networks of photosynthetic eukaryotic organisms are complicated by the interplay of synthesis and degradation of carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids. hence, the regulation of a main carbon metabolic pathway can affect other metabolic pathways. to increase lipid production, the synthesis of fatty acids of the substrates through a substitute method of metabolic pathway regulation should be improved. studies on the relationships between carbon flux and lipid accumulation have focused on arabidopsis thaliana and oil crops. thus far, the genes involved were accase  <cit> , sn-glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase  <cit> , pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase  <cit> , pyuvate kinase complex  <cit> , and d-glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase  <cit> . ratcliffe and shachar-hill labeled carbon flux with isotope in rape seed development. they identified sugar cane and glucose as the main source of carbon flux during rape seed development  <cit> . this process produced tp, pag, and pep. the photosynthetic carbon flux was divided into four parts:  <dig> % was used to synthesize oaa through pep catalyzed by pepc in the glycolytic pathway;  <dig> % entered the tca pathway through pyr and ac–coa produced from pep;  <dig> % was used to synthesize amino acids through the intermediate products tp, pag, and pep; and the remaining  <dig> % was used for lipid production through ac–coa. therefore, carbon efficiently flowed into lipid synthesis through directly or indirectly inhibiting pepc activity, tca pathway, and protein synthesis. fan et al. identified starch as that the main storage sink for chlamydomonas rather than oil. even under n starvation conditions, the carbon flux derived from acetate has two destinations, namely, starch and oil. significant increase in oil accumulation was caused by the blocking of starch biosynthesis in the starchless mutant bafj <dig>  thus, carbon supply was the limiting factor in tag biosynthesis by chlamydomonas <cit> . in our study, the effective blocking of crcis activity through the rna interference method increased lipid accumulation, whereas increased crcis activity in transgenic algal cells decreased lipid accumulation. cis is one of the key enzymes involved in cell metabolism. this enzyme catalyzes acetyl–coa and oaa to form citrate, the first reaction of tca in mitochondria. this reaction uses most of the carbon flux. modulating cis activity is the most important step affecting carbon flux distribution in tca. the activity of cis determines the speed of tca and the concentrations of pep and pyruvic acid. both pep and pyruvic acid can enter the plastid and then transform into acetyl–coa and propionyl–coa, respectively. acetyl–coa and propionyl–coa are substrates for fatty acid synthesis. in this study, crcis gene silencing increased tag production by  <dig> % in algal cells. crcis activity decreased by  <dig> % to 37% in transgenic strains compared with that of the control. the mrna levels of dgat <dig> and pap <dig> directly related to lipid biosynthesis significantly increased. this result proposed that carbon flux in lipid synthesis was altered in transgenic strains. application of the same method in rape development is unsuitable, as determined by tong et al.  <cit> . antisense gene silencing in cis was introduced to rape, decreasing the mrna level of cis but not its lipid production. the results obtained were contradictory with the expected low lipid production of seeds and leaves, as well as with the corresponding phenotypes such as dwarf, small lamina, and shortened pod. the association of this phenotype with the complexity of multicellular organisms was speculated because the cis gene can function in rape development. the knockdown of cis can affect the expression of genes related to cell differentiation and development. nevertheless, our results showed that in unicellular photosynthetic eukaryote chlamydomonas, crcis gene silencing did not slow down cell proliferation .

we observed that crcis gene silencing resulted in the artificial blockage of tca pathways, which caused photosynthetic carbon flux to mainly enter the oil accumulation in c. reinhardtii. this observation is consistent with the hypothesis that carbon supply is the limiting factor in tag synthesis by chlamydomonas <cit> . further studies are required to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the exact signals triggering the switches. our findings suggested that increasing oil by suppressing crcis expression in microalgae was feasible. furthermore, the success of inducing oil accumulation by crcis silencing validated the usefulness and effectiveness of biotechnology methods in manipulating microalgae to promote oil production.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, crcis gene silencing increased tag production by  <dig> % in algal cells. crcis activity decreased by  <dig> % to 37% in transgenic strains compared with that of the control. the mrna levels of dgat <dig> and pap <dig> that are directly related to lipid biosynthesis significantly increased. conversely, overexpression of crcis gene decreased the tag level by 45% but increased crcis activity by 209% to 266% in transgenic algae. this result suggested that the silencing or overexpression of crcis gene caused photosynthetic carbon flux to enter fatty acid synthesis or the tca cycle, thereby controling the lipid synthesis in cells.

