BACKGROUND
the gram + bacterium listeria  monocytogenes is an opportunistic food-borne pathogen with considerable impact on human and livestock health and food safety. it causes listeriosis  <cit> , which may manifest in distinct clinical forms including febrile gastroenteritis, abortions, septicemia, and neurolisteriosis  <cit>  and is associated with high mortality  <cit> . in humans, l. monocytogenes is commonly isolated in the context of meningitis  <cit> , and neurolisteriosis is responsible for high fatality rates and chronic sequelae . in farmed ruminants, neurolisteriosis is amongst the most common causes of central nervous system  disorders and characteristically presents as encephalitis, which targets the brainstem  and is often deadly . clinical observations in livestock may indicate differences in organ tropism between l. monocytogenes strains. different clinical forms of listeriosis rarely overlap in the same ruminant herd or in the same animal during an outbreak  <cit> . rhombencephalitis generally occurs without involvement of other organs and without inducing abortion in pregnant ruminants .

the ubiquitous nature of l. monocytogenes as a saprophytic soil inhabitant constitutes a challenge for surveillance and effective disease control  <cit> . l. monocytogenes is divided into four phylogenetic lineages  <cit>  as determined by various genotypic and phenotypic subtyping tools  and may differ in virulence and the potential to cause epidemic outbreaks . for instance, of the two major phylogenetic lineages i and ii, which are associated with human and animal infections, lineage i is overrepresented in clinical isolates  <cit> . in contrast, lineage ii strains are more commonly isolated from food and the environment. the two minor lineages iii and iv are rarely isolated and are associated with ruminant infections  <cit> . from the  <dig> known serotypes, serotype 4b  is associated with most of the severe clinical cases and the majority of outbreaks  <cit> . nonetheless, available subtyping methods cannot predict the virulence of a given isolate, and the propensity of certain subtypes to cause sporadic illness, epidemic outbreaks or specific clinical syndromes  remains poorly understood  <cit> .

there have been few systematic investigations of the genetic diversity of l. monocytogenes strains isolated from ruminants . using multilocus variable number tandem repeat analysis  of  <dig> isolates, we could show that ruminant rhombencephalitis strains are found predominantly in mlva complex a and also b, belonging to lineage i, and to a lesser extent to complex c of lineage ii  <cit> . nearly all rhombencephalitis strains from cattle cluster in mlva complex a indicating that strains of this genetic complex may have increased neurotropism and neurovirulence  <cit> . this observation is in line with studies showing that lineage i strains are overrepresented in rhombencephalitis, whereas lineage ii strains are equally associated with rhombencephalitis, septicemia and fetal infections  <cit> .

the lack of a relevant model hinders experimental determination of neurovirulent potential and neurovirulence mechanisms of l. monocytogenes strains and means that neurovirulence can at present only be defined using data from neurolisteriosis cases  <cit> . in a previous study, we developed a bovine organotypic hippocampal brain-slice model, which is susceptible to l. monocytogenes  <cit> . the aim of the present study was to investigate if ruminant rhombencephalitis strains can be discriminated from non-encephalitic strains using the in vitro cns model. to this end, bovine hippocampal slices were infected with a panel of  <dig> selected l. monocytogenes strains from various clinical, environmental and food sources. replication and spread of strains within brain-slice cultures were analyzed by determination of cfu’s and size of infection foci. these results were correlated with the source of the isolate and mlva–complex of the respective strains and compared to plaque test results in two cell lines.

RESULTS
infection of organotypic brain-slice cultures with l. monocytogenes strains
we analyzed replication and capacity to spread in organotypic hippocampal brain-slice cultures of 21 l. monocytogenes strains isolated from ruminant rhombencephalitis cases and  <dig> strains of ruminant non-encephalitic cases , human clinical infections or food/environment . all but one  replicated in the brain slices  and established at least one visible focus of infection at 48 h post inoculation . typically, values between  <dig> and 107 cfu were recovered from the brain-slices at 48 h post infection, which corresponds to a 103– <dig> times increase over the incubation period. recovered cfu numbers were significantly higher in brain-slices infected with l. monocytogenes strains from mlva complex a than with strains from mlva complex c . the difference between mlva complexes was also apparent with encephalitis strains, although as a statistically non-significant tendency . additionally, strains from complex a spread over a significantly larger area than strains from complex c . no differences in cfu counts were detected when comparing strains by host species or source except between human strains isolated from cerebrospinal fluid  and environmental strains . human csf strains spread farther than strains isolated from small ruminants  and from the environment .fig.  <dig> replication of l. monocytogenes strains in brain-slices. results are shown relative to the internal control strain l <dig>  a aligned dot plot of the relative cfu counts of the individual strains. red: mlva complex a; green: mlva complex c; blue: mlva complex b. the horizontal line indicates the mean. b box plot comparing relative cfu counts between complex a and c strains. cfu counts are significantly higher in brain-slices infected with complex a strains, * = p <  <dig> . c box plot comparing relative cfu counts between complex a and c strains isolated from ruminant rhombencephalitis. d box plot comparing relative cfu counts according to host species. whiskers represent maxima and minima. the horizontal line represents the median, + is the mean

fig.  <dig> immunofluorescence stained confocal images of bacteria in infected brain-slices. a delineation of an infection focus . l. monocytogenes are stained in red. the surface area covered by l. monocytogenes was drawn and calculated using the fluoview software . magnification 20×. b representative double-immunofluorescence of a l. monocytogenes infected brain-slice. the vast majority of bacteria are found within microglia. left: microglia are stained with cd <dig> in green. center: l. monocytogenes in red. right: overlay 

fig.  <dig> spread of l. monocytogenes strains in brain-slices as determined by size of infection foci. results are shown relative to the internal control strain l <dig>  a aligned dot plot analysis of bacterial spread of the individual strains used in this study. red: mlva complex a; green: mlva complex c; blue: mlva complex b. the horizontal line indicates the mean. b box plots comparing the total size of foci between complex a and complex c strains. complex a strains cover a significantly larger area than complex c strains. c box plot comparing total size of foci according to host species. human strains caused larger infection foci in brain-slices than strains isolated from small ruminants. box plots: whiskers represent maxima and minima. the horizontal line represents the median, + is the mean, * = p <  <dig> 

fig.  <dig> cfu counts  and size of infection foci  in organotypic brain-slices infected with l. monocytogenes strains. results are mapped according to the source and associated clinical infection, respectively. data are presented as box plots, whiskers represent maxima and minima. the vertical line represents the median, + is the mean. * = p <  <dig> . cfu counts  and surface of bacterial spread  are shown relative to the internal control strain l104



in agreement with our previous study  <cit> , immunofluorescence with l. monocytogenes antibodies and cell markers revealed that the vast majority of bacteria were located in the cytoplasm of microglia, irrespective of the strain . only a few bacteria were associated with neurofilaments or astrocytes .

plaque forming assays in cell lines
to assess whether the results obtained in the brain-slice infection assay are tissue specific, we performed plaque forming assays  <cit>  in two cell lines: bomac  and caco- <dig> . in parallel to the results in brain-slices, all strains except o/d1387/ <dig> caused plaques in the bomac cell line , and strains from mlva complex a caused significantly larger plaques than strains from complex c . in contrast, plaque assays in caco- <dig> cells demonstrated no correlation between plaque size and mlva-complex . intriguingly, strain o/d1387/ <dig> caused plaques half the size of the reference strain in this cell line, although it made no plaques in bomac cells . also, the mean absolute plaque size of l. monocytogenes strains was significantly larger in caco- <dig> cells than in bomac cells . in the caco- <dig> cell line , but not in the bomac cell line , human clinical strains produced larger plaques than strains isolated from small ruminants.fig.  <dig> plaque sizes of l. monocytogenes strains in the bomac and caco- <dig> cell lines. results are shown relative to the internal control strain l <dig>  a the relative plaque size in bomac-cells is shown for each strain as an aligned dot plot. red: mlva complex a strains; green: mlva complex c strains; blue: mlva complex b strains. the horizontal line indicates the mean. b box plots comparing plaque size in bomac cells between complex a and complex c strains. plaques of complex a strains are significantly larger than those of complex c strains. the horizontal line represents the median, + is the mean. c the host species had no influence on plaque-size in bomac cells. d caco- <dig> cells: the relative plaque size for each strain is shown as an aligned dot plot. red: complex a; green: complex c; blue: complex b. the horizontal line indicates the mean. e box plots comparing plaque size in caco- <dig> cells between complex a and complex c strains. there is no difference in plaque size between complex a and c strains. e human strains formed larger plaques in caco- <dig> cells than strains isolated from small ruminants. * = p <  <dig> . box plots: whiskers represent maxima and minima. the horizontal line represents the median, + is the mean



discussion
given the ubiquitous presence of l. monocytogenes in the environment, discrimination of neurovirulent subtypes would be highly desirable for surveillance purposes and effective disease control, especially with regard to the high mortality rate  <cit>  and the high frequency of persistent neurologic deficits associated with neurolisteriosis  <cit> . in our study, infection assays with l. monocytogenes strains from various sources and mlva complexes showed that all l. monocytogenes strains except one are able to replicate and spread in bovine brain-slices and that discrimination between rhombencephalitis and non-encephalitic strains is not possible in this system. hence, based on our results we suggest that all l. monocytogenes strains should be regarded as potentially neurovirulent, independent of their genotype and source of isolation. brain-slices have the inherent drawback that they only model the intracerebral phase of l. monocytogenes infection and can not mimic invasion barriers . hence, we cannot exclude that encephalitogenic strains diverge from other l. monocytogenes strains due to their efficiency of brain invasion.

mlva complex a strains  showed a higher replication and spread farther in brain-slices than strains from complex c, indicating that they are better adapted to establish encephalitis. this observation is in accordance with the higher prevalence of lineage i strains in clinical infections and in particular ruminant rhombencephalitis compared to lineage ii strains  <cit> . analysis of strains according to their source did not identify significant differences in replication and spread in brain-slices except between human and environmental or small ruminant isolates. however, these observations are likely to be related to the mlva complex of the strains. all human csf strains belonged to mlva complexes a and b , whereas all environmental and the majority of small ruminant strains belonged to complex c . microglia, the innate immune cells and resident macrophages of the cns  <cit> , were the main target cells for all l. monocytogenes strains investigated in hippocampal brain slices. the replication of l. monocytogenes within microglia indicates that these may paradoxically act as a replication niche for l. monocytogenes during encephalitis. in this aspect, our model is consistent with the natural disease, where most bacteria are found within phagocytes of microabscesses  <cit> .

mlva complex a strains form larger plaques in the bovine macrophage cell line  than complex c strains. interestingly, this difference was not apparent in caco- <dig> cells, where plaques were generally larger than in bomac cells, indicating a particularly high susceptibility of epithelial cells to l. monocytogenes, which does not allow further differentiation. this notion is further supported by the fact that strain o/d1387/ <dig>  a complex c strain that seems to be naturally attenuated, completely failed to replicate and spread in brain-slices and to cause plaques in bomac cells, but caused small plaques in caco- <dig> cells. further analysis of this strain revealed a novel prfa truncation, associated with the attenuated phenotype in vitro  <cit> .

our data suggests that differences in replication and spread between l. monocytogenes strains are host cell type-specific. contradictory experimental data on l. monocytogenes virulence from studies using various types of cell lines may support this view . unlike caco- <dig> cells, bomac  and microglia share essential features including phagocytic potential and a respiratory burst system  <cit> . taken together, the more efficient replication and spread of mlva complex a vs. complex c strains in microglia and macrophages suggests that complex a strains are more resistant to mononuclear antibacterial defense mechanisms. in this context, it should be noted that listeriolysin s, a virulence factor induced by oxidative stress, has been implicated in l. monocytogenes survival within phagocytes and is specifically expressed by strains of lineage i  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our data demonstrates that all l. monocytogenes strains should be considered potentially neurovirulent and encephalitis strains cannot be conclusively discriminated from non-encephalitis strains using the bovine organotypic brain-slice model. in this cns model, microglia cells are the main target cells for all tested l. monocytogenes strains, which are able to multiply in these phagocytic cells. correlation of mlva data with our in vitro data show that strains from mlva complex a replicate and spread better in bovine microglia and macrophages possibly by virtue of their higher resistance to mononuclear antibacterial defense mechanisms. these results support the notion that l. monocytogenes strains from mlva complex a are highly accomplished at establishing encephalitis.

