BACKGROUND
in the past few years several bioinformatic tools and approaches have been developed to assist medical genetic researchers in positional candidate disease gene identification . several tools use functional genomics to prioritize candidate genes located within disease-associated genomic loci by evaluating functional relationships between known disease genes and positional candidate genes  <cit> . these tools are based on the premise that genes which are involved in the same disease phenotype are likely to be functionally related  <cit> . this has indeed been shown to be the case as evidenced by the fact that these tools all perform better than random expectation in the prediction or prioritization of candidate disease genes. nevertheless, not all types of functional genomic data perform equally well in terms of sensitivity and specificity  <cit> . microarray expression data have wider coverage than other high-throughput genomic data such as protein-protein interactions, as genome-scale expression analyses are readily and routinely performed with them. additionally, they are less biased toward better studied genes than gene function annotation or literature mining, although the latter approaches fare better at prioritizing disease candidate genes  <cit> . therefore, given the large coverage of co-expression data and their complementarity to functional annotation and literature mining, it is of importance to maximize the disease gene predictive value of this type of data.

several bioinformatic candidate disease gene prioritization tools already incorporate microarray-based co-expression data  <cit> . this approach is based on the assumption that if two genes are functionally related then their expression should vary concordantly across tissues and under different circumstances, and proposes that their expression profiles should therefore be correlated. for candidate disease gene prioritization, the use of co-expression analysis is preferable to the use of tissue-specific gene expression patterns, as it is a better predictor of functional relatedness between genes  <cit> .

however, co-expression data can be applied more comprehensively than is currently implemented by these tools. one important and currently underexploited approach is to incorporate co-expression data from other species. one might expect that while human co-expression data are the most relevant for disease gene prioritization, evolutionary conservation of co-expression can be used to enhance the reliability of identified co-expression relationships. the premise is that co-expression relationships that are maintained across phylogenetically distant organisms must be under selective pressure, and should therefore be functional – a premise that has indeed been confirmed in several previous studies  <cit> . though one tool already includes multi-species co-expression data  <cit> , the improvement in disease gene ranking performance due to the exploitation of evolutionary conservation has not yet been investigated.

we therefore investigated the predictive value of conserved co-expression for candidate disease gene prioritization. to this end we analyzed how well co-expression between known and candidate disease genes could prioritize positional candidate disease genes. we restricted our analysis to known disease genes from genetic diseases containing at least two known causative genes. we constructed artificial loci of  <dig> candidate genes around the known disease-causing genes, and investigated the tendency of these causative genes to have higher co-expression with other known causative genes compared to the non-causative candidate genes from the same disease loci. using co-expression data from five eukaryotic species – baker's yeast , nematode worm , fruit fly , mouse  and human – we investigated the effect of evolutionary conservation on the ranking of the disease gene pairs, finding that evolutionary conservation of co-expression does indeed improve disease gene ranking. therefore, exploiting evolutionary conservation could potentially improve the performance of co-expression data in existing disease candidate gene prioritization tools  <cit> , which might in turn improve the prioritization of less well-studied genes.

RESULTS
evolutionary conservation of co-expression improves disease gene ranking performance
we investigated how well disease genes tend to rank relative to non-causative candidate disease genes when ranked according to co-expression with other genes known to cause the same disease. we combined co-expression scores across species using orthology relationships from the eukaryotic clusters of orthologous groups  database  <cit> . the co-expression scores are thus based on these kogs rather than on individual genes . we used expression data from human, mouse, fruit fly , worm  and baker's yeast  assembled from the gene expression omnibus database  <cit>  and the genomics institute of the novartis foundation  <cit>  gene atlas expression data. for this study we used artificial disease loci containing  <dig> genes per locus. testing with  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes per locus does not make much difference though smaller loci tend to perform slightly better than larger loci . only disease gene pairs with co-expression scores unlikely to occur randomly in the corresponding dataset  were included in the final rankings. this process implicitly weighs the scores according to the number of species involved, as the random score distributions are narrower for datasets combining more species. the standard deviations of these randomized distributions range from  <dig>  for the five-species combined dataset to between  <dig>   and  <dig>   for the individual single-species datasets. therefore, a given correlation score is more likely to be considered significant in a multi-species dataset than in a single-species dataset.

genes whose co-expression is conserved through evolution have been shown to have stronger functional ties than genes whose co-expression is not  <cit> . therefore, conserved co-expression between species should improve disease gene ranking over co-expression in one species alone. such a trend is indeed apparent . both for human and for multi-species kog-based co-expression sets, disease gene pairs generally score in the upper half of the co-expression rankings for the kog-mappable genes in the disease loci and are significantly better than random expectation . therefore, the causative disease gene in a candidate locus will generally rank higher than the other locus candidate genes. furthermore, the multi-species combined co-expression set performs significantly better than the human-only co-expression set , indicating that the use of evolutionary conservation can significantly improve co-expression-based candidate disease gene ranking.

given that co-expression-based disease gene ranking is only sensible if there is a non-random co-expression relationship between the disease genes, we further narrowed down the analysis to only those disease gene pairs that are likely to be genuinely co-expressed, having scores that are unlikely to occur randomly in their datasets. this substantially improves the rankings , at the expense of reduced coverage . both the human-only and the conserved co-expression datasets now rank the disease genes very high , with the conserved co-expression still significantly outperforming the human-only co-expresssion . a much higher proportion of disease genes is now ranked in the top 10% of the candidate gene lists, and the use of evolutionary conservation increases this proportion by almost half, from 31% to 44% of the ranked disease genes.

disease gene ranking improved by co-expression conservation at different evolutionary distances
evolutionary conservation across multiple species clearly improves the disease gene ranking performance of gene co-expression. however, what influence might different evolutionary distances have on this improvement? is the evolutionary distance between human and mouse sufficient to improve co-expression performance, and is yeast biology so divergent that it would reduce rather than improve performance? to examine the role of evolutionary distance on the disease gene ranking performance of gene co-expression, we conducted pairwise comparisons in which we compared the ranking performance human co-expression with co-expression conserved between human and each of the other species. for all pairwise comparisons except the human-yeast comparison, evolutionary conservation significantly improves co-expression-based disease gene ranking compared to using only data for human genes . surprisingly, even human-mouse conservation improves disease gene ranking despite the relatively short evolutionary distance between these two species.

* statistically significant at p =  <dig>  level

in contrast to the other species, co-expression conservation with yeast does not significantly improve disease gene ranking . for this species pair yeast-only co-expression performs best, outperforming even the combined human-yeast set at ranking human disease genes . this is primarily due to specific disease types involving housekeeping processes such as metabolism  and dna repair  which consistently score well particularly in the yeast set. as yeast co-expression already performs very well, the combination with human co-expression may not yield much extra information. however, this performance comes at the expense of much reduced coverage of disease genes relative to the other sets, which all have a similar coverage . it is thus evident that despite the large evolutionary distance between these two species, yeast co-expression is still effective at ranking human disease genes for those genes that have orthologs in both species.

disease gene ranking performance is dependent on co-expression data used
we initially used the multi-species co-expression dataset from stuart and colleagues  <cit> , but this resulted in limited disease gene ranking performance. we suspected that the extensive pooling of expression data from different platforms might have a negative impact on performance. therefore, we created our own custom multi-species co-expression dataset, in which we restricted ourselves to a single microarray platform per species. consistent with the findings of others  <cit> , this single platform approach resulted in significantly better performance, even when using only the four species included in the stuart et al. dataset . though both datasets tend to rank disease genes highly, the new  dataset performs significantly better than the larger and more inclusive dataset from stuart and colleagues  without loss of coverage .

in addition to restricting expression data to a single platform per species, normalizing the microarray expression data according to total expression level also improves the ranking of disease genes relative to non-disease genes from the candidate loci. as we were mainly interested in relative expression levels of genes across conditions and not in total gene expression levels, we normalized all expression values according to the total expression level of the microarray sample . this reduces systematic biases between samples due to differences in total expression levels and highlights the expression relationships between genes per sample, resulting in up to 5% improvement in candidate disease gene ranking .

all disease gene ranking and conserved co-expression correlation data presented here are freely available online  <cit> .

discussion
in this study, we show that we can increase the predictive value of co-expression for disease gene prioritization by exploiting evolutionary conservation, despite the variations in the biology of the species compared. given a genuine co-expression relationship between the disease genes, using conserved co-expression to prioritize candidate disease genes can reduce the number of genes to be tested over sevenfold compared to using a random ranking of the candidate disease genes, as the correct gene will be found on average after testing 7% of the candidates  instead of 50% . encouragingly, even human-mouse conservation can lead to a substantial improvement in disease gene ranking performance, despite the relatively short evolutionary distance between these two species . this means that improvements in specificity can be gained without large losses in sensitivity, as most human genes have mouse orthologs.

an interesting finding is that large pooled datasets which combine as many expression data as possible from various experiments and platforms can actually result in reduced co-expression performance relative to smaller but more coherent expression datasets . microarray data are notoriously variable between independently generated datasets while they are somewhat more consistent between experiments using the same platform  <cit> . in order to minimize dilution of the co-expression signal when combining data from many different sources a weighting scheme is required, such as using the co-expression overlap between different sets to weigh the relevance of the co-expression value  <cit> . our results are consistent with these previously reported findings, as our single-platform-per-species dataset ranks disease genes significantly better than the more inclusive pooling approach adopted earlier by stuart and colleagues  <cit> . an alternative explanation would be that their expression sets are of lower quality or are less representative of the relationships between disease genes, but there is no reason to assume that either of these is the case. this underscores the fact that combining as many data as possible does not necessarily lead to an improved performance of co-expression data for disease gene prioritization, so it is therefore not a trivial finding that combining data from different species does.

another reason why the larger sets do not perform as well as the smaller sets could lie in the use of correlation coefficients to determine genetic relatedness. correlation coefficients estimate expression coherence across all conditions surveyed, but even functionally related genes may not have coherent expression patterns across all tissues and conditions. the larger the datasets, the greater the potential for irrelevant conditions to mask the co-expression relationship that a group of genes has under a limited set of conditions. therefore, a biclustering-based approach  <cit>  may yield more refined co-expression relationships between genes, and is a potential avenue for future improvement of co-expression-based disease candidate gene prioritization.

CONCLUSIONS
we analyze here the predictive power of gene co-expression for disease gene prioritization and identify factors that affect it, such as evolutionary conservation. we show that co-expression data from other species have predictive power for human disease gene prioritization, and that evolutionarily conserved gene co-expression can improve disease gene prioritization over human-only gene co-expression. in addition, we show that platform consistency is important and that smaller but more cohesive datasets can outperform larger pooled datasets. though we only examined disease gene ranking, these findings have broader relevance for the use of microarray co-expression data in functional genomics. we provide these conserved co-expression data as a new resource that can be used in disease gene prioritization programs, particularly those that integrate several different data types.

