BACKGROUND
two members of the gram-negative diplococci, neisseria meningitidis and neisseria gonorrhoeae, are particularly associated with pathological infections. n. meningitidis is specialized for the mucosa of the nasopharynx and causes meningitis and septicemia. n. gonorrhoeae is adapted for the mucosa of the urogenital tract and causes gonorrhoea and pelvic inflammatory diseases. both species colonize only humans and share a great deal of relatedness at the nucleotide level  <cit> . this high degree of relatedness is reflected in the many common genetic, biochemical and antigenic features of the two bacteria.

γ-glutamyl transpeptidase   catalyzes the hydrolysis of γ-glutamyl compounds, and is found in a variety of bacteria such as escherichia coli  <cit>  and helicobacter pylori  <cit> . to distinguish n. meningitidis from n. gonorrhoeae, ggt activity is used as one of the identification markers for n. meningitidis because n. meningitidis is positive for this activity but n. gonorrhoeae and related species, e.g., neisseria lactamica, are not  <cit> . in fact, the detection of ggt activity is applied for the identification of n. meningitidis in the gonochek ii enzymatic identification system   <cit> . from these empirical facts, it was believed that the gene encoding for ggt should exist only in n. meningitidis, but this has not been proven yet  <cit> .

recent remarkable progress in the sequencing of various genomes has led to the detection of nucleotide sequences that appear to be phenotypically silent, termed pseudogenes. the pseudogenes are defined as dna sequences of formerly functional genes rendered nonfunctional by mutations and usually identified by their disrupted open reading frames . pseudogenes have been identified in a variety of eukaryotes, including insects  <cit> , plants  <cit> , and particularly vertebrates  <cit> , but are relatively few in the bacterial genomes. notable exceptions are intracellular bacterial parasites such as rickettsia prowazekii and mycobacterium leprae  <cit> , which seem to have lost many genes due to obtaining nutritional supplies from the host cells. cryptic genes such as the cel operon in e. coli  <cit>  and the flagellar master operon in the genus shigella  <cit>  seem to be a kind of pseudogenes, but are different from pseudogenes because the cryptic genes completely retain intact orfs, which can be occasionally activated by rare genetic events such as mutation, recombination, insertion of elements. as a whole, compared to the pseudogenes in eukaryotes, relatively few pseudogenes have been reported in bacterial genomes  <cit> .

in this study, a gonococcal ggh gene, which is highly homologous to the meningococcal ggt gene, was found to be pseudogene. sequence analyses of the flanking regions of both the ggt and ggh genes suggest that both genes were derived from a gene in a common ancestor, and subsequently diversified.

RESULTS
the gonococcal ggh gene was highly homologous to the meningococcal ggt gene
since ggt activity was detected only in n. meningitidis among the related species, it was speculated that the corresponding gene also existed only in n. meningitidis. however, by blast search, the nucleotide sequences highly homologous to the meningococcal ggt gene were found in the genome of n. gonorrhoeae fa <dig> . the overall nucleotide sequence of the meningococcal ggt homologue was approximately  <dig> % identical to that of the meningococcal ggt gene . eleven n. gonorrhoeae clinical strains were analyzed by pcr, and the corresponding dna fragments were amplified in all of these strains , indicating that this gene was generally present in n. gonorrhoeae. to analyze whether ggt homologues existed in the genomes of the other neisserial strains, southern blotting was performed . dna fragments that hybridized with the meningococcal ggt gene were found in the meningococcal and gonococcal genomes  but not in the other neisserial genomes . these results suggested that the meningococcal ggt homologue was present only in n. gonorrhoeae among the neisserial species examined. the putative gene in n. gonorrhoeae was named ggh .

variations of the nucleotide sequences of ggh genes among clinical isolates
to characterize the gonococcal ggh gene, the ggh genes were amplified from the chromosomal dna of  <dig> n. gonorrhoeae strains and sequenced. the nucleotide sequences of the ggt genes from  <dig> n. meningitidis strains and of the ggh genes from the  <dig> n. gonorrhoeae strains were aligned, and the distance matrix calculated from these data was displayed as a phylogenetic tree . the results revealed that the nucleotide sequences of the gonococcal ggh genes were more divergent than those of the meningococcal ggt genes . alignment of the nucleotide sequences of the  <dig> gonococcal ggh genes also showed that the mutations in the ggh gene consisted of the following four polymorphisms: 1) a 6-base insertion , 2) an ochre mutation , 3) a 7-base deletion , 4) a 46-base insertion  . in addition, all of the  <dig> ggh genes had one-nucleotide substitutions compared to the ggt genes in the same  <dig> sites , with only  <dig> exceptions: a one-nucleotide variation in niid <dig>  and another in niid <dig>  . the one-base substitutions in the common sites of the ggh genes strongly suggested that reconstruction of the ggh gene would have occurred at an early stage after speciation .

putative amino acid sequences in hypothetical coding region of the ggh genes
due to the ochre  and 7-base deletion  mutations, the orf in each ggh gene was completely disrupted by the formation of  <dig> or  <dig> stop codons . in fact, none of the gonococcal isolates showed any ggt activity , indicating that there was no expression of functional ggt-like protein in n. gonorrhoeae. all of these results showed that the gonococcal ggh gene was a pseudogene of the functional ggt gene in n. meningitidis. on the other hand, if the two types of mutations  in the ggh genes were artificially corrected, the hypothetical amino acid sequences were approximately  <dig> % identical to those of the meningococcal ggt genes and were highly conserved among the gonococcal ggh genes . this result also supported the idea that the ggh and ggt genes were derived from a common ancestral gene and that the translational inactivation of the gonococcal ggh gene was solely due to the ochre  and the frame-shift mutations caused by the 7-base deletion .

the genetic organization of the ggt- and ggh-flanking regions in the genomes of n. meningitidis and n. gonorrhoeae
by using the information in the database for n. meningitidis strain mc <dig>  <cit> , n. gonorrhoeae strain fa <dig> and n. lactamica  st- <dig> strain, the flanking regions of the meningococcal ggt and the gonococcal ggh genes were further analyzed. the ggt and ggh genes were both localized in the identical gene cluster of fbp-ggt -glya-opca-deda-abcz in the genomes of n. meningitidis and n. gonorrhoeae, respectively . the fbp-glya-deda-abcz locus was also found in the genome of n. lactamica but lacked the ggt and opca homologues . this highly conserved genetic organization implied that a dna island containing an original ggt gene was first incorporated into an ancestor's genome of the above three species and subsequently diversified after the speciation .

the expression of the ggh gene in n. gonorrhoeae
the hitherto identified bacterial pseudogenes are not expressed transcriptionally or translationally  <cit> . to examine the ggh transcriptional expression, dot blot analysis was first performed and rna that hybridized with the ggt probe was detected in the total rnas of  <dig> n. gonorrhoeae strains . the transcriptional expression was also confirmed by rt-pcr, and the products were amplified with all  <dig> sets of primers from total rna of all  <dig> n. gonorrhoeae strains tested . these results strongly suggested that the full-length ggh gene transcript was expressed in n. gonorrhoeae. primer extension analysis further revealed that the gonococcal ggh rna was transcribed from the same starting point as the meningococcal ggt mrna . all of these results indicated that the gonococcal ggh gene was transcriptionally active though it was a pseudogene.

to further study the translational expression of the truncated ggt-like protein in n. gonorrhoeae, western blotting was performed with anti-meningococcal ggt rabbit antiserum  <cit> . when the same amounts of the whole cell extracts were analyzed , approximately 15-kda bands were detected in the extracts of niid <dig> and niid <dig> n. gonorrhoeae strains . because the 15-kda protein was not observed in the Δggh background of niid <dig> and niid <dig> , the 15-kda protein was thought to be the ggh gene product whose translation was terminated at the 145th codon . however, the 15-kda protein was not found in the extracts of the atcc <dig> and niid <dig> n. gonorrhoeae strains  and seemed not to be expressed in any of the other gonococcal strains .

discussion
in this study, it was shown that the gonococcal ggh gene is a member of bacterial pseudogenes, and is transcribed but not properly translated so that active ggh protein product is not produced. 11fh-mttfa  <cit> , osmu4- <dig>  <cit> , na88-a  <cit> , makorin1-p <dig>  <cit> , dnm3a <dig>  <cit>  and pseudonos  <cit>  genes are known to be transcriptionally active eukaryotic pseudogenes. in neisseriae, the gonococcal pora and Ψopcb genes have been reported as neisserial pseudogenes  <cit> . the pora pseudogene contains mutations in the promoter and the coding regions, and is not translated  <cit> . while some hypothetical bacterial pseudogenes with repetitive runs of a and t are speculated to be potentially expressed by transcriptional slippage  <cit> , the expression, including the transcription, has not been proven yet. to our knowledge, the gonococcal ggh gene is the first identified bacterial pseudogene that is transcriptionally active.

the 15-kda derivative of the putative ggh protein product is detected in the niid <dig> and niid <dig> n. gonorrhoeae strains but not in the atcc <dig> and niid <dig> n. gonorrhoeae strains . since the predicted amino acid sequences of the putative 15-kda proteins seem to be similar among the  <dig> gonococcal strains, the reason why the 15-kda protein was not detected in atcc <dig> and niid <dig> is not clear. the 15-kda protein might be degraded in atcc <dig> and niid <dig> backgrounds but not in niid <dig> and niid <dig> backgrounds. it seems unlikely that the 15-kda protein encoded by the ggh gene has an essential function for n. gonorrhoeae because the 15-kda protein is not always detected in any of gonococcal strains .

why does the gonococcal ggh gene still retain the transcriptional activity? there are some examples in which rnas transcribed from pseudogenes have some biological functions: antisense rna expressed from the pseudonos gene hybridizes with nnos  mrna, resulting in the suppression of the nnos gene expression in the neurons of the snail lymnaea stagnalis  <cit> . rna of makorin1-1p, a pseudogene of makorin <dig>  regulates the makorin <dig> mrna stability, which is important for the correct formation of the kidneys and bone in mice  <cit> . some eukaryotic genes may be duplicated and one of the plural genes may be subsequently reconstructed due to its redundancy, resulting in a pseudogene. however, since a bacterial pseudogene generally does not have a functional counterpart  in a single organism, the ggh rna does not seem to have the same kind of biological function as the pseudonos and makorin1-1p genes. in fact, we could not find any prominent phenotype for a Δggh gonococcal mutant . however, we cannot exclude the possibility that the ggh rna has some biological function in other milieus such as the urogenital tract and further analyses will be required to address this possibility.

the ggt and ggh genes are located in the fbp-ggt -glya-opca-deda-abcz common gene cluster in the genomes of both n. meningitidis and n. gonorrhoeae   <cit> . the genome of n. lactamica lacks ggt and opca homologues in the fbp-glya-deda-abcz locus . it would not be the result of chance that the two ggt  and opca genes are located in the same respective sites of the fbp-glya-deda-abcz gene locus of both n. meningitidis and n. gonorrhoeae but not in that of n. lactamica. moreover, it is also unlikely that a nonfunctional ggh gene was horizontally transferred into the gonococcal fbp-glya-opca-deda-abcz gene cluster since such a pseudogene could not have been sustained due to the lack of selection  <cit> . therefore, it seems more probable that the fbp-ggt-glya-opca-deda-abcz gene cluster was present in an ancestor of the three neisserial species, and has been subsequently diversified independently among the three species, as shown for the opca gene  <cit> . during the diversification, the meningococcal ggt gene has been maintained in an active state while the gonococcal ggh gene has been reconstructed by insertion, deletion and substitutions, resulting in the translational inactivation. in n. lactamica, the ggt and opca homologues might have been lost because of their dispensability for n. lactamica .

it is also interesting that the ggh gene has not been fully deleted from the gonococcal genome. the kinds and sites of mutations in the ggh genes are relatively few and highly conserved, respectively, among the gonococcal isolates . it is also noted that, while in general the rna polymerase-binding sites and sd regions of pseudogenes are highly degraded, there are also a few exceptions in species such as y. pestis that could have emerged in recent evolutionary times  <cit> . since the ribosome-binding sites  of the gonococcal ggh gene are identical to those of the meningococcal ggt gene and the rna polymerase-binding sites are almost completely conserved  , it is speculated that the reconstruction of the ggh gene may have occurred in relatively recent evolutionary times. from the evolutional viewpoint, the drastic deletion of the approximately 2-kb dna region containing the ggh gene in n. gonorrhoeae may not have been likely to occur in such a short period. alternatively, deletion of the 2-kb dna region may not be more advantageous for gonococcal evolution than reconstruction involving short deletions, insertions and substitutions.

the maintenance of a functional ggt gene in n. meningitidis would have some advantages for its survival. n. meningitidis causes meningitis, which is due to the meningococcal invasion into the human central nervous system, including cerebrospinal fluid   <cit> . it has been shown that meningococcal ggt has a physiological function of acquiring cysteine from environmental γ-glutamyl-cysteinyl peptides under cysteine-limited environments such as the csf  <cit> . almost all  meningococcal isolates from humans are positive for ggt activity  <cit> . all of these results suggest that the ggt activity is important for n. meningitidis but not for n. gonorrhoeae. the dispensability of ggt activity for n. gonorrhoeae seems to be consistent with the fact that a cysteine-limited milieu such as the csf in humans is not a natural gonococcal habitat. however, it is not very likely that the milieu of csf exerts selective pressure for an active ggt gene because human csf is not a relevant milieu for human-to-human spread of meningococcus  <cit> . we believe that the meningococcal ggt must have some unknown essential function for n. meningitidis and further studies will elucidate the function.

CONCLUSIONS
our data on the ggh gene indicate that the ggh gene in n. gonorrhoeae is a pseudogene of the functional ggt gene in n. meningitidis. to our knowledge, the ggh gene is the first reported bacterial pseudogene that is transcriptionally active but phenotypically silent. our findings may also contribute to understanding the speciation of n. meningitidis and n. gonorrhoeae.

