BACKGROUND
the innate immune system is the first line of defense against invading pathogens and other xenobiotic substances. its activation is characterized by a host of cellular responses including the release of pro-inflammatory compounds such as cytokines and the production of high levels of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species   <cit> . while these compounds play critical roles in the orchestration and execution of the host defense response, their actions are not always limited to the immune system. for instance, whereas various ros and pro-inflammatory agents play important roles in the normal physiology of the brain, imbalances in these signalling systems have been associated with detrimental effects on brain function  <cit> . particularly, excessive  increased levels of ros are associated with decreased cognitive performance in both vertebrates and invertebrates  <cit> , leading to the suggestion that reducing ros levels in animals with elevated ros may be sufficient to improve memory function  <cit> .

one of the major players in the execution of the inflammatory response recruited by ros is phospholipase a <dig> , a family of enzymes that mediate the release of free fatty acids  from the sn- <dig> position of membrane phospholipids  <cit> . one of the ffa’s liberated by pla <dig> is arachidonic acid, the primary substrate for the epoxygenase , lipoxygenase  and the cyclooxygenase  branches of the eicosanoid pathway. together, cox, lox and cyp- <dig> generate a range of primarily inflammatory modulators  <cit> . importantly, ros are also generated as a by-product of cox activity, thus creating a positive feedback loop that potentially can cause escalation of pla <dig> and cox-dependent aspects of the host defense response and substantive deregulation of lipid homeostasis  <cit> .

under normal physiological conditions, the potential damage induced by ros and other highly reactive oxidizers is controlled by the antioxidant defense system, an array of enzymatic and non-enzymatic elements  <cit> . however, under certain conditions antioxidant defense capacity of an organism may become overwhelmed by either excessive formation of ros and other oxidizers, failing antioxidant capacity or both. such imbalance can lead to oxidative stress. for example, pro-oxidative shifts in cellular redox status may arise as a consequence of immune system recruitment. interestingly, age-associated accession of immune-derived oxidative stress and its impact on phospholipid metabolism are increasingly regarded as a factor in both biological and pathological aging of the nervous system  <cit> . in view of the above and building on our recent observations implicating age-associated and experimental oxidative-stress related induction of pla <dig> activity in learning and memory impairment  <cit>  we investigated the question whether a biologically realistic experimental provocation of the immune system also caused cognitive impairment in our model system.

in our studies we use the pond snail lymnaea stagnalis  as a model system to delineate the neurobiological intracies of oxidative-stress and age-associated memory impairment  <cit> . in this study we utilize an established and widely used classical appetitive reward-conditioning paradigm involving chemosensory conditioning of l. stagnalis’ feeding behaviour   <cit> . using this model we investigated the effects of experimental systemic challenges to the snails’ immune system on long term associative memory  formation in the absence and presence of pla <dig>  cox and lox inhibitors.

as systemic immune challenge we delivered β- <dig>  glucan laminarin intra-coelomic by means of injection. previous work has shown that this β-glucan is a potent stimulant of circulating haemocytes, the principal cellular effectors of l. stagnalis’ immune response  <cit> . the response repertoire of these cells includes elimination of pathogens via phagocytosis, encapsulation and the generation of various reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates  what is called the respiratory burst  <cit> . our results implicate the state of activation of l. stagnalis host defense system to be a contributing factor in the species’ appetitive learning performance and indicate a pivotal role for pla <dig> and cox in the process of immune-associated suppression of the species’ learning abilities.

RESULTS
in vivo immune response to laminarin
to examine whether systemic delivery of a immune stimulant triggers an immune response in animals, we first performed experiments measuring haemocyte h2o <dig> release at varying times after intracoelomic injection of a single bolus of laminarin  or vehicle-only. haemocytes of both laminarin-treated and vehicle control animals were collected  <dig> ,  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hrs after injection and immediately submitted to fluorescent respiratory burst assays. figure  <dig> shows that amplex-red fluorescence was very similar in samples of haemocytes collected from laminarin and vehicle treated animals  <dig>  hr,  <dig> hr and  <dig> hrs after injection, but significantly differed in samples collected  <dig> hrs after injection .

laminarin does not directly affect neuronal activity
next, we examined whether laminarin application to the nervous system directly affect neuronal activity of the cerebral giant cells , serotonergic modulatory interneurons with a critical function in the expression of appetitive ltm. cnss were either exposed for  <dig> minutes to saline followed by a  <dig> min laminarin  treatment or to saline only for the same period of time while recording intracellular from the cgc. these experiments revealed no significant differences in cgc resting membrane potential and spontaneous action potential activity between cns subjected to the two test conditions .

laminarin induced long term memory deficits
to assess laminarin’s impact on the formation of appetitive long term memory  animals randomly assigned to four test groups were injected with, respectively, laminarin or vehicle-only either  <dig> or  <dig> hours before their first training session and tested for the presence of conditioned feeding responses ~ <dig> hrs after their last training session . these experiments revealed a prominent suppression of conditioned feeding responses in animals that received treatment with laminarin  <dig> hr prior to the first training session but not in any of the other three test groups . notably, both vehicle-injected conditioned test groups  displayed robust conditioned feeding responses compared to their non-conditioned peers whether they were injected  <dig> hr or  <dig> hrs prior to their training . in the case of laminarin-injected animals statistically significant conditioned feeding responses were only observed in animals trained  <dig> hrs after they received their injections . while the statistic suggests near significance of the effect of behavioural conditioning in animals treated with laminarin  <dig> hr prior to training the results leave no doubt  that, in contrast to the animals trained  <dig> hrs after treatment, the impact of training in this group is drastically reduced compared to their vehicle-injected counterparts .

laminarin does not affect chemosensory or motor functions
to assess the possibility that the behavioural results presented above were due to effects of laminarin injection on chemosensory and/or motor proficiency rather than plasticity mechanisms underlying appetitive ltm formation, we performed a number of electrophysiological and behavioural control tests.

first, we verified the amyl-acetate detection ability of laminarin-treated animals through analysis of evoked electrical responses recorded in the right superior lip nerve  of semi-intact preparations. the rsln carries chemosensory information from the lip area to the cns. figures 4a and 4b show representative examples of extracellular recordings of the rsln of animals pre-treated  <dig> hr prior with vehicle-only and laminarin injections. the figures illustrate that robust increases in spiking frequency were recorded from the rsln upon application of  <dig> ppm amyl-acetate to the lip in both experimental groups. on average, spiking frequency rapidly climbed from a baseline of around  <dig> events per  <dig> seconds immediately preceding the sensory stimulus to 300- <dig> events per  <dig> seconds during application of the stimulus in both test groups . formal statistical analysis indicated a highly significant effect of peripheral amyl-acetate application on rsln spiking frequency that was independent of prior treatment of the test animals .

behavioural assessment of the possibility that laminarin-injection adversely affects feeding motor functions was done by testing the unconditioned feeding response to sucrose of intact animals pre-treated  <dig> hr prior with either laminarin or vehicle-only. figure 4c illustrates that there were no meaningful differences in the response characteristics of the two test groups. that is, the disturbance stimulus  did not elicit a significant response in either of the test groups, whereas application of  <dig> % sucrose induced robust, statistically indistinguishable feeding responses in animals injected with laminarin  and animals pre-treated with vehicle-only injections .

laminarin does not affect intermediate term memory
to test the possibility of a differential sensitivity of appetitive intermediate term memory  and ltm to systemic laminarin challenges, we examined itm performance of vehicle and laminarin treated snails 1- <dig> hrs after the end of the last training trial . figure 5b shows that laminarin treatment has no effect on itm formation . that is, the conditioned animals of each of the treatment groups responded significantly different from their unconditioned partners . conditioned vehicle and laminarin treated animals showed similar feeding responses .

laminarin induced ltm deficiency involves pla2
considering pla2’s pivotal role in the orchestration of key facets of the inflammatory response in many model systems, we next probed pla2’s involvement in the laminarin induced ltm deficits presented above. to test this idea, four groups of animals that received, respectively, intracoelomic injections of either laminarin, aristolochic acid, laminarin + aristolochic acid or vehicle-only were behaviourally assessed as described before . the results of these experiments are summarized in figure 6b.

we found that pretreatment with the pla <dig> inhibitor aristolochic acid counteracted laminarin’s negative effect on ltm formation . further statistical analysis indicated that this interaction resided in opposing effects of laminarin and aristolochic acid on conditioned feeding responses. that is, while pretreatment with laminarin caused a significant reduction in the conditioned feeding response compared to vehicle treated animals as before , animals pretreated with aristolochic acid learned well  in a manner that was statistically indistinguishable from that of vehicle pretreated animals . moreover, animals pretreated with the combination of laminarin and aristolochic acid did display a significant conditioned feeding response  that was significantly different from the laminarin injected animals .

laminarin induced ltm impairment is rescued by indomethacin
next, we tested the possibility of the involvement of the eicosanoid pathway in the laminarin-induced ltm impairment. for this purpose we used nordihydroguaiaretic acid  and indomethacin, broad-spectrum inhibitors of, respectively, lox and cox, the two major branches of the eicosanoid pathway. drug administration, training and  <dig> hrs ltm assessment were performed according to procedures described before . consistent with previous results, laminarin-injected animals but not vehicle-injected animals failed to show robust conditioned feeding responses  <dig> hrs after their last training . the black bars in figure 7b show that concurrent treatment with laminarin and ndga  did not prevent ltm failure. in fact, the amyl-acetate evoked rasping response of conditioned animals pretreated with laminarin plus ndga was indistinguishable from their unconditioned  counterparts . in contrast, the conditioned feeding response of indomethacin treated animals  differed significantly from that of their none conditioned counterparts . however, as the figure illustrates the conditioned feeding response of indomethacin treated animals was significantly attenuated when compared with conditioned vehicle treated animals . interestingly, concurrent treatment with laminarin and indomethacin significantly improved conditioned feeding responses of the trained animals. that is, in contrast to the animals treated with laminarin only, animals that received laminarin plus indomethacin showed a robust conditioned feeding response  that was neither significantly different from the conditioned response of animals treated with vehicle-only  nor from that of animals treated with indomethacin only .

haemocyte activation is not affected by aristolochic acid or indomethacin
the effects of aristolochic acid and indomethacin described above may arise from inhibition of laminarin-induced processes at the level of immunocytes or the level of the nervous system. thus next we explicitly tested the former possibility by measuring the impact of both compounds on laminarin induced h2o <dig> release by isolated haemocytes. amplex red fluorescence was very similar in laminarin activated haemocytes that were pre-treated with either aristolochic acid or indomethacin when compared to haemocytes pre-treated with vehicle-only .

discussion
the primary purpose of this study was to examine the plausibility of inflammation-mediated learning and memory dysfunction in l. stagnalis. the concept of inflammation and inflammation-mediated oxidative stress as agents of neural dysfunction and degeneration has become well-established in the context of mammalian nervous systems  <cit> . however, despite their prominence as neurobiological model systems of learning and memory, remarkably little is known about neuroinflammatory aspects of learning and memory dysfunction in gastropods. recent findings implicating non-enzymatic lipid peroxidation in pla2-dependent ltm failure in aging l. stagnalis <cit>  led us to hypothesize involvement of the snails’ immune system in learning and memory dysfunction. the current results support that hypothesis, even though many questions about the identity, modes and loci of action of the signalling processes involved remain to be answered. this conclusion hinges on the following observations: 1- systemic delivery of the immune activator laminarin induces a transient increase in h2o <dig> release from circulating haemocytes within 1- <dig> hrs after injection that dissipates within  <dig> hrs; 2- intracoelomic injection of laminarin  <dig> hr before the start of behavioural conditioning induced ltm dysfunction; 3- intracoelomic injection of laminarin  <dig> hrs before the start of behavioural conditioning had no impact on ltm function; 4– co-administration of laminarin with putative pla <dig> inhibitor aristolochic acid or the putative cox inhibitor indomethacin negated laminarin’s effect on ltm; 5- neither aristolochic acid nor indomethacin inhibited laminarin-induced haemocyte- mediated h2o <dig> release; 6- intracoelomic injection of laminarin did not cause obvious chemosensory or motor deficits; 7- laminarin injection did not affect intermediate term memory  function; 8- exposure of isolated cns to laminarin did not affect electrical activity of interneuron cgc. taken together these results support a model in which the haemocyte’s inflammatory response disrupts ltm formation by recruiting neuronal pla2-mediated processes. as will be discussed below, such a model is consistent with our recent finding that pla <dig> plays a pivotal role in ltm impairment associated with oxidative stress and old age in l. stagnalis <cit> .

signalling mechanisms
we propose that the inflammatory response from circulating haemocytes is a primary cause in laminarin’s behavioural effects. we base this opinion on the following evidence. first, the h2o <dig> release data leaves no doubt that circulating haemocytes are among the targets of laminarin in our experiments. second, neither the chemosensory response to amyl-acetate, nor the behavioural response to sucrose application were affected by laminarin  <dig> hr after its injection, a time point where no measurable increase haemocyte h2o <dig> release had occurred yet. third, laminarin applied to isolated cns preparations had no effect on spontaneous spiking activity and resting membrane potential of the cerebral giant cell, one of the interneurons of the feeding circuit that is crucial to the formation of appetitive ltm and that receives chemosensory synaptic input and maintains widespread synaptic connections throughout the circuit. although it is difficult if not impossible to test all-inclusively for the absence of drug effects, these results together provide quite compelling evidence that laminarin has no substantial direct neuronal effects in at least the first 1- <dig>  hr after treatment. further investigations are required to assess whether, on the longer run, laminarin may affect components of the nervous system like perhaps the professional phagocytes known to reside in the cns  <cit> .

the present results show striking parallels with a previous report that aristolochic acid corrects experimental oxidative stress-induced ltm failure in l. stagnalis as well as age-associated ltm impairment  <cit> . in other words, pla <dig> appears to lie at the root of oxidative stress-dependent, inflammation-induced and age-associated ltm impairment paradigms in the l. stagnalis model system. we interpret these parallels as evidence of a close causal relation between these phenomena. this interpretation resonates well with a rapidly growing literature that associates pla <dig> with inflammation, deregulation of lipid metabolism, and cell-, neuronal- and cognitive dysfunction in humans and other mammals  <cit> .

we assume that aristolochic acid’s ability to restore ltm impairment in the current inflammation model reflects the drug’s actions at the level of the nervous system. this idea arises from previous evidence demonstrating that pla <dig> inhibition with aristolochic acid reverses, within minutes, electrophysiological phenomena induced by experimental oxidative stress in isolated cns preparations thought to contribute to ltm impairment as well as similar phenomena in the brains isolated from ltm impaired old snails  <cit> . the idea of a neural locus of aristolochic acid’s restorative actions is further supported by the present finding that the drug does not affect laminarin-induced haemocyte h2o <dig> release, a result consistent with prior literature emphasizing phospholipase c /protein kinase c -dependent signalling pathways in this process  <cit> . parenthetically, assuming the above reasoning is true, the question of identity of the signalling intermediate between haemocytes and neurons arises. there is probably more than one answer to this question. however, based on the uncanny parallels between the experimental oxidative stress model of ltm impairment that identifies non-enzymatic lipid peroxidation as a probable activator of neuronal pla <dig> <cit>  and the current data, we consider oxidizers released by activated haemocytes are plausible candidates.

at this point it is important to recognize the importance of ros and rns signalling in synaptic plasticity and memory formation including the induction of ltm in the very model system we used here  <cit> . specifically, no-signalling is particularly relevant during the first  <dig> hours of ltm consolidation in the current ltm paradigm  <cit> . since l. stagnalis hemocyte’s release substantial amounts of no together with h2o <dig> during their respiratory burst  <cit> , the possibility that haemocyte-derived no interferes directly with critical no-dependent steps in appetitive ltm formation exists.

the finding that the putative cox inhibitor indomethacin, but not the putative lox inhibitor ndga, partially reversed laminarin’s inhibition of appetitive ltm suggests cox involvement in this process. although this notion is consistent with the metabolic interdependence of cox and pla <dig>  this conclusion needs to be treated with some care because, as discussed in more detail below, reservation’s about indomethacin’s cox specificity. nevertheless, the notion of cox involvement in inflammation-induced learning impairment is consistent with the enzyme’s long-standing stature as a pivotal producer of pro-inflammatory mediators  <cit>  and not without precedent in the context of synaptic transmission and plasticity, learning and memory formation  <cit> . very little, if anything, is known about inflammatory and/or neuro-modulatory implications of cox activity in l. stagnalis. considering growing evidence implicating pla <dig> and cox-metabolites in cognitive function and dysfunction in mammals  <cit> , the current results, although not conclusive, do warrant further investigation into this matter.

haemocyte activation: in vivo immune challenge vs. in vitro immune challenge
our data support the conclusion that a single intracoelomic injection of laminarin provokes an increase in haemocytic h2o <dig> release within 1- <dig> hours after injection that dissipates within  <dig> hrs of the injection. whereas these results are in general agreement with those obtained in in vitro studies of l. stagnalis haemocytes, they also reveal important differences  <cit> . particularly, whereas h2o <dig> release increases within  <dig> to  <dig> minutes after in vitro stimulation of isolated haemocytes with  <dig> mg/ml laminarin, our results indicate that the same may take up to three hours when laminarin is injected into the animal’s body cavity. considering the much more complex biological and pharmacokinetic conditions prevailing in the whole animal, a somewhat slower and smaller in vivo response does not seem to be out of the ordinary. most importantly, although we cannot pinpoint the exact time course of the response, our data do support the notion that the impact of laminarin injection on haemocyte h2o <dig> release is gone by the time ltm tests are performed  <dig> hrs after training.

limitations: alternative targets of laminarin and drug specificity?
as any other study relying on pharmacological interventions, our results might be affected by non-specific actions of the drugs we used. aristolochic acid has a long track record as broad spectrum pla <dig> inhibitor  <cit> . other than an extensive literature on the compound’s genotoxic effects that are associated with its ability to form aristolactam-dna adducts  <cit> , we are not aware of reports of non-specific activities. it seems unlikely that dna-adduction is a factor of importance in the present study. an observation strengthening our believe in aristolochic acid’s relative specificity is the finding that the compound does not interfere with laminarin’s ability to activate haemocytes, a process that involves a major phospholipid-dependent signalling component in the form of protein kinase c- , phospholipase c- , extracellular signal-regulated kinase-  and mapk/erk kinase -dependent signalling cascade  <cit> . moreover, no effect of aristolochic acid on electrophysiological, behavioural and biochemical facets were observed in l. stagnalis without any form of pro-oxidant present  <cit> . while we have no compelling reason to suspect aristolochic acid’s pharmacological activities, indomethacin warrants more extensive scrutiny. for instance, like other nsaids, indomethacin may modify the activity of various serine/threonine kinases  <cit> . however, electrophysiological studies on l. stagnalis neurons revealed no evidence of indomethacin effects on pkc nor protein kinase a  signalling at the concentrations used here  <cit> . moreover, we show that indomethacin does not affect laminarin induced h2o <dig> release from haemocytes, which as noted before, is a pkc-dependent process. thus, it seems unlikely that the effects of indomethacin reported here are due to interference with pka and/or pkc signalling. however, several reports indicate that indomethacin, in addition to its ability to inhibit cox, can inhibit several types of pla <dig> enzymes  <cit> . no information is available about the type of pla <dig> underlying the current observations. thus we cannot exclude the possibility that indomethacin’s effects reported here are in part due to the inhibition of pla <dig>  however, that uncertainty does not in any way invalidate our central conclusion that laminarin-mediated haemocyte activation induces pla2-dependent ltm dysfunction.

differential susceptibility of itm and ltm to systemic immune challenge
our results show that non-aversive appetitive itm in contrast to its ltm counterpart is not significantly compromised by systemic injection of laminarin. there are a number of noteworthy observations to make from this finding. first, it provides additional evidence that relatively short term exposure to laminarin itself does not compromise the neural systems and processes involved in the detection and execution of chemosensory-induced feeding responses. second, it points towards independence of the neural substrates itm and ltm and as such reiterates recent evidence by marra et al. indicates that non-aversive appetitive itm and ltm formation in this model follows a parallel rather than serial causal pathway  <cit> . third, the current evidence that ltm is more sensitive to disruption of immune-related processes than itm takes on a particularly intriguing perspective in view of a growing body of literature associating inflammation with age-associated cognitive and neurological dysfunction and our own work showing ltm but not itm to be impaired in old l. stagnalis in both learning and memory paradigms we use in our research  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we provide evidence for a role of the innate immune system in learning and memory impairment in the snail l. stagnalis. specifically, our results indicate that provocation of the immune system induces a pla2-dependent form of ltm dysfunction resembling the memory impairment associated with experimental oxidative stress and old age in this model system. the results emphasize the significance of membrane lipid biology and enzymes of the pla <dig> family in dysfunction of the nervous system of this invertebrate model system and underwrite the fast growing perception of these processes as a fundamental and evolutionary conserved dimension of immune- and age-associated changes in neural- and cognitive failure. as such, l. stagnalis provides an excellent model system for detailed fundamental investigations into the role of the innate immune system in disorders of the nervous system.

