BACKGROUND
tau is an important microtubule-associated protein, promoting microtubule assembly and stabilizing microtubules  <cit> . the protein is recognized as a multifunctional molecule that interacts with actin in addition to microtubules  <cit> , and is involved in the organization of the cytoskeletal network  <cit> . actin monomers  were found to form gels in the presence of tau  <cit> . according to farias and colleagues  <cit> , the association of tau with tubulin immobilized on a solid phase support system is inhibited by actin monomers, and a higher inhibition can be attained with preassembled actin filaments. interestingly, tau can interact with f-actin, resulting in bundles of f-actin. maclean-fletcher and pollard  <cit>  have observed that tau dramatically induces an increase in the viscosity of actin filaments. using electron microscopy tau has been shown to be capable of bundling microfilaments. examination of morphological aspects of microtubules and actin filaments which coexist in vitro revealed associations between both cytoskeletal filaments, and in some cases, the presence of fine filamentous structures bridging these polymers  <cit> . several reports have demonstrated that tau interacts with actin in vivo. sub-portions of tau co-immunoprecipitated with actin filaments have been found in various cell types  <cit> . as described by yu and colleagues  <cit> , under ngf stimulation, tau is distributed at the ends of cellular extensions, where it associates with actin in a microtubule-independent manner in pc <dig> cells. moreover, fluga and co-workers  <cit>  have provided evidence that tau induces changes in the organization and stability of neuronal actin filaments, which in turn contributes to alzheimer's-like neurodegeneration in drosophila and mouse model systems. this further demonstrates the physiological importance of interactions between tau and actin.

according to buee and colleagues  <cit> , tau consists of four parts: the n-terminal region, the proline-rich domain , the microtubule-binding domain  and the c-terminal region. the microtubule binding domain has been reported to bind to actin  <cit> , but no data is available for the other regions bound to actin. it has been proposed that the proline-rich domain of tau participates in interactions with microtubules  <cit> . interactions between tau and dna have been studied in our laboratory  <cit> , and prd and mtbd were found to associate cooperatively with the minor groove in dna double strands. these results intrigued and led us to investigate whether the proline-rich domain of tau also participates in interactions with actin.

RESULTS
tau binds to g-actin and f-actin from skeletal muscle and platelets
human actin has three subtypes, alpha actin being found primarily in muscle, and beta and gamma actin in other tissues. the interaction of tau with alpha actin has been well studied, however, little attention has been given to beta and gamma actin. since tau mainly exists in neurons, beta and gamma actin are the subtypes of actin that tau can encounter. in this work we mainly used skeletal muscle actin. platelet actin  was also employed to test whether subtypes of actin differ in their interactions with tau.

here, solid phase assays were used to study interactions between tau and actin. human tau <dig>  was employed in our experiments. g-actin and f-actin from skeletal muscle and platelets were immobilized in 96-well plates, and increasing concentrations of tau were added. levels of bound tau were monitored by using an anti-tau monoclonal antibody. as illustrated in figure  <dig>  absorbance increased with increasing tau concentration, indicating a positive correlation between added tau and bound tau. bsa used as a negative control showed no interaction with g-actin or f-actin . these results suggest that tau is capable of binding to g-actin and f-actin.

as shown in table  <dig>  the data could be fitted to a one-site binding model. kapp and bmax values for the binding of g-actin and f-actin to tau showed close agreement, suggesting that polymerization of g-actin does not affect its binding to tau. similar patterns were observed for the binding of tau to g-actin and f-actin from both skeletal muscle and platelets.

conditions were the same as those referred to in figure  <dig>  binding parameters were estimated with the non-linear curve fit hyperbl function  in the origin program.

the proline-rich domain is involved in binding to g-actin
co-sedimentation assays are commonly used to investigate the binding of specific proteins or protein domains with actin  <cit> . low speed centrifugation  can only pellet f-actin bundles, while high speed centrifugation  can pellet all f-actin filaments. under our experimental conditions, tau could co-sediment with actin by low speed centrifugation . this result indicated that tau can both induce polymerization of g-actin to f-actin and to f-actin bundles. to investigate the roles of the four regions of tau in interactions with actin, we designed a group of primers  and constructed a series of tau truncation and deletion mutants: mutants in which the n-terminal region , proline-rich domain , microtubule-binding domain , c-terminal region  were separated, and mutants in which the mtbd , and both the mtbd and prd domains  were deleted .

results indicated that the deletion of mtbd did not eliminate the ability of tau to bind to actin since both Δmtbd and g-actin were present in protein pellets as shown by sds-page . under our experimental conditions, the taun, tauc and tauΔprd&mtbd  mutants exhibited no association with actin in co-sedimentation assays, indicating that the proline-rich domain may be an essential domain involved in the association of tau with actin. incubation of the tauprd mutant with g-actin gave rise to a positive result in co-sedimentation assays, and tauprd, taumtbd, tau and bsa alone used as negative controls did not show any deposits in co-sedimentation assays . to judge the efficiency of bundling during the reaction, both the pellet and supernatant fraction were loaded in gels . the result showed that most of the g-actin was in the pellet fraction under the experimental conditions, presenting the formation of f-actin bundles. taken together, these results suggest that the proline-rich domain is involved in the association of tau with g-actin.

platelet actin was also used in low speed co-sedimentation assays. results were similar to those obtained for skeletal muscle actin . under the same conditions, tauprd bound to skeletal muscle and platelet actin without discrimination, i.e. tauprd was capable of binding to alpha-, beta- and gamma-actin. these results again indicate that in addition to the microtubule-binding domain, the proline-rich domain played an important role in the association of tau with actin.

atomic force microscopy was used to observe the morphology of actin-tauprd complexes . filaments were observed after globular platelet actin was incubated with tauprd. under the experimental conditions used, tau, tauΔmtbd and taumtbd also induced formation of f-actin. when taun, tauc and bsa were incubated separately with g-actin, no filaments were observed . g-actin and tau were observed as globular particles in the absence of actin. this demonstrates again that tauprd is a functional domain involved in the association of tau with actin and in the promotion of g-actin assembly.

the proline-rich domain binds to f-actin and promotes f-actin bundling
that tauprd co-sedimented with actin under low-speed centrifugation suggested the formation of f-actin bundles. to investigate the induction of f-actin bundles, alpha f-actin was incubated with different concentrations of tauprd, followed by high speed centrifugation to pellet the f-actin-bound tauprd . tauprd alone and tau with f-actin were used as a negative and positive control, respectively . as shown in figure  <dig>  tauprd co-sedimented with f-actin, showing that tauprd binds to f-actin, although its affinity with f-actin was weaker than that of tau.

to confirm the results from co-sedimentation assays, the association of tauprd, taumtbd or tau with f-actin was also analyzed by solid phase assay. as shown in figure  <dig>  tauprd, taumtbd and tau could bind to f-actin. kapp and bmax values were analyzed as previously . the value of kapp for tauprd was greater than that for taumtbd and at least  <dig> times greater than that for tau  . the value of bmaxtauprd was close to that of bmaxtaumtbd, but less than that of bmaxtau. bmaxtau was approximately equal to the sum of bmaxtauprd and bmaxtaumtbd, suggesting that both the prd and mtbd domains of tau bind to f-actin simultaneously.

data were taken from figure  <dig>  and conditions were the same as for table  <dig>  except that the reaction of f-actin with tauprd was monitored by solid phase assay.

low-speed co-sedimentation was used to measure f-actin bundles in the presence of tauprd. as shown in figure  <dig>  tauprd co-sedimented with f-actin, clearly showing that bundles were formed during the reaction. similar results were observed when tau and taumtbd were used as positive controls.

electron microscopy was used to clarify whether tauprd is able to induce f-actin bundles. significantly, tauprd was found to be bound to skeletal muscle f-actin, leading to bundle formation  as shown in figure  <dig>  taumtbd was used as a positive control. incubation of taumtbd with f-actin resulted in bundles  but a few filaments remained . tau induced bundling of muscle and platelet f-actin . a few actin filaments were observed in the presence of tauprd or tau. in the absence of tau and the mutants, however, f-actin from muscle tissue or platelets did not form bundles and remained as filaments .

tauprd induces f-actin bundles at physiological ionic strength
to clarify whether tau interacts with actin in the presence of salts under physiological conditions, we added different concentrations of nacl to the reaction buffer. after incubating f-actin with tau, low speed co-sedimentation assays showed that the amount of f-actin and tau in the pellets decreased as the concentration of nacl increased . similar results were obtained when taumtbd or tauprd were employed instead of tau. under the experimental conditions used, f-actin alone, or with bsa, showed no significant protein precipitates . likewise, precipitates were not detected when tauprd, taumtbd, tau or bsa were used in the absence of actin as controls.

it is well known that low-speed centrifugation  can precipitate actin bundles but not actin filaments. a few bundles associated with tau could be observed at physiological ionic strength  as shown in figure  <dig>  we used high-speed centrifugation to further investigate the interaction between tauprd and f-actin at physiological strength. as shown in figure  <dig> , tauprd still co-sedimented with actin in the presence of  <dig> mm nacl. under the same conditions, association of tau with f-actin was also visualized .

electron microscopy was employed to examine the morphological details of interactions between f-actin and tau or its mutants in the presence of different concentrations of nacl. as shown in figure  <dig>  bundles of f-actin could still be observed in  <dig> mm or higher concentrations of nacl. the diameter of the actin bundles  was similar to those present in the absence of nacl . when nacl concentration was increased to  <dig> mm, bundles and some filaments were observed to co-exist in the same visual field. as shown in additional file  <dig>  the diameter of the bundles was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm and that of the filaments was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm, similar to those present in the absence of nacl . even when the salt concentration was as high as  <dig> mm, bundles of f-actin  could still be seen in the presence of tauprd. that is to say that tauprd was able to promote the assembly of f-actin into bundles at high concentrations of nacl, but that the diameter of these bundles was somewhat lower than that of those formed in the absence of nacl. under our experimental conditions, similar results were obtained for tau and taumtbd, as indicated in figure  <dig> 

f-actin alone as a control did not assemble in the presence or absence of nacl but existed in filaments of similar diameter  . on the other hand, some actin globules were observed when the nacl concentration was increased to  <dig> mm, suggesting that actin filaments started to collapse at these high salt concentrations. tau, tauprd or taumtbd appeared as particles without any filaments or bundles in the absence of actin under these experimental conditions .

discussion
studies on the interaction of tau with actin have generally focussed on the relationship between mtbd and alpha-actin  <cit> . here we show that the proline-rich domain of tau is also capable of binding to actin, promoting g-actin assembly and f-actin bundling. our results indicate that:  tau is still able to interact with actin after the microtubule binding domain has been deleted ;  the isolated proline-rich domain alone was able to associate with actin;  the taun, tauc truncation mutants, and the Δpbd&mtbd deletion mutant showed no interaction with actin; and  the isolated proline-rich domain was still able to induce f-actin bundling.

compared to the microtubule binding domain, the proline-rich domain of tau is a relatively less-well characterized domain. however, evidence has shown that this domain is functionally important and participates in multiple biological processes. prd has been demonstrated to be an indispensable domain for tau's stabilization of microtubules  <cit> . further work has shown that prd may interact with the n-terminal region from another tau molecule to form dimers  <cit> . tau was reported to associate with the sh <dig> domain of fyn and src via its proline-rich domain  <cit> . here we show another function of proline-rich domain. as shown in the results above, prd binds to actin with a lower affinity than native tau . the value of kapp for the complete protein is much lower than that for either tauprd or taumtbd. this suggests again that both prd and mtbd are involved in interactions with actin.

to investigate whether tau or its mutants binds with actin under physiological ionic strength, as suggested by roger and colleagues  <cit> , we observed the interaction of tau with actin at different concentrations of nacl. our results showed that the interaction between tau and actin decreased significantly with increasing ionic strength. however, high ionic strength could not eliminate the interaction completely. at physiological ionic strength, a relatively weak interaction was still observed using high speed co-sedimentation and electron microscopy. we consider high-speed co-sedimentation and electron microscopy are more sensitive and accurate methods than low-speed co-sedimentation. our results indicate that interactions between f-actin and tau, tauprd and taumtbd persist at physiological ionic strength.

tau and map2c are two major microtubule binding proteins that are considered to be potential cross-linkers between microtubules and actin microfilaments. however, the interaction of map2c with actin may be different in nature. konati and colleagues found that tau and map2c have different behaviour when studying their effect on actin filament viscosity  <cit> . compared with map2c, the binding of tau to f-actin was relatively weak at physiological ionic strength  <cit> . according to yamauchi and co-workers  <cit> , phosphatidyl-inositol completely disrupts map2c-induced bundles. however, tau-induced actin bundles are unaffected by phosphatidyl-inositol. these reports indicate that tau and map2c behave differently in their interactions with cytoskeletal components.

tang and coworkers have proposed the polyelectrolyte theory for f-actin bundling similar to dna condensation  <cit> . the general behaviour is dictated by the polyelectrolyte nature of f-actin, which causes a class of nonspecific binding by ligands that carry several net positive charges including divalent metal ions and basic polypeptides. such bundling is induced by electrostatic force, and usually does not require a specific binding site. tau is a positively charged protein, with a pi of  <dig>  . moraga and co-workers proposed that electrostatic forces are involved in the interaction between actin and a tau fragment containing a repetitive sequence from the mtbd domain, because selective carbamoylation resulted in a complete loss of the peptide induction of actin bundles  <cit> . we have shown that the interaction of tau with f-actin is influenced strongly by ionic strength.

these reports provide evidence that tau may act like polycations to induce f-actin to form bundles. the charge distribution in tau is depicted in additional file  <dig> which shows that mtbd and prd are both highly positively charged, while the n-terminal and c-terminal regions are neutral or negatively charged according to wang and coworkers  <cit> . we hypothesize that electrostatic force is the basis of the interaction between tauprd and actin. the relatively weak and nonspecific nature of the electrostatic forces between tau and f-actin does not necessarily mean that the interaction is of no relevance in vivo. filament concentration could be higher than we can achieve in vitro. besides, several reports have confirmed the physiological importance of this interaction  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, using co-sedimentation assays and solid phase assays we have shown that the proline-rich domain  of tau binds with g-actin and f-actin. the prd domain induced g-actin to form filamentous actin and promoted f-actin to form bundles as observed under both atomic force microscopy and electron microscopy. the promotion of actin bundles in the presence of prd was also observed in the presence of nacl under physiological conditions. according to the results presented here and other reports in the literature on mtbd associations with actin, it is suggested that both prd and mtbd are involved in the association of tau with actin.

