BACKGROUND
a rapidly expanding body of evidence demonstrates that cysteine sulfenic acid  formation within protein molecules can serve as a means of regulating protein activity. under variant biochemical circumstances it may serve to mediate redox signaling  <cit> , fundamentally alter protein activity  <cit> , or absorb and deflect oxidative insults  <cit> . much of this evidence has only recently come to light because the unstable, transient nature of cys-soh has prevented its thorough study in decades past: as a protein modification it is generally unstable unless enveloped within a stabilizing protein microenvironment.

the ability to quantify the extent to which individual proteins are modified by cys-soh in complex biological matrices is an important step in understanding the full range of biological processes in which the posttranslational modification plays a role. naturally, complex biological samples represent the ultimate context for such relative-percent-abundance  determinations of protein cys-soh. but a combined lack of spectral absorption properties and chemical instability have historically left few options available with regard to analyzing protein cys-soh in even the simplest matrix. covalent trapping with a sulfenic acid-specific probe that changes an intrinsic property  of labeled protein molecules is, currently, the only viable path of routine detection. to date, the most commonly used chemical traps of cys-soh are molecules with dimedone or sulfhydryl functional groups  <cit> . these have been employed successfully and are quite useful in the analysis of isolated proteins; the former have even been applied to detecting the presence of protein cys-soh in biological samples  <cit> . but the molecular complexity of biological samples imparts a layer of analytical difficulty that has yet to be overcome with regard to determining the precise degree to which specifically targeted proteins are modified by cys-soh in their native environments. thus, beyond simple  detection of cys-soh within specific proteins or the relative quantification of cys-soh in many proteins together in bulk, little has been developed in the way of technologies to quantify the precise degree to which particular proteins within complex biological samples are modified by cys-soh.

herein we report on the application of mass spectrometric immunoassay   <cit>  to the detection and relative quantification of cys-soh as it modifies specifically targeted proteins in human plasma. msia is high throughput affinity chromatography, followed by the analysis of intact proteins by mass spectrometry, using relative mass spectral peak intensities corresponding to modified and unmodified protein forms as representative of their relative abundances  <cit> . this is a well established analytical procedure  <cit>  and is analogous to an ultra-high resolution, semiquantitative western blot. in addition to the now well known example of albumin  <cit>  we report on the rpa of previously undocumented cys-soh formation in transthyretin  as it occurs within the biological matrix of human plasma. taken altogether, however, our results also compel the description of several analytical precautions related to trapping, detecting, and quantifying cys-soh in complex biological samples.

RESULTS
detection and relative quantification of cys-soh formation within specific plasma proteins: the strategy taken was to trap cys-soh, then extract and analyze all molecular forms of targeted proteins using msia. albumin and ttr serve as ideal model proteins by which to assess this strategy because each possesses a single free cysteine residue--meaning that only one mole of cys-soh can form per mole of protein.

albumin and ttr were immunoaffinity-extracted from human plasma that was treated with hydrogen peroxide and the dimedone-based cys-soh trapping reagent 5--4-- <dig> -cyclohexanedione . dimedone itself and other dimedone-based probes such as dcp-bio <dig>  <cit>  produce qualitatively analogous results. the high mass of dimedone-based probes such as cppchd and dcp-bio <dig> provides a significant mass shift to the protein such that tagged protein molecules lie out of the mass range of commonly observed posttranslationally modified protein variants. for example, s-cysteinylation  and s-cysteinylglycinylation  are frequently observed as posttranslationally modified forms of free cysteine-containing proteins . the rpa of each posttranslationally modified form of the proteins analyzed in figure  <dig> are listed in table  <dig> 

ip = "interfering peak", cannot properly integrate

because it can readily be analyzed intact by esi-ms after a simple ~1000-fold dilution of plasma, albumin serves as a convenient model protein by which to assess the accuracy and precision of these techniques for relative quantification of cys-soh-modified protein. by comparing the rpa of cys-soh modified albumin detected following plasma preparation by dilution vs. immunoaffinity extraction, it can be determined whether or not antibodies bind dimedone-tagged forms of the proteins with different affinity than that with which they bind naturally occurring form.  functional group.)

to begin to assess the accuracy and precision of the technique for determining the rpa of cys-soh modified proteins, a series of experiments were run in which human plasma was exposed to increasing concentrations of hydrogen peroxide to generate abundant quantities of cys-soh. plots of the rpa of dimedone-tagged target protein vs. hydrogen peroxide concentration  reveal two potential problems. first, by comparing the rpa  of tagged albumin when analyzed by dilution vs. msia , a quantitative discrepancy is readily apparent in which the msia-based technique reports a lower rpa of covalently tagged albumin than the dilution technique. the most likely explanation for this phenomenon is that there is a diminished binding affinity of the anti-albumin antibodies for tagged forms of the protein. second, by comparing the rpa of cys-soh modified albumin reported by the two different dimedone-based probes across a series of hydrogen peroxide concentrations , a substantial quantitative discrepancy is readily apparent: dcp-bio <dig> was present in solution at a higher concentration than cppchd but results in lower apparent values for rpa of cys-soh. this is most likely due to differences in reaction rates between the two probes for the cys-soh site. this brings up the question of which, if either probe reports a truly accurate  quantitative value for the rpa of cys-soh originally present in the plasma.

the final calculated concentrations of cppchd and dcp-bio <dig> in solution were  <dig> mm and  <dig> mm, respectively. however it is possible that these final concentrations may not have actually been reached due to solubility issues: cppchd has a calculated  aqueous solubility of about  <dig> μm and dcp-bio <dig> of about  <dig> μm. however, the existence of 5-10% dmso in solution coupled with evidence from others that dcp-bio <dig> shows increased rates of alkylation of pure protein with increasing concentrations of dcp-bio <dig> up to about  <dig> mm  <cit> , leads to the final conclusion that both probes were saturated in solution and that the concentration of dcp-bio <dig> was higher than that of cppchd.

but even at saturating concentrations, the rates of reaction of dimedone-based probes with cys-soh are slow enough that, in a complex biological fluid like human plasma, resulting reports of cys-soh rpa stand to be in error because of the presence of endogenous free small molecule thiols such as cysteine, homocysteine, and glutathione which react much faster with protein cys-soh than dimedone  <cit> . the concentration of free cysteine in human plasma is typically in the 1- <dig> μm range  <cit> , if not more  <cit> . experimentally, evidence for the competitive reaction of endogenous free cysteine with protein cys-soh can readily be seen vis-à-vis an increase in the intensity of the peaks representing s-cysteinylated albumin and ttr in samples to which hydrogen peroxide was added to generate cys-soh . this is a fundamental limitation of dimedone-based probes of protein cys-soh.

by nature no surrogate trapping technique can guarantee a quantitatively perfect representation of a trapped molecular species--particularly when the species to be trapped are molecularly unstable and there is endogenous competition for reaction with them. this suggests that, other factors held equal, the trapping reagent with the fastest reaction rate toward the unstable target molecule will provide the most quantitatively accurate estimate of the unstable species.

assessment of 2-nitro-5-thiobenzoic acid as a quantitative probe
2-nitro-5-thiobenzoic acid  is the disulfide-reduced form of ellman's reagent which is classically used for the determination of free thiol groups in proteins. recently, turell et al determined that the rate constant for tnb reaction with albumin cys-soh is  <dig> m- <dig> s-1--over  <dig> times greater than that for unsubstituted dimedone and  <dig> times greater than that for free cysteine  <cit> . thiols do not spontaneously react with other thiols in the absence of an oxidizing agent and, under the conditions employed, tnb does not readily participate in intramolecular disulfide exchange by reducing/inserting itself into the existing disulfide bonds of albumin. when this is the case, neither reduced thiols nor disulfides interfere with tnb as a probe of cys-soh  <cit> . under the conditions used for the experiments described below, no albumin modified by two or more molecules of tnb was detected. this serves as experimental verification that tnb was not reacting with protein disulfide bonds. 

to assess the utility of tnb as a quantitative probe for the rpa of cys-soh-modified albumin and transthyretin in human plasma, tnb was added to plasma at increasing concentrations immediately after the plasma was exposed to  <dig> mm hydrogen peroxide  then catalase. as described below, immediate protein purification and analysis  was found to be necessary to minimize artifactual formation of di-tnb  and subsequent labeling of free cysteine residues. as such, it was also important to minimize the concentration of tnb added to plasma samples. at concentrations beyond  <dig> μm the addition of tnb did not result in additional labeling of protein cys-soh ; thus this concentration of tnb was employed in subsequent experiments.

under these conditions tnb, like dimedone-based probes, reacts specifically with cys-soh modified protein molecules .  interestingly, based on its spontaneous reactivity with tnb in the absence of exogenous hydrogen peroxide , a significant proportion of ttr protein molecules appear to possess native cys-soh. this finding is not due to artifactual non-covalent association of tnb with ttr. tnb only binds to the native, free cysteine-containing form of ttr and not the thiol-blocked s-cysteinylated form .

to assess analytical precision and the potential for antibody bias against tnb-labeled protein, five replicate plasma aliquots were incubated with hydrogen peroxide/catalase and  <dig> μm tnb, then analyzed for tnb-modified albumin and ttr by both dilution and  msia. for both albumin and ttr there was no statistically significant difference in the rpa of tnb-modified protein when samples were prepared by dilution vs. immunoaffinity extraction . though, for ttr, a t-test p-value of just over  <dig>  suggests that there may indeed be a slight antibody bias against tnb-labeled protein molecules. for plasma prepared by dilution, the mean relative percent tnb-tagged albumin was  <dig> ±  <dig>  se; by msia it was  <dig> ±  <dig>  se. for ttr, these values were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  se and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  se, respectively. these values have not previously been reported for ttr because the existence of cys-soh modified ttr was unknown. however, for albumin, our results are consistent with a previously reported value  for percent cys-soh modification under similar oxidative conditions but in the absence of a complex biological matrix such as plasma  <cit> . notably, these values may well vary depending on the percentage of albumin molecules carrying a free cysteine residue. during the course of examining hundreds of individual plasma samples, we have observed the percentage of free cysteine-containing albumin to range from less than 5% to greater than 65% .

analytical precautions for the use of tnb
when exposed to air for prolonged periods of time, tnb can form disulfide homodimers--resulting in the formation of dtnb which readily reacts with free cysteine residues. as such, when employed as a trap of cys-soh without precaution to prevent such homodimer formation, erroneously high values for relative percent cys-soh abundance may be obtained.

to quantitatively determine the extent of this effect at  <dig> μm tnb, a fresh solution of tnb was prepared in a  <dig> mm bicarbonate buffer containing  <dig>  m nacl  and monitored for loss of absorbance at  <dig> nm  <cit>  over  <dig> minutes--a time period longer than that required to immediately pass tnb-exposed plasma through a gel filtration spin column , dilute or immunoaffinity extract, and introduce the resulting sample into a mass spectrometer.  decay was limited to a loss of  <dig>  μm/min, corresponding to a potential maximum dtnb formation rate of  <dig>  μm/min. conservative  incubations of 1- <dig> μm dtnb in plasma for  <dig> minutes showed that this rate of formation of dtnb from tnb results in no detectable  formation of tnb-modified albumin and only trace/marginally detectable quantities of tnb-modified ttr. but given that, in our experiments, freshly reduced tnb was employed  and >95% of tnb was filtered out of our samples within seconds via centrifugal gel filtration, it is reasonable to assert that artifactual formation of dtnb and its subsequent contribution to our measured rpa values of tnb-modified protein was negligible.

advantages and disadvantages of cys-soh relative quantification by mass spectrometric analysis of intact proteins
when coupled with a rapid purification technique, mass spectral analysis of intact proteins provides a degree of molecular detail and an ability to analyze proteins in complex biological matrices that is essentially impossible to match with other available techniques such as spectrophotometry or western blotting. for example, the mass spectral data shown in figures 4c and 4d readily reveal that only the protein molecules with an available free cysteine residue are modified by tnb . protein molecules in which the single free cysteine residue was already s-cysteinylated remained unmodified.

a potential criticism of the technique is that possible differences in ionization efficiency between differentially modified protein molecules may render relative quantification of the different protein forms inaccurate--i.e., that resulting mass spectral integrals may not represent the exact molar percentage of each protein variant detected. however, considering the overall size of proteins and the sheer number of charges on each protein molecule  coupled with the at-most ±  <dig> charge-unit effect of a single differential substituent on whole protein ionization, the argument for an effect of ionization efficiency on apparent molar abundances becomes negligible.

physiological relevance
with few exceptions, most studies of protein-soh described in the literature involve induction of protein-soh using non-physiological concentrations of exogenous oxidants such as h2o <dig>  because the addition of exogenous oxidants to create protein-soh is required for most proteins, the rpas of protein-soh observed in this and other studies reported in the literature are certainly higher than might be found physiologically. however, this study, as well as others, clearly shows that mixed protein-glutathione and protein-cysteine disulfides exist naturally in significant quantities. based on the observations reported in this study, we hypothesize that a major physiological role of protein-soh  is to serve as an oxidative intermediate in the formation of reversible mixed protein disulfides. as such, the in vivo rpa of protein-soh in most proteins at any given instant in time will likely be low.

CONCLUSIONS
molecular probes which covalently trap cys-soh can yield modified proteins that are less well-recognized by antibodies than their unmodified/natural counterparts. each combination of protein, probe, and antibody stands to differ in this effect and must be investigated empirically. dimedone-based probes of cys-soh are useful for detecting the presence of protein-specific cys-soh within complex biological matrices  <cit> , but with regard to relative quantification, their reaction rates with cys-soh may be outpaced by reactions with endogenous thiols. tnb reacts faster with cys-soh than endogenous thiols or dimedone  <cit> ; we have shown herein that when proper precautions are taken to ensure its stability, tnb's fast reaction rate, limited antibody bias, and net mass shift make it useful in the relative quantification of cys-soh on specific proteins within human plasma when mass spectrometry is employed for detection. transthyretin in its native environment appears to be modified by cys-soh in the absence of exogenous oxidants. amongst different individuals, free cysteine-containing plasma proteins can vary widely in the fraction of protein molecules carrying free thiol groups. thus ultimately, to understand and properly interpret the relative quantification of protein modification by cys-soh, it is necessary to be aware of this percentage of target protein molecules that contain free thiol groups and thus are available for modification by cys-soh.

