BACKGROUND
the evolution of organisms with increasing complexity was significantly facilitated by duplication of genes and genomes followed by diversification  <cit> . gene duplication per se produces two identical copies. subsequently, one of the copies may either accumulate beneficial changes to give rise to a functionally diversified gene or accrue deleterious mutations to end up as a pseudogene, while the other copy retains its original function. the former mechanism leads to the creation of 'gene families' capable of carrying out diverse functions  <cit> .

the classification of genes into gene families by human gene nomenclature committee  on the basis of sequence similarity of the encoded proteins  <cit>  and the availability of human genome sequence  <cit>  allow us to carry out a comprehensive survey of a class of important functional element, namely the n repeats. analysis of the distribution of nrepeats within genes in 'present day' gene families holds the potential to provide insights into the factors steering their abundance and selective distribution. although the characteristic property of n repeats exhibiting length polymorphism has been widely used in genetic mapping  <cit> , a growing body of evidence accumulating over several years point to their multiple functional roles in various biological processes.

the n repeats have a propensity to undergo structural transitions  <cit>  and have been shown to modulate transcription in several genes including rat α-lactalbumin  <cit> , rat prolactin  <cit> , mmp- <dig>  <cit> , ifn-γ  <cit> , egfr  <cit> , hsd11b <dig>  <cit> , tilipia prolactin <dig>  <cit>  and human housekeeping genes  <cit> . furthermore, the n tracts have been observed to act as stimulator in recombination and in mrna splicing  <cit> .

in the current study, the analysis of distribution of n repeats in human gene families affords assessment of the distribution of these repeats by examining for positive association or negative association with respect to gene length and function.

RESULTS
characteristics of human gene families and their functional classification
each of the  <dig>  gene families included members with similar functional roles. the family sizes varied in a wide range between  <dig> to  <dig> members . the number of gene families was found to bear an inverse exponential relation to family size. about two-fifths of the gene families were duplex. only three gene families had more than  <dig> members per family: immunoglobulin heavy chain , zinc finger proteins  and solute carrier .

the functional classification of  <dig>  gene families comprising  <dig>  genes in the six functional classes unveiled that the signaling and communication is largest with  <dig> families and  <dig>  genes . the cell cycle is the smallest with  <dig> families and  <dig> genes.

of the  <dig>  gene families,  <dig> were entirely intrachromosomal. chromosome  <dig> had the largest number with  <dig> families followed by chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> with  <dig> and  <dig> families respectively. the remaining chromosomes had less than  <dig> intrachromosomal gene families per chromosome. the functional classification of these  <dig> intrachromosomal gene families revealed that the highest number  belonged to the class of 'immune and related functions' closely followed by the class of signaling and communication with  <dig> families. the remaining classes had the following distribution of gene families: metabolism , information , structure and motility  and cell cycle . these observations indicate that the creation of intrachromosomal human gene families was driven by large number of duplications followed by divergence in selected functional classes.

global distribution of n repeats  in gene families
of the  <dig>  gene families,  <dig> families had n repeats in at least one of their members and  <dig> families had repeats in all their members. of the  <dig>  genes in  <dig>  families,  <dig>  genes had intragenic n repeats of length greater than or equal to  <dig> units. all  <dig>  genes had repeats in their introns. only  <dig> genes had n repeats in exons indicating that these repeats are mainly present in introns.

the distribution of genes with n repeats in the six functional classes is displayed in figure  <dig>  it is apparent that the class of signaling and communication had the highest number of genes with n repeats. comparison of the proportion of genes with repeats in each class with the global proportion showed that the class of signaling and communication had significantly higher than the expected proportion . in contrast, the classes of immune and related functions and information had significantly lower than the expected proportion of genes with repeats . the proportion of genes with repeats was not significantly different from the global proportion in the cell cycle, metabolism and structure and motility classes. these observations show that the n repeats exhibit positive association with the genes belonging to signaling and communication whereas, they are negatively associated with the genes belonging to immune and related functions and information.

it has been shown that the human genome has an isochore structure that varies in gc content  <cit> . this variation raises the possibility that the observed selective distribution of n repeats might have arisen due to fluctuations in the local % content of the genomic region as opposed to function. we examined this by comparing the average % content of the genes in the six functional classes with the corresponding proportions of genes with repeats. the average % content was observed to be in the narrow range  in the six functional classes whereas, the proportion of genes with repeats varies widely in the range  <dig> –61%. these observations indicate that the proportion of genes with repeats is significantly determined by function instead of small fluctuations in % content.

correlation between gene length, function and global distribution of n repeats
comparison of the proportion of genes containing n repeats with the average lengths of genes in each of the six functional classes revealed a linear relationship . the signaling and communication class had the longest average gene length  along with the highest proportion of genes with n repeats . the class of immune and related functions had the shortest average gene length  with the lowest proportion of genes with n repeats . these observations show that the proportion of genes with n repeats bears a linear relationship to the length of genes.

trinity of n repeats in gene families
in order to examine the characteristics of distribution of n repeats with respect to multiple functional roles principally governed by their length, we analysed the repeats stratified into three categories: type i , type ii  and type iii . the results are displayed in figure  <dig>  the number of genes containing n repeats decreases with increasing repeat length. it is also apparent that several genes  have multiple types of repeats in various combinations.

classification of the distribution of genes with n repeats stratified into three categories into six functional classes is shown in figure  <dig>  it is evident that the proportion of genes containing repeats decreases in the order i > ii > iii in all classes. the proportion of genes containing n repeats of signaling and communication were significantly higher than the expected proportion in all three categories of repeats . on the other hand, the proportion of genes with n repeats of immune and related functions and information were significantly lower than expected proportion in all three categories: immune and related functions , information . the proportion of genes with type iii repeats was marginally lower than the expected proportion in metabolism class  and marginally higher than the expected proportion in structure and motility class . the proportion of genes with repeats in the three categories was not significantly different from the expected value in the class of cell cycle. these observations show that repeats of all types are positively associated with the genes of signaling and communication whereas they are negatively associated with the genes of immune and related functions and information.

the distribution of average number of n repeats per gene in the three categories in the six functional classes is displayed in figure  <dig>  comparison of the average number of repeats per gene in the three categories with the global distribution pattern revealed that in most cases the observed number was significantly lower than the expected value, except for the genes belonging to signaling and communication and structure and motility, which had significantly higher average number of repeats per gene than the expected value . the average number of type iii repeats per gene in the class of cell cycle was not significantly different from the expected value. these observations show that the repeat densities were higher in the genes belonging to signaling and communication and structure and motility classes whereas, the genes belonging to other classes had lower repeat densities.

large gene families
as a special case of this study, we examined the distribution of n repeats in the top 2% large families . the family sizes of this category varied widely from  <dig> to  <dig> members. functional classification of these large families revealed the following distribution: immune and related functions , signaling and communication , information , metabolism , structure and motility  and cell cycle .

the proportion of genes with n repeats in large families is displayed in table  <dig>  comparison with the global distribution showed that the proportion of genes with repeats was significantly higher than expected value in the signaling and communication and structure and motility classes . there was no significant difference between the observed and the expected proportion of genes with repeats in the class of metabolism. in the remaining classes, the proportion of genes with repeats was significantly lower than the expected value . as observed with all gene families, a linear relationship was observed between gene lengths and proportion of genes with n repeats .

a: chromosomal distribution of the members of gene families. 'dispersed' indicates that members are distributed on different chromosomes.

b: average gene length  for each gene family.

c:numbers in parentheses show the number of large sized gene families in each functional class.

the large collagen gene family belonging to the class of structure and motility had the highest proportion of genes containing repeats . in order to analyze this further, we examined the sequence conservation of the region flanking  <dig> bases upstream and downstream in addition to the repeats by comparing the human sequence with the available genome sequence of chimpanzee , a nearest ancestor to human  <cit> . we observed, that of the  <dig> sequence segments including repeats from human collagen genes,  <dig> were conserved with greater than 92% identity in the chimpanzee. of these  <dig> repeats in human collagen genes,  <dig> repeats were identical in length,  <dig> repeats displayed length polymorphism in the chimpanzee,  <dig> repeats had point mutations and in  <dig> cases there were no repeats in the corresponding segments in the chimpanzee. these observations show that both human and chimpanzee collagen genes have high repeat content, high conservation of position and flanking sequences of the repeats. however, majority of repeats exhibited length polymorphisms, which is consistent with their characteristic property  <cit> .

discussion
the inverse relationship between the number of gene families and their corresponding sizes, resulting in a large number of small sized gene families, suggests that several duplicated copies may have been lost during the first round of genome duplication itself, considering the hypothesis of two rounds of genome duplication in vertebrate evolution  <cit> . the non-uniform distribution of the number of gene families across the six functional classes suggests that widespread gene duplication across gene families spanning a wide range of functions may have been less productive in attaining higher levels of complexity. an alternate course involving large amount of duplications followed by divergence producing a wide range of functions in selected classes might have been favorable. the support for the latter hypothesis emerges from the fact that large sized gene families, inherently low in number, mainly belong to immune and related functions , signaling and communication  and information class . a few members of large sized gene families of metabolism class function in bioenergetics and xenobiotic metabolism and of cell cycle class function in packaging of nuclear dna. similarly the large collagen gene family of structure and motility class offers a useful repertoire for the formation of multiple tissues  <cit> .

it is apparent that short repeats are abundant in human genes and long repeats are rare. our findings are consistent with the observations by whittaker et al. , who showed that longer repeats are more likely to contract than expand  <cit> . accordingly, contraction of long repeats in time would result in accumulation of higher number of short repeats.

of the six functional classes, the signaling and communication class was the richest in repeats including the proportion of genes with repeats and repeat densities. many of the genes belonging to this class function at the interface between the body and its environment that appears to be a distinct feature of eukaryotes  <cit>  to confer species-specific advantages  <cit> . the positive association of n repeats associated with genes of this class strongly argues for a positive temporal regulatory role that could provide for variations in gene expression to complement the enormous diversity characteristic of this class. compared to this class, the anciently evolved gene families of information and cell cycle are poor in repeats. considering the fact that these genes are highly conserved  <cit>  and are involved in implementing the molecular processes acting at the core of cellular physiology, these observations suggest that repeats are negatively associated with these genes to avoid unpredictable consequences for the normal functioning of the cell.

another argument in favor of these inferences stems from the linear relationship between the average gene length of gene families belonging to the respective functional classes and the proportion of genes with repeats in these classes. the average length of genes belonging to information class was short and this factor aids in obtaining high levels of expression of these genes  <cit> . this requirement, however, generates a space constraint to accommodate additional elements. this situation contrasts to that of genes of signaling and communication class with higher average gene length offering more space for accommodating other regulatory elements. the analysis of collagen gene family belonging to large sized families presents itself as an interesting case. most of the members of this family have n repeats. sequence comparisons of repeat containing regions of human collagen genes with the nearest ancestor to humans, the chimpanzee, revealed that although there is high conservation in terms of content and position of repeats, majority of repeats were polymorphic, which is consistent with their characteristic property  <cit> . among repeats that displayed polymorphism between human and chimpanzee, nearly equal proportions of human repeats were either contracted or expanded in chimpanzee. these results are also consistent with the whittaker's model  <cit> .

strikingly, the genes of immune and related functions class are poor in n repeats in general and in type iii repeats in particular. a characteristic trend of this class is to have large sized families with their genes arranged juxtaposed on the same chromosomal locations. this arrangement increases the possibility of these gene families to display more uniform sequence characteristics  <cit> . further, these genes have the smallest average gene length indicating a compact arrangement, which is likely to act as a space constraint in the accommodation of n repeats. in addition, the negative association of type iii n repeats in these genes may have a directional role. the immunoglobulin genes use the  <dig> bp and  <dig> bp repeats for generation of variants through vdj recombination  <cit> . accommodation of type iii n repeats  might introduce variations in this process and could result in loss of directional recombination essential to generate diversity in immunoglobulins and t cell receptor chains in an ordered manner.

CONCLUSIONS
the n repeat distribution pattern observed in human gene families is consistent with whittaker's model of repeat expansion and contraction. it appears that multiple factors including gene length, function and directionality of recombination processes steered the observed selective patterns of distribution of n repeats in human gene families.

