BACKGROUND
phylogenetic trees are an important tool in evolutionary biology for representing the history of evolution of organisms. they are composed of nodes, representing hypothetical ancestors, and branches or edges, reflecting the relationship between nodes. terminal nodes or taxa represent the taxa whose evolution has been investigated, and they can represent extant or extinct organisms  <cit> . in phylograms and chronograms, branches contain information, e.g. character changes or evolutionary time; in both cases they represent distances between nodes. consequently, the taxon order is meaningless, and the closeness of taxa can be misleading. for example, two taxa lying adjacent to each other on a phylogenetic tree may actually be very distantly related, creating problems of interpretation.

previous work has already accepted the challenge of ordering the taxa to add a meaning according to the genetic distance. the software neighbor-net  <cit>  is shown to build a network which also minimizes the distance among taxa, given a matrix that fulfill the kalmanson inequalities  <cit> . this software relies on phylogenetic networks, using an algorithm based on neighbor joining  <cit> . levy and pachter  <cit>  showed that the algorithm, considering the problem as a "traveling salesman" problem, is robust for ordering taxa according to a distance matrix. other studies have endeavored to minimize the distance between taxa as a minimum hamiltonian path  <cit> , either while building the tree or after having built it.

in our previous work  <cit>  we introduced an innovative method to order taxa on a phylogenetic tree to make taxon order more meaningful. we used  - evolutionary algorithms   <cit>  to reorganize taxon order by random rotation of internal nodes , evaluating the modified tree on the basis of genetic distances. figure  <dig> reports a brief scheme of the process to generate and select the optimal tree. the main goal is to order the taxa on a phylogenetic tree according to any given distance matrix. the tree can be built with any software for phylogenetic inference and then used as input for our algorithm.

in the current study we apply this method to different data sets using different types of distances. we chose published phylogenetic trees of three rna viruses infecting different hosts with different modes of transmission: vesicular stomatitis virus  presented by perez et al.  <cit> , west nile virus  presented by bertolotti et al.  <cit>  and rice yellow mottle virus  presented by abubakar et al.  <cit> . we reorganized each tree using genetic and geographic distance matrices as well as combined distances  to improve graphical representation by optimizing the order of taxa.

RESULTS
vsv case study
vsv is a negative-sense single-stranded rna virus member of the family rhabdoviridae, which causes vesicular stomatitis in horses, cattle, swine, and certain wildlife species  <cit> . starting from the tree originally published in  <cit> , we created an euclidean distance matrix from collection sites coordinates. then, the ea was run  <dig> times, each starting with the original tree plus λ- <dig> different initial trees , generated from the original one . the performance of the runs was comparable, and we analyzed the best trees . the order of taxa follows a clear north-south progression, reflecting the geographic arrangement of collection sites, represented in the map in figure  <dig>  in other words, the algorithm was able to group those taxa belonging to the same state . we also tested the algorithm using a separate genetic distance matrix and a combined genetic and geographic distance matrix. using genetic distances only, the improvement in tree representation is less evident, as might be expected considering that the original tree was constructed using genetic data. however, the ea returns a tree in which the most genetically divergent clades are moved to the extremities of the phylogeny, leading to a "c"-like shape, as shown in figure 2c. the effect of combining the two matrices is strongly evident: the tree has the same "c"-like shape arrangement as the genetically modified tree, and moreover it conserves the aggregation of taxa from same states  .

wnv case study
wnv is a positive-sense single-stranded rna virus belonging to the family flaviviridae, and it is transmitted primarily through the bite of infected mosquitoes to birds. occasionally it infects horses and humans causing west nile febrile illness and neurologic disease  <cit> . the original tree, from  <cit> , shown in figure 4a, was rearranged using a matrix of geographic distances, as described in the methods section. in the case of wnv, the geographic arrangement of locations is not linear , as in the case of vsv. in the modified tree , taxa nevertheless group by sampling location. due to large sample size and constraints of tree topology, this grouping is less evident than in case of vsv.

in the original paper, the authors declared that more than the 90% of viral genetic variance was contained within sampling sites. modifying the tree using a matrix of genetic distances yielded a tree that did not tend to group taxa by geographic location ; rather, the modified tree acquired the aforementioned "c"-like shape. as reported in the same paper, the authors found a significant association between viral genetic and spatial distances, with samples collected from the same site likely to be genetically similar. the modified tree obtained with merged genetic and geographic distance matrices tended to move samples collected from the same location closer, supporting the original contention that that viruses from the same location are also genetically similar . furthermore the "c"-like shape of the tree was conserved even when merged matrices were used. the new trees obtained therefore graphically support the statistical analyses in the original publication showing weak genetic-geographic association  <cit> .

rymv case study
rymv is a positive-sense single-stranded rna virus belonging to the genus sobemovirus and it is considered to be among the most important rice pathogens in sub-saharan africa  <cit> . the original tree of rymv, published in  <cit> , is shown in figure 6a and has fewer taxa than trees in the previous examples. for this reason, rymv provided a convenient system to examine the influence of the radius parameter in the fitness evaluation, where we previously showed  <cit>  that r =  <dig> offers an acceptable balance between computational intensity and accuracy. in the rymv case, where the tree had  <dig> terminal taxa, r =  <dig> was too large to discriminate differences among samples, such that we examined r ∈ { <dig>  4}. the best relative fitness improvement was obtained by r =  <dig>  since this value was able to discriminate well among distances in the process of fitness evaluation.

the tree modified using geographic distance  shows two clusters of geographic locations: samples from west and east africa . within clusters, the taxon order reflects the geographic relationship on the map. in addition, samples from central africa  were moved farther away from tanzanian samples  than from samples in western african countries. this result may be explained by the fact that the algorithm would be expected to optimize taxon order within clusters more efficiently than between clusters. we note that manually modifying the tree in order to improve geographic order often returned a worse fitness compared to the artificially evolved tree .

CONCLUSIONS
in our previous studies  <cit>  we introduced an innovative method to give a meaning to the order of taxa on a phylogenetic tree using an evolutionary algorithm. here we test the algorithm using different viral systems, trees and distances with the aim of improving the graphic representation of the tree without modifying its topology. qualitatively, the most improved tree was obtained when we evolved the vsv phylogenetic tree using a matrix of geographic distances, since the order of taxa on the improved tree closely mirrored geography. in the case of wnv, our algorithm generated trees that support previous studies of genetic diversity and spatial correlation. in the case of rymv, we identified a possible limitation of the algorithm: the improvement in graphical representation may be less pronounced when the tree contains small numbers of taxa. for this reason we evaluated the role of r, highlighting that, in case of small sample sets, small radii may be sufficient to achieve marked improvements. the strength of this method is that a phylogeny can be inferred using any available method for building trees, using distance and algorithm, from a simple approach  to a more accurate bayesian inference. the user can choose the appropriate method, using the genetic information contained in the considered sequences and, in the next step, add a second matrix, containing for example geographic information. the tests of the algorithm presented here showed promise. very good results were achieved when the geographic distribution of the samples was linear, as in the vsv and rymv cases. when the geographic distribution was more complex, as in the case of wnv, the grouping of taxa collected from the same site is hard to see. in this case, geographic information alone is not enough, but much greater improvement is gained when both genetic and geographic information are incorporated, as shown in figure 3d. in conclusion, the algorithm tested in this paper offers a customizable method that can help biologists to better represent results of their phylogenetic analyses, improving the interpretation of phylogenetic trees and making them more understandable.

