BACKGROUND
precise estimation of genetic relatedness between isolates of a microorganism is important for determination of phylogenetic relationships, which has important applications in studies of disease transmission  <cit> . the definitive standard for assessing genetic relatedness among organisms is the complete genome sequence of nucleotide bases  <cit> . however, nucleotide sequencing is expensive and time-consuming, thus, generally it is impractical for use in most investigations, particularly when a large number of samples is analyzed.

currently, one genotyping technique used frequently as an alternative to complete genome sequencing is restriction fragment analysis , in which restriction endonuclease enzymes cleave the genome at specific sites, producing dna fragments that are then separated by size using electrophoresis  <cit> . the percentage of fragments matching in size has been commonly used as an index to represent the genetic similarity between samples  <cit> . the accuracy of rfa in determining the true genetic relationships can be influenced by several factors, including the number of restriction enzymes used, the specific enzymes selected for dna digestion, and laboratory conditions  <cit> .

another common alternative to complete genome sequencing is partial genome sequencing, i.e., the nucleotide sequencing of a particular gene or segment of the genome  <cit> . the gene or genome segment is often targeted by polymerase chain reaction . selection of an appropriate gene or region for analysis is critical for accurately representing phylogenetic relationships  <cit> .

in a comparison of rfa and partial genome sequencing with respect to their similarity in interpreting a disease outbreak caused by pseudorbabies virus in a swine producing region in illinois, usa, both genotyping methods generated similar conclusions about patterns of spread of the virus  <cit> . however, the accuracy of each genotyping method in representing the complete genome was not evaluated.

restriction fragment analysis detects genetic variation by surveying specific endonuclease restriction sites over the entire genome; in contrast, partial genome sequencing detects genetic variation by comparing nucleotide bases from a specific region of the genome. each method detects a different dimension of genetic variation, and each can detect only a proportion of the genetic variation present in the entire genome. therefore, it is important to determine which method, using partial information, provides a more accurate estimation of genetic relatedness.

the primary purpose of this study was to compare both restriction fragment analysis and partial genome sequencing to complete genome sequencing, with regard to their agreement in estimating genetic relationships and in reconstructing phylogenies under the ideal conditions of absence of laboratory error. computer simulation of the genotyping analysis was conducted, using completely sequenced papillomavirus isolates obtained from genbank.

RESULTS
discussion
sequencing entire genomes is impractical in most investigations of genetic relationships. the computer simulation conducted here determined that compared to restriction fragment analysis, partial genome sequencing had higher agreement with complete genome sequencing in estimating genetic relatedness and greater similarity in the topology of the dendrograms of phylogenetic relationships derived from these estimates. these results using papallomavirus sequences with a genome length averaging less than  <dig> kb, indicate that for microorganisms with small genomes, partial genome sequencing targeting genes comprising approximately 20–25% of the total genome length can provide a very good estimate of genetic relatedness. the topological structure of phylogenetic trees was also stable for partial genome sequencing, particularly for the most closely related samples. the degree to which these results generalize to larger genomes is unknown, in part because microorganisms with large genomes are rarely, if ever, sequenced in their entirety. there are also other considerations in selecting partial genome sequencing as a genotyping method, such as presence of the gene in all isolates, and sufficient variability to differentiate isolates  <cit> . in addition, whether genetic variation is random or due to natural selection needs to be taken into account  <cit> , because in the latter case genetic dissimilarity may not reflect time since divergence, thus making it more difficult to infer evolutionary relationships, which are important for making inferences about pathogen transmission. these limitations should be considered as well for restriction fragment analysis.

one might expect that increasing genome size would diminish the advantage of partial genome sequencing compared to restriction fragment analysis. as total genome size increases, the number of restriction sites cut by restriction enzymes is expected to increase, providing more fragments and more genetic information for estimating genetic relatedness at no increased cost. this also needs to be taken into account in the selection of a genotyping method. however, it has been argued that if a gene is selectively neutral , it is only the length of the gene sequenced, not the ratio of sequenced gene length to genome size, that is important for determining the degree of divergence from a common ancestor  <cit> . to the extent that these conditions are satisfied, the results of this study indicate that specific gene sequencing is likely to provide a better estimate of genetic relationships than restriction fragment analysis of the complete genome under a wider variety of genome sizes.

the general conditions under which partial genome sequencing is more accurate than restriction fragment analysis in representing true genetic relatedness have not been addressed in the analysis conducted here. however, another study from our laboratory  <cit> , using simulated genomes of various size with different nucleotide substitution rates, and varying degrees of genetic diversity among samples, found that only under conditions of both short partial genome sequence length and low rates of nucleotide substitution did rfa provide a more accurate topological reconstruction of phylogenetic relationships than did partial genome sequencing; the degree of genetic diversity among samples did not affect the advantage partial genome sequencing had in accurately depicting phylogenetic relationships. thus, whether one is investigating the genetic relatedness among samples collected from a single disease outbreak or a diverse collection of samples from different times and geographic regions, under most conditions partial genome sequencing will represent genetic relationships more accurately than does rfa. genotyping using partial genome sequencing and phylogenetic reconstruction  have become standard for several virus species, including not only papillomavirus  <cit> , but also human immunodeficiency virus  <cit> , classical swine fever virus  <cit> , porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus  <cit> , and foot-and-mouth disease virus  <cit> .

the simulated genotyping conducted here assumed no error of measurement. the sources of error in restriction fragment analysis are well known  <cit> . fragments of similar size in the same lane of a gel may be indistinguishable, thus appearing to form one fragment. fragments of small size may be undetectable. the relationship between migration distances and fragment size may be affected by variation in gel density both between and within gels. there are also differences in measurement error between laboratories  <cit> . these deficiencies are accounted for by use of marker dna fragments of known nucleotide base pair length to assist in estimating cleaved dna fragment sizes; however, acknowledgement of remaining error of measurement of the size of detectable fragments is inherent in the application of a tolerance range for considering fragments of similar but different sizes as a "match"  <cit> . laboratory error is also inherent in partial genome sequencing  <cit> . with the commonly used polymerase chain reaction  methodology for detection and amplification of genes for sequencing, there can be error in primer development because primer sites may not be specific to the gene sequences or too specific to demarcate all occurrences of the gene. heterogeneity of amplified dna, due to replication error, recombination, low primer specificity, or impurity of the template can result in a failure to produce consistent sequencing results. in the comparison of the degree of similarity of dna sequences between samples, alignment of sequences with unequal sequence lengths due to deletion or duplication, or the management of inverted sequences presents additional challenges for estimating genetic similarity and phylogenetic affinity  <cit> . the relative magnitude of sources of error in rfa versus partial genome sequencing is unknown and, thus, the conclusions presented here are those based upon the assumption of the absence or minimization of laboratory error.

in practical terms, laboratory error and cost need to be taken into account in the selection of a genotyping method. however, when the impact of these factors is minimized, the computer simulation analysis conducted here indicates that partial genome sequence becomes the preferred alternative for representing genetic relationships.

CONCLUSIONS
for small genomes, partial genome sequencing of target genes comprising 20–25% of the total genome provides a more accurate estimate of genetic relatedness and more accurate representation of evolutionary and transmission histories than does restriction fragment analysis and thus is indicated to be the preferred genotyping method for phylogenetic reconstruction under these conditions. the degree to which these results are generalizable to larger genomes and conditions of laboratory error remains to be determined.

