BACKGROUND
the lustre or glossiness of soybean seeds is a variable trait that is controlled by genetic and environmental factors  <cit> . the amount of endocarp adhering to the seed surface is the primary determinant of lustre  <cit> . the presence of adhering endocarp tissues also lightens the colour of the seed and produces soybeans with a paler or more whitish appearance. this is equally true for pigmented soybeans as for yellow or buff coloured soybeans that lack seed coat pigmentation. a dense or contiguous covering of the honeycomb-like endocarp tissue produces a bloom phenotype, whereas a fragmented or patchy covering of endocarp produces a dull phenotype  <cit> . shiny phenotypes occur when seeds are mostly free of endocarp deposits on the surface. in a cross between dull- and shiny-seeded phenotypes, dull-seededness segregates as a single dominant gene b  <cit> . additional genes that influence seed lustre have also been proposed  <cit> .

it is not known what molecules control the adherence of endocarp to the seed surface, but one likely factor is an  <dig> kda cysteine-rich protein named hps . past studies indicate that hps is synthesized in the endocarp and deposited on the seed surface during development  <cit> . the presence of hps on the seed surface is a trait that cosegregates with the seed lustre determinant b  <cit> . these facts along with other evidence suggest that hps can mediate the attachment of endocarp tissues to the seed surface and thereby affect the seed lustre.

the hps protein has also been named gly m  <dig> because it is the major allergen that causes asthma in persons allergic to soybean dust  <cit> . epidemic outbreaks of asthma caused by the presence of soybean dust have been documented in many cities  <cit> . the occurrence of relatively large amounts of hps on the seed surface results in the release of aerosols containing the protein during seed handling. airborne hps can be detected in ports where soybeans are transferred and even in regions where soybeans are grown, during the harvesting season  <cit> .

here we demonstrate that genetic polymorphisms that affect the copy number of the hps gene are prevalent in soybean germplasm. we show that hps genes are clustered in a tandem array at a single genetic locus, and we suggest that a process of gene amplification has led to this structural arrangement. finally, we propose that changes in hps gene copy number modulate hps protein expression levels and seed lustre phenotypes.

RESULTS
the hps gene structure is polymorphic among soybean cultivars
to compare hps gene structure among soybean cultivars or lines that differ in seed lustre, a dna blot analysis was performed using an hps cdna probe. figure  <dig> shows results from a representative analysis of ten different soybean lines, after digestion of genomic dna with the restriction enzyme bgl ii. polymorphisms were noted in both the number and intensity of hybridizing genomic dna fragments among the different cultivars and lines. the most intensely hybridizing fragment was estimated to be  <dig>  kb in size. this fragment could produce strong hybridization signals even after short exposure times, indicating that multiple copies may be present in genomes of selected soybean cultivars or lines. the presence of this hybridizing fragment was associated with seed phenotypes that were dull or intermediate in lustre. this fragment was absent from shiny seeded phenotypes. two different soybean lines with a bloom phenotype showed contrasting patterns, with the hybridizing band present in clark b <dig> but absent from sooty.

this analysis was extended to compare soybean dna samples to genomic dna samples isolated from six related legume species, including five species from the same genus glycine. the results shown in figure  <dig> indicate that hybridizing bands to hps cdna could only be detected in two species, soybean  and wild soybean , at least under the high-stringency hybridization conditions that were performed here. the genomic dna samples from the five different soybean lines displayed greater differences in their hybridization patterns and signal intensities than did the four glycine soja lines. the strong hybridization signals present in glycine max cv harosoy  <dig> were not detected in any of the glycine soja lines, although the patterns of hybridization were similar. the hybridization results shown in figure  <dig> also demonstrate that copies of the hps gene are present in shiny seeded phenotypes.

multiple copies of hps are present at a single genetic locus
the restriction enzyme fragments producing strong hybridization signals in the dna blot analyses suggested that hps may occur as a multi-copy gene in certain glycine max lines, such as cv harosoy  <dig>  to estimate the number of copies of the hps gene present in soybean cv harosoy  <dig>  hybridization signals were compared between samples of soybean genomic dna and a plasmid standard carrying a single copy of the hps gene. results from this 'reconstruction hybridization' are shown in figure  <dig>  measurement of the band intensities by image analysis results in a calculated value of  <dig> ±  <dig> copies of hps per haploid genome, for the  <dig>  kb bgl ii fragment, assuming a haploid genome size of  <dig>  pg dna  <cit> . this is a minimum value, since additional bands hybridizing to the hps cdna were also present in the bgl ii digestions of cv. harosoy  <dig> 

to determine whether differences in hps gene copy number among soybean lines could be detected by other methods, we performed a comparative genomic dna hybridization to cdna microarrays. this method has been shown to be effective to distinguish changes in gene copy number in other species  <cit> . a total of six hybridizations were performed in three experiments, using a cdna microarray of  <dig> soybean cdnas. two experiments compared genomic dna from ox <dig> to mukden, and one experiment compared genomic dna from harosoy  <dig> to sooty, as shown in table  <dig>  the results from experiment ii are shown in more detail in figure  <dig> 

the absolute hybridization values, and therefore the signal-to-noise ratios, were low compared to microarrays that were conventionally probed with cdna derived from mrna samples. nonetheless, the normalized ratios for the ~ <dig>  genes on the array were tightly clustered around unity , as expected, but the cdna on the array encoding hps displayed exceptional hybridization ratios in these experiments in every case. thus, in each experiment that compared hybridization ratios of ox281:mukden or of harosoy 63:sooty, the cdna encoding hps always displayed a hybridization ratio > <dig>  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . these results indicate that the hps copy number differences detected by conventional southern analysis are also detectable by comparative genomic dna hybridization to cdna microarrays.

to determine whether the hps copy number polymorphisms cosegregate with seed lustre phenotype, seed surface protein , and associated genetic markers  <cit> , we analyzed  <dig> f <dig> families from a cross of ox <dig> and mukden. a total of  <dig> of the f <dig> families were shiny in phenotype, without surface hps, and displayed a non-repetitive, low-copy hps restriction fragment length polymorphism  pattern. the remaining  <dig> f <dig> families were dull in phenotype, with abundant surface hps, and displayed a repetitive, high-copy hps rflp pattern. a representative hybridization is shown in figure  <dig>  as expected, results from this analysis indicate that hps copy number polymorphisms absolutely cosegregate with seed lustre phenotype. this analysis additionally shows that the multiple copies of hps that are present in ox <dig> segregate as a genetic unit, indicating that the copies occur together at a single locus.

analysis of genomic clones indicate a tandem array of hps genes
to isolate the hps gene, soybean genomic libraries were screened with an hps cdna probe. additional probes, derived from the sequences of the genomic clones identified from the first round of screening, were used to isolate overlapping or flanking clones. in all, more than  <dig> genomic clones were isolated. the size, the library source, and the restriction enzyme digestion patterns of the various clones were compared. using these criteria, the genomic clones could be classified into six different types. a representative of each type was chosen for complete sequencing, as shown in table  <dig>  analysis of the dna sequences revealed all of the clones shared regions of high sequence identity, and that three of the clones could be aligned to produce a repetitive motif, as shown in figure  <dig>  this hypothetical or model hps repetitive motif was tested by dna blot hybridization using three distinct probes derived from different regions of the repetitive unit. the results show that for each probe the most intensely hybridizing dna fragments, representing most of the copies of the repetitive unit, could be accounted for by reconstructing the restriction enzyme fragments from the aligned genomic clones. a single hps gene is present in each unit. a putative matrix attachment region was predicted to occur  <dig> kb upstream from the hps open reading frame but no other genes were detected. thus, most copies of hps occur in a reiterated array of  <dig>  kb units.

other copies of hps are also present in the soybean genome, as evidenced by the additional hybridizing bands on the dna blots and by the genomic clones that do not exactly match the repetitive pattern. there are closely related genes, such as hps <dig> , that may correspond to paralogue pair-mates that arose from whole genome duplication, since soybean is considered an ancient tetraploid. additional hps genomic copies may also represent flanking regions or sequence variations occurring within the tandem array. for example, clones hps <dig>   and hps <dig>   share  <dig> % sequence identity over their  <dig> kb length, but hps <dig>  has a single hind iii site whereas hps <dig>  possess two hind iii sites. these two copies of hps will produce different patterns of hybridization after hind iii digestion. although both patterns appear to be visible in the dna blots, the smaller sized fragments produce much stronger signals, indicating that clone hps <dig>  with two hind iii sites better represents the majority of copies of hps within the genome.

discussion
past studies have pointed to a role for hps in the control of seed lustre in soybean cultivars  <cit> . now, we have conducted an extensive study of hps copy number polymorphisms in a range of soybean lines and related legume species. the structure of the hps gene was investigated by isolating and characterizing clones from the genomic region. the results have led us to propose a model to account for variation of seed lustre controlled by hps.

from the analysis of dna blot hybridizations of various soybean cultivars, lines, and related species, we can conclude that hps copy number polymorphisms are common in soybean. the hps locus appears to have evolved and diversified in soybean  in comparison to its wild ancestor . hybridization patterns show that the hps sequence itself is also specific to these two species, a result that is supported by searches of dna and protein sequences in genbank . hps shows similarities to so-called bi-modular proteins containing plant lipid transfer protein  domains  <cit> . the plant ltps constitute a large group of related proteins derived from the prolamin super-family. our results show that hps has diverged substantially from other ltps and that there are no close counterparts in other species.

all glycine max lines that were tested contained multiple copies of the hps gene, but there were large differences in the number of copies of hps depending on the cultivar examined. we observed a good correlation between the apparent hps copy number, as judged by hybridization intensity on dna blots, and seed lustre. this is especially true for dull- and shiny-seeded phenotypes and for intermediates between these types. this relationship was not apparent for bloom phenotypes, an exception that has been noted in past studies that correlated the occurrence of hps protein to seed lustre  <cit> . two bloom phenotypes analyzed, clark b <dig> and sooty, produced contrasting patterns of hps hybridization. this can be accounted for by tracing the pedigree of clark b <dig>  the cv clark is a dull phenotype with a high-copy hps rflp pattern, whereas sooty is a bloom phenotype with a low-copy rflp pattern. clark b <dig> is an isoline derived from a cross between clark and sooty, with clark as the recurrent parent. this indicates that the bloom phenotype  is controlled by genes that are independent of b and hps.

multiple copies of hps could be detected in a number of different soybean cultivars and lines by conventional dna blot hybridizations. multiple genomic copies of hps were also detected by real-time pcr analysis . copy number estimates from real-time pcr analysis were more variable and always exceeded estimates determined by conventional hybridizations. each type of analysis, real-time pcr and conventional hybridization, were performed many times and, overall, we have greater confidence in the results from conventional hybridizations. by this method, the soybean cv harosoy  <dig> was estimated to posses  <dig> ±  <dig> copies of hps per haploid genome.

variation in hps copy number among different soybean lines could also be detected by comparative genomic hybridization  to cdna microarrays. although substantial differences in hps copy number were detected by cgh, quantifying the number of hps copies in a particular genome was not possible since hybridization intensities were not calibrated. nonetheless, we have shown that cgh may be used to search for copy number polymorphisms in plant genomes. it is a potentially powerful application of microarrays that may be under-appreciated. for example, genomic dna from plant lines that differ in a particular trait of interest could be screened using microarrays to identify genes that show differences in copy number. these genes could be tested as candidates for the trait of interest.

from our analysis of hps gene structure, at least three pieces of evidence suggest that most of the hps copies share a high degree of sequence identity. first, the hybridization patterns produced upon digestion of genomic dna with a variety of enzymes indicate that restriction enzyme sites have been conserved in most of the gene copies. secondly, analysis of hps genomic clones indicates that independent clones with nearly identical sequences correspond to separate copies of hps genes. finally, expressed sequence tags encoding hps transcripts do not show a high degree of sequence polymorphism  <cit> . thus, it appears that most copies of the hps gene have not diverged in sequence. this indicates that duplication and expansion of this gene cluster has been a recent event, or that sequence identity is maintained by frequent recombination events occurring within the cluster. naturally, it would be desirable to clone a contiguous region of genomic dna encompassing the entire tandem array of hps genes. we attempted to do this by screening bacterial artificial chromosome  libraries but were unsuccessful. it is known that tandem arrays may be intractable to cloning and propagation  <cit> , perhaps explaining this result.

in the cross between soybean lines ox <dig> and mukden, hps copy number polymorphisms cosegregated with seed lustre phenotype b and associated genetic markers. this result was expected because past studies have shown that b cosegregates with the presence of hps protein on the seed surface, and with a dna marker derived from the hps cdna sequence  <cit> . the multiple copies of hps that are present in ox <dig> segregate in a mendelian fashion, indicating that they occur at a single genetic locus and are not distributed throughout the genome. the analysis and assembly of hps genomic clones substantiates the inheritance results, since the clones could be aligned to produce a reiterated array of hps genes. all of the evidence therefore points to a tandem array of hps genes occurring in a structural configuration arising from gene amplification.

gene amplification occurs when multiple identical copies of a dna sequence are duplicated within the genome. it may be an adaptive mechanism that results from selective pressure on the genome, as illustrated by drug, insecticide, or herbicide resistance observed in cell lines or in populations  <cit> . amplification typically leads to a tandem array of reiterated units, such as that observed for genes encoding rrna, snrna, and histones  <cit> . unlike genes that undergo duplication and divergence  <cit> , individual units within a tandem array are under constraint and maintain a high-degree of sequence identity. structural genes occurring in tandem arrays that are stable over generations, such as rdnas, are considered a mechanism to accommodate cellular demand for large amounts of identical gene product. genetic components embedded within tandem arrays that act to stabilize or promote gene amplification have been proposed, such as at-rich tracts, autonomously replicating sequence  elements, and matrix attachment regions   <cit> . these cis-acting elements have even been used to modulate gene copy number and expression levels of heterologous genes in transformed cells  <cit> .

thus, the features of the hps locus appear to be consistent with characteristics associated with other amplified genes, from plants and animals. plant genomes are known to have many large gene families and duplicated genes occurring in tandem arrays are also fairly common  <cit> . one of the largest tandem arrays characterized in plants corresponds to a gene cluster of  <dig> copies encoding alpha zeins in zea mays  <cit> , but there are few other examples of extensive arrays of nearly identical structural genes at one locus. the hps locus is also exceptional because of the allelic variation in copy number of this gene cluster among different soybean cultivars and lines. although it is not clear whether all copies of hps are functionally expressed and transcribed, previous work has shown that transcripts encoding hps are far more abundant in the endocarp of soybean lines with many genomic copies of hps than in lines with few copies  <cit> .

the results from this study together with past work  <cit>  can be integrated into a model, whereby hps genomic copy number operates as a genetic rheostat to control transcriptional and translational flux and the resulting quantity of hps protein synthesized by the endocarp. variation in hps protein levels expressed in the endocarp could then account for the variable pattern of attachment of this tissue to the seed surface, and the resulting seed lustre phenotypes. alternative explanations cannot be excluded, but the evidence so far tends to favour this gene amplification-based hypothesis. what kind of selection pressure could cause this to occur? the size, shape, colour, and general appearance of the seed are traits that are under intense selective pressure for crop plants, especially so for legumes. even today certain markets may favour dull- or shiny-seeded soybeans for particular uses, so it is not unreasonable to suppose that selection for various lustre phenotypes has accompanied the development and expansion of this crop since its domestication some  <dig>  years ago  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates that copy number polymorphisms of the hps gene are common in soybean cultivars and lines. in some cultivars, in excess of  <dig> ±  <dig> copies of hps occur in a tandem array at a single locus. from these results, together with past studies on the occurrence and inheritance of the hps protein, we developed a model to account for variation in seed lustre controlled by the b locus. the model proposes that hps copy number changes provide a mechanism to modulate hps protein levels expressed in the pod endocarp. variable hps expression in the endocarp likewise generates variation in the quantity and pattern of attachment of the endocarp to the seed surface, thereby affecting the seed lustre. experiments in the future can be designed to test this model, and to investigate additional genetic loci controlling seed lustre that are independent of b and hps.

