BACKGROUND
secondary metabolites , also known as natural products, are a structurally diverse group of compounds with varied and important biological activities. fungi are prolific producers of these compounds, which can be classified as polyketide, non-ribosomal peptide, terpene or molecules of mixed heritage . well-known fungal secondary metabolites include the antibiotic penicillin from penicillium chrysogenum, the immunosuppressant cyclosporine from tolypocladium inflatum, and the cholesterol-lowering agent mevinolin  from a. terreus. with over  <dig> million predicted fungal species  <cit>  and dozens of secondary metabolite  clusters per species  <cit> , the number of yet undiscovered sms is quite large. indeed, recognition of sm clusters and other valuable attributes within the fungal genome led to the doe joint genome institute’s  <dig> fungal genomes large-scale sequencing project  <cit> .

despite the abundance of available fungal genetic sequence data highlighting an enormous abundance of sm clusters, many remain ‘silent’ in laboratory growth conditions and require genetic manipulation to be expressed. several approaches have been taken to ‘turn-on’ sm clusters with some success. these include over-expressing cluster specific transcription factors or enzymatic genes, deleting or over-expressing chromatin modifying genes, over-expressing trans-acting activators or deleting trans-acting inhibitors  <cit> . these molecular machinations, however, only work for genetically amenable fungi of which there are remarkably few. this latter point has led to the use of sm workhorses, most commonly members of the genus aspergillus or yeast, for expression of heterologous sm genes  <cit> .

expression of a heterologous cluster in fungi is one approach to identify the encoded sm and the biosynthetic genes responsible for its biosynthesis, but this is not a trivial undertaking. recently, this approach has been reported for synthesis of the a. terreus-encoded compounds geodin and asperfuranone using a. nidulans as the heterologous host  <cit> . a. nidulans was also used to heterologously express a dermatophyte-derived gene cluster responsible for the synthesis of neosartoricin b  <cit> . these studies utilized yeast recombinatory plasmids, multiple fusion pcrs and numerous transformation events to stitch together and insert individual genes to create a single full length cluster in a. nidulans. these technologies require considerable effort and time to express just one heterologous cluster and have been limited in the size of the inserted cluster.

bacterial artificial chromosomes  have been widely used for genomic dna sequencing, positional cloning, and mapping in prokaryotes and eukaryotes including filamentous fungi  <cit> . although large-insert dna systems have also been applied for heterologous expression of microbial natural product biosynthetic pathways and metagenomic studies, there has been limited success reported due to technological challenges  <cit> . the challenges include but are not limited to: 1) dna cloning bias; 2) small dna insert size; 3) lack of advanced heterologous expression hosts and 4) insufficient high-resolution chemical and data analysis pipelines. here we address all of these limitations through creation of a novel aspergillus/e. coli shuttle fungal artificial chromosome  expression vector by utilizing unbiased random shear bac technology  <cit>  coupled with an autonomous fungal replicating element ama <dig>  <cit> , to expression of facs in a. nidulans, to characterization of fac sms using state-of-art liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry  and a chemoinformatic analysis pipeline. we present the heretofore undiscovered a. terreus astechrome biosynthetic machineries as proof-of-concept of our fac sm methodology.

RESULTS
construction of unbiased shuttle bac library of a. terreus dna and heterologous expression of sm clusters as facs in a. nidulans
to develop a fungal artificial chromosome  system, we used unbiased random shear bacs as the basis for our technology as bac inserts can reach up to 300 kb, and random shear bac cloning generates even coverage of a fungal genome for the selection of all sm clusters within the genome  <cit> . the lucigen psmart bac vector was modified to operate as a shuttle vector between e. coli and a. nidulans. the ama <dig> dna fragment, previously identified as an autonomously replicating dna fragment from a. nidulans  <cit> , was incorporated into psmart bac to create psmart-bac pyrgama1- <dig>  or shuttle bac vectors, and tested for autonomous replication in a. nidulans as facs .

a. terreus was selected for shuttle bac dna library construction because it has a fully sequenced genome containing  <dig> annotated sm gene clusters  <cit> . high molecular weight genomic dna was prepared from a. terreus and construction of the unbiased bac library resulted in ~20x genome coverage of the a. terreus genome, or a total of  <dig>  bac clones with an average insert size of 100 kb . the bac library was arrayed into 384-well plates and both ends of  <dig>  bac clones were sequenced. sequence alignment of these end sequences with the a. terreus reference genome was used to identify sm-bac clones or candidate facs containing all  <dig> sm gene clusters . fifteen facs  were selected for heterologous expression and analysis through transformation into a. nidulans . all were successfully transformed into a. nidulans. to validate the shuttle function of facs, we also extracted five of the  <dig> fac dnas from transformed a. nidulans strains and successfully transformed fac dna back into e. coli . this was the first demonstration of the capability of ama <dig> in supporting autonomous replication  of large dna constructs greater than 100 kb in a. nidulans.table  <dig> 
fifteen facs chosen to transform into
a. nidulans



fac name
at cluster*
pcr
tx/μg fac**
fungal strain
the a. terreus clusters they contain are indicated as well as pcr results denoting if all or part of the cluster was confirmed in the fac clone.

*at = a. terreus, **tx = transformants.



lc-hrms linked sm library screening
upon confirmation that a. nidulans faithfully replicated fac dna, a. nidulans fac 6j <dig> strain was selected for initial proof-of-concept experiments, as it contained a cluster highly homologous to the recently characterized hexadehydroastechrome cluster in a. fumigatus  <cit> . fac 6j <dig> contains seven out of the eight genes found in the corresponding a. fumigatus cluster . the gene, hasg, not present in the a. terreus cluster, encodes for an fad binding protein responsible for converting a prenyl to a methylbutadienyl side chain to produce hexadehydroastechrome from astechrome. fac 6j <dig> metabolites were identified by analyzing organic extracts of the a. nidulans fac 6j <dig> transformant and control a. nidulans using lc-hrms. following data acquisition, sieve software was used for component detection and relative quantitation. when comparing fac 6j <dig> extracts to control sample extracts , a compound that was present only in the fac 6j <dig> extract  was identified as terezine d by both accurate mass  and tandem mass spectrometry  . terezine d is a stable intermediate of astechrome biosynthesis  <cit> .figure  <dig> fac transformants contain intact gene clusters confirmed by pcr. panel a: astechrome gene cluster  is present in a. nidulans transformed with fac as examined by pcr. the seven astechrome genes  are not present in wild type a. nidulans but are in a. terreus and all a. nidulans 6j <dig> transformants. panel b: putative gene cluster  <dig>  is present in a. nidulans transformed with fac 9d <dig> as examined by pcr. the seven cluster genes  are not present in wild type a. nidulans but are in a. terreus and a. nidulans 9d <dig> transformant. all of primers are listed in additional file 2: table s <dig>  panel c shows both astechrome gene cluster  on the top and the cluster  <dig>  on the bottom.
identification of astechrome biosynthetic precursor, terezine d.
 a compound was identified in fac 6j <dig> cell extracts with exact mass matching the theoretical exact mass of terezine d, the predicted product of fac 6j <dig>   selected ion chromatograms of lysates from cells containing fac 6j <dig> and all other analyzed facs show that the compound of interest is unique to the fac 6j <dig> expressing strain.  analysis of ms <dig> fragmentation data for the identified compound lead to identification of predicted fragments of terezine d, confirming the compound’s identity.



discussion
there is an urgent need for new therapeutic agents to combat rapidly-emerging multiple drug resistant  and pan-resistant pathogens such as methicillin resistant staphylococcus aureus  and acinetobacter baumanii. filamentous fungi are prolific producers of sms and have historically been a rich source of lead compounds for the pharmaceutical industry. genomic sequencing data confirms that fungi contain a far greater biosynthetic capacity than has been realized to date, and thus fungi should continue to be viewed as important reservoirs for novel bioactive compounds  <cit> . in fact the number of sm cluster sequences available for characterization far outstrips our current ability to characterize each cluster. to address this post-genomic sm characterization gridlock, in this report we have demonstrated a new technology that generates a whole genome sm fac library for expression in suitable host systems and characterization in high-throughput chemical analysis pipelines. an overview of this technology is presented in figure  <dig> figure  <dig> a diagram shows the workflow of cryptic sm production. high molecular weight genomic dna from a. terreus was mechanically sheared and cloned into shuttle amai-bac  clones, sm facs were selected and transformed into a. nidulans, transformants screened for metabolites followed by compound identification and structure elucidation.



to date, there does not exist an efficient heterologous expression system to cover entire sm clusters  in a single cloning step. bac vectors have been widely used for cloning large dna fragments but there is no successful report of heterologous expression of fungal sm clusters. a previous attempt to introduce up to  <dig> kb of fungal dna into fusarium oxysporum and a. awamori using an agrobacterium tumefaciens transformation system yielded few transformants with large dna inserts and furthermore, no attempts to examine stability of heterologous dna, let alone expression, were made  <cit> . in order to build high quality shuttle bac libraries for entire sm gene clusters, the cloning methods and vectors used are of extreme importance. the bias introduced by partial restriction digestion of genomic dna results in various regions being highly under-represented, over-represented, or missing for all eukaryotic multi-cellular genomes studied, including arabidopsis, drosophila, rice, mouse, fungi and humans. the bias is most evident in certain regions of genomic dna that contain highly repetitive sequences, such as centromeres and telomeres  <cit> . as a result, numerous clone gaps can be impossible to close, even with multiple biased partial digestion libraries and up to  <dig> x coverage, thus dramatically increasing finishing costs. fungi are known to contain many sm clusters in telomeric and subtelomeric regions of the genome  <cit>  and from our bac end sequencing and reference genome alignment, we found that at least  <dig> of  <dig> sm clusters of a. terreus are located near telomeres and some telomeric sequences are still not complete in the whole genome sequence database . we successfully overcame this potential bias in conventional bac library construction through the introduction of randomly sheared genomic dna into the fac vectors.

to improve transformation yield and subsequent expression level of the gene clusters in a heterologous system, the bac vector was modified into a fac vector by inserting a fungal self-replicating element. the ama <dig> sequence from a. nidulans is known to increase transformation efficiency up to 2000-fold compared to a traditional integrating plasmid . the ama <dig> sequence was also shown to be fully or partially functional in other filamentous fungal systems including a. fumigatus resulting in 10– <dig> copy numbers per cell and increased gene expression  <cit> . by introducing the ama <dig> element in a bac vector, thus creating the fac system, we were able to introduce and express at least 150 kb heterologous dna in a. nidulans. strictly the concept of bac itself is truly an f-plasmid, not a ‘bacterial artificial chromosome’, fac can be justified similarly as bac with the capability of shuttling and maintaining large dna and potential wide applications. in addition, fac, a shuttle bac vector, is capable of cloning >300 kb insert dna in e. coli  <cit> ; it will be interesting to see the size limitation and stability of more facs in a. nidulans as compared with the yeast artificial chromosome  in saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> .

the entire a. terreus sm genome was captured in our fac library with  <dig> sm clusters . the availability of such a library is powerful, allowing us to swiftly screen the host recipient for individual sm activities. the host recipient is critical for transformation and expression properties and we found the genetic model a. nidulans to be an efficient host . as a first assessment of fac transformation,  <dig> facs were successfully expressed in a. nidulans  and, equally important, successfully transferred back to e. coli .

a fac based on an a. terreus sm cluster similar to a known a. fumigatus hexadehydroastechrome cluster  <cit> , was chosen for hrms screening and characterization. a. nidulans fac 6j <dig> yielded a unique compound, the stable astechrome intermediate terezine d . this was consistent with the predicted metabolite production for this gene cluster . currently our focus is on elucidating novel chemistries of two other facs which produce metabolites with masses that are not consistent with any known fungal metabolites , as well as measuring mrna levels in strains expressing facs of interest  to confirm that all encoded genes are being correctly expressed.

we anticipate that many alternative and expanded studies will follow on from this work. for instance, in addition to the fac end sequencing and reference genome alignment presented in this work, there are optional and potentially more economic genomic tools to identify sm containing facs, such as pooling facs for either pcr or southern hybridization-based library screening of sm backbone genes. alternatively, extracts of fac transformants could be first screened for desired activity and then only those showing activity be subjected to fac sequencing. these alternative approaches could be useful for those genomes which are poorly- or not sequenced. we also envision an expansion of fac libraries to include not only aspergillus spp. but also other genera. the successful expression of neurospora crassa and lichen promoters in a. nidulans may suggest that a fair number of ascomycetes can be used in our system, because the lichen promoters are most likely from the fungus in the symbiotic relationship, which is typically an ascomycete  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the results that we have described represent significant advancements to the field of translating whole genome sequence information into functional genomics and genome biology. we report the first fac system, which is capable to shuttle and stably maintain large  dna fragments in both e. coli and the filamentous fungus. our concept of a large fac equals one intact sm gene cluster including all genes and regulatory elements within a large gene cluster and/or pathway for heterologous expression provides a route for the discovery of natural products potentially missed by traditional methods. further analysis of the entire set of the intact sm gene clusters of a. terreus will deepen our understanding of the dynamics of sm gene pathways and the fungal natural products.

in summary, we have successfully created a breakthrough fac technology that can help address the challenge of characterizing the accruing fungal sm genome data. this technology allows for the creation of a sm cluster library of a single fungal species that can be shuttled and expressed in a. nidulans and likely other appropriate fungal hosts in one transformation step. this will allow the detailed genetic analysis and manipulation of fungal gene clusters from a wide range of species in the future. additionally, we have validated an analytical and statistical pipeline to confidently identify the compound encoded by the sm cluster-containing facs, resulting in the confident discovery and identification of the astechrome precursor terezine d and discovery of the astechrome biosynthetic machinery in a. terreus. this methodology enables the unbiased library construction of entire genomes of not only sequenced fungi but also potentially for unsequenced, and even unculturable fungi when sufficient material can be collected for dna preparation. when combined with the high sensitivity of hrms-based metabolomics, this technology has the potential to identify intact gene clusters and their associated sms in fungi and other complex microbial metagenomes on a scale not previously considered feasible.

