BACKGROUND
in microbial communities, the perception of conspecific  neighbors by an individual bacterium can elicit specific biochemical and behavioral responses that are required for bacterial virulence  <cit> . alternatively, perception of heterospecific  bacterial neighbors or even different strains of the same bacterial species can lead to entirely different, often antagonistic responses  <cit> . in a similar way, social insects such as ants are able to recognize and differentially respond to colony members versus colony invaders  <cit> . this recognition is modulated by chemical and biological signals that impact the fitness of individual ants and the success of the colony as a whole  <cit> . perception and recognition of conspecifics by mammals often requires multiple chemical, biological and behavioral cues. these processes affect mate recognition, antagonism, and immune response, impacting individual fitness  <cit> . thus, organisms ranging from the simplest to the most complex differentially perceive and respond to conspecific and heterospecific neighbors. although this type of neighbor perception and response system is widely recognized in other taxa, it has to a large extent been neglected in studies of plants .

it is generally accepted that plants are able to recognize and respond to multiple biotic and abiotic stimuli. for instance, changes in the availability of nutrients and light prompt both morphological and chemical changes within the plant  <cit> , which are often associated with specific changes in gene expression  <cit> . similarly, plants exhibit both general and specific responses to a variety of pathogens, mutualists and herbivores at the biological, molecular and chemical levels  <cit> . however, the ability of an individual plant to differentially recognize and respond to neighboring plants remains a subject of debate  <cit> . the ways in which plants recognize and respond to all aspects of their environment will influence their competitive ability in a given ecosystem, and can thus have important consequences for the overall success of a species.

competition between organisms is thought to be largely responsible for structuring ecological communities and may help to explain observed spatial patterns of species density and diversity. due to the sessile nature of plants, spatial distribution greatly influences the amount of conspecific and heterospecific competition an individual plant experiences. the spatial distribution of plants in a community impacts the way in which plants interact with each other, with mutualists  <cit> , with consumers  <cit>  and with other aspects of the environment. competition between conspecifics can be strikingly different than competition between heterospecific plant neighbors  <cit> , and plant neighbor identity can alter plant growth habits, metabolism  <cit>  and gene expression  <cit> .

in experimental communities, high relative densities of conspecifics affect parameters such as growth, fecundity  <cit>  and the production of defense compounds  <cit> . in addition, high relative densities of conspecifics can suppress competitively superior species  <cit> , enhance facilitative relationships  <cit> , and increase herbivore loads  <cit> . however, the impact of conspecific density on species performance is expected to differ depending on the plant species and its competitive competency  <cit> .

exotic invasive plants would appear to have substantial competitive competency, as they are often observed to displace native species and are typically considered a major threat to biodiversity in native ecosystems  <cit> . invasive plants often establish very high relative population densities, resulting in a near monoculture of conspecific neighbors. however, they also exist at much lower relative densities within in a matrix of heterospecific neighbors. because of this wide variation in relative density, invasive plants represent useful ecological models with which to examine the effect of plant community composition on plant biochemistry under natural field conditions. biochemical characteristics of plants may play a role in invasive success  <cit> , and thus a detailed understanding of plant biochemistry is likely to provide insight into the mechanisms of invasion  <cit> .

centaurea maculosa lam.  hayek, c. biebersteinii, spotted knapweed) is a particularly problematic invasive weed in the north western united states that tends to form dense stands, displacing native species. we were interested in determining if an individual c. maculosa plant would alter its defensive strategy due to the presence of conspecific versus heterospecific plant neighbors. in an initial greenhouse experiment we manipulated plant neighbor identity , resource availability  and herbivory  to determine the relative influence of these factors on c. maculosa growth and production of defense compounds. methyl jasmonate  was used as an elicitor to simulate insect herbivory, as the jasmonate biosynthesis and signaling pathways are known to be induced under conditions of biotic stress  <cit> . additionally, meja can serve as a volatile warning signal of future herbivore attack for plant neighbors, and leads to increased production of defense-related compounds  <cit> .

to further investigate the findings of our greenhouse experiment in a field setting, we utilized a non-targeted metabolomics analysis to explore chemical differences between naturally occurring c. maculosa individuals in two different stand types . although metabolomics studies have generally been used in highly controlled experiments and applied to genetically uniform model species , we were interested in investigating the utility of this tool using a non-model organism in a field biology setting.

this study not only provides support for the idea that c. maculosa individuals modify their physiology and biochemistry based on the identity of their plant neighbor, but it further demonstrates the utility of metabolomics as a tool for field biologists.

RESULTS
greenhouse study
leaf phenolic content and biomass accumulation in c. maculosa individuals were both influenced by various combinations of the three factors tested; plant neighbor identity, nutrient level and whether or not the plants were elicited with meja. an overall anova revealed significant interactions between plant neighbor identity and meja elicitation for both response variables .

due to large differences in both biomass and leaf phenolic content resulting from different levels of resource availability, the data for each nutrient level  were also analyzed in separate anovas . this analysis revealed a significant interaction between plant neighbor identity and meja elicitation at both nutrient levels for both response variables . pair-wise comparisons of this interaction revealed a response that was consistent for both nutrient levels . in non-elicited conditions, there were no significant differences between c. maculosa leaf phenolic content or in total biomass due to plant neighbor identity . however, when the plants were elicited with meja, c. maculosa individuals accumulated a significantly greater amount of total phenolics and exhibited reduced biomass when growing with a conspecific  versus a heterospecific  neighbor .

anova was performed on measures of c. maculosa total phenolics and total biomass . f and p values sorted by nutrient condition.

test statistics and p values for pair-wise comparisons of the interaction between plant neighbor identity and elicitation with methyl jasmonate  in both high and low nutrient conditions.

although the presence of a conspecific neighbor was consistently correlated with significant increases in leaf phenolic content and significant reductions in biomass accumulation under meja elicited conditions, the extent of these changes was influenced by the level of available nutrients . for instance, when plants were elicited with meja under low nutrient conditions, the relative increase in total phenolic accumulation due to a conspecific versus a heterospecific neighbor was 17%  per gram dry weight ), whereas in high nutrient conditions this increase was 10% ). plant biomass exhibited a 28% relative decrease in dry weight  under low nutrient conditions versus a 39% decrease  under high nutrient conditions due to the presence of a conspecific versus heterospecific neighbor when plants were elicited .

as expected, higher nutrient levels resulted in larger plants , and additionally resulted in plants with lower amounts of total phenolics in leaf tissue . it was expected that elicitation with meja would result in an increase in total phenolic content of c. maculosa leaves. however, total phenolics only increased due to elicitation in low resource conditions .

root to shoot ratios were calculated for c. maculosa individuals as an indicator of response to far-red light given off by neighboring plants . plant neighbor identity did not have a significant impact on c. maculosa root:shoot ratios .

metabolomic analysis of field plants
to further investigate the findings of our greenhouse experiment under field conditions, we analyzed naturally occurring c. maculosa plants, which are commonly found in both conspecific stands  and heterospecific stands .

an initial analysis of total phenolics in leaf tissue confirmed increased leaf phenolic content in plants from conspecific versus heterospecific field stands . we then conducted a non-targeted metabolomics analysis on these c. maculosa leaf tissues using gas chromotography-mass spectrometry  and ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry . the metabolomics-based analyses of field collected c. maculosa leaves from conspecific stands revealed a significantly lower accumulation of many small primary metabolites involved in glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, lipid metabolism, and amino acid metabolism in comparison to c. maculosa plants growing in more diverse heterospecific stands . gc-ms analysis revealed significantly reduced amounts of maleic acid, fumaric acid, succinic acid, fructose and six protein amino acids in conspecific versus heterospecific stands . in addition, many metabolites potentially involved in membrane metabolism were decreased in conspecific stands, including phosphoric acid, ethanol amine, glycerol, glycerophosphate and linoleic acid . wax components such as hexacosanol, octacosanol, and hexacosanoic acid were also found at diminished levels in conspecific versus heterospecific stands .

in contrast, multiple secondary metabolites including inositol-like compounds, cholorogenic acid, and quinic acid demonstrated significantly increased accumulation in conspecific stands . in addition, several unidentified polar metabolites that eluted from the chromatographic column at longer retention times exhibited increased abundance in plants from conspecific stands . galactose was the only primary metabolite identified that was increased in conspecific versus heterospecific stands .

univariate anova of uplc-ms samples revealed approximately  <dig> mass spectral signals that were significantly affected by stand type  at p <  <dig>  . although many of the features were unable to be identified, the sesquiterpene lactone cnicin, an herbivore defense compound primarily found in centaurea species, accumulated to significantly higher levels in plants from conspecific stands based on comparison to an authentic cnicin standard  . multivariate analyses of the uplc-ms data demonstrate that samples from conspecific and heterospecific stands can be distinguished .

herbivory rates and other field parameters
the metabolomics results indicated that plant neighbor identity might affect individual plant metabolism in the field, as metabolites accumulated to significantly different levels and multivariate data analysis was able to separate samples based on stand type . however, factors such as resource availability and herbivory also impact the extent to which c. maculosa plants allocate resources towards primary versus secondary metabolism, as was demonstrated in the greenhouse experiment. thus, it was important to investigate if other factors in the field that might correlate with the relative density of c. maculosa could have contributed to or confounded the metabolomics results.

to determine if resource availability was correlated with stand type under field conditions, three soil samples were taken from the base of three randomly selected c. maculosa plants per stand type at each site. analyses of soil characteristics revealed no significant differences between the conspecific and heterospecific c. maculosa field stands . in general, these parameters differed more due to site than to stand type .

to investigate the potential influence of herbivore damage on the c. maculosa metabolomics results, evidence of leaf herbivory was noted for all plants sampled. a portion of individual plants sampled from both stand types experienced some form of leaf herbivory. however, leaf herbivory data collected from conspecific and heterospecific field stands at the time of sampling did not improve anova model fit when included as a covariate, suggesting that herbivory was not a major factor influencing the results.

although leaf herbivory damage data taken at the time of sampling did not help explain the metabolomics results, it was possible that the presence of unseen herbivores caused changes in the c. maculosa leaf metabolome, as a variety of specialist herbivores have been introduced into north america that feed on c. maculosa roots or flowers as opposed to leaf tissue.

we conducted an independent analysis of specialist herbivore abundance and damage in c. maculosa stands. specialist root and flower herbivores occurred more frequently in conspecific versus heterospecific stands. root damage by the specialist herbivore agapeta zoegana was higher in conspecific than in heterospecific stands of c. maculosa . additionally, the abundance of the flower head herbivore urophora spp. was higher in conspecific stands of c. maculosa  and a higher percentage of seed heads were parasitized by urophora in conspecific stands .

discussion
the results of the field metabolomics study tend to reflect those found in the greenhouse experiment. field collected c. maculosa plants with heterospecific neighbors allocate more resources towards the production of primary metabolites which are crucial for plant growth, and allocate fewer resources to secondary metabolite production. similarly, in the greenhouse elicited c. maculosa plants with heterospecific  neighbors allocated more resources towards biomass production, and fewer resources towards production of leaf phenolic compounds. field collected c. maculosa individuals with conspecific neighbors allocate more resources towards production of secondary metabolites. likewise, in greenhouse conditions, elicited c. maculosa plants with conspecific neighbors allocated more resources towards production of phenolic compounds and fewer towards biomass production.

secondary metabolites, particularly phenolic compounds are often implicated in plant anti-herbivore defense mechanisms  <cit> , and have been considered important factors in multiple hypotheses of plant defense against herbivores  <cit> . thus, the increased levels of secondary metabolites in c. maculosa grown with conspecific neighbors may reflect an increase in herbivore defense response. galactose was the only primary metabolite identified that was increased in conspecific versus heterospecific stands . interestingly, galactose is reported to have defensive properties in spruce trees against the herbivore western spruce budworm when compared to the other sugars fructose and glucose  <cit> .

in the greenhouse experiment, differences in resource allocation due to plant neighbor were only identified under conditions of simulated herbivory, and there was a strong interaction between these two factors. however, under field conditions, leaf herbivory data taken on site did not improve anova model fit, initially suggesting that plant neighbor identity may play a larger role than herbivory in c. maculosa metabolism in the field. in a separate study, greater numbers of c. maculosa conspecifics were positively correlated with root and flower specialist herbivore damage and abundance. there is some evidence to suggest that below ground herbivory can increase production of secondary compounds present in plant leaves  <cit> , and that plant defenses can be up-regulated in tissues distant from the site of herbivore attack  <cit> . thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that an increased rate of specialist herbivory in conspecific stands led to the observed increases in leaf secondary metabolites.

although measures of specialist herbivory confounded the potential link between plant neighbor identity and defensive chemistry in the field study, the results of the greenhouse experiment suggested that plant neighbor identity was an important factor in c. maculosa defense response. however, a variety of resource-related factors, not typically linked to specific neighbor identity, are known to influence plant metabolism and should mentioned in regards to plant neighbor-induced changes in our experiment.

for instance, differences in light amount or quality in the environment are involved in both plant competition and defense response. plants are able to sense the presence of plant competitors by detecting changes in light quality  through phytochrome pathways  <cit> . increases in far-red  radiation impact plant secondary metabolite accumulation  <cit> , and can lead to an attenuated defense response resulting in increased levels of herbivory, fewer phenolic compounds and reduced expression of genes in the jamonate pathway  <cit> . in the current greenhouse study, c. maculosa plants appeared to be experiencing similar amounts of fr radiation between neighbor treatments, as root to shoot ratios  did not change significantly due to neighbor identity within nutrient treatments . thus, although changes in light quality are able to impact plant metabolism and defense response, differences in fr-response do not explain observed differences in biomass or phenolics in the greenhouse.

in some plants, ultraviolet -b radiation triggers ja accumulation  <cit> , induces signaling pathways similar to those involved in plant response to herbivory  <cit> , and can lead to increases in plant phenolic compounds  <cit> . the majority of uv-b radiation is blocked inside greenhouses, and therefore uv-b is not presumed to be a factor in the results of the greenhouse experiment. site geographical features are likely the most important factors determining plant exposure to uv-b in the field, but it is possible that stand type  could influence uv-b amounts .

nutrient availability can directly influence plant metabolism and is integrated into multiple plant-defense hypotheses  <cit> . in the greenhouse study, nutrient condition directly impacted mean levels of both biomass and leaf phenolic contents. however, the response trends identified for the interaction between plant neighbor identity and elicitation were the same in both the high and low nutrient condition. soil nutrient availability was highly variable in the field experiment , yet the results paralleled the general trends of the greenhouse experiment in that metabolic profiles differed due to stand type.

changes in resource ability  can have profound effects on plant metabolism and defense response, but did not appear to be key factors influencing the interaction between plant neighbor identity and elicitation identified in the current study. this suggests that c. maculosa individuals utilized some other form of perception to differentiate between plant neighbors and subsequently modify their defense response.

a variety of other potential plant neighbor recognition mechanisms have been posited in the literature, including the perception of plant volatile organic compounds   <cit> , root exudates  <cit> , oscillatory signals  <cit> , and physical contact between roots or leaves  <cit> . of these possible mechanisms of plant to plant signaling, voc-mediated communication  has received the most attention, as multiple recent studies have demonstrated direct and indirect voc-induced plant defense response . meja, the elicitor used in our greenhouse experiment, is a naturally occurring voc that, in sagebrush, can provoke defense response in conspecific plant neighbors, and to varying degrees in heterospecific plant neighbors  <cit> . however, the extent of voc specificity and the fitness consequences of voc-mediated communication for 'emitter' and 'receiver' plants remain under debate  <cit> . it is not clear if c. maculosa utilizes vocs in plant communication; however, it is interesting to speculate that c. maculosa individuals modify their voc bouquet in relation to plant neighbor identity leading to neighbor specific changes in defensive chemistry.

other evidence suggests that c. maculosa exhibits specificity in its response to plant neighbors  <cit> . expression of some c. maculosa genes are up or down regulated due to the presence versus absence of a plant neighbor; while other genes appear to be regulated in a neighbor specific fashion  <cit> . although the experiment of broz et al.  did not evaluate gene expression in c. maculosa paired with conspecifics or in situations of herbivory, it lends support to the idea that c. maculosa is able to differentially sense and respond to specific plant neighbors. in solanum nigrum, schmidt and baldwin  found that the presence of heterospecific competitors  results in decreased expression of primary metabolism genes, both with and without elicitation by meja  <cit> . in addition, meja elicited a response consistent with a trade-off between growth and defense , regardless of the competitive situation  <cit> . in the greenhouse study presented here, meja elicitation led to this type of response only when plants were paired with conspecific neighbors. although gene expression is not always a good indicator of metabolite concentrations, which may help explain this discrepancy, our results suggest that plant neighbor identity can have important impacts on the presumed trade-off between plant growth and defense. clearly, further investigations are needed to identify the recognition mechanism and response system involved in c. maculosa plant-neighbor communication.

although more evidence is needed to provide a direct link between plant neighbor identity and defense response under field conditions, it is plausible that a modification of a defense strategy based on plant neighbor identity would confer evolutionary advantages. for instance, high conspecific plant density often correlates with higher attack rates by consumers  <cit> , as was identified for c. maculosa in our field analysis of specialist herbivores. individual plants growing in conspecific stands are more likely to be subject to herbivore attack than those growing in diverse plant communities. thus, in a conspecific stand, a defensive strategy involving the accumulation of chemical herbivore deterrents is likely to be more effective than a strategy based on growth. in a heterospecific stand where the probability or occurrence of herbivore attack is lower, factors such as plant competition for light or nutrients could have larger impacts on individual success. thus, investing resources in growth rather than defense may be more effective over time in a diverse plant community, even when herbivores are present.

CONCLUSIONS
although the perception of and response to neighbors is widely recognized in other taxa ranging from microorganisms to mammals  <cit> , it remains understudied in the field of plant biology. our results indicate that greenhouse-grown c. maculosa individuals modify their defensive chemistry based on the identity of their plant neighbor. in addition, c. maculosa individuals were found to exhibit different metabolic profiles in the field based on stand type , which is likely due to a combination of factors including plant neighbor identity and rates of specialist herbivory. whether or not a majority of plant species are able to differentially sense and respond to different plant neighbors remains to be determined. if plants are indeed capable of these processes it will have large implications for both the study and human management of ecological systems.

