BACKGROUND
cell migration is a fundamental cellular process that is essential for embryonic development and many normal functions, such as wound healing and immunity. it also plays a role in various disease processes including tumor angiogenesis and metastasis  <cit> . although our current understanding of cell migration is incomplete, research in the past  <dig> years has shed light on this complex process .

signaling cascades mediated by ntks are believed to play a central role in cell migration. knock-out mutation in mice of ntks such as src/yes/fyn  <cit> , fak  <cit>  or abl/arg  <cit> , or ntk substrates such as p130cas  <cit>  or paxillin  <cit> , results in embryonic lethality, which has been specifically attributed to the failure of cell migration. integrin receptor activation following adhesion to extracellular matrix is believed to be the primary stimulus to activate the signaling cascades mediated by ntks. following integrin receptor activation, autophosphorylation of fak at tyrosine  <dig>  <cit>  recruits src  <cit>  and p130cas  <cit>  leading to the activation of two separate pathways working in conjunction with each other. the first pathway involves activation of erk via grb2/sos/ras-mapk pathway as a result of fak phosphorylation at tyrosine  <dig> by src  <cit>  . erk activates myosin light chain kinase , which phosphorylates myosin light chain thereby promoting its interaction with actin, resulting in the generation of force required for cell movement  <cit> . mlck activation also allows retrograde flow of actin in the lamellipodia  <cit> , which brings about "periodic lamellipodial retractions" that bring activated signaling molecules from the front to the back, where they act . the second pathway involves extensive phosphorylation of p130cas  <cit>  that promotes crk binding  <cit> , which in turn recruits dock  <dig>  <cit> , leading to the activation of the rho family gtpase rac <dig>  <cit> . rac <dig> activation promotes membrane ruffling, lamellipodium formation and actin reorganization  <cit>  by acting on the wasp/wave family of arp2/ <dig> complex activators to stimulate actin polymerization  <cit> .

in summary, it is now accepted that activation of rac <dig> promotes membrane ruffling, lamellipodial extensions and actin reorganization, while erk activation promotes the interaction of actin and myosin to generate the force for cell movement. together, these actions generate cell polarity, where the coordinated movement of actin and myosin result in the formation of a leading edge and a trailing edge necessary for cell migration .

ntks such as src are known to interact physically with a large number of substrate proteins such as enzymes, cytoskeletal proteins and adaptor molecules. binding is mediated by the src homology  <dig>  and sh <dig> domains of the kinases with phosphorylated tyrosine residues and proline-rich sequences on the substrate. the src-substrate interaction induces the efficient phosphorylation of substrates, which in turn serves to initiate downstream signaling for cellular processes such as cell migration, differentiation, proliferation and survival  <cit> . however, due to the complexity of the network of protein interactions, and the fact that many proteins are phosphorylated simultaneously upon ntk activation, it has been difficult to determine which particular kinase-substrate interactions play a critical role in cell migration .

p130cas is one of the adaptor molecules that is known to be a substrate of ntks such as src. it was first isolated as a heavily tyrosine phosphorylated protein from v-src-  <cit>  and v-crk-transformed cells  <cit> , and it has been shown to play a role in cell transformation  <cit> . p130cas is also thought to play an important role in cell adhesion, migration, growth factor stimulation, cytokine receptor engagement and bacterial infection . however, determining which of these specific biological outputs occur as a direct result of the phosphorylation of p130cas has been difficult. moreover, there is an ongoing controversy over the mechanism of phosphorylation of p130cas. the substrate domain of p130cas is known to be tyrosine phosphorylated by src directly after interaction of the rplpspp motif of p130cas with the sh <dig> domain of src  <cit> . however because p130cas exists at focal adhesions in a macromolecular complex with fak and src  <cit> , both of which possess tyrosine kinase activity, the relative role of fak and src in phosphorylating p130cas is difficult to assess .

at least four different models have been postulated for the phosphorylation of p130cas in this complex  <cit> . using fak mutants in in vitro kinase assays and antibody labeling, hanks and co-workers  <cit>  have provided evidence for a model in which fak autophosphorylation at y <dig> results in recruitment of src via its sh <dig> domain, while interaction of the sh <dig> domain of p130cas with proline rich regions in fak recruits p130cas to fak; src then phosphorylates p130cas bound to fak. a similar conclusion has also been reached using src mutations  <cit> . support for the idea that fak kinase activity is dispensable for phosphorylation of p130cas was also provided by studies utilizing overexpression of fak mutants in cho cells  <cit> , and the observation that phosphorylation of p130cas is reduced in src-/- cells  <cit> .

in order to determine which particular effects are mediated upon specific phosphorylation of p130cas and to address the relative roles of src and fak in phosphorylation of p130cas, we have utilized a methodology called the functional interaction trap   <cit> . briefly, fit utilizes an artificial binding interface composed of two leucine zipper coiled-coiled domains   <cit> . one coiled coil segment is present in a constitutively active ntk lacking its sh <dig> and sh <dig> substrate binding domains, and the second in a substrate of interest. expression of the modified kinase and substrate in a cell induces a specific interaction between them, resulting in the specific phosphorylation of only that substrate. any biological output observed can thus be directly attributed to the phosphorylation of that particular substrate .

we have already shown that fit can indeed promote a physical and a physiological interaction between two proteins of interest that can lead to a biological output by mimicking endogenous signaling pathways  <cit> . our initial observation that fit-induced phosphorylation of p130cas induced in nih 3t <dig> cells a bipolar shape with long, thin terminal processes  <cit>  suggested that specific phosphorylation of p130cas might be sufficient to induce actin cytoskeletal rearrangements. in this study, we have utilized fit to study the specific biological output mediated by the specific phosphorylation of p130cas in more detail. additionally, we have used fit to address the controversy regarding the mechanism of p130cas phosphorylation in focal adhesions.

RESULTS
syf and c-src reconstituted cells as a biological system for fit
to use fit to determine the normal functional  consequences of tyrosine phosphorylation of specific substrates by ntks, a cellular system is needed that lacks the ntk and as a result exhibits a defect in some aspect of cellular functioning. in such a system, if expression of fit-compatible kinase and substrate can rescue the phenotype, this would provide strong evidence that phosphorylation of that particular substrate is essential for the biological output under investigation. syf cells are mouse embryonic fibroblasts  that lack the three src family kinases detectably expressed in fibroblastic cells . these cells exhibit defects in cell migration  <cit> , and therefore could serve as an excellent system to determine the biological consequences that result from fit-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation.

we first tested the feasibility of using the syf cells as a cellular system to study fit-mediated responses. as reported previously  <cit> , we found that syf cells and syf cells reconstituted with c-src show no obvious differences in the organization of cytoskeleton and focal adhesions . however, as expected, the basal level of tyrosine phosphorylation was significantly different. few, if any sites of tyrosine phosphorylation were observed in syf cells by immunofluorescence , which is in agreement with previous findings of reduced phosphotyrosine content of fak that can be immunoprecipitated from syf cells  <cit>  and failure to detect significant tyrosine phosphorylation in syf cells  <cit> . as expected, the c-src reconstituted cells showed significantly more tyrosine phosphorylation, primarily at discrete punctuate sites at the ends of actin stress fibers, consistent with focal adhesions . transfection of v-src in syf cells also led to extensive tyrosine phosphorylation at focal adhesions . in contrast, transfection of v-src lacking the substrate binding sh <dig> and sh <dig> domains, but containing a coiled-coiled domain  and an intact membrane targeting sequence , induced no significant increase in tyrosine phosphorylation in syf cells . these results demonstrate that syf cells expressing fit-compatible src have sufficiently low background to study the biological effects of fit-mediated phosphorylation of specific substrates.

fit-mediated specific phosphorylation of src substrates increases tyrosine phosphorylation in syf cells
focal adhesions are macromolecular signaling complexes that link the extracellular matrix to the intracellular actin cytoskeleton  <cit> . the assembly and disassembly  of focal adhesion components is important for regulating cell adhesion and cell migration  <cit> . many proteins believed to play a role in cell migration are localized at focal adhesions, including fak, src, csk, ntk substrates such as p130cas, paxillin and cortactin, mapk, ras, rho and rac, and protein tyrosine phosphatases .

in order to observe directly whether the fit-mediated phosphorylation of p130cas promotes localization to focal adhesions, we expressed fit-compatible src and fit-compatible p130cas  in syf cells. co-transfection of fit-compatible src and p130cas resulted in increased tyrosine phosphorylation at focal adhesion sites . transfection of p130cas alone  or p130cas and v-src lacking sh <dig> and sh <dig> domains, both lacking the artificial binding interface , do not lead to increased tyrosine phosphorylation at focal adhesions, indicating the specificity of this process. moreover, tyrosine phosphorylation of p130cas is apparently sufficient to recruit p130cas to focal adhesions, since much more p130cas is found at focal adhesions when it is tyrosine phosphorylated by fit  as opposed to when it is not .

we also used fit to induce the specific tyrosine phosphorylation of several other substrates of src in syf cells. fit-mediated specific tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin  and fak  also increased the tyrosine phosphorylation at focal adhesions, while that of cortactin showed increased tyrosine phosphorylation at the cortical membrane in addition to focal adhesions . the specific phosphorylation of p130cas  by fit could also be detected in nih 3t <dig> or syf cells by immunoprecipitation and western blot studies . these results confirm that specific phosphorylation of substrates such as p130cas by fit occurs at discrete and specific sites within the cell, consistent with the normal subcellular distribution of the substrate.

fit-mediated specific phosphorylation of p130cas results in activation of rac1
signals that activate cell migration are known to activate rac <dig>  and phosphorylation of p130cas is thought to activate downstream signals that activate rac <dig>  <cit> . since fit relies on the assumption that appropriate downstream signaling cascades can be activated as a result of phosphorylation of a single substrate, we tested whether the fit-mediated phosphorylation of p130cas led to the activation of rac <dig>  we used a rac <dig> pull-down assay as described previously  <cit>  to test whether fit-mediated p130cas phosphorylation increased overall levels of gtp-bound  rac <dig> in cell lysates. as shown in figure  <dig>  the level of activated rac <dig> was much higher in cells expressing fit-compatible src and p130cas than in controls, confirming that tyrosine phosphorylation of p130cas  is sufficient to lead to rac <dig> activation.

fit-mediated specific phosphorylation of p130cas results in increased membrane ruffling and lamellipodium formation
activation of rac <dig> is known to stimulate actin polymerization and membrane ruffling and is required for the protrusion of lamellipodia  <cit> , and dominant negative rac <dig> inhibits lamellipodium formation, membrane ruffling and cell migration  <cit> . in order to determine whether the fit-mediated specific phosphorylation of p130cas and the resulting activation of rac <dig> are sufficient to induce membrane ruffling and lamellipodium formation, we observed syf cells and c-src reconstituted syf cells under normal growth conditions.

we quantified membrane ruffling in fixed transfected cells by confocal microscopy, summarized in table  <dig>  and also monitored living cells by video microscopy. observation of the membrane dynamics of syf cells shows a relatively static membrane with few membrane ruffles and lamellipodia . in contrast, c-src reconstituted cells showed a dynamic membrane with large membrane ruffles and lamellipodia along with active actin reorganization , indicating that src is responsible for these effects. when fit-compatible src and p130cas were transfected in syf cells, the membrane dynamics approached that of c-src reconstituted cells, exhibiting extensive membrane ruffling, and lamellipodium formation, and actin reorganization . transfection of fit-compatible src alone or p130cas alone in syf cells did not lead to a significant increase in membrane ruffling or lamellipodium formation , indicating that it is indeed the specific phosphorylation of p130cas that leads to these effects. quantification of membrane ruffling in fixed cells demonstrates that statistically significant increase in membrane ruffling in syf cells is observed only when fit-compatible src and fit-compatible p130cas are co-transfected . thus, we can conclude that the fit-mediated specific phosphorylation of p130cas is sufficient to promote increased membrane ruffling and lamellipodia.

syf cells were transfected and fixed as described in materials and methods and membrane ruffling observed by confocal microscopy . data is expressed as percent mean ± s.e.m.  of three independent observations and was analyzed by one-way anova , followed by tukey's multiple comparison test. * denotes p <  <dig>  as compared to zipa Δsrc transfected group or zipb p130cas transfected group. Δsrc = v-src lacking sh <dig> and sh <dig> domains, zipa Δsrc = Δsrc containing a coiled-coiled domain , zipb p130cas = p130cas containing a complimentary coiled-coiled domain .

the role of p130cas as an important mediator of cell migration was further corroborated by live cell imaging of mefs lacking p130cas, which show similar membrane dynamics as the syf cells , while mefs from wild-type littermates show extensive membrane ruffling, lamellipodium formation and actin reorganization . taken together, these results suggest that tyrosine phosphorylation of p130cas is both necessary and sufficient to induce membrane ruffling in fibroblasts.

mechanism of phosphorylation of p130cas
since p130cas can exist in a macromolecular complex with the two ntks src and fak at focal adhesions, a number of studies have been conducted to determine the role of each of these components, i.e., who associates with whom and how, and who phosphorylates whom. a number of different models have been proposed . based on methodologies such as in vitro kinase assays  <cit> , antibody labeling  <cit>  or mutational analysis of src  <cit>  or fak  <cit> , and knockout studies  <cit> , it has been proposed that fak acts as a scaffold to recruit both p130cas and src; in this complex, src phosphorylates p130cas .

in order to obtain direct evidence that it is indeed src kinase activity and not fak activity that is responsible for p130cas phosphorylation, we approached this seemingly complex problem with a very simple experiment utilizing fit. 293t cells were transfected with flag-tagged p130cas, fit-compatible myc-tagged fak, and fit-compatible ha-tagged src . using fit to force interaction of src and fak eliminates any need for kinase activity or phosphorylation to mediate this association. p130cas was then immunoprecipitated by anti-flag antibody, and blots probed by anti-ptyr antibody to monitor phosphorylation. as shown in figure  <dig>  tyrosine phosphorylation of p130cas was seen only when fak was present and when src possessed kinase activity, but not when src lacked kinase activity . in contrast, p130cas was still tyrosine phosphorylated when fak lacked kinase activity . thus we conclude that the primary role of fak in the complex is to serve as a scaffold to recruit src and p130cas to focal adhesions, promoting efficient phosphorylation of p130cas by src.

discussion
activated tyrosine kinases associate with and phosphorylate multiple substrates, which can in turn associate with other proteins. this multiplicity of substrates and interactions makes it difficult to determine the exact role of an individual substrate protein in mediating a particular biological process. in practical terms, it is often impossible to study a binding or phosphorylation event in the absence of many other confounding factors. fit was designed to overcome this limitation by promoting a specific association between two proteins of interest, allowing the biological effects to be assessed. this approach allows upstream activating signals to be bypassed, greatly simplifying experimental analysis by focusing analysis on a single interaction or phosphorylation of a single substrate.

adaptor and scaffold proteins such as p130cas are of considerable interest in signal transduction pathways since they can associate with multiple proteins, serving as points for signal convergence and divergence to regulate multiple biological processes. p130cas can bind to a number of proteins via its sh <dig> domain, a proline rich region, a substrate domain containing  <dig> yxxp motifs , a serine-rich region, and carboxyl terminal domain . p130cas has been found to be phosphorylated in v-crk-  <cit>  and v-src-  <cit>  transformed cells. since p130cas is expressed ubiquitously and is mainly localized in focal adhesions  <cit> , which regulate biological processes such as cell adhesion, migration, differentiation, proliferation and survival, p130cas aptly serves as a site of convergence and divergence in cell signaling. for example, mechanical forces  have been shown to induce a conformational change in p130cas, leading to its phosphorylation and the activation of downstream signaling  <cit> .

possibly the best evidence that p130cas plays an important role in cell migration comes from the fact that mice lacking p130cas were found to die in utero exhibiting several severe developmental defects which were specifically attributed to failure of cell migration  <cit> . moreover, fibroblasts derived from these mice had short, thin peripheral actin fibers, as opposed to the long, thick fibers traversing the cell seen in wild type fibroblasts, and exhibited defects in cell migration as well as cell transformation  <cit> . although the role of p130cas in cell migration is well documented, it was not known whether phosphorylation of p130cas is sufficient to initiate cell migration, or if p130cas is just one of many proteins whose simultaneous phosphorylation is required. in this study, we have used fit to induce the specific phosphorylation of p130cas, and show that this is sufficient to initiate downstream signaling and actin reorganization.

syf cells are an ideal biological system to study fit-mediated biological responses, as these cells are known to have defects in cell migration and they have a low background level of tyrosine phosphorylation  <cit> . furthermore, reconstitution of these cells with wt c-src provides an excellent control for normal src-initiated signals. this system allows us to induce the phosphorylation of specific substrate proteins by fit and assess the results on rescue of actin cytoskeletal defects.

previously, we have shown that fit-mediated phosphorylation can activate downstream signaling from stat <dig> using a luciferase reporter assay  <cit> . however, because it involves elimination of normal upstream signals, it was possible that fit-mediated phosphorylation of p130cas might either be insufficient to activate downstream signaling pathways, such as rac <dig>  or might activate other pathways not normally activated under physiological conditions . in our studies, we were able to detect activated rac <dig> after fit-mediated phosphorylation of p130cas , thereby suggesting that the downstream signaling pathways normally activated upon phosphorylation of p130cas signaling are intact. furthermore, we were unable to detect activation of erk upon fit-mediated phosphorylation of p130cas  consistent with other studies showing that erk activation is independent of phosphorylation of p130cas  <cit> . these results support the premise that fit is a valuable tool to elucidate the normal physiological responses mediated by the specific phosphorylation of a particular substrate.

activation of rac <dig> due to activation of signaling cascades involving p130cas phosphorylation is known to increase membrane ruffling and lamellipodial extensions  <cit> . the importance of rac <dig> in mediating these effects is further corroborated by other studies using dominant negative forms of rac <dig>  which inhibited membrane ruffling, lamellipodium formation and cell migration  <cit> . activation of rac <dig> is not the sole determinant of membrane ruffling, however, since rac1-deficient macrophages exhibit reduced but not absent membrane ruffling  <cit> . it has been suggested that activation of rac <dig> may be necessary primarily for membrane ruffling while activation of rac <dig> may be necessary primarily for cell migration .

a recent study has indicated even more complexity to the role of rac <dig> in cell migration, indicating that in the absence of chemotactic signals, low levels of activated rac <dig> occurred when cells were in a three dimensional matrix promoting a "directionally persistent" cell migration with reduced membrane ruffling and peripheral lamellae, while higher levels of activated rac <dig> occurred when cells were in a two dimensional matrix promoting random cell migration with increased membrane ruffling and peripheral lamellae, as seen when cells are exploring their local environments  <cit> . furthermore, during chemotaxis, rac <dig> may also potentiate the effect of growth factors to stimulate erk, but erk activity does not influence rac <dig> activity or membrane ruffling  <cit> . our live cell microscopy studies  are in agreement with these observations, since fit-mediated specific phosphorylation of p130cas  stimulated the formation of membrane ruffles and lamellipodia  in syf cells, which are normally devoid of these structures.

we recently showed that recruitment and subsequent phosphorylation of p130cas is important for membrane ruffling and actin reorganization following pdgf stimulation of fibroblasts  <cit> . while that study focused on the role of nck adaptors in transducing signals from p130cas, it is entirely consistent with our current data on the importance of p130cas tyrosine phosphorylation for membrane ruffling and actin reorganization. we show here that fit-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of p130cas is sufficient to bring about these effects, clearly demonstrating the usefulness of the fit approach for dissecting complex biological responses.

the fit approach also allows us to test experimentally the functional role of individual components of multimolecular complexes, such as the fak-src-p130cas complex found in focal adhesions. since both fak and src possess tyrosine kinase activity, it has been difficult to say with certainty which of the two kinases is responsible for phosphorylating p130cas. we used a simple fit experiment to validate the model proposed by hanks and colleagues  <cit> , in which fak acts as a scaffold while src is responsible for p130cas phosphorylation. by allowing us to induce the specific association of src and fak, independent of the activity or phosphorylation state of each, fit allowed us to isolate the importance of src kinase activity for p130cas phosphorylation .

in summary, our results strongly suggest that the phosphorylation of p130cas alone is sufficient to initiate activation of rac <dig> and actin reorganization including the formation of membrane ruffles and lamellipodial extensions. of course, these results do not imply that other substrates of ntks such as paxillin or cortactin play no role in cell migration; indeed, it is likely that many proteins involved in adhesion and motility are at least partially redundant, and in most cases fibroblasts lacking one or more components are able to adhere and migrate, albeit with decreased efficiency. however the availability of a method to address the sufficiency of a protein phosphorylation for a biological effect provides a valuable complement to knockout and knockdown methods, which can only address whether a protein or its phosphorylation is necessary. although we cannot exclude the possibility that other substrates that may physically associate with the src-p130cas complex, such as fak or paxillin, may be phosphorylated to some extent in our experiments, anti-ptyr immunoblotting indicates that such phosphorylation, if any, is minor. in any case, we can state with confidence that the association between src and p130cas, and the resulting phosphorylation of p130cas, is the immediate cause of the biological effects that we observe.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, we conclude that src-p130cas complex formation and the resulting phosphorylation of p130cas is sufficient to induce events leading to membrane ruffling and rac activation in fibroblasts. we also conclude that src is primarily responsible for the tyrosine phosphorylation of p130cas in complex with fak at focal adhesions.

