BACKGROUND
relaxin is a multifunctional peptide hormone initially identified in reproductive tissues during pregnancy and later classified as a pleiotropic factor that induces biochemical changes also in a number of non-reproductive organs. indeed, relaxin receptors have also been found in brain, heart, skin, small intestine and blood vessels  <cit> . three relaxin genes are present in the human genome and they code for the peptides indicated as h <dig>  h <dig> and h <dig>  which differ in their primary and tertiary structure, activity and expression site. h <dig>  is the major circulating form and it is mainly produced in the corpus luteum  <cit> . besides its well-established biological role during pregnancy in reproductive tissues, where it relaxes the pelvic ligaments and tendons, more recently relaxin has been shown to be involved in the maternal adaptation of the renal and cardiovascular systems. moreover, the latest studies have also established the potential of relaxin as vasodilator, and its contribution in angiogenesis and extracellular-matrix remodeling . most of these functions are important in the underlying pathology of acute heart failure , in fact, cardio-renal protective effects along with a significant benefit of dyspnea relief in patients with this pathology seem to be attributable to the capacity of relaxin to improve systemic, cardiac and renal hemodynamics, and protect cells and organs from damage via its neuro-hormonal, anti-inflammatory, anti-remodeling, anti-fibrotic, anti-ischemic, and pro-angiogenic effects  <cit> . in  <dig> serelaxin, recombinant human relaxin, passed phase iii clinical trials for the treatment of ahf  <cit>  and was appointed as “breakthrough therapy” by the us food and drug administration  <cit> . furthermore, by using an in vivo mouse model hampel and colleagues found a novel role for relaxin  <dig> for the maintenance and regeneration of the ocular epithelial cell layer, underlying a new potential therapeutic application in ophthalmology for the treatment of corneal ulcerations  <cit> .

differently from other peptide hormones belonging to the same family, such as pro-insulin, it was demonstrated that also the immature/unprocessed hormone pro-form, pro-relaxin, is biologically active  <cit> . although animal tissues represent a source of relaxin, their pro-relaxin content is very low. moreover, extraction procedures are inefficient. about  <dig>  mg of relaxin and  <dig>  mg of pro-relaxin were obtained by using 165 g of placenta homogenate extracts from  <dig> hamsters  <cit>  and a yield of  <dig>  mg of pro-relaxin per gram of wet tissue was obtained from decapsulated corpus luteum of pregnant gilts  <cit> . in addition the relatively low structure similarity between animal derived h <dig> forms and human ones  might elicit strong immunogenic responses thus reducing the field of application. therefore, it is desirable to replace such animal-tissue extraction procedures with biotechnological processes, in order to generate larger and safer stocks of relaxin/pro-relaxin for therapeutic applications. the production of human relaxin/pro-relaxin by intensive cultures of genetically engineered microorganisms is more compatible with pharmaceutical applications. to date, different prokaryotic and eukaryotic hosts have been adopted to produce recombinant relaxin and pro-relaxin all sharing the same limitation represented by quite low expression levels . however, human recombinant relaxin h <dig> was expressed in e.coli cells, purified from inclusion bodies and characterized, demonstrating biologically active in in vitro assays with human endometrial cells  <cit> , and recently reached phase iii clinical trials for patients with acute decompensated heart failure.

the theoretical possibility of secreting high levels of correctly folded human proteins in the yeast p. pastoris, and the availability of commercial protease-deficient strains that reduce protein degradation over time, encouraged our efforts towards the use of this yeast as host for the production of human pro-relaxin h <dig> 

in the present work a simple approach was established for the production of recombinant human pro-relaxin h <dig> on a semi-defined medium exploiting glycerol/methanol fed-batch fermentations that result in the production of active pro-hormone as established by bioactivity assays.

RESULTS
strategy and construction of the recombinant strains
since one of the main problems related to protein production and purification processes is degradation by endogenous proteases, the production of human pro-relaxin h <dig> was evaluated in a commercial pichia knock-out strain that produces a lower number of vacuolar proteases. the aminoacid and the codon-optimized nucleotide sequences of the native and histidine tagged human pro-relaxin h <dig> used in this study are shown in additional file  <dig>  the pro-relaxin sequences with and without histidine tag were cloned in the ppink vector  in frame with the mat-α signal sequence to enable protein secretion. the histidine tag was fused to the c-terminus of the protein in order to compare different purification strategies. all constructs were sequence verified before integration into the genome of competent pichia pink cells. the colonies that showed a change in color from pink to white were further analyzed, confirming the specific insertion of the pro-relaxin gene into their genome and generating the recombinant strains indicated in the following as pichia pink-prel and pichia pink-prelhis, respectively.

shakeflask and fermentation experiments
eight positive colonies for each recombinant strain were screened in shakeflasks for pro-relaxin productivity by methanol induction. the supernatants of all clones collected after 72 h of methanol induction were concentrated and analyzed by western blotting. all colonies showed a band of the expected molecular weight. the colonies producing most intense bands were selected for further experiments .


pichia pink-prel and pichia pink-prelhis were grown in fed-batch cultures involving initial batch and do-stat growth on glycerol to increase biomass, followed by a switch to a methanol fed-batch phase to induce protein expression. after the batch phase about 300 g of total glycerol were fed to the cultures until a concentration of about  <dig> gcdw/l of biomass was reached. the following addition of 300 g of methanol, with a volumetric flow that ranged between  <dig> and 2 g/l∙h during 24 h of induction, only slightly improved the final biomass titer. accumulation of methanol  was observed in both strains 2-3 h after induction indicating a lower initial consumption rate. this also corresponded to a slight decrease of biomass production in the first hours post-induction. on average a 15% higher concentration of biomass was obtained at the end of the process for pichia pink-prel .fig.  <dig> dual phase fed-batch experiments. time course of glycerol and methanol consumption, and biomass production during the processes. native indicates parameters relative to the fermentation of the strain pichia pink-prel that produces un-tagged pro-relaxin, whereas tagged refers to strain pichia pink-prelhis producing his tagged pro-relaxin. fermentation experiments were run in triplicate for each strain and the reported data are the mean values ± s.d




samples for pro-relaxin analyses by western blotting were taken during the process for both strains, as described in the methods section. western blotting experiments with anti-prorel and anti-rel antibodies on cell-free supernatant and cell lysates were performed for both strains at time zero,  <dig>   <dig> and 24 h after induction demonstrating different protein patterns in the two strains . the time zero sample was taken when cells were growing in fed-batch on limiting amounts of glycerol, prior to the addition of methanol. densitometric analyses of the films indicated an average concentration of  <dig> and 14 mg/l of pro-relaxin in the fermentation broth 24 h post induction in pichia pink-prel and pichia pink-prelhis, respectively. for both strains the portion of intracellular protein was on average only 1-2% of the total produced.fig.  <dig> determination of intracellular and extracellular relaxin and pro-relaxin distribution. western blotting with anti-prorelaxin anti-relaxin antibodies on intracellular and extracellular fractions collected at different time points during fermentation experiments performed with recombinant strains pichia pink-prel  and pichia pink-prelhis 




purification of pro-relaxin
two different protocols were used for the purification of pro-relaxin from the two recombinant strains . the first attempt to purify human pro-relaxin h <dig> from pichia pink-prel was a combination of ultrafiltration and chromatography . the cell free supernatant was initially ultra-filtered on  <dig> kda membranes in order to concentrate the sample and then it was loaded on anion exchange column. this step was only useful to partially purify the sample, in fact, separation in the elution phase was not efficient and besides the unbound fraction only one single undefined peak was obtained. the latter was loaded on a rpc column following a gradient step elution, and the recovered fractions were analysed by western blotting . the peak eluted with 35% of eluent b corresponds to pro-relaxin and in accordance with iex results its representativity is quite low. the peak was recovered and analysed by hplc showing an elution time of about  <dig>  min in the set conditions. the samples showing a higher representativeness than 60% were analyzed by mass spectrometry.fig.  <dig> schematic overview of downstream processes. initial step used to recover the supernatant from all dual-phase fed-batch fermentation broths  followed by different strategies used for the purification of pro-relaxin  and his tagged pro-relaxin  


fig.  <dig> fplc and western blot analyses of partially purified recombinant un-tagged and tagged prorelaxin.  human recombinant pro-relaxin h <dig> was purified from fermentation supernatant by ultrafiltration, iex and rpc. the panel shows the rp chromatogram; the recovered fractions were analysed by western blotting. lane 1) unbound, lane 2) 20% b, lane 3) 30% b, lane 4) 35% b, m) molecular weight marker.  human recombinant his tagged pro-relaxin h <dig> was recovered by affinity chromatography in batch and sequentially the sample was loaded on a rpc column; the resulting chromatogram is shown in the panel. the fractions recovered from rpc were analysed by western blotting. lane 1) unbound, lane 2) 20% b, lane 3) 30% b, lane 4) 35% b, m) molecular weight marker. the arrow in the rp chromatograms indicates the peaks recognized by the anti pro-relaxin antibody




the purification of the his tagged pro-relaxin obtained from the fermentation of pichia pink-prelhis did not involve any membrane based step. the fermentation broth was centrifuged and the supernatant was incubated with a ni ff sepharose resin in batch, in order to attach tagged pro-relaxin. after imidazole separation the sample was loaded on a rpc column that showed the presence of different peaks demonstrating a low representativeness of pro-relaxin . as confirmed by western blotting experiments pro-relaxin was only present in the fraction eluted with 30% eluent b, indicating a modification of the interaction of tagged pro-relaxin with the matrix . the fraction demonstrating the presence of pro-relaxin was analysed by hplc and, as previously observed during fplc purifcation, elution time in these conditions was slightly different, in fact, tagged pro-relaxin was eluted after  <dig>  min, probably due to the presence of the his tag and of the xa factor cleavage site. the pro-relaxin peak area shows a representativeness that is higher compared to that obtained with the recombinant native form, reaching 80% purity.

the purified fractions of both un-tagged and tagged pro-relaxins were analysed by rp-hplc/esi-it-tof. figures 5a and b show the analytical chromatogram of the native and tagged pro-relaxins, respectively. inspection of the two chromatograms clearly shows the different quality of the two purified samples. in the first chromatogram, a broad main peak at rt  <dig>  min  is clearly evident, while the second chromatogram shows a more intense and sharper peak at rt  <dig>  min , thus evidencing the higher purity of the tagged pro-relaxin.fig.  <dig> lc-ms/ms analysis of recombinant pro-relaxins.  rp-hplc chromatogram with uv detection at  <dig> and 280 nm of untagged pro-relaxin.  rp-hplc chromatogram with uv detection at  <dig> and 280 nm of tagged pro-relaxin.  tryptic digested peptides and sequence covered of tagged pro-relaxin, as assessed by mascot and manual analysis of ms/ms data




the mass spectra of the two samples display several signals indicative of high molecular weight species; however, they were not easily assignable, due to low signal/noise ratio, caused by inefficient ionization of the intact proteins. therefore, the tagged pro-relaxin, which demonstrated to be the purest sample, was identified by standard proteomic procedures. lc–ms/ms of the tryptic digest and database search in the human subset of ncbi with online available mascot software allowed us to confirm the presence of the intact tagged pro-relaxin. in fact, eight peptides were identified, covering 38% of expressed sequence and, most notably, comprising the n- and c-terminal portions . given the different glycosylation pattern between human and yeast, ms spectra of the identified peptides were checked for o-glycosylation. post-translational modifications were absent in the seven peptides containing ser/thr residues . these analyzed peptides contain 50% of the ser/thr residues present in the whole sequence.

eia immunoassay
camp levels in the fermentation samples and in the fractions collected after the last purification step were determined by camp biotrak eia assay. the camp response of the thp- <dig> cells were used to test the biological activity of pro-relaxin produced from engineered pichia strains. all fractions of tagged and untagged pro-relaxin resulted active when compared to human relaxin used as control; however, while the supernatant recovered 24 h post induction showed a similar activity in both recombinant strains, samples deriving from the final steps of the purification processes demonstrated a different activity. in particular, a significantly higher  activity was found for the his-tagged pro-relaxin, as compared to the native form .fig.  <dig> immunoenzymatic activity assays. ability of human recombinant pro-relaxin h <dig> to stimulate camp production in a relaxin receptor expressing cell line  in comparison to the relaxin standard. the tagged and native recombinant pro-forms of the hormone were compared. 24 h p.i indicates that the test was performed on the supernatant collected during the fermentation process; p.p. indicates that the test was performed on prorelaxin samples recovered after purification. data are mean ± s.d. values of three independent experiments. t-test results are indicated in the figure: *p <  <dig> 




discussion
relaxin is a natural hormone with several potential applications the use of which is partly limited by the insufficient and hazardous animal derived protein supply. for this reason numerous attempts to develop a biotechnological process for relaxin production in prokaryotic and eukaryotic hosts were previously evaluated. porcine pro-relaxin was also expressed in transgenic tobacco  <cit> . in vitro studies demonstrate that porcine relaxin may possess various therapeutic effects, and tobacco was selected because it is a non-food, non-feed crop, and recombinant protein production could readily be scaled up. the authors verified the occurred insertion, transcription and translation of the gene of interest but no concentration or purity data were reported  <cit> . also immortalized bovine mammary epithelial  cells were used as hosts for the production of a recombinant tagged equine pro-relaxin by neumann and colleagues  <cit> . cells were transfected with the pst-erlx construct by using a liposome-mediated method. the concentration of relaxin found in the supernatants was of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg/l while sample lysates showed a concentration of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg/l. the use of mac-t cells as expression hosts offers the advantage of producing well folded proteins with a correct glycosylation pattern, however, some issues concern process scale-up and the complexity of the medium to be used. e.coli was used as host for the expression of both porcine pro-relaxin h <dig> and of human recombinant relaxin h <dig>  <cit> . however, since the proteins were expressed as inclusion body, cell lysis and in vitro renaturation were necessary for protein recovery, thereby making the process expensive and not competitive for production scale up. nevertheless, recombinant human relaxin h <dig> was the only one that reached phase iii clinical trials for patients with acute decompensated heart failure  <cit> .

the aim of the present work was to produce the unprocessed form of this hormone, pro-relaxin, that was shown to posses activity before processing, as well  <cit> . we chose the metylotrophic yeast p. pastoris as expression host, since yeasts combine the capability of a protein processing apparatus, that is typical for eukaryotic organisms, to the absence of endotoxins and viral dna. the human pro-relaxin h <dig> gene, with and without a c-terminal tag of histidines, was introduced in the genome of a protease deleted strain  under the control of the aox <dig> methanol-inducible promoter and in frame with a secretion signal, resulting in strains pichia pink-prelhis and pichia pink-prel, respectively. fed-batch processes based on a dual phase growth on glycerol and methanol were performed on 22 l fermenters resulting in a final yield of about  <dig> gcdw/l of biomass. one of the main problems commonly encountered during recombinant protein production is protein loss due to protease degradation. we therefore modified the protocol suggested by pai-chanfrau and collegues  <cit>  that evaluated the effect of temperature, ph and addition of excess nitrogen source and edta, on mini-pro-insulin expression. it was also previously observed that addition of casaminaocids reduced proteolysis of ovin interferon in p. pastoris by acting as preferential substrates  <cit> . we used a medium containing casein hydrolysate as main n source, and, before methanol induction, one single pulse of edta and ammonium sulphate was performed to divert proteases activity. the behavior of the recombinant strains was quite similar in terms of final biomass, growth rate and c-source consumption rate. although pichia is one of the hosts that is most commonly used for protein secretion several studies aim to improve the secretion of foreign proteins due to the variability of efficiency  <cit> . in both strains 1-2% of pro-relaxin could also be found inside the cells indicating a partial, although almost negligible, failure of the secretion system. expression of secreted tagged pro-relaxin strongly increased during induction whereas it remained constant inside the cell. moreover the processed form of the pro-hormone  was detected in both strains in the extracellular fraction. one of the key steps involved in secretion and activation of peptide hormones is site specific proteolysis, which is mediated in eukaryotic cells by serine proteases. in yeast the kex <dig> enzyme is undertaking this role. it was previously demonstrated that kex <dig> mainly targets proteins that are secreted to the environment  <cit>  and coexpression of human pro-relaxin with kex <dig> from saccharomyces cerevisiae in human kidney cells resulted in the secretion of mature relaxin  <cit> . it was therefore not surprising to observe relaxin in the extracellular fraction of broth samples. the result is a potentially more powerful active principle composed of a mixed population of pro-relaxin, that should have a higher half life and therefore a better pharmacokinetic performance, and relaxin, for immediate applications. western blot densitometric analyses performed on the supernatants and cell lysates showed quite similar concentrations of native and tagged pro-relaxin at the end of the fermentation process, that ranged between about  <dig> and 14 mg/l, respectively.

different procedures were used for the purification of the native and tagged forms of pro-relaxin produced. however, one of the major issues encountered during downstream processing was protein degradation. the output of the computational analysis of the human pro-insulin aminoacidic sequence with the protparam tool  <cit>  indicates an instability index of  <dig>  and classifies the protein as “stable”. the same analysis performed on pro-relaxin h <dig>  that also belongs to the insulin-like family of hormones, results, on the contrary, in an instability index of  <dig>  and classifies the protein as “unstable”.

both purification strategies allowed the attainment of proteins with the expected aminoacidic sequence and that also demonstrate binding to the relaxin receptor and therefore imply biological activity compared to the human relaxin control. a comparison of the purification efficiency and yield obtained during the two processes is difficult to perform due to the absence of a method that allows a precise determination of the concentration of pro-relaxin in the fermentation broth and after each purification step. the first strategy used for native pro-relaxin purification, based on a sequence of uf, iex and rpc chromatography resulted in a protein with a final purity of 60% as determined by hplc. the difficulties found during the purification procedure addressed us towards the development of a second strategy focused on the addition of a 6xhis-tag in order to  reduce protein losses due to the interaction with uf membranes  minimize degradation by reducing process time  perform most steps at low temperature in controlled conditions. the tag was added at the c-terminus of human pro-relaxin. moreover a xa factor cleavage site was inserted after the tag to allow removal of the latter after the purification step. the c-terminus was chosen, based on the work that investigated on the geometry of the relaxin receptor binding site, according to which addition to the c-terminus would not interfere with residues defined as critical for receptor binding, on the b chain interface  <cit> . this approach resulted in a final sample purity of up to 80%.

the higher content of intact pro-relaxin in the tagged sample was confirmed by lc-ms analyses. in fact, the rp-hplc profiles clearly indicate the higher recovery and purity of the tagged purified fractions. this allowed a complete proteomic analysis of the tryptic digest, confirming the intact sequence of the tagged recombinant protein. thus, lc-ms/ms analysis with it-tof platform revealed a valuable tool for rapid and sensitive analyses, which can be used in combination with biochemical methodologies, in order to confirm the purity and the chemical structure even in complex samples, with the ultimate purpose of explaining differences in functional properties  <cit> . our spectra analyses also excluded any post-translational modification. this is particularly meaningful, since hypermannosylation is a known issue in yeast expression. in fact, hypermannosylated proteins may imply drawbacks, such as allergic reactions, thus limiting their therapeutic use  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
with the aim of developing an alternative to currently used extraction procedures from animal tissues and possibly prokaryotic relaxin production avoiding recovery from inclusion bodies, the present study demonstrates the possibility of producing biologically active human pro-relaxin and relaxin by exploiting the yeast p. pastoris. the purified recombinant proteins underwent a complete proteomic analysis confirming their intact sequence with a greater purity of the tagged protein. optimization of the fermentation strategy and of the purification process are however necessary to improve biomass titers for pharmaceutical applications.

