BACKGROUND
the study of the evolutionary history of arthropods is a challenging field of research, as they constitute the large majority of known metazoan species and exhibit an extreme diversity of body plans and physiology. nowadays, evo-devo approaches largely contribute to this research area , but the evolution of peptide hormone families directly involved in physiological adaptations remains poorly investigated in arthropods, especially when compared to vertebrates. the crustacean hyperglycemic hormone  family could constitute a model of choice to address this question, as chh family peptides are well known in decapod crustaceans, where they do play major roles in many physiological processes. since decapods were the first invertebrates where a neuroendocrine mechanism was discovered, they have been extensively used in comparative endocrinology studies, and chh has become the archetype of a neuropeptide family including around  <dig> members to date . chh family peptides are  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids long and are, based on structural features, divided into two sub-families  <cit> . type i peptides, the chhs sensu stricto, are pleiotropic hormones involved in the regulation of energetic and ionic metabolism and, in addition, can also exert an inhibitory effect on molting and reproduction . by a tissue-specific alternative splicing mechanism, chh genes produce a second peptide, devoid of hyperglycemic activity, named chh-l , which may be involved in osmoregulation  <cit> . type ii peptides, namely the molt-inhibiting hormones , the vitellogenesis-inhibiting hormones  and the mandibular organ-inhibiting hormones , are functionally more specialized than chhs. characterized through their inhibitory actions on molting and reproduction, they never elicit hyperglycemia .

the evolution of chhs has been recently discussed in decapods  <cit>  and we have intended here to extend the evolutionary study to the entire family, by including data from non-decapod taxa. little is known about the chh family outside decapods, but it may be present in the entire arthropoda, and even in all ecdysozoa. indeed, a chh and a vih were isolated from an isopod crustacean  <cit> , and neuropeptides sharing the same structural signature, the ion transport peptides , were also characterized in several insect species . as for decapod chhs, itp genes produce an itp-l isoform by alternative splicing, whose function remains elusive. to go further, heterologous immunostainings revealed the occurrence of chh-like peptides in two branchiopods  <cit> , a myriapod  <cit>  and a chelicerate  <cit> , and a gene was found in the genome of the nematode caenorhabditis elegans, which encodes a putative peptide exhibiting a chh family structural signature  <cit> . to increase our knowledge on the chh family in the taxa cited above, we have conducted an in silico study on available genomic sequences from arthropods and nematodes. exon-intron patterns of the genes were determined and sequences of putative chh family peptides were deciphered. in addition, chh family sequences were obtained by molecular cloning in a collembolan and in a branchiopod, whose phylogenetic positions are currently uncertain. indeed, the grouping of crustaceans and hexapods in a pancrustacea clade is widely accepted but the relationships inside pancrustacea remain controversial. recent molecular phylogenies based on mitochondrial genes  notably yield a paraphyletic hexapoda, with collembola separated from insecta, and branchiopoda as a sister-group to malacostraca and cephalocarida  <cit> . these phylogenies largely differ from those based on nuclear genes , where hexapoda appears monophyletic, and branchiopoda are generally sister-group to hexapods  <cit> .

newly characterized sequences were included in chh family sequence datasets, which were then used to build phylogenies of this family and to investigate its evolutionary history. because of the reduced size of these datasets, a test was conducted to assess which of the two phylogenetic hypotheses presented figure  <dig> was more strongly supported by our data, and could be further used as a basis to elaborate evolutionary scenarios of the chh family genes.

RESULTS
chh family peptides characterized in daphnia magna and folsomia candida
in the branchiopod daphnia magna, rt-pcrs conducted with degenerate primers designed from insect itp transcripts and followed by 3'-5'race produced two complete cdnas. their length was  <dig> and  <dig> bp, respectively, and they encoded peptide precursors composed of a signal peptide, a precursor-related peptide and a mature hormone. the two cdna sequences were identical except for a  <dig> bp stretch  present in only one of them, suggesting the occurrence of an alternative splicing during mrna processing. the short cdna encoded a 72-residue peptide with a c-terminus end putatively amidated, which was named ion transport peptide  as it appeared to be related to insect itps . on the other hand, the long cdna encoded a non-amidated peptide of  <dig> amino acids, only differing from itp after the fortieth residue, which was named itp-l .

the two complete cdna sequences obtained from the collembolan folsomia candida led to similar results: two transcripts of different lengths  encoded prepro-peptides which only differed after the fortieth residue of the mature peptide. the  <dig> residue amidated peptide, translated from the short cdna, was named itp and the  <dig> residue non-amidated peptide, translated from the longest cdna, was named itp-l .

sequences characterized in silico
for the insects anopheles gambiae, apis mellifera, culex pipiens, nasonia vitripennis and pediculus humanus, nucleotide sequences encoding for itp or itp-l, which have not been recovered by automatic annotation programs were deduced from the gene sequence following alternative splicing rules. a gene encoding putative itp and itp-l isoforms was also found in the genome of another water flea, daphnia pulex. at the present time, both itp  and itp-l  sequences are available from  <dig> insect and two branchiopod species .

in the genome of the deer tick ixodes scapularis , a gene was found that encoded only one mature itp-like peptide. in addition, cdna and peptide sequences of another itp-like peptide were found, during database mining, in the american dog tick dermacentor variabilis. these peptides are  <dig> and  <dig> residue long, respectively, and are not amidated on their c-terminal end .

in the caenorhabditis elegans genome, the gene zc <dig>  has been described as putatively encoding a chh family peptide of  <dig> amino acid residues  <cit> . in the present study, a second gene  which may encode another putative chh family peptide was found in the c. elegans genome: this gene encodes a mature peptide of  <dig> amino acids containing six cysteyl residues whose positions are similar to those found in chh family hormones . the corresponding peptides zc <dig>  and c05e <dig>  were named itp  <dig> and itp  <dig>  respectively, based on their similarity with insect itps and without predicting any physiological function. similar itp  <dig> and itp  <dig> peptides were also deduced from the genomes of caenorhabditis briggsae and caenorhabditis remanei. finally, single chh family peptides were deduced from the genomes of the malaysian filarial worm brugia malayi and the whipworm trichinella spiralis. these putative peptides were  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids long, respectively .

for each of the genes described here, exon-intron structures were determined and compared to those already described . these data were further used, in addition to phylogenetic information, to infer evolutionary scenarios of the chh family.

phylogeny of chh family peptides in pancrustacea
in the maximum-likelihood  phylogeny of pancrustacean chh family peptides , type i and type ii peptides of decapods were both arranged in monophyletic sub-groups. type i and ii peptide clades were also found in the phylogeny built by bayesian inference  based on the dna dataset. the "type i" clade, supported by a bootstrap value of 95% in the ml analysis , contained all chhs from decapods, with the chh from the isopod armadillidium vulgare at their base. similarly, the "type ii" clade, supported by a bootstrap value of 100% , contained all mihs, vihs and moihs from decapods, with the isopod vih at their base. this topology suggests that the type i and type ii peptide genes constitute paralogous lineages, which have appeared by duplication of an ancestral gene before the radiation of malacostracans . inside the type i clade, the clade of dendrobranchiata  chhs encoded by three-exon genes is at the base of the other decapod chhs, encoded by four-exon genes, found both in dendrobranchiata and pleocyemata . it suggests that a duplication of a chh gene has occurred before the radiation of decapods and the split between dendrobranchiata and pleocyemata, but this node was strongly supported only in the bi analysis .

a clade supported by a bootstrap value of 76%  was positioned at the base of the type i and type ii clades and contained all itps from insects, together with the peptides characterized in the collembolan folsomia candida and the branchiopods daphnia magna and daphnia pulex, which were located at the base. the type iii sub-family was thus created to designate peptides contained in this clade.

since the topology of this clade was only weakly supported , amino acid and dna datasets containing less taxa but more characters were used for phylogenetic inference. when an outgroup  was included in these datasets, a structure of two monophyletic groups was found within the ingroup: a "type i" clade  and a "type iii" clade . since the four exons used in these datasets exist only in the ingroup species, the inclusion of the outgroup resulted in a loss of phylogenetic signal. then, the outgroup was removed for subsequent analyses and the resulting trees were rooted using the structure in two clades previously found.

phylogenies built from these 23-taxa datasets using ml and bi methods were similar . insects appeared monophyletic, albeit with moderate support, and the relationships within the insect clade were not resolved. yet, the collembolan folsomia candida was positioned at the base of the insects, thus forming a moderately supported monophyletic hexapod clade, and branchiopods were a sister group to hexapods, with high support.

evolutionary scenarios of the chh family genes
using the 23-taxa sequence datasets, a kh test was conducted to decide which of the two competing phylogenetic hypotheses for arthropods presented in figure  <dig> could be used to build an evolutionary scenario of the chh family. this test clearly supported  the tree based on nuclear genes, with a monophyletic hexapoda sister-group to branchiopoda , versus the tree based on mitochondrial genes . then, the ml phylogeny of chh family peptides  was superimposed on a species tree in which branchiopoda were sister-group to hexapoda, to create a topology accounting for gene duplications in pancrustacea . in nematodes, a gene duplication was also inferred in the caenorhabditis phylum, as two paralogs were found in genomes of caenorhabditis species. in the most parsimonious scenario of gene structure evolution based on this topology, chh family genes of ecdysozoa evolved from an ancestral two-exon gene, with nine partial insertion or deletion events .
in this scenario, chh family genes of arthropods have all evolved from a three-exon gene, and the four-exon gene structure would have appeared independently twice, in a common ancestor of decapods and in a common ancestor of insects and branchiopods.

because of the weak support, in the ml phylogeny , at the node indicating the duplication which led to the two paralogous chh genes found in dendrobranchiata , an alternative topology was considered for pancrustacean chh family genes, where the chh gene duplication would have occurred only in the dendrobranchiata phylum . in that case, the most parsimonious scenario implied eight intron or exon insertion/deletion events, and the exon duplication leading to the four-exon gene structure would have occurred only once.

regardless of the evolutionary scenario considered, the putative ancestral gene was likely composed of two exons and a phase  <dig> intron interrupting the codon of the amino acid residue following the fourth cysteine of the mature peptide. such an intron was found in every known chh family gene, except the itp <dig> genes in caenorhabditis species and the itp gene of trichinella spiralis .

dibasic processing sites used for precursor maturation by prohormone convertase then likely appeared independently twice, in the common ancestor to arthropods on one hand and in the common ancestor to the caenorhabditis genus on the other hand, leading to the occurrence in these lineages of precursor related peptides , such as the chh-precursor related peptides  of decapods.

discussion
evolution of the chh family in decapods and functional implications
since the discovery of neuroendocrine factors within the eyestalks of decapods seventy years ago  <cit> , structural and functional data about chh family peptides in these crustaceans have been accumulated. while our knowledge increased, it became more and more difficult to propose a model of endocrine regulation applying to all decapods. indeed, chh family peptides are not identical in all decapod groups, and their function varies with the species. this diversity prompted us to investigate the evolutionary history of these peptides.

in decapods, many gene duplications have occurred, leading to two main paralogous lineages  and to a large polymorphism of chh family peptides inside these lineages . for example, two clusters containing each at least  <dig> different chh genes were identified in the shrimp metapenaeus ensis  <cit> . a paradigm in evolutionary biology is that gene duplication represents the major mechanism for emergence of new functions, as one of the two copies is potentially freed from selective pressure and will accumulate more mutations during evolution  <cit> . in the chh family, the functional divergence observed between the two paralogous lineages could result from a subfunctionalization  <cit> , rather than from a neofunctionalization. in fact, the ancestral gene may have encoded a pleiotropic hormone, like current chhs, and after duplication of this gene the type ii paralogous lineage may have evolved faster to peptides with a chh-like structure, but devoid of hyperglycemic activity and conversely exhibiting more specialized activities, such as inhibition of molting or vitellogenesis . the faster evolution rate of type ii peptide genes may explain the loss of phylogenetic signal observed in mihs, vihs and moihs sequences. indeed, the topology of the "type ii" clade  is not congruent with the phylogeny of decapods, whereas it is for the "type i" clade, as shown in earlier work  <cit> . this clearly impedes the elucidation of evolutionary relationships between type ii peptides. the only paralogous lineages clearly identified so far are the mihs and moihs of cancer crabs, as the moih genes seem to have appeared from a duplicated mih gene only in this genus  <cit> . in lobsters, there is no mih identified so far but a vih instead, whose gene may have evolved from a mih gene subjected to a reduced selective pressure, as molt inhibition is exerted in this taxa by a chh isoform  <cit> .

evolutionary history "outside decapods"
a high number of gene duplications were observed in decapods only. so far, the only paralogous lineages identified outside decapods are the "itp1" and "itp2" genes found in caenorhabditis species , and only one chh family peptide gene could be found in genomes of the other nematodes, the insects and the deer tick. in the water flea daphnia pulex, one itp gene was also rebuilt from whole genome shotgun  sequences but other wgs sequences sharing sequence identity with the itp gene have been found. however, it is unclear whether these sequences correspond to another chh family peptide coding gene or to a pseudo-gene: this gene would have a peculiar structure, with exon iii lacking, and the prepro-peptide putatively encoded would lack the dibasic processing site found in every chh or itp precursors and the  <dig> following residues of the mature peptide as well. yet, although only one itp and one itp-l cdna have been cloned in daphnia magna, recently published est data suggest that both genes may be expressed in daphnia pulex  <cit> , but est and genomic sequences do not match . to include these data in an evolutionary scenario, genomic and mrna sequences should be characterized by molecular cloning.

this apparent lack of paralogous lineages outside decapods raises the question of a possible conservation of function between the itps of insects and the related peptides found in branchiopods, chelicerates and nematodes. yet, functional studies are too scarce to address this question. in insects, the effect of itp on ionic and water balance was only demonstrated in locusts  <cit>  and nothing is known about the function of itp-like peptides in chelicerates or nematodes. in branchiopods, only one gene expression study on sex determination in daphnia magna has indicated that chh family peptides may inhibit methyl farnesoate synthesis by the mandibular organ  <cit> . it is noteworthy that several chh family peptides are known to play such a role in decapods  <cit> . it will be informative to determine whether daphnia peptides exhibit other typical "decapod" functions such as hyperglycemia or ecdysteroid synthesis inhibition, or if they also possess an anti-diuretic activity, as shown for insect itps. a similar question about another neuropeptide family, the rpch/akh family, has recently found a partial answer. like for the chh family, the putative rpch  of daphnia magna shares more sequence similarity with akhs  of insects than with rpch of decapod crustaceans  <cit> . in a heterologous bioassay, this peptide was able to trigger a mobilization of lipid reserves when injected into the green shield bug nezara viridula whereas it did not provoke pigment migration when injected into the shrimp palaemon pacificus  <cit> . although heterologous bioassays must be considered cautiously, such results suggest that this peptide could have an adipokinetic function in water fleas  rather than a pigment-concentration function .

emergence of the four-exon genes
one important step in the evolution of the chh family is the emergence of the four-exon genes found in decapods, branchiopods and insects. in these genes, exons iii and iv encode peptide sequences of similar lengths, with two cystein residues in the same positions, thus suggesting that the supplementary exon has appeared by tandem duplication of another exon. at first glance, it seems more likely that this duplication has occurred only once, in a common ancestor of pancrustacea . in all these taxa, two peptides are produced by alternative splicing; one peptide  is  <dig> or  <dig> amino acids long and is always amidated on its c-terminal end, and the other peptide  is slightly longer and is never amidated. moreover, the expression of these two isoforms seems to be similar in decapods and insects; in the crab carcinus maenas and the caridean shrimp macrobrachium rosenbergii, chh transcripts were mainly found in neurons of the central nervous system  whereas chh-l transcripts were found in neurons of the peripheral nervous system  <cit> ; in the moths manduca sexta and bombyx mori and the locust schistocerca americana, itp-immunoreactive neurons were only found in the brain, whereas itp-l-immunoreactive ones were found along the ventral nervous chain. itp-l immunoreactivity was also detected in the brain, but was weak and restricted to cell bodies, thus suggesting that itp-l was not secreted from this tissue  <cit> .

yet, even if the hypothesis of an independent emergence of the fourth exon  appears unlikely, it should not be rejected, as a similar exon duplication also occurred in a drosophila ancestor, leading to the five-exon gene found in drosophila melanogaster  <cit> .

controversy about pancrustacean phylogeny
given the relative short length of the sequences used, the objective of this study was not to build a phylogeny of pancrustaceans using chh family peptides, but to choose the appropriate phylogeny to infer evolutionary scenarios of the chh family. the kh test carried out with our datasets indicated a congruence of the data with recent molecular phylogenies of pancrustaceans based on nuclear gene sequences  <cit>  and not with those based on mitochondrial genes  <cit> . moreover, the robustness and quality of the signal contained in mitochondrial gene sequences for arthropod phylogenetics have recently been questioned  <cit> . supplementary taxa will have to be represented within chh family datasets to confirm this result, but studying the evolutionary history of this family may help to select synapomorphies to support concurrent phylogenetic hypotheses about pancrustacean relationships. for example, the presence of paralogous type i and type ii peptides could constitute a trait shared by malacostracans and their sister-groups.

CONCLUSIONS
the evolutionary scenarios proposed in this study suggest that genes encoding crustacean hyperglycemic hormone family peptides of ecdysozoa evolved from an ancestral two-exon gene. in the malacostracan lineage , the evolution of the chh family has involved numerous duplications, insertions and deletions of exons or entire genes, leading to the wide variety of functions displayed by the encoded neurohormones in decapods. this neuropeptide family could thus constitute a promising model to investigate the evolutionary forces at the root of the functional divergence of duplicated genes. outside malacostracans, the number of gene duplications seems to have been lower, which may reflect different evolutionary pathways. at present, chh family peptides characterized outside decapods are still scarce, and this work constitutes a first step in a wider quest. in the future, the evolutionary scenarios elaborated here will be completed and amended, as chh family peptides will probably be characterized in new taxa. the  <dig> genome sequencing projects currently under way in ecdysozoan species will be of valuable help as soon as they are completed, to enlarge our view on the evolution of this multigenic family.

