BACKGROUND
since the introduction of the heterobranchia concept by haszprunar  <cit> , considerable advances have been achieved, solving the phylogeny of certain heterobranch groups  on morphological  and molecular levels . members of the euthyneura - the major heterobranch clade - have conquered marine, limnic and terrestrial habitats from the deep sea to the high mountains. as a result they form one of the most successful and diverse groups within gastropoda, and even within mollusca as regards species numbers and ecological diversity. quite some effort has been dedicated to revealing relationships in the taxon, and to supporting or rejecting the respective monophyly of traditional higher groupings such as pulmonata and opisthobranchia. nevertheless, the phylogeny of the euthyneura has remained partially unresolved and heavily discussed . while morphological analyses face the problem of convergent developments that might mask the true phylogenetic signal, and depend on the coding procedure for morphological characters  <cit> , single-marker molecular analyses are challenged in choosing a suitable marker, and multi-locus molecular studies stand and fall with the available taxon sampling.

one major problem in molecular studies is that highly aberrant or derived taxa of uncertain taxonomic relationships "jump around" in phylogenetic analyses and weaken the phylogenetic signal for higher taxa. members of such groups are often hard to obtain ; thus, the groups are frequently either excluded from phylogenetic analyses or only included with a low number of representatives, resulting in poor overall taxon sampling. one attempt to support future phylogenetic approaches on a higher taxonomic level  is to provide data on small enigmatic groups and their phylogenetic relationships step by step.

the acochlidia, a traditional "order" of the opisthobranchia since their establishment by odhner , form one of the unsolved mysteries within euthyneura  <cit> . being a small group with only  <dig> valid species worldwide, these slugs are morphologically and biologically highly aberrant and diverse, comprising a series of unusual characters  . most acochlidians live interstitially in marine sands, while some have conquered limnic systems . their monophyly is widely accepted  <cit>  especially since a proposed sister group relationship of the acochlidian family ganitidae with sacoglossa  could be rejected based on a comprehensive parsimony analysis of morphological characters  <cit> . during the last years a series of studies have redescribed key acochlidian taxa in great detail, including 3d reconstructions  <cit> , and added considerably to the morphological and biological knowledge of this previously little understood group. a first comprehensive cladistic analysis of their phylogeny is now established  <cit> , but the identity of their sister group remains uncertain. most recent morphological analyses suggested a common origin with either the equally enigmatic rhodopemorpha  <cit> , the diaphanid cephalaspidean toledonia  <cit> , or with runcinid or philinoid cephalaspideans  <cit> . however, morphology-based analyses by schrödl and neusser  <cit> , demonstrated that acochlidia usually group with other mesopsammic taxa, if any were included . thus, it is likely that convergent adaptations to the interstitial habitat mask the truly phylogenetic signals. molecular markers independent from direct ecological pressures suggested an unresolved basal opisthobranch origin for acochlidia . a first combined multi-gene dataset led to the surprising result of acochlidia clustering in a pulmonate relationship, united in a clade with pyramidelloidea, amphiboloidea and eupulmonata  <cit> . however, only three derived acochlids  were included, with partially missing data. therefore this unexpected result requires re-examination based on complete multi-locus data and a more focused taxon sampling, including all previously suggested potential sister groups of acochlidia. most recently, another curiosity with potential affinities to acochlidia has been described: the amphibious and insectivorous sea slug aiteng ater from mangrove mud in thailand  <cit> . due to its unusual combination of morphological characters  it was placed in a new family, aitengidae, with unclear phylogenetic relationships and affinities to sacoglossa, acochlidia and cephalaspidea. a similar but still undescribed species was found in japan, which was available for the present study. morphologically it clearly belongs to the aitengidae, but shows differences to a. ater at genus or species level . its affinity to a. ater is confirmed by comparison of the mitochondrial 16s rrna-sequences .

the present study aims to clarify the origins and phylogenetic relationships of acochlidia and potentially related enigmatic taxa such as aitengidae, based on a combined molecular dataset from nuclear and mitochondrial markers. for the first time, representatives of six out of seven acochlidian families  <cit>  are analysed in the context of a broad taxon sampling that includes other meiofaunal slugs  and most euthyneuran sub-groups. furthermore, the potentially related gascoignella nukuli  and an undescribed species of aitengidae are included in the present study. since there is no fossil record of acochlidia or any other mesopsammic euthyneura, we apply a molecular clock approach to estimate divergence times for these groups. on the basis of our phylogenetic hypothesis we discuss evolutionary trends and potential consequences for euthyneuran classification in general.

RESULTS
neighbournet analysis
the neighbournet graph created by splitstree  <dig>  visualises a generally high conflict in the data , and high substitution rates displayed by long terminal branches in many taxa. there is no clade-supporting pattern for the monophyly of opisthobranchia or of pulmonata on the basis of our dataset. of the major traditional heterobranch taxa only acteonoidea and nudipleura show a clear split support ; some split support is present for pyramidelloidea, cephalaspidea s.s., anaspidea, umbraculoidea, pteropod gymnosomata and thecosomata, amphiboloidea and siphonarioidea. no pattern supporting any of the other opisthobranch or pulmonate groups can be found, mainly due to affinities of individual species to neighbouring groups. no split pattern indicates a relationship between the different meiofaunal heterobranchs such as acochlidia, smeagol phillipensis and philinoidea  .

the monophyly of the acochlidia receives no split support. a very weak signal supports a grouping of acochlidia together with some pulmonate taxa, but there is no indication for affinities to other opisthobranch taxa. the acochlidian subgroups hedylopsacea and microhedylacea receive no split support, due to some common support for hedylopsis  and asperspina . the enigmatic aitengidae sp. receives split support grouped with acochlidian pseudunelidae and acochlidiidae, and shows no affinity to sacoglossa or cephalaspidea.

phylogenetic analysis
examination of differences in incongruence length between the four genetic markers - 18s rrna, 28s rrna, 16s rrna and cytochrome c oxidase subunit i  - using the ild-test implemented in paup*  <cit>  revealed that the phylogenetic signal is improved in the combined data set . thus a concatenated dataset was used for phylogenetic analyses. the likelihood values of the different partitions of the dataset were compared via the akaike information criterion  and the separation into  <dig> partitions  improved the likelihood significantly . the dataset aligned with mafft, masked with gblocks and analysed in  <dig> partitions led to the best likelihood value, thus it is presented herein as the most probable phylogenetic hypothesis based on our data . for comparison of the different analytical approaches and the resulting differences in tree topology and related support values, see table  <dig> 

the table lists the different methods of masking the alignment, phylogenetic approaches and models of sequence evolution used for the different analyses, as well as the resulting differences in tree topology .

the euthyneura form a monophyletic group without significant bootstrap support  in ml-analyses, or posterior probability  in bayesian analyses. they do not include the acteonoidea  in most of our analyses, but include the pyramidelloidea and glacidorboidea as sister group to amphiboloidea. within the euthyneura the opisthobranchia clearly result as non-monophyletic. at the basis of the euthyneura the nudipleura split off, with high internal support. the clade of the remaining euthyneuran taxa receives good support . first, an opisthobranch clade  is composed of umbraculoidea, runcinacea, cephalaspidea s.s., anaspidea and pteropoda, with umbraculoidea as the most basal branch. the runcinid runcina africana forms the sister group to the anaspidea and the well backed  pteropoda , and the above combined are sister to the remaining cephalaspidea s.s., with high support for monophyly of cephalaspidea s.s. . internally the cephalaspidea s.s. are poorly resolved, and their internal topology differs between the raxml and bayesian analyses . the mesopsammic philine exigua and philinoglossa praelongata do not form a clade: p. praelongata clusters with scaphander lignarius, whereas no clear sister group relationship could be identified for p. exigua.

the pulmonata as traditionally defined result as non-monophyletic due to the inclusion of the opisthobranch groups sacoglossa and acochlidia and of the "lower" heterobranch pyramidelloidea and glacidorboidea. the pulmonate clade is significantly supported , but internally characterised by an unstable topology, with no or low support concerning the sister group relationships between the major groups. siphonarioidea and sacoglossa form a clade  sister to the remaining taxa . in the analyses of the aliscore dataset siphonarioidea form the most basal group, followed by a split-off of the sacoglossa . the monophyletic sacoglossa  combine clades with shelled and shell-less representatives, with gascoignella nukuli  as the most basal offshoot of the latter. siphonarioidea + sacoglossa are recovered as sister group to a clade composed of ) + ). apart from acochlidia, the monophyly of all higher taxa is well supported: amphiboloidea , pyramidelloidea , hygrophila  and eupulmonata . however, relations between these taxa are poorly resolved, not supported, and vary within the different analyses . in all our analyses amphiboloidea cluster with glacidorboidea and pyramidelloidea. thus thalassophila  and basommatophora  are left as polyphyletic. the eupulmonata  are recovered sister to acochlidia. within eupulmonata stylommatophora  form the basal group; systellommatophora  is sister to a clade ellobioidea + , the latter comprising smeagol phillippensis and otina ovata.

acochlidia are recovered as monophyletic but with no significant support. the internal phylogeny of the acochlidia is composed of the two monophyletic traditional suborders hedylopsacea  and microhedylacea , and is congruent with the morphology-based phylogeny of acochlidia proposed by schrödl and neusser  <cit> . additionally the enigmatic aitengidae sp. clusters within the hedylopsacea as sister group to pseudunelidae and acochlidiidae  or basal within hedylopsacea.

in analyses of gblock datasets acochlidia are sister to eupulmonata , in aliscore based analyses they cluster sister to hygrophila +  . to assess the level of confidence of the "best" tree , we calculated the p-values of an alternative topology  in combination with the "best" tree topology. based on the resulting p-values of the au test the alternative hypothesis is highly significantly rejected .

molecular clock
the phylogenetic hypothesis obtained with the software beast  based on the concatenated four-marker gblocks dataset largely confirms the topology obtained from raxml and mrbayes . based on the three fossil calibration points the euthyneura originated already in the palaeozoic, probably in the carboniferous or permian. the diversification of euthyneura with the rise of many extant taxa started approximately in the late palaeozoic  and major divergence events occurred in the mesozoic. on the basis of our analysis the pulmonate clade  first appeared in the late palaeozoic to early mesozoic, approximately at the permian/triassic transition. the split between eupulmonata and acochlidia took place in the mesozoic, between the triassic and jurassic periods. the diversification of acochlidia is estimated to have happened in the jurassic with the split between hedylopsacea and microhedylacea. aitengidae split off from pseudunelidae and acochlidiidae in the cretaceous. the transition to limnic habitats within acochlidiidae appears as a comparatively recent event dating to the palaeogene.

according to our data, major opisthobranch groups originated also in the mesozoic .

for comparison and to evaluate the impact of removing ambiguous parts of the alignment on molecular clock analyses, we repeated the analysis with the raw  alignment of our data . even though the topology varied slightly from the one in the previous analysis, the estimated divergence times stayed surprisingly constant, supporting the rough estimate given above.

discussion
implications for the phylogeny of heterobranchia
our results on the origin of acochlidia - in congruence with previous molecular studies on euthyneura based on the same molecular markers  <cit>  - necessitate the reconsideration of current classification concepts. redefinitions below aim to observe continuity in traditional nomenclature and cause the unavoidable minimum of changes in terminology.

euthyneura
the monophyly of euthyneura  has been widely accepted and well supported  <cit> , even though their eponymous apomorphy - the euthyneury - has been revealed as convergent development  <cit> . euthyneuran monophyly was recently questioned due to inclusion of "lower heterobranchia" pyramidelloidea unresolved within pulmonata  <cit>  or sister to amphiboloidea  <cit> . some other morphological studies place pyramidelloidea as sister to euthyneura  <cit> . dinapoli and klussmann-kolb  <cit>  argued to include them within euthyneura, which has also been supported by morphological analysis  <cit> . latest molecular data on pyramidelloidea support an euthyneuran origin and indicate a relationship with glacidorboidea and amphiboloidea  <cit> . our data again recovers pyramidelloidea as sister to amphiboloidea within pulmonates , but with no significant support. in addition to nucleotide sequences , data from mitochondrial gene arrangements  <cit> , a "morpho-molecular" synapomorphy  as well as morphology  all support the inclusion of pyramidelloidea within euthyneura. when first describing glacidorboidea, ponder  <cit>  placed them within pulmonata and discussed a relationship to amphiboloidea. however, haszprunar  <cit>  moved them to "lower heterobranchia". the first molecular data on glacidorboidea confirmed a pulmonate relationship  <cit> . this is again supported by our data.

"opisthobranchia"
while the monophyly of several opisthobranch subgroups  receives good support, the monophyly of the opisthobranchia in a traditional sense is rejected in all recent studies, regardless of whether the latter are molecular or morphological . this is confirmed by our multi-locus molecular approach  and supported by the results of the au test. thus, "opisthobranchia" as traditionally defined should be considered as non-monophyletic.

as in previous studies we can clearly distinguish at least two clades  within "opisthobranchia" that lead towards the pulmonate level of organisation.

only one of our analyses indicates the acteonoidea sister to nudipleura . this clade that had resulted repeatedly in molecular studies with still limited "lower heterobranch" taxon sampling, either in a derived position  <cit>  or as a basal offshoot within euthyneura  <cit> . a recent molecular phylogeny on acteonoidea suggest a common origin with lower heterobranch rissoelloidea and a sister group relationship to nudipleura  <cit> . while the basal position of acteonoidea was commonly accepted  <cit> , some authors doubted the basal position of nudipleura, which was originally considered as a highly derived taxon, and suspect rate heterogeneity and deviant base composition as causing this unnatural grouping  <cit> . based on potential synapomorphies in the reproductive system , ghiselin  <cit>  already suggested a relationship between acteonoidea and nudipleura. however, acteonoidea form a well-supported "lower heterobranch" clade with rissoelloidea, , confirming results by aktipis et al.  <cit>  and dinapoli and klussmann-kolb  <cit> . the latter authors also recovered nudipleura as the first offshoot of euthyneura, which is confirmed by our study. salvini-plawen and steiner  <cit>  grouped umbraculoidea with nudipleura, but none of the recent molecular or morphological studies support such a relationship  <cit> .

a common clade including umbraculoidea, anaspidea, cephalaspidea s.s. and pteropoda was already well supported in previous molecular analyses  <cit> , and monophyly of a clade anaspidea + pteropoda received strong support in one previous study  <cit> . the present results confirm cephalaspidea s.s., including diaphanidae, but excluding runcinidae as suggested in a previous analysis  <cit> . in our study runcina africana groups with anaspidea and pteropoda, as in the bayesian analysis of the concatenated 18s rrna, 28s rrna and coi dataset of the more comprehensive cephalaspidean phylogeny by malaquias et al.  <cit> . the latter authors thus proposed to reinstate runcinacea as a taxonomic category equivalent to cephalaspidea s.s.. however, different analyses of the same authors led to different placements of runcinacea, e.g. as sister to the remaining cephalaspidea s.s.; hence the group's origin was left unresolved. surprisingly our study indicates independent origins for the mesopsammic philine exigua  and philinoglossa praelongata. the internal topology of cephalaspidea s.s. is weakly supported in our study, but a more complete cephalaspidean sampling also rendered philinoidea paraphyletic   <cit> .

based on our results and in congruence with the topology in previous studies  <cit> , we suggest to unite umbraculoidea, anaspidea, runcinacea, pteropoda and cephalaspidea s.s. in the new clade euopisthobranchia , presenting a monophyletic remainder of the "opisthobranchia" as traditionally defined. previous studies  <cit>  discussed the gizzard  with gizzard plates as homologous apomorphic structures supporting a clade composed of cephalaspidea s.s., pteropoda and anaspidea. a gizzard with gizzard plates probably originated in herbivorous taxa in which it worked like a grinding mill, thus might be secondarily reduced in carnivorous groups within cephalaspidea s.s. and gymnosomata  <cit> . klussmann-kolb and dinapoli  <cit>  considered the gizzard in umbraculoidea as non-homologous with the one in the previous groups, on account of the absence of gizzard plates or spines. this contradicted salvini-plawen and steiner  <cit> , who had proposed the gizzard to be a synapomorphy of the larger clade of paratectibranchia  and eleutherobranchia, secondarily lost in nudipleura but still present in umbraculoidea. as coded in wägele and klussmann-kolb  <cit> , our phylogenetic hypothesis supports homology of the gizzard in umbraculoidea with the gizzard with gizzard plates and spines in the other euopisthobranchian taxa. thus, the structure is proposed as a synapomorphy of euopisthobranchia.

"pulmonata"
the monophyly of pulmonata as traditionally defined has been well supported in morphological analyses  and molecular studies  <cit> . however, doubts have arisen recently due to molecular studies which recovered additional taxa  within "pulmonata"  <cit> , or to novel studies based on mitochondrial gene arrangements  <cit>  which rendered "pulmonata" polyphyletic. based on our phylogenetic hypothesis  "pulmonata" as traditionally defined is non-monophyletic due to the inclusion of pyramidelloidea, glacidorboidea, sacoglossa and acochlidia. on the premise of monophyletic euthyneura, with basal nudipleura and monophyletic euopisthobranchia , the remaining euthyneuran taxa necessarily form a clade, in our study supported with maximum posterior probability  and significant bootstrap support  . even though the topology within this pulmonate clade is unstable and not well resolved , for practical reasons and due to the assumptions of monophyletic euthyneura and euopisthobranchia we suggest the new taxon panpulmonata to unite siphonarioidea, sacoglossa, glacidorboidea, pyramidelloidea, amphiboloidea, hygrophila, acochlidia and eupulmonata . the scientific meaning of the name "pulmonata" and the corresponding major feature of those animals being "air-breathers" surely are not applicable to the novel panpulmonate groups acochlidia, sacoglossa and pyramidelloidea, but also not for traditional pulmonate taxa such as siphonarioidea or hygrophila, most members of which lack permanently air-filled lungs. the term panpulmonata is chosen for continuity in terminology. while certain pulmonate groups are well supported morphologically and molecularly , unambiguous synapomorphies for panpulmonata are hard to find .

siphonarioidea and sacoglossa form a clade sister to the remaining panpulmonata . while haller  <cit>  classified siphonarioidea as opisthobranchs , nowadays they are usually considered as "primitive" pulmonates, either grouped at the basis of the remaining pulmonata  <cit>  or united with amphiboloidea as basommatophoran thalassophila  <cit> . molecular studies rendered basommatophora and thalassophila paraphyletic and indicated a close relationship of siphonarioidea to sacoglossa, either both within opisthobranchia  <cit> , at their basis  <cit> , or basal to the remaining pulmonata  as sister groups or separate clades. however, all studies show weak support at these nodes, and the positions of siphonariids and sacoglossans as well as their relationship still need confirmation by other character sets and improved taxon sampling.

in the present study the monophyly of sacoglossa is well supported and also the split into shelled oxynoacea and plakobranchacea is well backed . both suborders are also well supported morphologically  <cit> . platyhedylidae stand basally within the latter, as sister to limapontioidea plus the remaining plakobranchoidea. jensen  <cit>  placed platyhedylidae at the basis of plakobranchoidea but already pointed out their unclear relationships.

hygrophila, amphiboloidea and eupulmonata are all well supported monophyletic groups in the present study, but their sister group relationships are not well resolved and receive little to no support.

origin of acochlidia
all groups previously discussed as having an affinity or closer relationship to acochlidia were included in the present study to reveal their phylogenetic relationships. only the enigmatic rhodopemorpha are lacking, but a recent molecular phylogeny based on nuclear and mitochondrial markers shows no affinities between acochlidia and rhodopemorpha  <cit> , and the morphological characters common to both groups can be explained as convergent developments . a phylogenetic relationship of acochlidia with the diaphanid toledonia, which was suggested based on similar radula characteristics  <cit> , is rejected by the present molecular data and also resulting from morphological analyses  <cit> . morphological studies indicated a common origin for small runcinacea and cephalaspidea  with acochlidia  <cit> . however, schrödl and neusser  <cit>  showed the liability of the topology to inclusion of other interstitial taxa such as rhodope and platyhedyle, which always resulted as direct sister groups to acochlidia in various analyses. the authors thus concluded that the convergent adaptations to the interstitial habitat  mask the true phylogenetic signal. this interpretation is supported by our splitstree analysis  and the present molecular results , which clearly signal independent evolutionary origins for all the different mesopsammic heterobranchia included here.

previous molecular analyses placed the acochlidia basally in an unresolved opisthobranch level  <cit>  or surprisingly clustered them in an unresolved pulmonate relationship  <cit> . while any opisthobranch affinities are rejected based on split support , based on the au test and based on phylogenetic analysis, the pulmonate relationship of acochlidia is confirmed in this study , which presents a much better acochlidian taxon sampling and highly likely topology within acochlidia . even though support for their direct sister group relationships are low and the topology varies between the different analyses, all analyses performed in the present study placed acochlidia within pulmonates . this grouping based on molecular markers requires a re-evaluation of morphological characters and earlier, potentially biased homology assumptions, and a search for potential synapomorphies uniting acochlidia with pulmonates. three anatomical characters are generally accepted as true synapomorphies of the "pulmonata" as traditionally defined: the pallial cavity opening by means of a pneumostome, presence of a procerebrum  and the existence of medio-dorsal  bodies  <cit> .

1) pallial cavity opening by means of a pneumostome
although denied by some earlier authors, the pulmonary cavity of "pulmonata" is today generally considered as homologous to the pallial cavity of non-pulmonate gastropods  <cit> . whereas the loss of a gill and the presence of a "lung" certainly is a matter of multiple convergence paralleled in several prosobranch clades, the acquisition of a pneumostome  is considered as synapomorphic for "pulmonata"  <cit> . dayrat and tillier  pointed out that the pneumostome of siphonarioidea is not contractile, and their phylogenetic hypothesis  <cit>  favoured homology with the pneumostome of the remaining pulmonata. on the other hand, at least some siphonariids are reported to open and close their pneumostome . a morphocline from a wide open pallial cavity to a narrow, nearly closed one  is present in both "opisthobranchia" and "pulmonata"; thus the presence of a pneumostome in general cannot be considered as a pulmonate synapomorphy  <cit> . barker  <cit>  also questioned the synapomorphic contractile pneumostome, which might have evolved independently in different pulmonate taxa, e.g. in eupulmonata and some siphonarioidea. the presence of a small opening seems to be variable, indeed, and might depend on the habitat. for example, the truly subtidal marine williamia  have a wide opening  <cit> , while intertial siphonaria have a small one . the opening is wide also in subtidal shell-bearing sacoglossa  <cit> , whereas the pallial cavity is usually reduced in shell-less sacoglossa. pyramidelloidea also have a wide opening. in general within "pulmonata" the "lung" undergoes a series of reductions; e.g., the tiny smeagol climoi only has a small pallial cavity without respiratory function  <cit> , as do larger onchidiidae. a small, reduced pallial cavity can still be found in the quite basal acochlidian hedylopsis ballantinei  <cit>  , while all remaining acochlidia studied so far entirely lack such a cavity  <cit> . all hedylopsacean nervous systems described in detail contain an osphradial ganglion  <cit> , which can be interpreted as a remainder of an osphradium that was reduced in the course of the reduction of the pallial cavity. a group of derived, benthic and limnic acochlidians have developed a sensory, osphradium-like organ  <cit>  like the one reported for the basal ellobiid ovatella  <cit> .

2) presence of a procerebrum
the procerebrum of "pulmonata" is defined as an accessory lobe linked to the cerebral ganglion via two connectives, associated to the optic, tentacular and peritentacular nerves  <cit> . its homology with the opisthobranch rhinophoral ganglion has long been discussed  <cit> . the configuration of the cerebral nerves and associated ganglia is complex in acochlidia. the labiotentacular nerve arises ventrally from the cerebral ganglion; the rhinophoral ganglion usually gives rise to the rhinophoral nerve , and the optic ganglion to the optic nerve . however, in pseudunela cornuta the optic nerve splits off from the rhinophoral nerve, and no nerves arise from the optic ganglion  <cit> . a similar arrangement occurs in hedylopsis spiculifera and h. ballantinei, except that the optic ganglion is lacking  <cit> . in the microhedylaceans pontohedyle and microhedyle the rhinophoral nerve emerges directly from the cerebral ganglion, and eyes nestle directly on it ; thus the additional ganglion might refer to either the rhinophoral or the optic ganglion. tillier et al.  <cit>  discussed a potential homology between the optic ganglion in "opisthobranchia" and the pulmonate procerebrum. in acochlidia double cerebral connectives could be identified for the rhinophoral ganglion in tantulum elegans <cit> , the optic  in strubellia paradoxa  <cit> , and for the unclear optic/rhinophoral ganglion in pontohedyle milaschewitchii and microhedyle glandulifera . the variable development of cerebral features in acochlidia makes homologisation difficult at this time. rhinophoral and optic ganglia are closely related to and might develop from the cerebral ganglion, and they share common features with the pulmonate procerebrum. based on our phylogenetic hypothesis, the plesiomorphic state for panpulmonata might be separate rhinophoral and optic ganglia that have been fused various times independently. however, the presence of so-called "globineurons" - neurons with densely packed, small, round nuclei - in eupulmonata  <cit>  appears to be a synapomorphy for this clade.

additionally, the presence of a cerebral gland - a small, tube-like structure involved in the formation of the procerebrum - is considered as characteristic for the pulmonate nervous system  <cit> . this ectodermal structure may form a tube-like process from the procerebrum towards the lateral head region, or it may be reduced to a small epithelial cavity attached or enclosed within the procerebrum  <cit> . no structure similar to the cerebral gland has been described for acochlidia, but due to the small size of the cerebral gland and the previously unknown pulmonate affinities of acochlidia it might have been overlooked in morphological studies; hence, ultrastructural reinvestigations of acochlidian nervous systems are needed in the future. the cerebral gland is lacking also in other pulmonate taxa, e.g. amphiboloidea  <cit> , which either raises doubts about their pulmonate affinities  <cit>  or suggests that the structure might have been lost secondarily. moreover, tardy  <cit>  described a similar invagination involved in the formation of the rhinophoral ganglion in different nudibranchs. in light of the present phylogenetic hypothesis, with nudipleura as the most basal euthyneuran offshoot, this might indicate that the formation of the rhinophoral ganglion  involving an ectodermal invagination is plesiomorphic within euthyneura, and that there are remnants  of this structure in adults of  pulmonate taxa.

3) presence of medio-dorsal  bodies
dorsal bodies  are endocrine organs situated dorsally of the cerebral ganglia in "pulmonata"  <cit> , but considerable variation exists within the main pulmonate groups as regards the structure and innervation of the dorsal bodies  <cit> . similar structures closely attached to the cerebral ganglia have been found in several acochlidia: first described as "dorsal bodies"  <cit> , they were later renamed "lateral bodies" by neusser et al.  <cit> , due to their more lateral position to the central nervous system and the unclear homology to pulmonate dorsal bodies. since dorsal bodies in pulmonata play a role in female reproduction  <cit> , they might be fully developed in female adults only, thus might have been overlooked in some studies of gonochoristic acochlidian species or of hermaphrodites with "sex change". further ultrastructural data on acochlidian "lateral bodies" and their potentially neurosecretory function are needed to evaluate homology with pulmonate structures. moreover, pulmonate dorsal bodies might be homologous to the juxtaganglionar organs of some opisthobranchs  <cit> , and thus might represent a plesiomorphic character of panpulmonata and a potential synapomorphy of euthyneura.

in addition, the presence of an unpaired dorsal jaw, which probably originated through the fusion of the paired lateral jaws  <cit> , has been discussed as a potential synapomorphy of "pulmonata"  <cit> . the presence of a pair of dorso-lateral jaws is a plesiomorphic character state for euthyneura  <cit> , but that condition has been reduced various times independently in "opisthobranchia" and "pulmonata"  <cit> . a dorsal, unpaired jaw might have evolved at the basis of panpulmonata, and then have been secondarily reduced various times independently   <cit> . in acochlidia, jaw-like structures are reported only for the derived microhedylacean family ganitidae , and as unclear "cuticular elements" for microhedyle glandulifera . according to the derived position of ganitidae in morphological  <cit>  and molecular analyses , these structures may represent either secondary developments  or paedomorphic structures; however, studies of acochlidia larvae are still overdue.

the only potential synapomorphy of "opisthobranchia" is the presence of a rhinophoral nerve with a thickened basis  and of associated sensory structures such as hancock's organ  <cit> . based on our phylogenetic hypothesis the presence of a rhinophoral nerve has to be considered as a plesiomorphic character within euthyneura, and thus for panpulmonata. the rhinophoral ganglion, and potentially the optic ganglion, is considered as homologous with the pulmonate procerebrum. rhinophoral nerve and hancock's organ have been reduced various times independently, probably correlated with the reduction of the rhinophores and/or habitat changes.

in summary, we are currently unable to find clear morphological synapomorphies which support a placement of acochlidia within pulmonate taxa, as sister to eupulmonata. in the light of our phylogenetic hypothesis, conventional pulmonate synapomorphies appear to be plesiomorphies or convergences within pulmonate taxa. on the other hand, no morphological characters currently contradict that molecular phylogenetic hypothesis, nor do they favour any alternative relationships, since morphological characters common to the mesopsammic heterobranchs are shown to be convergent developments, and the potential synapomorphy of acochlidia with "opisthobranchia" has to be considered as plesiomorphic.

the aberrant morphology of acochlidia in relation to its proposed sister groups remains problematic. in his ontological studies on the nudibranch aeolidiella alderi, tardy  <cit>  reported an abnormal development in some larvae that leads to a visceral hump separated from the head-foot complex in juvenile stages, thereby closely resembling external morphology in acochlidia . according to tardy  <cit>  these abnormal developmental forms are also known from pulmonate stylommatophora. progenesis is discussed as a principle in the evolution of meiofaunal taxa  <cit> , and acochlidian morphology might have evolved by retention of the juvenile characters of an aberrant developmental form of an early pulmonate.

monophyly and phylogeny of acochlidia
the monophyly of acochlidia is well supported morphologically  <cit>  and also backed by previous molecular studies  <cit> . our study, which includes all valid acochlidian families except for the monotypic tantulidae, also recovers acochlidia as monophyletic but with low posterior probability and bootstrap support. the low bootstrap values for acochlidia and some internal acochlidian taxa  might be caused by their relatively early  divergence times : recent acochlidian taxa probably constitute but a remnant of much larger diversity in evolutionary history.

the acochlidian internal topology confirms the morphological analysis of schrödl and neusser  <cit> , showing the same family relationships, but with better resolution within microhedylacea: the genus pontohedyle splits off at the basis of the microhedylidae s.l.  with the closely related genera microhedyle and paraganitus. the hedylopsacean family acochlidiidae includes the genera strubellia and acochlidium as proposed by arnaud et al.  <cit>  and schrödl and neusser  <cit> . puzzling is the position of the enigmatic aitengidae within acochlidia, either as sister to pseudunelidae and limnic acochlidiidae  or basal within hedylopsacea . aitengidae shows some of the general, but not unique, features of acochlidia, such as the lack of a shell, reduction of mantle cavity, the praepharyngeal  nerve ring, and the radula with a descending and ascending limb. this taxon also shares some features with limnic acochlidiidae: the radula with a strong rhachidian tooth specialised in egg feeding, as also reported for strubellia sp.  <cit> ; the large, internal lateral eyes closely associated with the cerebral ganglia; and the presence of a foot groove and a branched digestive gland like reported for the genera acochlidium and palliohedyle  <cit> . on the other hand, aitengidae lacks several acochlidian characteristics: the division of the body into head-foot complex and visceral hump; presence of 1- <dig> head appendages ; and the ability to retract the head-foot complex into the visceral hump. however, in the absence of a separated visceral hump a. ater is able to retract its head under the notum. the presence of spicules is confirmed for aitengidae sp., and the "parasites" described for a. ater might represent spicules instead . re-examination of the doubtful "ascus" in a. ater is necessary; examination of aitengidae sp. showed no true  ascus containing old teeth, just a radula slightly bent at the end . the presence of an ascus is currently accepted as a unique synapomorphy of sacoglossa  <cit> , and any sacoglossan relationship is clearly rejected by splitstree analysis  and phylogenetic analyses in the present study.

at the present stage of knowledge, molecular data suggests an inclusion of aitengidae within acochlidia, as sister to pseudunelidae and acochlidiidae. detailed description by semithin serial sectioning and 3d reconstruction of the aitengidae sp. used in the present study, together with focused redescription of a. ater, are needed as a basis to evaluating phylogenetic relationships of acochlidia and aitengidae in the future. this should be supported by a comprehensive molecular phylogeny of acochlidia, including the two known species of aitengidae.

evolutionary traits in euthyneura
invasion of the interstitial habitat
our study supports earlier assumptions that invasion of the interstitial habitat has occurred various times independently within the euthyneura  <cit> , probably by benthic, sand-dwelling or temporarily  mesopsammic ancestors of the nudibranch genera embletonia and pseudovermis, the cephalaspidean philinoglossa and philine exigua, the sacoglossan platyhedyle, some members of the rhodopemorpha incertae sedis , and the acochlidia  <cit> . the pulmonate genus smeagol is found in gravel or pebble beaches on the undersides of stones; due to the relatively large body size in some species , it cannot be generally assigned to the meiofauna.

major convergent adaptations to this spatially limited and unstable habitat are the worm-shaped body, loss of shell, and reduction of head appendages and pigmentation  <cit> . the development of subepidermal, calcareous spicules in acochlidia, rhodopemorpha and potentially platyhedyle can also be considered as an adaptation to the interstitial habitat, probably serving to stabilise certain body parts during movements through the interstices  <cit> , even though the occurrence of spicules is not limited to the mesopsammon. as far as is known, acochlidia represent the most successful group of heterobranchia in the mesopsammon concerning species diversity and abundance  <cit> . key features for their success probably are an initial heterochronic miniaturisation and two different evolutionary trends towards a rapid, imprecise sperm transfer  <cit> . additionally, adaptation to  brackish waters with the development of a complex excretory system in hedylopsacea  <cit>  allows colonisation of shallow sands with freshwater impact , overcoming limitations to deeper, truly marine sands.

colonisation of freshwater and terrestrial habitats
it is undisputed and again confirmed by the present study that the "pulmonata" have a marine origin . the hygrophilian radiation in the freshwater system is the most successful within "pulmonata"  <cit> , in terms of diversity and abundance, but not a unique event in pulmonate evolutionary history. dinapoli and klussmann-kolb  <cit>  already showed that the invasion of freshwater within pulmonate taxa took place at least twice, in hygrophila and in the enigmatic glacidorbis. according to our study, the colonisation of freshwater in panpulmonata has occurred at least one more time in acochlidia. schrödl and neusser  <cit>  showed that within acochlidia the freshwater colonisation already occurred twice independently, with a radiation of the indo-pacific acochlidiidae and the single caribbean tantulum elegans . thus, the development of a complex kidney within hedylopsacea  <cit>  as an adaptation to  brackish water can be considered as a precursor to the invasion of limnic systems in acochlidia. acochlidian invasion of freshwater originated probably from a mesopsammic ancestor with temporary freshwater tolerance  <cit> , or via a semi-terrestrial habitat as reported for aitengidae  <cit> . our study thus highlights the high diversity and flexibility of pulmonate habitats ranging from marine to temporarily brackish, permanently brackish, limnic and terrestrial environments. the still enigmatic aiteng ater  lives "amphibiously" and tolerates marine to brackish waters, but there are no observations of these animals truly leaving the water  <cit> . the species' mangrove habitat is comparable to that of representatives of, e.g., the pulmonate onchidiidae, and is classified as marginal zones from which the transition to terrestrial habitat probably originated  <cit> . similar to the limnic habitat, terrestrial environments have been colonised various times independently  <cit> . the present study indicates a least four independent pathways to the terrestrial habitat: in amphiboloidea, stylommatophora, systellommatophora and ellobioidea.

molecular clock and estimation of divergence times in acochlidia
the use of molecular clocks to estimate divergence times is controversially debated, due to conflicting results from different studies and disparities with paleontological or archaeological data  <cit> . criticism focuses on the major problems such as faulty calibration, impact of rate heterogeneity among lineages, and "time dependency of molecular rates"  <cit> . some of the problems could be solved by the relaxed clock approach  <cit> , and despite all pitfalls and criticism, molecular clock approaches have helped considerably to reveal the evolutionary history of life, especially when it comes to divergence times of groups with poor or no fossil record  <cit> . thus, we consider it a valuable methodology to roughly estimate divergence times for tiny, sluggish gastropods for which there is no fossil record. molecular clock dating stands and falls with the accuracy with which genetic distances can be estimated  <cit> ; thus we consider the removal of ambiguous  sites from the alignment as problematic. it seems common use to run the molecular clock analyses with reduced datasets , but the crucial question, how this will affect the molecular dating, has remained unaddressed. the exclusion of highly saturated positions - e.g., in some cases the 3rd codon position of the coi sequence  - can be justified by the biasing effect of saturation on the molecular clock. it can be argued that ambiguous parts of the alignment are often highly variable and might suffer from saturation, but on the other hand the exclusion of a series of non-saturated sites might result in underestimated divergence times. however, our beast analysis of the raw, uncut dataset provided estimations of divergence times very similar to those from the gblocks dataset . nevertheless, we recommend to critically compare data from masked and raw alignments for molecular clock analyses, and to stay mindful of the potentially underestimating effect on divergence times.

the only molecular clock data on heterobranchia  <cit>  available prior to the present study suffers from unreliable calibration, which is considered as the most sensible and critical part of divergence time estimations  <cit> . there is no objective way to assign fossils to a certain point of a stem line in a recent phylogeny, thus the age of the fossil has to be taken as the minimum age of the split between the extant taxon it is assigned to and its sister group  <cit> . in  <cit>  the fossil ages were assigned to the diversification of heterobranchia, acteonoidea and omalogyridae, respectively, rather than to the splits from the corresponding sister groups, which led, e.g., to the surprising pre- to early cambrian split between vetigastropoda and apogastropoda. our molecular clock was calibrated to the split between caenogastropoda and heterobranchia; thus molecular dating of this node is biased . however, fossil data shows two clearly different lineages by the mid-devonian, thus indicating a pre- or early devonian split of apogastropoda  <cit> . according to our study euthyneuran gastropods already emerged in the palaeozoic permian, diverting from the "lower heterobranchia", but all major radiations of euthyneura occurred in the early mesozoic. according to paleontological data the oldest opisthobranchs appeared in the triassic , the earliest pulmonates in the jurassic   <cit> .

based on their phylogenetic hypothesis from morphological data and the fossil record of cephalaspidean outgroups, schrödl and neusser  <cit>  suspected a jurassic time frame for the origin of acochlidia. their inferred sister group relationships are different from the present study, but the early divergence time is supported by our molecular clock approach, which places the origin of acochlidia in the late triassic to early jurassic and their major diversification in the jurassic. in the present study the eupulmonata as sister group to acochlidia show similar origin and diversification times, and so do the hygrophila. tillier et al.  <cit>  inferred divergence times from branch lengths in a molecular distance tree , indicating a similar jurassic time frame for eupulmonata and slightly younger for hygrophila. this corresponds with fossil data, which reports a first occurrence in the late jurassic   <cit> . based on fossils, diversification times of eupulmonate groups such as stylommatophora can be dated to the late cretaceous, when most extant families appear  <cit> .

according to our data most acochlidian families appeared in the jurassic or cretaceous, only ganitidae, pseudunelidae and acochlidiidae have a palaeogene origin. these old splits on the family and even genus levels  might indicate either that the extant diversity of acochlidia is only a small remnant of high diversity in former times, or that known acochlidian diversity is just the tip of the iceberg still waiting to be discovered.

based on fossil data the major diversification of "opisthobranch" taxa in a traditional sense took place comparatively recently, at the beginning of the cenozoic , with the first records of sacoglossa, anaspidea and thecosomata  <cit> . however, due to more or less reduced shells the fossilization probability is low. our study suggests that most extant "opisthobranch" taxa, e.g. sacoglossa, cephalaspidea s.s., pteropoda, umbraculoidea and anaspidea, have a mesozoic origin. ambiguous is the basal euthyneuran position of the nudipleura and the resulting estimates of an old age  and diversification . this contradicts previous molecular clock analyses on nudipleura, which indicated a triassic origin and jurassic diversification  <cit> . these discrepancies clearly result from major differences in tree topology . moreover, while our study includes only three nudipleuran representatives , göbbeler's and klussmann-kolb's  <cit>  analysis lacks comprehensive heterobranch outgroup sampling. future studies are needed to resolve the origin of nudipleura within the heterobranchia.

CONCLUSIONS
our multi-locus molecular study including six out of seven acochlidian families and the recently established aitengidae confirms a pulmonate relationship of acochlidia, which was traditionally placed within opisthobranchia. the enigmatic aitengidae cluster within acochlidia. previously assumed morphological synapomorphies of pulmonata  appear as either homoplastic or plesiomorphic in light of the present phylogenetic hypothesis, as does the potential opisthobranch synapomorphy . at present, morphological characters neither justify a placement of acochlidia within pulmonata, nor do they favour any opisthobranch relationships that would contradict the molecular hypothesis. the aberrant acochlidian morphology might have resulted from ancestral progenesis and paedomorphic retention of the morphology of an abnormally developed juvenile.

the present study once more underlines the respective non-monophyly of euthyneura, opisthobranchia and pulmonata as defined traditionally. we demonstrate the necessity for inclusion of small, enigmatic groups to solve deep-level phylogenetic relationships, and highlight that the "pulmonate" and "opisthobranch" phylogenies cannot be solved independently from each other. clarification of remaining enigmas such as rhodopemorpha, and of well supported taxa with unclear relationships such as pyramidelloidea or sacoglossa, is needed for future advances. the reclassification suggested herein defines 1) euthyneura as including pyramidelloidea and glacidorboidea; 2) euopisthobranchia as including umbraculoidea, cephalaspidea s.s., runcinacea, anaspidea and pteropoda, but excluding acteonoidea and nudipleura, as well as sacoglossa and acochlidia; and 3) panpulmonata as composed of siphonarioidea, sacoglossa, hygrophila, amphiboloidea, pyramidelloidea, glacidorboidea, eupulmonata and acochlidia. the present results based on standard molecular markers require confirmation from other character sets  and careful examination of morphological characters and homology assumptions in the light of the new phylogenetic hypothesis. our molecular clock analysis estimates a mesozoic origin for all major panpulmonate taxa. the poorly supported topology within panpulmonata might be promoted by the old age of this group, which potentially stands for a series of radiation and extinction events in history, resulting in poor taxon representation in present times.

the present study shows that the mesopsammon was colonised various times independently within euthyneura, resulting in a series of convergent adaptations to the interstitial habitat. the inclusion of acochlidia within pulmonate taxa extends the structural and biological diversity of the pulmonate clade, which exhibits remarkable flexibility in habitat choice, with various transitions from marine to limnic and terrestrial habitats.

