BACKGROUND
hallucinations – perceptions without a basis in the physical environment – are a hallmark symptom of schizophrenia. since the precise synchronization of neural activity in the γ band  of the electroencephalogram  may underlie the representation of perceptions  <cit> , γ oscillation abnormalities could be related to hallucinations in schizophrenia. previously we have reported that the history of visual hallucination symptoms in chronic schizophrenia patients was positively correlated with the degree of phase locking of a β oscillation recorded over visual cortex  <cit> . in another study, we found that the overall hallucination history of first-episode schizophrenia patients was positively correlated with the phase locking of the  <dig> hz harmonic of the  <dig> hz auditory steady-state response  recorded over fronto-central electrodes  <cit> . the positive direction of the correlation in both studies was unexpected, as most reports of oscillatory activity in schizophrenia patients have observed reductions in power and/or phase synchronization relative to healthy individuals .

taken together, our previous two observations suggest that a greater propensity for hallucinations in schizophrenia is associated with increased phase locking of high-frequency oscillations in the scalp-recorded eeg  <cit> , even when patients are not actively hallucinating. while we did not utilize a symptom rating scale with items for modality-specific hallucinations in the above-mentioned assr study, the overall hallucination scale likely reflected primarily auditory hallucinations. since the cortical generators of the assr are located in the primary auditory cortex , and the visual β oscillation was observed over occipital cortex, oscillations demonstrating positive correlations between phase synchronization and hallucination symptoms may originate in sensory cortical areas associated with the modality of the hallucinations. consistent with this hypothesis, baldeweg and colleagues reported that a psychiatric patient experiencing somatic hallucinations evinced γ oscillations over sensorimotor cortex  <cit> , and ropohl et al.  <cit>  found abnormally large β oscillations localized to the left auditory cortex in a schizophrenia patient with treatment-resistant auditory hallucinations.

there is a good deal of evidence implicating the language-related areas of the left cerebral hemisphere  in auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia . to date there have also been reports that the structure  <cit>  and activity  <cit>  of the left primary auditory cortex  is related to auditory hallucinations as well. since γ oscillations may reflect cortical circuitry abnormalities in schizophrenia , which have been observed in the primary auditory cortex  <cit> , and the phase synchronization and power of γ-band assrs are reduced in schizophrenia  <cit> , here we used the  <dig> hz assr to investigate whether the propensity for auditory hallucinations might be associated with increased γ synchronization in the left primary auditory cortex. the activity of assr sources in the primary auditory cortex of chronic schizophrenia patients and healthy control subjects was measured using time-frequency decomposition in conjunction with dipole source localization. in addition, we examined whether the assr deficit might involve cross-frequency interactions, as a recent study demonstrated that oscillatory activity in the auditory cortex of macaques is organized hierarchically, with higher-frequency oscillations being modulated by the phase of lower-frequency oscillations  <cit> .

RESULTS
scalp eeg data
the scalp phase-locking factor  and evoked power data are shown in figure 1a &1b. both measures showed maxima at fronto-central and lateral posterior sites, in agreement with dipolar sources in the superior temporal plane. to be consistent with prior scalp eeg studies, we measured plf and evoked power at fronto-central sites . as expected, plf and evoked power were significantly reduced in schizophrenia patients  compared to healthy controls  . both measures also had larger values over the right hemisphere  than the lh across both subject groups , but the group × hemisphere interactions were not significant .

source localization
most studies in which source localization of the assr is performed have utilized magnetoencephalography , which is primarily sensitive to sources that are tangential to the scalp surface  <cit> . with meg, the assr is well-fit by  <dig> dipoles, one each in the primary auditory cortex of the lh and rh that are oriented normally to the superior temporal plane .  the eeg is sensitive to both radial and tangential source orientations, and is more sensitive to deep sources than meg. not surprisingly, eeg studies have suggested that additional sources contribute to the assr besides the main superior temporal plane dipoles. these additional sources have been accounted for by dipoles in primary auditory cortex that are more radially-oriented than the tangential superior temporal dipoles, as well as a deep midline dipole that accounts for residual and/or subcortical activity  <cit> .

assr source localization was performed with brain electric source analysis  v <dig>  . besa models brain activity as the contributions of dipolar sources with unique temporal patterns  <cit> . the goodness of fit of a dipole model is evaluated by its residual variance  – the lower the rv, the better the fit. the hc grand average assr was filtered from 13– <dig> hz to eliminate the transient auditory evoked potentials, and the 30– <dig> ms segment of the resulting waveform  was used for dipole modelling with the standard besa 4-shell  spherical head model. 

our procedure for constructing the dipole model was similar to the "regional source" modeling procedure that has been utilized in numerous dipole modeling studies of auditory cortex activity . first,  <dig> dipoles were simultaneously fit with a symmetry constraint . this 2-dipole model converged to deep midline positions. since the 2-dipole model was unrealistic, a 4-dipole model was fit. this model consisted of  <dig> symmetrically-constrained dipoles as before, and  <dig> additional dipoles, each bound to the position of one dipole in the first pair but with unconstrained orientations. the dipoles in this model were simultaneously fit and converged to lateral temporal locations . finally, a fifth dipole was added to the 4-dipole model. this dipole converged to a deep midline position . thus, the final 5-dipole model consisted of  <dig> pairs of dipoles in the superior temporal plane of each hemisphere, and a deep midline dipole accounting for residual activity . the locations and orientations of the dipoles are given in table  <dig>  this model is similar to those of herdman et al.  <cit>  and poulsen et al.  <cit> .

values are given in the besa unit sphere coordinate system.

we adopted the following terminology for labelling the dipoles: the dipoles that are oriented tangentially to the lateral scalp surface  are here termed "lh tangential" and "rh tangential", and are the same dipoles as are typically found in meg assr studies. the complementary cortical dipoles that have less tangential orientations are termed "lh radial" and "rh radial" . the deep midline dipole is termed "residual".

this modeling procedure was repeated numerous times with different initial conditions but always converged to the same solution. the procedure was also conducted without the symmetry constraint for the 4-dipole model, which resulted in a rv of  <dig> %, but with the lh dipoles occupying a position that was unrealistically medial and deeper than with the symmetry constraint.

we also attempted to model the grand average assr of the sz group but the results were unsatisfactory , likely due to the overall reduction in assr strength and the typical decrease of signal-to-noise ratio in the sz data. therefore, the hc model was used for both the hc and sz data. when the 5-dipole hc model was applied to the sz grand average assr the rv was  <dig> %. it should be noted that while there are reductions in the size of portions of the brain in schizophrenia  that might reduce the validity of using the same dipole model for hc and sz, these reductions are not expected to be significant when compared with the anatomical accuracy of the present method. furthermore, teale et al.  <cit>  reported that the hemispheric asymmetry in the anterior-posterior location of the assr "tangential" dipoles was reduced in schizophrenia. the asymmetry they found in their control subjects with mri co-registered meg was  <dig> mm, a difference which is likely to be undetectable with our methods.

source data
finally, single-trial source waveforms were estimated for each subject. this was accomplished in the besa source analysis module by selecting the hc dipole model and reading in the single trial data. besa computes the projection of the single trial data into source space, estimating how the current scalp eeg data would be accounted for by the given dipole model. the single-trial source waveforms were then output from besa for time-frequency analysis. plf and evoked power were computed on the single-trial source waveforms as for the scalp electrode data.

the plf source data are shown in figure  <dig>  plf was reduced overall in sz compared to hc . there was a main effect of source , indicating that the plf of the sources differed, but the group × source interaction was not significant . post-hoc t-tests  found that plf of the rh tangential dipole was significantly reduced in sz , while the plf reduction of the lh radial dipole in sz was nearly significant . 

the evoked power source data are shown in figure  <dig>  evoked power tended to be reduced in sz compared to hc, but in contrast to the scalp eeg data, the group effect was not significant , nor was the group × source interaction . the main effect of source was significant . to explore the reason for the non-significant group difference in evoked power, t-tests were conducted for each source. three of the sources showed non-significant reductions in sz relative hc , while the other  <dig> sources had slightly increased evoked power in sz .

evoked power and plf are complementary measures of the same oscillatory activity. while the mathematical differences between these measures are clear , the extent to which they differ in practice is not well understood at this time. for instance, since plf is independent of oscillation power, it may be more sensitive to signals with a poorer signal-to-noise ratio than evoked power. to examine the relationship between evoked power and plf at the source level, we computed correlations between these measures for each cortical dipole. in hc each dipole showed strong positive correlations . in contrast, sz showed strong positive correlations for the rh dipoles while the lh dipole correlations were weaker, particularly for the lh radial dipole . these results may be interpreted as a decoupling of oscillation power and phase locking in the left auditory cortex in schizophrenia. on the other hand, the coupling between oscillation power and phase locking was preserved in schizophrenia in the right auditory cortex, despite overall reductions in these measures. as our understanding of the relationships between these measures grows, the meaning of these patterns will become clearer.

correlations between eeg measures and hallucination symptoms
to test our hypothesis that oscillatory activity in the left primary auditory cortex would be positively correlated with auditory hallucination symptoms, we computed correlations between source plf and evoked power and the auditory hallucination item of the scale for the assessment of positive symptoms   <cit> . a significant positive correlation was found for plf of the lh radial dipole  . there were no significant correlations for plf of any of the other sources . for evoked power there was a similar pattern of results: a significant positive correlation for the lh radial dipole , but no significant correlations for the other sources . none of the other source measures were correlated with any of the other saps hallucination items  . furthermore, no correlations were found between the auditory hallucinations item and scalp plf  or evoked power  measures at the fronto-central electrodes, where the assr deficit in sz was observed.

cross-frequency interactions
lastly we conducted exploratory analyses to examine whether the assr plf deficit in sz was modulated by the phase of oscillations in the δ  and/or θ  frequency bands . cross-frequency interactions were tested at the frequencies of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hz for the rh tangential and lh radial dipole data. a significant group × phase bin interaction  was observed only for the lh radial dipole data at  <dig> hz . follow-up analyses found a main effect of phase bin for sz  but not hc . exploratory t-tests indicated that plf for this source was significantly decreased in sz relative to hc in the 120–180° phase bin . in this bin, lh radial dipole plf in sz was positively correlated with the auditory hallucination item of the saps  . plf in the 0–60° phase bin was also positively correlated with the auditory hallucinations item . assr evoked power at  <dig> hz did not differ between hc and sz.

correlations with demographic and clinical variables
there were no significant correlations between scalp and source eeg effects and the demographic and clinical variables listed in table  <dig> 

 mean +/- standard deviation are given for each variable.

discussion
based on previous findings of positive correlations between high-frequency oscillatory activity and hallucination symptoms in schizophrenia patients, we hypothesized that the left auditory cortex response to  <dig> hz auditory steady-state stimulation would be correlated with auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia patients. phase locking and evoked power of the  <dig> hz assr were decreased in sz compared to hc, as expected. however, the phase locking and evoked power of a lh assr source were positively correlated with the auditory hallucinations symptom rating of the saps. thus, patients with higher γ activity in the left primary auditory cortex had a greater propensity for experiencing auditory hallucinations. furthermore, we found evidence that the degree of phase locking of this lh source was modulated by oscillatory activity at  <dig> hz in sz but not hc.

three main patterns of abnormalities were observed at the source level in the present study: 1) plf was reduced in the sz group for the rh tangential and lh radial dipoles . 2) lh radial dipole plf was positively correlated with auditory hallucination symptoms . 3) the coupling between evoked power and plf was reduced in the sz group for the lh but not the rh sources. the paradoxical finding of a positive correlation between auditory hallucination symptoms and lh radial dipole plf, in the context of overall reductions of rh tangential and lh radial dipole plf, suggests that the left and right auditory cortices may be differentially impaired in schizophrenia.

one possible explanation for the different impairments is that there is a single circuit abnormality underlying both patterns which causes the reduction in assr plf, and this abnormality is expressed in different ways in the left and right auditory cortex. as a reviewer of this manuscript proposed, the ability to downregulate the assr could be an adaptive response to neural circuit dysfunction in schizophrenia. this adaptive response could be impaired in the left auditory cortex of patients who experience auditory hallucinations despite receiving antipsychotic treatment, so that the lh assr is "preserved" in these patients. this hypothesis takes into account the potential effects of adaptive homeostatic responses, which are likely to play a critical role in shaping the functional consequences of neural circuit abnormalities in schizophrenia .

another possibility is that at least two distinct neural circuit abnormalities may be present in the auditory cortex in schizophrenia. the first abnormality is responsible for the overall  <dig> hz assr deficit, and is most associated with the rh tangential dipole. this finding is consistent with previous studies that have shown that the right auditory cortex is the predominant generator of the assr . one possible cause of such a deficit is reduced synaptic connectivity  <cit> . sweet et al.  <cit>  found reductions of pyramidal cell somal volume  and axon terminal density in deep layer  <dig> of primary auditory cortex, the likely generator of the assr. consistent with the microscopic evidence of reduced synaptic connectivity, reductions in the volume of heschl's gyrus in schizophrenia patients have been reported in magnetic resonance imaging  studies . there is also evidence that these reductions, which are apparent in first-episode schizophrenia , progress over time in the left hemisphere  <cit> . furthermore, the surface area of heschl's gyrus was found to be reduced in a study of post-mortem samples  <cit> .

the second circuit abnormality implied by the present results is manifested as an increase in γ activity in the left auditory cortex in association with an increased propensity for auditory hallucinations. this abnormality is associated with the lh radial dipole. if the neural substrate of a perceived object is an attractor state in the brain, such as oscillatory synchronization among cells coding individual features of the object  <cit> , then hallucinations could result from an increased propensity for a dysfunctional network to enter attractor states independently of external biasing influences  <cit> . possible external biasing inputs include sensory stimulation or an attentional bias signal from prefrontal cortex  <cit> . the dysfunctional network would consist of sensory areas and possibly association cortex, depending on the complexity of features making up the hallucination. delusions might originate from a similar dysfunction in higher-level areas. olypher et al.  <cit>  have reported evidence supporting this proposal in electrophysiological recordings from the rat hippocampus.

as noted above, we have found positive correlations between hallucination symptom ratings and the phase locking of γ and β oscillations in previous studies  <cit> , and baldeweg et al.  <cit>  and ropohl et al.  <cit>  have reported evidence for increased γ activity during hallucinations in case studies. evidence from other sources points to an association between increased intrinsic levels of cortical activity and hallucinations. in a functional mri study of patients with charles bonnet syndrome, ffytche et al.  <cit>  reported that the visual cortex of visual hallucinators had an increased level of intrinsic baseline activity. hoffmann and colleagues have found that the application of slow repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation  to the left posterior temporal-parietal cortex alleviated auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia patients with medication-resistant hallucinations . since slow rtms decreases cortical excitability, the findings of hoffman et al. imply that the language-related association cortex in auditory hallucinators is in a hyperexcited state  <cit> . similarly, merabet et al.  <cit>  reported that slow rtms applied to the occipital lobe reduced visual hallucinations in a case study. more general evidence for cortical hyperexcitability in schizophrenia has been found, not just related to hallucinations. for instance, heckers et al.  <cit>  detected increased baseline activity in the hippocampus with positron emission tomography, and tms studies have documented a range of deficits of cortical inhibition .

cortical hyperexcitability can be produced by the antagonism of n-methyl-d-aspartate  receptors , which also results in a constellation of positive and negative symptoms and cognitive deficits in healthy individuals that closely resembles aspects of schizophrenia . recent studies with animal models have demonstrated that nmda receptor antagonists can increase or decrease the power of γ oscillations, depending on the brain region  <cit> . these effects of nmda receptor antagonism on γ activity are probably mediated mainly through parvalbumin-expressing, fast-spiking inhibitory interneurons, which are crucial elements of the circuitry that generates γ oscillations  <cit> . the abnormalities of these interneurons found in post-mortem studies of schizophrenia patients can be produced by nmda receptor antagonists . therefore, the evidence suggests that hallucinations in schizophrenia might result, at least in part, from aberrant oscillatory synchronization associated with cortical excitability and nmda receptor hypofunction in sensory cortex. the positive correlations between hallucination symptoms and β/γ activity we have observed may be due to nmda receptor hypofunction in sensory areas. further experiments are necessary to test this hypothesis.

lastly, the decoupling of evoked power and plf for the lh but not the rh sources in the sz group is an additional piece of evidence which suggests that different abnormalities may be present in the left and right auditory cortices. this finding could support either of the two hypotheses presented above.

in analyses of cross-frequency interactions, we found that the lh radial dipole assr in schizophrenia patients was modulated by oscillatory activity at  <dig> hz, in the δ band. assr plf was significantly reduced in patients compared to controls for phases of  <dig> hz activity between 120–180°, and was positively correlated with auditory hallucinations.  recently there has been much interest in interactions between oscillations at different frequencies, with studies demonstrating hierarchical relationships in which high-frequency oscillations can be modulated by the phase of low-frequency oscillations . in recordings from the auditory cortex of awake macaques, lakatos et al.  <cit>  found that δ band phase modulated spontaneous θ activity, and θ phase modulated spontaneous γ activity. here the δ phase modulation of the γ assr was abnormal, as it was only present in the schizophrenia patients and not the healthy controls.

that the δ modulation of the  <dig> hz assr was found in a pathological state, rather than a normal state, may seem paradoxical. however, abnormal δ-band activity has been associated with cortical lesions  <cit> , epileptogenic cortex  <cit> , and nmda receptor antagonism  <cit> , so it is plausible that some type of cortical abnormality could influence δ activity in schizophrenia. in fact, studies of resting state eeg have demonstrated enhanced δ-band power in schizophrenia  <cit> . in the present study the power of the  <dig> hz oscillation tended to be reduced in patients relative to controls, but this was measured during the assr. in future research we will examine whether resting-state δ activity is associated with the pathological δ modulation of the  <dig> hz assr.

it is important to note that our hypothesis does not exclude the possibility that hallucinations result from abnormalities in other neural systems. functional neuroimaging studies have documented that a variety of cortical areas are involved in hallucinations . one possibility is that aberrant oscillatory synchrony in sensory cortex could interact with dysfunctional efference copy mechanisms . also, it should be kept in mind that here we have reported correlations with hallucination symptom ratings that measure the lifetime history of hallucinations in the patients. the schizophrenia patients in this sample were chronic and medicated, and were not actively experiencing hallucinations at the time of the study.  presumably, actively hallucinating patients would show large-amplitude β/γ oscillations in the sensory cortex corresponding to the modality of their hallucinations, as suggested by the case reports  <cit> . hence, it may be considered notable that the present findings were obtained in non-actively hallucinating patients. the positive correlations we have observed between hallucination symptoms and oscillatory measures may reflect a subthreshold level of dysfunction in the cortex that would produce hallucinations in the absence of antipsychotic medication.

an alternative hypothesis should be noted. hong et al.  <cit>  reported that the power of the scalp-recorded  <dig> hz assr was larger in chronic schizophrenia patients who were taking atypical compared to typical antipsychotics. if the patients in the present study who had higher auditory hallucination symptom ratings also were taking higher doses of atypical antipsychotics, the positive correlation between auditory hallucination symptoms and lh plf might be explained as a medication effect. however, this hypothesis does not seem likely for several reasons. first, we did not find a significant correlation between medication dosage and the auditory hallucinations ratings . second, no effect of medication dosage was found on  <dig> hz assr evoked power measured at the scalp level , nor on any of the dipole measures. third,  <dig> of the  <dig> patients taking atypical antipsychotics in hong et al. were on clozapine, which has been found to stimulate nmda receptors  <cit>  and to reverse some of the effects of nmda receptor antagonism  <cit> . therefore, the increase of  <dig> hz assr power in the patients on atypical antipsychotics could have been due to half of them being on clozapine. however, only one of the patients in the present study was on clozapine, and this patient did not report any hallucination symptoms. finally, light et al.  <cit>  did not find any differences in the  <dig> hz assr between schizophrenia patients on typical compared to atypical antipsychotics in a larger sample than the hong et al. study, so a definitive effect of medication type has yet to be established. but since the determination of chlorpromazine equivalency for atypical antipsychotics is inexact, medication effects in the present study cannot be ruled out.

no alteration of the hemispheric asymmetry of the assr deficit was found here. in a previous study we found a larger reduction of the  <dig> hz assr at lh electrodes than rh electrodes in first-episode schizophrenia patients  <cit> , so the absence of an asymmetrical assr deficit in the present study suggests that some aspect of chronicity  could have normalized the deficit.

the use of source localization methods to measure the assr permits the testing of hypotheses with greater anatomical specificity than scalp eeg recordings, but the validity of the results rests upon the validity of the localization method. as a number of studies employing different localization methods have consistently localized the cortical sources of the assr to primary auditory cortex with meg , and since the dipole model we used is very similar to other published models based on eeg  <cit> , we are confident in the validity of our results. however, we note that one discrepancy in the present results was that source evoked power was not significantly decreased in sz compared to hc, while this effect was observed in the scalp voltage data. on the other hand, the patients' plf deficit in the scalp voltage data was reflected in the source plf results. the reasons for this discrepancy are not clear. using meg, teale et al.  <cit>  found plf and evoked power reductions of the tangential assr sources in both hemispheres in chronic schizophrenia patients.  we also compared assr evoked power between groups using the hc model for the hc group and a similar 5-dipole model derived from the sz grand average data for the sz group , but the overall group difference in evoked power still did not approach statistical significance . a higher degree of anatomical specificity could be obtained with improvements in the source localization method, such as performing localization on the individual subjects' data using head models derived from their anatomical mri scans.

CONCLUSIONS
two distinct neural circuit abnormalities may be present in the auditory cortex in schizophrenia. one is responsible for the overall  <dig> hz assr deficit, and the other is manifested as an increase in phase synchronization of left auditory cortex activity, which is associated with an increased propensity for auditory hallucinations. the latter finding is consistent with prior reports of associations between β/γ oscillations and hallucinations. the left auditory cortex assr deficit and correlation with auditory hallucination symptoms may also be related to pathological cross-frequency interactions.

