BACKGROUND
ultradian self-sustaining energy-metabolic oscillations arising spontaneously in high density saccharomyces cerevisiae continuous cultures exposed to glucose-limited growth have been known and studied for decades  <cit> , and have more recently been observed to induce genome-wide periodic patterns in different series of microarray experiments  <cit> , although with widely different periodicities, ~ <dig> min for  <cit>  and ~ <dig> min for  <cit> .

many studies aim at understanding the mechanisms inducing these sustained oscillations and the rigorous temporal compartmentalization they induce, see  <cit>  for surveys. suggested causes range from a single critical pathway  to the alternation of aerobic and anaerobic respiratory modes , from the interaction with cell cycle  <cit>  to the mutual incompatibility of different redox biochemical processes  <cit> .

the scope of this work is to emphasize a different aspect, intrinsically dynamical and post-transcriptional, which is likely to play an important role in the coordination of the "slower" yeast metabolic cycle  of  <cit> , namely mrna stability. we will show that there is a roughly linear relationship between the average half life  of the transcripts, clustered according to expression or function, and the phase at which their concentration peaks in the cycle. more generally, there seems to be a strong correlation between hl and the shape of the pulses of gene expression: genes with short hl have short and sharp  pulses, while genes with long hl have pulses that are not only delayed but also broader and with more gentle slopes.

in recent years, post-transcriptional control is being recognized as an important aspect of gene regulation, especially in eukaryotic dna, which lacks operonal structure  <cit> . it can occur in many guises, through mrna turnover  <cit> , or through "rna regulons"  <cit>  i.e., groups of genes coordinately guided in the rna processing, localization and protein synthesis by rna-binding proteins   <cit> , or even through the mediation of a metabolic substrate . our result confirms the importance of post-transcriptional control, and points at mrna turnover as a regulatory mechanism at a genome-wide level. its peculiarity consists in putting the time axis into the picture in an intrinsically dynamical way. consequently, in order to be observed, it requires times series sampled at a sufficiently high frequency and dynamics in the right time window, a combination seldom occurring in current expression profiling datasets. so for example the correlation between hl and phase/shape of the oscillations cannot be observed in the much faster ymc of  <cit> , where hl and the period are of comparable duration, hence the system has no time to decay before the arrival of the next wavefront.

in order to emphasize the dynamical aspects, we shall treat the ymc as the time response of a genome-wide dynamical system to a sequence of impulsive "inputs" of transcription activation. we will show that grouping genes in terms of progressively delayed and broadened responses to a sequence of "input pulses" of transcriptional activation allows to see in a remarkably fine detail the causal chain of events constituting the transcriptional program of the cell. the few ambiguities resulting from this classification can be interpreted in terms of some other annotation, typically compartmental localization.

in the following we shall proceed in two complementary ways: first the ymc time series are clustered in a completely unsupervised manner, only according to gene expression. the linear relationship between pulse phase  and hl then emerges in a straightforward way. next, we consider families of genes whose products share some common annotation, for example genes on the same pathway or genes that are subunits of the same protein complex, and look at the type of time series they produce and at their "position" along the ymc.

both approaches confirm that the ymc represents an organized cascade of events, in response to precisely equispaced bursts of transcriptional activation, with the temporal order reflecting the transcript turnover rate. extrapolating from the specific ymc context, this cascade of events is observable to a good extent also in other gene expression time series , suggesting it might reflect a prototypical dynamical mode of action of transcriptional response.

RESULTS
the ~ <dig> genes labeled as periodic by a periodogram test are subdivided into  <dig> clusters, see fig.  <dig>  in fig.  <dig> the clusters are sorted in increasing order of hl . it is immediately evident that the typical profiles, both in terms of the phase of the peaks  and of their width  is modified in an almost continuous manner as we move along the clusters figures. notice in particular how the peaks of the first clusters match the "valleys" of the last ones. for the average phase on each cluster, the phase/hl relationship is almost linear ). the scatter plot in  confirms this linear proportionality, but also shows a growing variance along the hl axis . the deviations from linearity of clusters  <dig> and  <dig> admit a reasonable explanation, mostly in terms of compartmental localization. cluster  <dig> is essentially composed of retrotransposons  and long term repeat mrnas  for a total of  <dig> out of  <dig> genes. for most of these genes  an hl measure is missing. hence the average hl for this cluster  may be biased or unreliable. cluster  <dig> instead is almost entirely composed of cytoplasmic ribosomal subunits . in between, clusters  <dig> and  <dig> contain to a large extent genes with mitochondrial localization and/or function . as is explained in detail in the next paragraph, the large deviation from linearity seen in cluster  <dig> can be due to an extremely fast and short lived response of the mrnas deputed to the biosynthesis of the cytoplasmic ribosomal complexes, not deducible from the available hl data, neither from the current literature . although less precise, also the relation between hl and pulse width on each cluster ) is approximately linear. unlike the phase/hl proportionality, this last result is expected from simple dynamical considerations, as longer hl means longer "kernel width", see also the dynamical model explanation below. the emergence of a linear relation between hl and phase once the genes are arranged in classes according to profile similarity suggests that a corresponding cascade of causally organized events may be taking place during the ymc. to some extent this is already visible through an ontological analysis of the clusters of fig.  <dig> , but in order to investigate more in detail the biological meaning and significance of such a genomic "assembly line" we computed hls, phases and pulse widths along the main yeast pathways and for some of the annotated yeast protein complexes. the data for the pathways  are then lumped together into the  <dig> functional macrocategories shown in fig.  <dig>  in terms of these macrocategories , the result is that the mrnas activation reflects tightly the gene expression program expected to take place in the cell, especially for the "fast" categories, i.e., transcription, nucleotide metabolism and translation starting essentially synchronously in the time scale of the ymc, followed by dna replication and repair and amino acid metabolism. progressing further toward the slow processes, one encounters the metabolism of energy, carbohydrates and lipids. also for this classification, the progression in terms of phase along the cycle is substantially faithful to the increase in hl  the most significant outlier is still the category "translation" already mentioned, see also fig. 3), and the progression in phase is paralleled by an increase in pulse width ).

a detailed functional analysis
using the ordering by phase of pathways and protein complexes , we can zoom on these categories in much more detail. the first phase of this cascade consists of the activation of the transcription machinery with the synchronous bursts of transcription of the three rna polymerases  and of most of the rna processing components, like the trna processing complexes  and rrna processing complexes , with the nuclear splicing complexes following closely. while the mrnas for the polymerases are highly coordinated, the same cannot be said for the basal transcription factors  required for their initiation. overall only a few of these genes follow the bursting trend of the rna polymerases, notably, among them, spt <dig>  which forms the tata-binding protein and is also a component of the polymerase i core factor and of tfiiib. most other genes involved with these general tfs do not show any periodic pattern, and their mrna concentrations never surpass very low levels.

from fig.  <dig>  the peak of mrna concentrations associated with the category "translation" seems to be synchronous with the rna processing burst. however, a more careful analysis reveals that this phase is an average of two "compartmentalized" activations of the translation machinery, having fairly different phases: while cytoplasmic translation follows almost simultaneously the rna machinery, the mitochondrial translation activation has a phase lag of more than one sixth of the period. in terms of time delay, this amounts to approximately  <dig> min, see fig.  <dig>  more in detail, most of the mrnas of ribosomal small and large subunits for both cytoplasmic and mitochondrial localizations are highly correlated within their complex  and correlated with the translation complexes at the corresponding location. in particular, among the cytoplasmic translation complexes, the initiation factors eif and the termination factors erf are very coordinated and respond very fast, while of the three elongation factors only eef <dig> and eef <dig> are well-coordinated, whereas the larger complex eef <dig> shows a less-defined response pattern, with only the subunit eef1-β clearly expressed. overall for the class of translation complexes the pattern of activation of the response reflects closely the corresponding hl distributions  <cit>  . notice that a simple comparison of the hls of the cytoplasmic and mitochondrial ribosomal and translation machineries  does not show the significant difference which can be seen on the time series profiles and which is instead revealed by the phase delay analysis. for cytoplasmic ribosomal biogenesis, a similar anomaly is encountered also in the stress/stimuli responses analyzed below. for mitochondria, the same type of pattern is verified also by other complexes, for example by both the translocases located in the outer and inner mitochondrial membranes  which are known to mediate the protein import into the mitochondria, see fig.  <dig> 

a neat organization can be seen also in the phase of the nucleotide and amino acid metabolism: while pyrimidine and purine synthesis, as well as e.g. the ctp synthase enzyme involved in pyrimidine biosynthesis, are synchronous with the burst of transcription, the peaks for most of the enzymes involved in amino acid pathways tend to be in phase with the activation of the translational machinery. also the synthesis of aminoacyl-trnas, necessary for the delivery of the amino acids to the ribosomes during translation has a similar phase. as expected, the "synthesis" pathway of an amino acid always anticipates its "degradation" pathway . in order to start translation, the initiator trna carrying methionine is required, and in fact, among the amino acid metabolic pathways, methionine is one of the fastest. as a matter of fact, the pathways of sulfur metabolism and of the sulfur-related amino acids  present very similar and very compact time series , with an early  but long lasting activation . this tight coordination may hint at a special role played by the sulfur pathways in the yeast population synchronization  <cit> .

to conclude the protein synthesis, the nascent polypeptide chains must fold into 3d structures. the molecular chaperonin-containing t-complex and the gim complex, which help in the folding, behave synchronously with the main burst. on the contrary, ubiquitin and proteasome, that proceed to the recognition and degradation of anomalous proteins, as well as the scf and anaphase promoting complexes, that cause the proteolysis of the cyclin-cdk complexes, have patterns of activation which are more delayed and broadened. actually, this class of proteolytic processes  has the highest values of phase i.e., it has the slowest response to the transcription bursts.

the macrocategory "dna replication and repair"  contains what remains of the "fast" responses to a large extent synchronous  or within a short time delay from the initial bursts of transcription. the peculiarity of this class is that the pulses are more long lived than in the "transcription" and  "translation" categories. also the complexes regulating the cohesion and separation of sister chromatids during the s-phase  follow the same pattern .

moving to the core of the cell's metabolic activity, the average phase increases further , but the main qualitative difference is on the shape of the pulses, which are now broader and often with an asymmetric rise/decay profile: still sufficiently fast activation but slower and less abrupt decay. this difference is likely to reflect the longer hl associated to these categories , and implies metabolic functions more overlapping than sequential. along each metabolic pathway, the degree of correlation among enzymes catalyzing neighboring reactions is higher than it is expected  implying a coherent and coordinated temporal behavior along the metabolic routes. especially for mitochondrially localized pathways such as citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation the pulses are very broad, with a neat downregulation only in correspondence of the bursts of transcription and an overall profile often exhibiting a double peak on each period . the four respiratory chain complexes for example follow this pattern in a fairly precise manner. as shown in additional file  <dig>  this double peak characteristic is often associable with pairs of genes whose products are isoenzymes oscillating in antiphase, especially for enzymes involved in oxidoreductive processes .

regulation via tfs versus rbps
in terms of regulatory influence, while the importance of transcription initiation via tfs is widely studied and a large amount of data  is available about the binding of tfs to target genes, similar post-transcriptional systematic data on the regulation by means of rbps are still sporadic  <cit> . notable examples are mrnas associable to the nuclear export proteins mex <dig> and yra <dig>  <cit> , the puf family of rbps  <cit> , and the 3' utr motif collection of  <cit> . inspired by  <cit> , we applied these rbp lists as well as the list of tf binding sites from  <cit>  to the ymc time series comparing the average correlation among genes being common targets of a tf or of a rbp. the two distributions are shown in fig.  <dig>  for both tfs and rbps, only a few motifs emerge as having a significantly high correlation. the number of genes regulated by the same tf varies between  <dig> and  <dig> with a mean of  <dig> , while the number of genes with a common target mrna motif varies between  <dig> and  <dig> with a mean of  <dig> . if we draw from a null distribution representing random grouping, increasing the number of genes in a group the probability of finding a high mean correlation obviously decreases, so we expect the distribution for the second set to be tighter around  <dig>  in our case, on the contrary, there are  <dig> groups out of  <dig> with a mean correlation ≥  <dig>  for the tf target genes  and  <dig> groups out of  <dig> for the genes with a target mrna motif . this suggests that post-transcriptional regulation is more significant that transcriptional regulation in the coordination of the metabolic cycle, although the evidence is not conclusive. when checking the groups of periodic genes with high correlation we found the following significant annotations:

•  <dig> genes out of  <dig> having fhl1p as tf and  <dig> genes out of  <dig> having sfp1p as tf are constituents of cytoplasmic ribosomes; notice that instead other cytoplasmic ribosomal tfs such as rap1p do not correspond to a sufficiently high correlation;

•  <dig> genes out of  <dig> having hap4p as tf code for subunits of respiration chain complexes;

•  <dig> out of  <dig> genes whose mrna is bound by puf3p are annotated for mitochondrial transcription/translation , see fig.  <dig> 

dynamical features of the unfolding cycle
possible origins of the sustained oscillations are discussed at length in the literature  <cit> . also tu et al. explain the cycle and its time compartmentalization in terms of metabolism and redox balance  <cit> . rather than adding to the list of mechanisms for metabolic regulation, by viewing each cycle as the dynamical response to a burst of transcriptional activation, this work aims at providing a characterization of the dynamics of the unfolding of the cycle, i.e., of how these "impulse responses" are progressively delayed and broadened with respect to the input pulses, and of how this correlates with the stability of the corresponding transcripts. the compactness in terms of phase and width of the early categories over repeated oscillatory cycles is an argument in favor of the existence of a single triggering event for each cycle, corresponding to the transcriptional activation bursts mentioned above. in fact, sharp, equispaced pulses are maintained in spite of the broader and less coordinated profiles of the events immediately preceding them. this hypothesis is not in contradiction with the observations about the metabolic origin of the ymc, neither with the observed alterations of the period following a genetic disruption  <cit>  . on the contrary, it merges the metabolic control level described in  <cit>  with an extra regulatory element which is known to play a role in dynamical contexts. in fact, the mrna stability reflects known properties of the corresponding gene products: while mrnas encoding transcriptional machinery or regulatory components tend to be short-lived and to turn over more quickly, transcripts encoding core enzymatic proteins are typically more stable  <cit> . for what is known, protein synthesis tends to follow the concentration of the corresponding mrna  <cit>  and to be at least as stable, if not longer-lived  <cit> . hence, it is expected that the concentration of the gene products follows profiles that are similar to those of the mrnas. the observation that the dynamics through a metabolic pathway can be considered as a timed and sequential process at the level of gene expression appears in several papers in the literature, see  <cit> . the same principle seems to be reflected in the ymc, although it is not observable at the level of detail investigated e.g. in  <cit> , but more macroscopically and at genome-wide level.

an input-output dynamical model
in terms of dynamical models, the progressive broadening and smoothing of the response to a sequence of  pulses can be described by means of simple linear input-output models  of increasing order having "low-pass" characteristics. as the time constant of this low-pass filter is essentially given by the hl of the mrna, this type of model naturally predicts the correlation hl-pulse width. in order to describe correctly also the phase along the cycle, a time delay is added to the response, see methods for a thorough description and fig.  <dig> for an example. if the order of such a fitted minimal dynamical model is used to sort the annotated macrocategories of fig.  <dig>  we still recover both the same expected cascade of events and the same direct proportionality with hl, see fig.  <dig>  meaning that even in terms of the simplest possible dynamical model the kernels providing the best fitting become increasingly complex as we progress through the cycle. this is of course expected as the mrnas gradually pass from fast turnover to high stability.

a common dynamical gene expression program
as the ymc is obtained only in particular conditions , an intriguing question is whether this highly organized unfolding of the dynamical response to pulses of transcriptional activation is peculiar only of the ymc or can be observed also in other experimental conditions. for this purpose, we consider the gene expression response of steady-state yeast to pulses of glucose described in  <cit> . in this case, the yeast shows a transient dynamical response but no oscillatory behavior. furthermore, the transient peaks are more or less synchronous for all genes, i.e., there is no time-ordering in the dynamics, unlike in the ymc.

however, if for a gene we compare the maximal signed amplitude of each expression profile on these time series with the corresponding phase and pulse width in the ymc, a sizable anticorrelation emerges, see fig.  <dig>  if, on the contrary, we consider the stress responses time series of  <cit> , the ymc phase/pulse width turn out to be positively correlated  with amplitude, i.e., categories appearing early in the ymc tend to be downregulated in most stress responses, while "late phase" categories tend to be upregulated, see fig.  <dig>  it is known that in the stress responses genes annotated for ribosomal proteins and/or rna metabolism are in general downregulated, while e.g. respiratory genes  become upregulated  <cit> . on fig.  <dig>  notice that also in all these responses cytoplasmic ribosomes  are aligned with the rest of the  transcriptional/translational machinery rather than with the assigned hl values.

the conclusion of this analysis is therefore that in intrinsically dynamical contexts some form of common response might indeed be taking place, although exerted by different means. such genome-wide coordinated response shows a graded ordering which reflects the degree of stability of the genes involved.

CONCLUSIONS
in  <cit>  the time compartmentalization of the cycle is interpreted in terms of the need to accumulate sufficient products from the metabolic reactions in order to move on to the next phase of the cycle and to autoinduce further cycles of oscillations. this picture is not contradicted by our observations.

if, as we do in this paper, rather than looking at the ymc merely as cyclic oscillations, we study it as a highly organized dynamical response to pulses of transcriptional activation, then this response can be analyzed in much more detail at genome-wide level and we can observe how an important role in the coordination seems to be played by the mrna turnover rate. the self-sustained character of what we consider the most upstream event of the cycle, the transcriptional activation burst, can still be conditioned to the accumulation of the required metabolites, while the unfolding of the cycle, which from the analysis of  <cit>  is already known to be functional to the distribution of e.g. the redox load of the cells, is enriched of an extra, intrinsically dynamical feature. this feature is a fine-graded detail of our notion that genes with a fast turnover are typically regulatory, while slow genes are enzymatic and metabolic  <cit> . it can be used to describe the sequence of events occurring in the ymc as a "natural" gene expression program.

extrapolating from the specific ymc context, the ordered pattern of events described for the ymc is to a good extent similar to that found on other intrinsically dynamical contexts such as the stress/stimuli responses. whether the mrna stability is the cause of this coherent behavior or is simply another effect of a more profound regulatory mechanism is a question to which we cannot provide a definitive answer at the moment.

