BACKGROUND
cerebrovascular stroke is a highly prevalent condition and the major cause of language impairment in adults. immediately following a stroke about 38% of the affected population experience aphasia  <cit> . spontaneous recovery is reported within the first six months after the event, while only minimal spontaneous improvements of language functions are expected after more than one year post-stroke  <cit> . additional rehabilitation efforts have produced beneficial effects, as reported for speech and language therapy on the basis of different performance indices  <cit> . in accordance with recent progress in neurorehabilitation, which takes into account evidence of the brain's capacity for reorganization  <cit> , intensive language training  seems to be the premise for substantial improvement of language functions in the chronic stage  <cit> .

to date, the evaluation of impairment and recovery of function, including training-induced improvement in aphasia, has been based mainly on performance in neuropsychological tests. this is now being increasingly complemented by measures of brain function. different mechanisms and time courses of recovery of language function after brain damage have been discussed. hemodynamic imaging suggests the involvement of two mechanisms:  regression of diaschisis  and  functional reorganization of the neuronal networks involved in language processing. regression of diachisis in perilesional and more distant regions have been shown to contribute to recovery of function particularly in early phases of the recovery process  <cit> . in contrast, "re"-recruitment  of perilesional areas of the left hemisphere  <cit>  or reactiviation of left hemisphere network components  <cit>  predict long-term recovery of language function. moreover, recruitment of homotopic right-hemispheric areas may contribute to language recovery when the left-hemisphere language network components are permanently impaired  <cit> . however, it has been debated whether the recruitment of right hemispheric networks constitutes an additional potential for language processing or whether it is just a by-product of increased general activation. others suggest this recruitment may even impair the recovery of left hemispheric areas, leading to a persistence of deficits  <cit> .

brain structures in the vicinity of structural lesions produce a larger amount of slow wave activity. this might be due to a loss of afferent input  or to a primary metabolic change within these perilesional areas  <cit> .

these abnormal slow waves can be detected in the electroencephalogram  and, due to their focal generators, they can be localized using magnetic source imaging, a magnetencephalogram  based technique. in abnormal slow wave activity mapping   <cit> , generators of abnormal slow waves are localized and mapped on to brain structures in order to identify areas that are active but incapable of normal function. a number of studies have demonstrated that focal slow waves indicate abnormality resulting from neurological damage such as contusions, tumors, or cerebrovascular stroke. in particular, abnormal slow wave activity in the delta-frequency range  has been found in areas adjacent to the structural lesion  <cit> . since focal slow wave activity varies with changes in metabolism and blood flow due to the insult  <cit> , it has been described as characteristic of a 'dysfunctional state'  <cit>  of the neuronal tissue or a dysfunctional border zone with little ongoing information processing. in patients with brain tumors, this relationship between slow wave activity and metabolic changes was further elucidated by combining meg and proton mr spectroscopic imaging  <cit> . a mild reduction of n-acetyl aspartate  and slight accumulation of lactate  was found in association with sources of focal slow wave activity in the border zones of the tumors, suggesting a border zone between seriously damaged and normal tissue with potential for re-recruitment in the course of the disease.

the mapping of abnormal slow wave activity can be used not only to identify dysfunctional neuronal networks, but also to track changes in the course of recovery or treatment. for instance, de jongh et al.  <cit>  reported increased focal delta activity in the meg before and a reduction after resection of brain tumors. the utility of 'abnormal slow wave mapping'  in diagnostics, recovery, or treatment evaluation may be validated by covariation with neuropsychological measures. lewine et al.  <cit>  found a correlation between symptom resolution and meg-slow wave reduction in patients with minor traumatic brain injury  and hensel et al.  <cit>  reported a decrease of eeg-delta amplitude and dipole strength parallel to spontaneous recovery of language functions across the first year post stroke in aphasia patients.

the present study employed aswam before and after intensive language training in aphasic patients. if aswam qualifies for the evaluation of treatment or training-supported rehabilitation in chronic aphasics, changes in the intensity and distribution of focally generated abnormal slow wave activity should vary with improvement of language function after a specific intervention. aphasics were recruited from an ongoing project evaluating the effectiveness of an intensive language training program. this program combines the learning principles of shaping and the efficacy of concentrated training  <cit>  while considering the principles of cortical reorganization  <cit> . in order to minimize any influence of spontaneous recovery on changes in the brain-function measure, only chronic aphasics were selected to participate either in  <dig> hours of constrained-induced aphasia therapy   <cit>  or in  <dig> hours of massed model-based  aphasia therapy  <cit> . all training sessions were scheduled within a two-week period.

it was hypothesized that  aphasics would display an increased density of slow wave generators in the damaged  hemisphere before training,  this density would be reduced in the perilesional zone following language training and  there would be an improvement of language functions as evaluated by a standardized language test   <cit> .

RESULTS
language functions
the average test performance of the entire patient group increased after language training, as indicated by the aat profile  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> , paired t-test, two tailed). similar improvements were found for the token test  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). the average improvement of the profile score was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  points and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  points on the token test . twenty-five of the  <dig> patients improved on at least one subtest  or subscale  of the aat.

maximum delta activity
in  <dig> subjects the maximum activity of delta dipoles was found in the left hemisphere and in the vicinity of the structurally obvious lesion . in one patient, the maximum delta activity was located in the right hemisphere anterior to the homologue of the lesion, a finding consistent across measurements.  in another subject, the maximum delta activity was located at the posterior border of a large left fronto-temporal lesion due to an ischemic infarct of the middle cerebral artery in the first measurement. after training, the maximum delta activity was found in the right-hemispheric area anterior to the homologue of the lesion. notably, both measurements showed that this patient had clusters of delta activity next to the lesion and its right hemispheric homologue. left hemispheric delta dipole density  decreased after training and increased in the right hemisphere, which might explain the shift of peak activity to the right.

the location of this delta focus remained stable across the two measurements . the coordinates of maximum delta dipole density were exactly the same in eleven patients, while maximum delta activity shifted by one voxel in one of the three cardinal planes in eight patients, and by more than one voxel in nine patients. .

hemisphere-specific average delta activity
thresholds were significantly higher in the left hemisphere  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). clusters of voxels with delta activity >  <dig> sd above the average ddd in a group of  <dig> healthy controls were found in  <dig> of the  <dig> patients in the left hemisphere before training. such clusters were found in the right hemisphere in only  <dig> patients. in two patients only, delta activity in the right hemisphere exceeded left hemisphere activity. average delta activity was significantly more pronounced in the left hemisphere before and after training  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ; for the post-measurement, f =  <dig> , p < <dig> .0001: figure 2).

twelve patients showed an increase in left hemisphere delta activity after training, while a decrease occurred in sixteen patients . this diverging pattern became evident in the non-significant interaction time*hemisphere  < 1). an increase in delta activity of the left hemisphere tended to covary with a longer amount of time since the lesion  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ).

changes in ddd relative to improvement of langauge functions
"magnitude of change" in the left hemisphere was more pronounced in those patients who displayed significant improvement in at least one subtest of the aat  compared to patients with minor improvements  or no improvements  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). magnitude of change of left-hemispheric delta activity varied significantly with improvements in language functions , while there was no correlation between right hemisphere magnitude of change and language measures .

discussion
the present results provide further evidence that abnormal slow wave activity mapping  discloses generators of abnormal slow waves. the mapping of abnormal slow wave activity on to brain structures allows for the identification of areas that are active, but not capable of normal function. this is, to the best of our knowledge, the first report of a re-test after controlled neuropsychological/-linguistic intervention within the same subjects. the comparison between the two measurements indicates a high reliability of peak locations in left hemispheric perilesional areas, even though successful training modified this activity in magnitude and spatial distribution. in almost all patients, the region surrounding the structural lesion continuously and reliably produced abnormal slow waves, whereas only very few patients presented slow wave activity distant from the structurally confirmed lesion. the amount of perilesional slow wave activity was markedly altered in patients who had improved after training, and the magnitude of this change was related to the changes in language functions.

substantial functional improvements were achieved even in chronic aphasic states by shaping procedures, constraint of non-verbal communication and massed practice. this replicates and extends the findings of pulvermüller et al.  <cit> . the present results further suggest that similar improvements can be achieved irrespective of the particular training procedures . both strategies might produce their effects – at least in part – by reorganizing brain regions next to a lesion. following liepert et al.  <cit> , who demonstrated with transcranial magnetic stimulation that constraint-induced  movement training of the arm expanded the area of the brain involved in generating activity in the muscles of the hand, we might assume a similar mechanism for the presently observed language improvements after intensive speech and language training in aphasics, namely an increased number of increasingly functional areas.

in contrast, some patients, though displaying language improvement after training, exhibited an increase of delta activity in the vicinity of the lesion. one explanation for this might be that the functional capabilities of the affected brain area remain disturbed, with no further potential to be restored or re-integrated in the language 'network', and this might inhibit or impair functionally intact regions. further segregation of these continuously dysfunctional areas from the remaining network might then lead to improved language functions and consequently to increased delta activity. this hypothesis is supported by the correlation between language improvements and either decrease or increase of delta activity in perilesional areas. moreover, the increase of delta activity was related to longer duration of disease. in most of the patients, re-integration of 'spared' brain areas into the language network should be completed in time . therefore, "dysfunctional" delta activity might be related, at least in a subgroup of chronic patients, to functionally more favorable outcomes. the increase of delta activity might be explained by reduced reciprocal exchange of information within functionally intact and permanently impaired network components.

CONCLUSIONS
compared to the more conventional procedures for aphasia treatment in the chronic stage, the present training involved an intense use of language capabilities and a restraining of alternative, non-verbal methods of communication. in our opinion, any training that encourages speech production several hours a day over several days has the potential to be efficacious. massed practice is likely to produce activity-dependent cortical reorganization, found to result from ci-movement therapy  <cit> . it is also presumed to be the basis for a long-term increase in the amount of use of the more-affected extremity and of improved language functions following short-term intensive training.

