BACKGROUND
cancer is a multifactorial disease which is determined by complex interactions between genetic variants and environmental factors
 <cit> . various non-infectious chronic inflammatory conditions have been consistently associated with the increased risk of cancer development. examples would be large bowel inflammatory conditions, which create a risk of colorectal cancer, chronic pancreatitis, which may precede the development of pancreatic cancer, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , which increases the risk of lung cancer
 <cit> . however, there are many unanswered questions about the role of chronic inflammation in cancer development
 <cit> . copd, as well as lung cancer, are disorders characterized by an abnormal local and systemic inflammatory response with smoking as a major environmental risk factor
 <cit> .

chronic inflammation involves activation and recruitment of leucocytes, especially neutrophils. neutrophils are key blood cells, which respond immediately to inflammatory stimulus and contain a wide range of toxic compounds for pathogen removal
 <cit> . furthermore, the release of huge amounts of reactive oxygen species  by neutrophils plays a key role in enhancing the inflammation through the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases and redox-sensitive transcription factors such as nuclear factor kappa b and activator protein-1
 <cit> . a small amount of ros is essential for cell protection, viability and apoptosis. however, high amounts of ros may act as carcinogenic agents by inducing structural changes in dna and by modulating stress gene expression
 <cit> . an oxidative stress is known to be increased in the cells of lung cancer patients and copd patients, especially smokers
 <cit> . activated neutrophils express serine proteases, including neutrophil elastase , cathepsin g, and proteinase- <dig>  matrix metalloproteinases - <dig>  mmp- <dig>  and proteins, such as myeloperoxidase  and human neutrophil lipocalin, and release them from the granules into the extracellular space. these mediators play an important role in the inflammatory process
 <cit> . neutrophil elastase is a neutral protease that is able to degrade insoluble elastin. the imbalance between proteases and their inhibitors  may cause emphysematous changes in the lung tissue and the development of copd. furthermore, ne has also been shown to cleave cell surface epidermal growth factor and transfor growth factor-alpha
 <cit> . the role of ne in the development of lung cancer has been described in animal models and cell-line studies
 <cit> , but there is limited data from the investigations of lung cancer patients. myeloperoxidase is an endogenous oxidant enzyme, which plays an important role in bacterial killing by neutrophils and is involved in copd pathogenesis
 <cit> . in addition, there is evidence of mpo role in pathogenesis of lung cancer
 <cit> . neutrophil elastase and mpo are mostly released from activated neutrophils and act locally in the airways and other pulmonary compartments. however, these inflammatory mediators can be also detected in serum and be considered as parameters of systemic inflammation
 <cit> .

local inflammation, the main characteristic feature of copd, is associated with an infiltration of airway by inflammatory cells and an increased expression of cytokines, chemokines, enzymes, growth factors and adhesion molecules
 <cit> . bronchoalveolar lavage  is a useful procedure to sample the cellular and humoral constituents of the lung microenvironment. although cellular changes in bal fluid have been widely studied in copd patients
 <cit> , data about cellular composition in lung cancer patients with copd are lacking. there are also not enough data comparing the cellular changes in lung cancer and copd.

a direct role of chronic inflammation in the pathogenesis of lung cancer and its relation to the processes in copd is still not fully understood. therefore, the aim of our study was to evaluate the local and systemic chronic inflammation by investigating the amount of neutrophils and markers of their activity  in peripheral blood and bal fluid of patients with lung cancer, copd and having both diseases simultaneously.

RESULTS
characteristics of subjects
the clinical characteristics of the study population are described in table 
 <dig>  there were no significant age, bmi differences between the groups. however, significantly more lung cancer patients with copd were current smokers. smoking intensity did not differ when compared with other groups. fev <dig> and fev1/fvc did not differ between copd groups. there were significantly fewer females in the copd group compared with lung cancer and healthy individual groups.

fev <dig> forced expiratory volume in one second, fvc forced vital capacity, bmi body mass index, copd chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

*p <  <dig> , when compared to lung cancer with copd, copd, and healthy individuals groups.

§p <  <dig> , when compared with healthy individuals.

aχ2- <dig> , p <  <dig> .

aaχ2- <dig> , p <  <dig> .

the clinical characteristics of the patients with lung cancer are described in table 
 <dig> 

nsclc non-small cell lung cancer, sclc small cell lung cancer, nsclc-nos non-small cell lung cancer not otherwise specified, ecog eastern cooperative oncology group.

cellular patterns of peripheral blood and bal fluid
table 
 <dig> shows the cellular patterns of peripheral blood and bal fluid from all the investigated groups. the percentage and cell count of leucocytes, neutrophils and monocytes in the peripheral blood were significantly higher in patients with lung cancer with or without copd than in patients with copd or healthy individuals  . furthermore, the percentage and cell count of leucocytes and neutrophils were significantly higher in patients with copd than healthy individuals. the cell count of lymphocytes did not differ between groups . the neutrophil to lymphocyte  ratio was significantly higher in lung cancer patients with or without copd compared to patients with copd or healthy individuals . the n/l ratio  and neutrophil cell count  were significantly higher in the lung cancer patients with poor performance status 2– <dig>  when compared to the patients with performance status 0– <dig> as well as. there were no significant differences in leucocyte, neutrophil, monocyte cell counts and n/l ratio according to gender, stage and histologic type of the disease .

data are expressed as mean ± sem. *p <  <dig>  when compared with healthy individuals; §p <  <dig>  when compared to copd group.

the percentage and cell count of neutrophils were significantly higher in the patients with lung cancer with or without copd than in healthy individuals but significantly lower than in patients with copd . the percentage and cell count of macrophages was significantly higher in lung cancer groups and healthy individuals, than in copd group .

neutrophil ros production in vitro
neutrophils produced higher spontaneous ros levels in the groups of lung cancer patients with or without copd compared to the copd patients or healthy individuals  . the spontaneous ros production in the lung cancer patients did not significantly differ despite the coexistence of copd. spontaneous ros production in neutrophils did not differ between the male and female patients with lung cancer . there were no significant differences of spontaneous ros production in neutrophils among the major histologic types of lung cancer: squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, large cell carcinoma, non-small cell lung cancer not otherwise specified and small cell carcinoma  as well as between non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer groups . additionally, spontaneous ros production in neutrophils was significantly higher in patients with advanced lung cancer than in those with early lung cancer  and in the lung cancer patients with poor performance status 2– <dig> compared with those with performance status 0– <dig> . furthermore, the patients with early lung cancer had a significantly higher spontaneous ros production in neutrophils than the patients with copd . there were no significant differences of spontaneous ros production in neutrophils in lung cancer groups among never smokers, former and current smokers . additionally, spontaneous ros production was found to be higher in lung cancer patients with or without copd, who have never smoked, when comparing to current smokers with copd . different concentrations of pma  stimulated ros production in neutrophils in all studied groups . an obvious increase of ros production in neutrophils was detected after stimulation with  <dig>  nm of pma in lung cancer patients , and with  <dig> nm in copd group . but the most significant increase of ros production in all studied groups was observed in neutrophils stimulated with  <dig> nm pma. there were no correlations between spontaneous ros production in neutrophils and age, bmi and smoking intensity in study groups .

levels of ne and mpo
serum and bal fluid levels of both ne and mpo were significantly higher in patients with lung cancer than in patients with copd or healthy individuals  . however, serum and bal fluid ne and mpo levels did not significantly differ in lung cancer groups  . we did not find any significant differences of ne and mpo levels in serum and bal between the male and female patients with lung cancer . there were no significant differences of ne and mpo levels in serum and bal fluid between the non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer  as well as among various histological types of cancer . however, serum ne and mpo levels were significantly higher in patients with advanced lung cancer than in those with early lung cancer  . furthermore, patients with early lung cancer had a significantly higher ne levels than patients with copd .there were no significant differences of ne and mpo levels in serum and bal fluid in lung cancer patients with performance status 0– <dig> when comparing to patients with performance status 2– <dig> . there were no differences of ne and mpo levels in lung cancer groups  among subjects that have never smoked, former and current smokers . additionally, ne and mpo levels in serum and bal fluid were found to be significantly higher in the lung cancer patients, who have never smoked compared with the current smokers with copd . correlations between ne, mpo levels and spontaneous ros production in the peripheral blood neutrophils in patients with lung cancer are presented in table 
 <dig>  no correlations were found between serum and bal fluid ne, mpo levels and age, bmi, smoking intensity in the investigated groups .

ne neutrophil elastase, mpo myeloperoxidase, bal fluid bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.

discussion
the goal of this study was to investigate local and systemic neutrophilic inflammation in patients with lung cancer and copd considering the common inflammatory signaling pathway in both diseases. it is known that chronic inflammation plays a role in pathogenesis of both diseases there are limited integrated data comparing chronic inflammatory processes when there is coexistence of lung cancer and copd. it is known that copd is a major independent risk factor for lung cancer among smokers and about 50-90% of patients with lung cancer also have copd
 <cit> . a mechanism, explaining why smokers with copd have an increased risk for lung cancer when compared to smokers without copd, is still not clear. furthermore, it is still not known why some patients with copd get lung cancer and some patients don't. in order to understand the inflammatory mechanisms and associations between lung cancer and copd we aimed to analyze the patterns of local  and systemic  chronic neutrophilic inflammation in lung cancer and copd.

our results are consistent with the findings of previous reviews, showing that the count of neutrophils in peripherial blood was higher in lung cancer patients
 <cit>  as well as in patients with copd
 <cit>  when compared to healthy individuals. to our knowledge such data comparing neutrophil cell count and n/l ratio in lung cancer patients, patients with copd and both diseases in coexistence are presented for the first time. recent studies have shown that the n/l ratio has a significant prognostic value for chronic conditions such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus
 <cit> , many cancers as well as lung cancer
 <cit> . we demonstrated an increased neutrophil cells count and n/l ratio in peripheral blood in patients with lung cancer compared with copd patients, but did not find significant difference between the groups of lung cancer patients with copd and without copd. furthermore, n/l ratio was significantly higher in patients with copd than in healthy subjects. the development of chronic systemic neutrophilia in cancer, as well as in copd, has not been fully understood. there are some hypotheses explaining pathogenetic mechanisms, which are responsible for the increased neutrophil count in the peripheral blood. one of them, states that increased neutrophil count in peripheral blood in case of copd can be influenced by the airway inflammation. this enhanced neutrophil influx to the airways may stimulate the activation of inflammatory markers, which on the other hand activate the neutrophils, cause an increase in their vitality and migration to the lung tissue due to chemoattractants
 <cit> . the other hypothesis, suggests that an enhanced expression of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and il- <dig> in patients with copd
 <cit>  plays and important role, as these mediators stimulate neutrophil release from the bone marrow, causing the increased neutrophil count in the peripheral blood. the same mechanisms can be responsible for the increased numbers of neutrophils and n/l ratio in lung cancer as well. however, there is additional mechanism that could contribute to the increase in neutrophil count. cancer cells produce granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, which directly stimulates bone marrow to release neutrophils
 <cit> . because of these mechanisms, lung cancer patients have higher neutrophil count and more pronounced systemic chronic inflammation than patients with copd.

there are limited data comparing local inflammation in lung cancer patients and copd. analysis of bal fluid cells and extracellular components allows to describe immune processes in the airway microenvironment. in agreement with the data from other studies, our results revealed that percentage and cell count of neutrophils were significantly higher in lung cancer patients
 <cit>  and copd patients
 <cit>  compared with healthy subjects. in contrast to neutrophilia in peripheral blood, percentage of neutrophils in bal fluid was significantly lower and percentage of macrophages was significantly higher in lung cancer patients compared with copd patients. furthermore, we observed that in lung cancer patients, when compared with copd patients, not only the count of macrophages in bal fluid was increased, percentage and cell count of monocytes in peripheral blood were also higher. lung cancer cells generate chemotactic factors and chemokine ligand for circulating monocytes, which are recruited into the lungs, where they differentiate into the macrophages
 <cit> . it is known that immune cells, including macrophages, infiltrate the tumor stroma
 <cit> . it is well know that monocyte-lineage cells including macrophages also play an important role in the pathogenesis of copd
 <cit> . a plausible explanation for the increased count of macrophages in bal fluid of patients with lung cancer is that tumor promotes migration of monocytes and their differentiation into the macrophages. this confirms the fact, that macrophages play central role in the immune response to lung cancer.

we observed that mean serum and bal fluid levels of ne and mpo were significantly higher in patients with lung cancer  compared with copd patients and healthy subjects. neutrophil elastase and mpo are important markers of neutrophil activation and neutrophilic inflammation
 <cit> . some studies have identified increased ne and mpo levels in patients with copd
 <cit>  and healthy smokers
 <cit> . the role of ne and mpo in chronic lung inflammation and association with lung cancer development has been characterized in cell line and animal models
 <cit> . nevertheless, there are no clear data comparing the importance of ne and mpo in lung cancer and copd. although we demonstrated that neutrophil cell count and percentage in bal fluid were lower in lung cancer groups compared with copd patients, ne and mpo levels in bal fluid were significantly higher in lung cancer groups than in copd group. thus, our findings let us hypothesize that in patients with lung cancer neutrophils appear in a more activated state through the production of ne, mpo than in patients with copd. furthermore, there are some data showing that ne and mpo is expressed not only in neutrophils but also in monocyte-derived macrophages
 <cit> .

it is generally accepted that oxidative stress, which is promoted by cigarette smoke, may be involved in cancer development
 <cit> . the literature is full of data on the increased oxidative stress in patients with copd
 <cit> . however it is still little known about ros production in lung cancer patients with copd and data comparing lung cancer with copd are lacking. in the present study we demonstrated that spontaneous ros production in peripheral blood neutrophils was higher in both lung cancer groups  than in patients with copd, but there were no differences between lung cancer patients with copd or without copd. heijink and colleagues suggested that chemical factor like cigarette smoke may influence a more intensive ros production in copd and healthy individuals
 <cit> . as a chemical factor which causes neutrophil activation we used a pma. our study showed that pma induced intensive ros production not only in patients with copd and healthy individuals but in lung cancer patient groups  as well. our results revealed that activated neutrophils after stimulation with pma produced more ros in lung cancer patients  compared with copd patients. it means that chemical factors cause enhanced inflammation in lung cancer. in addition, we provided evidence that intracellular ros was increased in peripheral blood neutrophils of lung cancer patients which positively correlated with levels of both inflammatory markers . such correlation supports the hypothesis that intensive chronic neutrophilic inflammation promotes more intensive ros production in lung cancer compared to copd.

we also investigated levels of ne, mpo and ros production in the patients with different stage of lung cancer . our data demonstrated that patients with advanced lung cancer had significantly higher serum ne, mpo levels and more intensive ros production in peripheral neutrophils than patients with early stage lung cancer. these results are consistent with the results reported in other studies
 <cit> , presenting additional evidence of the importance of chronic neutrophilic inflammation in lung cancer progression
 <cit> . furthermore, our findings of higher systemical ne, mpo and ros production in patients with early lung cancer compared with copd patients further support the fact, that chronic inflammation can be more pronounced in lung cancer than copd.

additional studies have demonstrated that smoking stimulates not only local but also systemic inflammation
 <cit> . however, the data on the influence of smoking itself on chronic neutrophilic inflammation in lung cancer patients with coexisting copd are scarce. the data are contradictory, some researches have shown that cigarette smoke is strongly associated with the increased inflammation of airways, proved by the exhaled breath condensate in lung cancer patients
 <cit> . other study failed to prove these associations in lung cancer patients
 <cit> . there is evidence that cigarette smoking plays an important role as the starting point of chronic inflammation
 <cit>  but has little influence in promoting inflammation in lung cancer. however, our results indicate that in patients with lung cancer local and systemic inflammation was increased independent of smoking and not only cigarette smoking but also other factors play a significant role in promotion of chronic inflammation in lung cancer.

CONCLUSIONS
we observed that individuals with lung cancer  had more pronounced local and systemic neutrophilic inflammation in comparison with patients with copd and healthy subjects. these data permit a suggestion that neutrophilic chronic inflammation has a significant role in lung cancer pathogenesis and is more pronounced in patients with lung cancer than patients with copd.

