BACKGROUND
protein-protein interaction  is the key process by which most of the proteins fulfill their function, and interactomics represents one of the current frontiers of biosciences  <cit> . it is well known that many proteins are single parts, called monomers, of a complex quaternary structure, a multimer. in any case, monomers alone do not have a specific function which is only achieved when the distinct parts interact together to accomplish a certain function  <cit> . ppis can help us to predict protein function and, therefore, many protein function predictors have been developed using ppi databases  <cit> . due to ppis, it is expected that in the near future the number of protein complexes will surpass the number of proteins in some organisms. a lot of ppis involve surface displacements among the members of the protein complex to achieve the required biological function.

nuclear magnetic resonance  and x-ray crystallography  are the two main technologies applied for structure elucidation, but these hi-tech methods are frequently constrained by the methodological requirements when dealing with protein complexes. it is assumed that these experimental limitations have reduced the amount of large protein complexes solved and, therefore, protein complexes have become less represented in the structural databases such as the protein data bank . therefore, when trying to analyze the dynamics of the interaction process among the proteins of a protein complex, a nmr spectroscopic technique may not be feasible, and the data obtained of a xrc experiment may not be useful to represent the dynamic behavior. consequently, despite the use of these two experimental technologies for protein structure determination being widely distributed, other complementary strategies may be useful to accurately model the dynamics of the interaction among the proteins of a protein complex. in this context, some theoretical methods to study protein complexes at a structural level, such as docking, are now emerging. protein-protein docking  is a computational method to predict the best way by which two proteins could interact  <cit> . in rigid body ppd approaches, conformational changes during the complex formation are not permitted, in order to save computation time. this technique may be appropriate when non-substantial conformational changes are expected to take place in the interacting proteins.

usually, it is considered that the best solution given by a docking program is the one with the best interaction energy, but quite a lot of the real interactions tend to involve large surface displacements with non-optimal interaction energies to finally form the protein complex. these displacements occur along the protein surface, generating multiple low-energy interaction complexes. in these cases, these low-energy interaction regions might not be, in reality, less important from a functional point of view, and the interaction region has to be wide enough to allow ppis coming from different orientations like, for instance, proteins that require movements among them when they act as a protein complex. owing to all of these facts, interaction among proteins seems to be a dynamic mechanism where there is not only one single solution with the best interaction energy, like most of the current ppd programs consider, but rather there are several solutions with more or less interaction energy, and not necessarily does the native form have the best theoretical solution  <cit> .

our approach attempts to deal with these particularities by considering the global contribution of the ppd calculated solutions and selecting those representative solutions  that describe a general behavior of a subset of solutions without improving an unrealistic one. to extract those solutions that best describe the real dynamic mechanism of interaction from the output datafile of the current ppd programs, we have developed an application, called dockanalyse, which is based on the already-existing dbscan clustering method  <cit>  and, moreover, is unsupervised and automatic. the aim of this new method is to choose the appropriate solutions, not only by taking into account the interaction energy, but also the dependence among the clusters generated by the docking outputdata representation. the way of choosing the representative solutions is made by searching for continuities among these clusters. the real challenge of the newly developed application is the ability to identify significant structures from the huge amount of previously calculated docking solutions without requiring too many tuning parameters from the user in order to run the program. normally, the decision about which of the docked structures is the most important is very difficult, but dockanalyse guides the search for good docking candidates by reducing the huge amount of putative docking solutions to check. furthermore, the use of dockanalyse allows a global vision of many characteristics of the ppi process through different data, graphical representations and possible personalized searches which also guides the search for signifiant solutions.

the exhaustive analysis of all of the ppi structures obtained with dockanalyse may help us to theoretically postulate the structure of the studied protein complex or to propose the way by which certain proteins interact together in a mobile fashion to execute a biological function. moreover, the analysis made by dockanalyse might guide future flexible ppd approaches, because of the important ppd information obtained from the use of this new application.

RESULTS
characteristics of dockanalyse
with the aim of elucidating which of the docked structures between two studied protein structures are the most important from a functional point of view, an unsupervised procedure, based on the already existing dbscan clustering method  <cit> , was designed and implemented with the r package. the movement, expressed in rotations and translations described by the proteins, and the interaction energy were considered in the algorithm to finally obtain the cluster distribution with the best internal coherence among the clusters generated by the docking output datafile representation. an initial transformation of the angles is required in order to make them comparable to location information.

first, distances among angles of the different docking solutions are computed. for instance, assume that a =  and b =  are the angles corresponding to two docking solutions, then the distance between a and b is defined as:

 d=d12+d22+d <dig> 

where di = min{|bi - ai|, |bi - ai + 2π|, |bi - ai = 2π|} for i =  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> 

that is, di is the angular distance between angles ai and bi. once the distance matrix between angles of docking solutions has been computed, multidimensional scaling   <cit>  is performed on this distance matrix. the resulting principal coordinates are then concatenated to position variables in the docking output datafile in order to have a new data matrix where the euclidean distances between rows represent the joint distance between angles and location of docking solutions. moreover, the weight  and the information of each angle/position are forced to be the same in the new data matrix. then, an automatic pre-processing step finds the radius necessary to run the dbscan clustering method, and the best ε  parameter possible, also necessary for a proper dbscan analysis, is chosen according to a battery of cluster quality measures. to be specific, high values for high quality clustering of the following indexes have been considered   <cit>  for more details): davies-bouldin , calinski-harabasz, hubert-levine  and silhouette. dbscan is applied to several ε-candidate values and the resulting clusters are evaluated by these criteria. the ε-candidate values are ranked according to every index, and the score of an ε-candidate value is then established as the mean of its ranks. finally, the value with the highest score is taken as the final ε and the corresponding cluster is considered to be the right one.

dockanalyse, was applied to interpret the results obtained from different ppd assays because it gives a lot of information that is produced by the ppd output datafile analysis. as well as this information, the shape, size and distribution of the clusters obtained along with the position of the outliers are shown in dockanalyse result graphical representations . these graphs give a global vision of the ppi process, enabling a curated study of the most interesting ppd solutions. figure  <dig> represents a bidimensional graph that depicts the representation in a plane of a cloud of points in a multidimensional space  after the application of a method to reduce dimensions . as is well-known, the two first principal components explain the main part of the variability contained in the data, but usually it is impossible to reflect all of the distances among the points in a multidimensional space in only two dimensions, which is why outlier points might appear very close to other cluster centers. to check that point, the alternative representation in the script where all combinations of axes are depicted can be activated . the representative solutions of each of the calculated clusters can be highlighted and they refer to the significant points among all of the docked structures tested . these points represent the most relevant solutions obtained from the ppd calculation and they allow us to identify which solutions among all might be more directly involved in the ppi process. these representatives  are central members of the clusters and they also have high interaction energy. what represents a real challenge, which is facilitated by dockanalyse, is the reduction of the number of solutions to analyze after the ppd experiment. with our program, the docking outputdata analysis is facilitated because the number of solutions is reduced from a huge number  to approximately less than  <dig> in most of the cases. some ppd programs do not incorporate a clustering process and the use of dockanalyse in these cases is even more justified. evidently, dockanalyse gives researchers the possibility to use it with a greater or lesser number of docking solutions although this characteristic has been proposed to guarantee the exhaustive exploration of the whole space of docking solutions.

the main advantage of dockanalyse, when trying to interpret the results from a docking procedure, is shown in figure  <dig> and in figure  <dig>  where it can be seen that obtaining conclusions from the graphical representations given by dockanalyse is much more intuitive than from the raw numerical data given by most of the ppd programs.

testing dockanalyse
through a set of  <dig> enzyme/inhibitor or enzyme/substrate protein complexes of the current protein-protein docking benchmark  <dig>   <cit>  , we have shown the way by which dockanalyse can be applied in a systematic way to monitor the quality and type of docking predictions. this group of known protein complexes included homodimers and heterodimers, protein inhibitors and other enzyme complexes. the unbound structures of the interacting proteins were used when available; otherwise, the bound structures were extracted from the complex.

the percentage of satisfactory dockings detected was  <dig> %, where a satisfactory docking is the one on which one or more dockanalyse clusters are significant in terms of a high number of members and high average interaction energy . in comparison to the crystallographic protein complex structure, which was obtained from the benchmark set, all of these satisfactory solutions showed a very low rms  deviation. this means that only through dockanalyse outputs could it be seen in these cases that the dockings were credible before realizing that the rms deviation was so low. on the contrary, the percentage of unsatisfactory dockings detected was  <dig> %, where an unsatisfactory docking means that all of the clusters given by dockanalyse are composed of few members and, moreover, have very low interaction energies. the rms deviation values calculated here were all very high. again, with dockanalyse these unsatisfactory dockings could be detected before knowing their high rms deviation values. rms deviation values could be calculated because we knew the crystallographic structure of the protein complex from the benchmark, but in real research it will almost never be known, so dockanalyse might be used at this point to guide the researcher concerning the quality and credibility of the docking. in addition,  <dig> % of the dockings were considered to be static interactions with a rms deviation again very low in the considered solutions. the way by which dockanalyse can detect this type of static interactions is explained below.

these interactions could be detected with our program due to the possibility to perform personalized searches, introducing specific ppd solution values in the "marker" variable of the program source code . in figure 2a, some of the best solutions of the docking program  are interpreted by dockanalyse as a clear trajectory. these values do not belong to any cluster so, consequently, they are included initially in cluster  <dig>  but the graphical representations provided by this tool and the different information given could help the user to realize that he is being faced with two proteins with a small binding site and without any permitted flexibility.

as has been reported thoroughly in previous sections, the main potential of this new method is the capability to explore the interaction space, making clusters that correspond to extensive contact regions. these graphical representations reproduce the movements that occur between the constituents of a protein complex. these preassumed non-optimal solutions described before have lower scores in the ppd program outputfile, therefore, they are discarded by the ppd initial filter. as shown below in the example, these solutions could be rescued and their score improved with dockanalyse application. in figure 2b, solution  <dig> has been included in cluster  <dig> in dockanalyse results, but in the ppd program it is ranked as solution  <dig>  far from the optimal solution although both rms deviation and energy values are significant. it has to be considered that dockanalyse highlights this solution as one of the most representative because it is at the center of the cluster with the highest interaction energy . moreover, as can also be seen in figure 2b, this cluster is in a highly connected interaction zone, demonstrating displacements among the two docked proteins. these are the types of results that could be obtained using dockanalyse.

for protein complex  <dig>  of the benchmark, dockanalyse outputs showed a satisfactory docking in which cluster  <dig> was significant. using the supplementary scripts that come with dockanalyse, all of the ligand positions of the solutions of cluster  <dig> were extracted as pdb files and then loaded in a protein modeling and visualization tool with the structure of the receptor. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  all of the ligand positions contained in this cluster were very similar and, therefore, corroborated the robustness of dockanalyse. furthermore, that is another useful way to apply our program.

modeling a protein complex
an example of a procedure where dockanalyse can be applied to model the movements between the members of a protein complex is as follows :

isu <dig> and isu <dig> are two yeast mitochondrial proteins which perform a scaffolding function during the assembly/maturation of iron-sulfur cluster  prosthetic groups  <cit> . these proteins physically and functionally interact, leading to the formation of a stable protein complex  <cit> . to achieve the appropriate orientation between these two proteins, we have seen that isu <dig> comes into contact with isu <dig> and slips on it with the aim of reaching a certain orientation. in this appropriate position, the two proteins are situated one in front of the other and their tails might allow for the required stable interaction. moreover, in this final conformation,  <dig> cysteine residues per protein  remain close enough to each other to be crucial for anchoring the isc that is being generated while isu <dig> and isu <dig> tails facilitate their interaction  <cit>  . most of the studies prompt the suggestion that the iron and sulfur atoms required for the isc biogenesis on isu1/isu <dig> are donated by other proteins, named frataxin and nfs <dig>  <cit> . this isc biogenesis machinery is not yet well understood and problems in it cause several human diseases linked to protein/enzyme deficits. that is why the study of this prosthetic group generation represents an important challenge from any point of view. the sequence, structure, function and current literature of these proteins were analyzed in-depth. after that, ppd experiments were performed between the structures of the two proteins, setting up a small rotation step to exhaustively explore a great number of solutions in a reasonable computing time. finally, dockanalyse was applied with the aim of reducing the huge amount of docking solutions obtained to several representative ones. these solutions were the 4th, 78th, 28th, and 1st initially ranked solutions of the escher ng docking output datafile. here, the main utility of dockanalyse in reducing the number of solutions to analyze after a ppd calculation is shown. for these four representative docking solutions, the protein structure  files were obtained, merged into a trajectory file and then subsequently loaded into a protein modeling and visualization tool with which we could analyze them. this procedure allowed us to build a point-to-point pseudo-trajectory with which we could postulate a model to explain the surface displacements between the given proteins . this pseudo-trajectory could be reconstructed by means of the selection of other solutions along dockanalyse clusters or by joining the different dockanalyse cluster representatives. for this reason, the representative solutions could be considered to be static frames that describe the motion between the interacting proteins, and we could model/study the surface displacements of one protein on the other.

CONCLUSIONS
a comprehensive tool for the analysis of ppis has been designed. this new application permits a better interpretation of the obtained ppd solutions as well as the surface displacements that may occur during the interaction between the proteins of a protein complex. therefore, this tool guides the modeling of a protein complex and can be applied in a systematic way to monitor the quality and type of docking predictions through global or local visions of the docking results that facilitate the desicion making process regarding the docking characteristics. the simplicity in applying this tool and the ease in interpreting the ppd solutions makes it ideally suited to analyze the data obtained in a ppd experiment. considering all of the facts stated above, to go further and propose new functional interpretations for the proteins of interest might be much easier. in terms of these new hypotheses, when the initially docked proteins are monomers, a proposal on the putative structure of a multimeric protein complex might be postulated  <cit> . another procedure to visualize the expected surface displacements between two interacting proteins may be suggested. this last approach could be applied to pairs of proteins that require displacements between them to fulfill a specific function  <cit> .

as a whole, dockanalyse could be used after a docking assay in the context of a more complex procedure where a model of the behavior between the proteins that take part in a biologically functional protein complex would be performed. a schematic description of how to use dockanalyse in this whole bioinformatics procedure is shown in figure  <dig>  first of all, an extensive literature mining analysis coupled with a profound study of the sequence, structure, function and interactome of the proteins of interest is required. secondly, the required ppd experiments have to be executed, taking into account that the more solutions tested during the docking assays, the more robust the results from dockanalyse would be. after that, the newly developed algorithm has to be applied to each of the docking output datafiles to obtain the representative docking solutions among those thousands calculated. lastly, manual curation of the obtained docking representatives might be necessary to fit the solutions given with the appropriate biological function and to eliminate the putative aberrant results. the combination of theoretical docking procedures with the available experimental information is shown to greatly improve the modeling. dockanalyse is accessible at: http://bioinf.uab.es/rker/dockanalyse/dockanalyse.zip .

