BACKGROUND
estrogens’ effects in focal cerebral ischemia have been a matter of debate for more than a decade. among studies performed in humans, the early epidemiological studies, indicating decreased stroke incidence from peri-menopausal hormone therapy  <cit> , starkly contrasted later randomized controlled trials, such as the women’s health initiative  <cit> . in an effort to explain the discrepant results, the window of opportunity hypothesis has been propagated, stating that estrogen therapy may be detrimental after a longer period of hypoestrogenicity  <cit> . to complement the human studies, a large number of animal studies have been devoted to investigate the impact of estrogens on artificially induced ischemic stroke. even if the vast majority of animal studies have reported protection from estrogens  <cit> , there are some studies where the hormone has been observed to increase infarction  <cit> , thus paralleling the dichotomy among human studies. the most popular suggestions to explain the discordant results in animal studies has, in analogy with the human studies, been that differences in length of wash-out time between ovariectomy and estrogen administration or animal age are the responsible factors  <cit> .

in  <dig>  a systematic analysis from our lab suggested that the use of different estrogen administration modes may explain the dichotomous results from the animal studies  <cit> . although such a hypothesis may seem less attractive because it is not readily extrapolated to the human studies, where the range of tested dosages and administration modes is extremely narrow, the fact that all animal studies that reported damage from estrogen used the same type of estrogen administration seemed an unlikely coincidence. in the studies included in the former systematic analysis, the only administration mode capable of rendering estrogens damaging was a type of subcutaneous slow-release pellet , which has been demonstrated to produce extremely high, prolonged serum 17β-estradiol concentrations in rodents  <cit> . however, in the  <dig> systematic analysis, separate analyses handled one variable at a time, and thus confounders were not controlled for. the discussion regarding what factors contribute to the estrogen-stroke dichotomy has nevertheless proceeded, and for example in a recent review, sohrabji et al. suggested that the factors age, hypertension, rat strain and whether the middle cerebral artery occlusion  was permanent or not could explain why some articles report enlarged infarcts from estrogen administration. the fact that slow-release pellets had been used in all cited studies in which estrogens had increased damage was not even mentioned  <cit> .

the statistical shortcomings of the previous systematic analysis, the continuing debate on the matter and the publication of several additional original studies since the previous systematic analysis encouraged us to perform an updated and improved meta-analysis, where all methodological differences that reasonably could affect the impact of estrogens on experimental ischemic stroke would be controlled for in a large multiple regression model. the current meta-analysis therefore aimed to address the hypotheses that  estrogen administration mode,  the age of the experimental animals and  the length of hypoestrogenicity affects estrogens’ impact on stroke.

RESULTS
slow release pellets render estrogens significantly less protective/more damaging
sixty-one studies, describing  <dig> pairs of estrogen-treated groups and control groups  of rats in which focal cerebral ischemia was induced, were included , and data regarding methodology and results was extracted for meta-analysis . in the final multiple regression model, with correction for all included confounding factors, the effects of estrogens on focal cerebral ischemia was clearly affected by the mode of estrogen administration. slow-release pellets rendered estrogens significantly more damaging/less protective than if the estrogens were administered via injections or silastic capsules . the use of direct, mechanical mcao procedures, laser-doppler flowmetry surveillance, edema correction and the variable length of time between initiation of estrogen administration and induction of the ischemic damage were also found to significantly influence the impact of estrogens on focal cerebral ischemia. notably, concerning the abovementioned hypotheses b and c, the factors elderly rats and washout were excluded in the preceding backward analysis due to too low impact on the outcome variable infarct size ratio between estrogen treated and control rats .

variables excluded in preceding multiple regression analysis  due to too low explanatory value: strain, sex, elderly rats, washout , occlusion duration, length of time between ischemia and evaluation of damage.

the final multiple regression model included  <dig> group pairs, and yielded an r2-value of  <dig> , hence explaining  <dig> % of the variation in ec-ratio.

higher dose in slow-release pellets increases the risk of estrogen exacerbating ischemic damage
simple linear regression analyses including only group pairs within one specific estrogen administration mode category were run with dose  as the independent factor and ec-ratio as the outcome variable. there was a significant, positive relation between slow-release pellet dose and ec-ratio , meaning that increasing the pellet dose increased the likeliness that estrogens would be damaging. this model had an r2-value of  <dig> , indicating that it explained 26% of the ec-ratio variation . adding the factor elderly rats  to the model did not affect the r2-value , and there was not even a slight tendency for increased damage in elderly rats . a similar analysis to address hypothesis c could not be done since only one single study administered estrogen via pellets more than 14 days after ovariectomy.

for the group pairs administered estrogens via injection or silastic capsules, there were no significant relations between dosage and ec-ratio, however the trend in both models was that increased estrogen dose increased neuroprotection .

descriptive statistics
the frequencies of categories in the  <dig> included group pairs are depicted in figure  <dig>  two variables, diseases and estrogen type, were excluded from the statistical analyses because too few group pairs deviated from the dominant category. descriptive statistics for the continuous variables are presented in table  <dig> 

discussion
the main multiple regression model, controlling for all listed confounders, revealed an indisputable impact of estrogen administration mode on the effects of estrogens in ischemic stroke . slow-release pellets significantly differed from the injection and silastic capsule treatments in terms of resulting ec-ratio, showing that slow-release pellets are more prone to render estrogens damaging. of note, the slow-release pellet confidence interval extended over the 100% ec-ratio line, underscoring the potential for harm as well as benefit . in an attempt to further shed light on this finding, administration mode-specific simple regression models between dose and ec-ratio were run. while no statistically significant relation was seen between dose and ec-ratio in the injection and silastic capsule group pairs, higher slow-release pellet dose was clearly related to increased ischemic damage .

a plausible explanation for the tendency of estrogens in slow-release pellets to be less protective/more damaging is that this high-dose administration mode causes extremely high, elevated serum 17β-estradiol concentrations. it has repeatedly been shown that the pellets from innovative research of america®, albeit with a large portion of unpredictability, render prolonged serum concentrations that are well beyond the physiological spectrum. silastic capsules produce serum concentrations in a much lower, often physiological, range, while daily injections result in hours-long spikes followed by estrogen-deficient intervals, rendering the 24 h-average serum concentrations low  <cit> . the finding that higher pellet dose increased the detrimental tendency  is well in line with the hypothesis that the administered dose is the culprit. such an explanation is reflected in the concept of hormesis, stating that dose–response curves are not always unidirectional, but that a substance can have diametrically different effects in different concentration ranges  <cit> . the current meta-analysis strongly suggests that low-dose estrogen therapy is protective in rat models of focal cerebral ischemia, while high-dose estrogen therapy is more likely to be detrimental. recently, a study aiming to experimentally test this hypothesis was published in bmc neuroscience. the main finding was that true hormesis, with bidirectional effects in different dose ranges compared to baseline, could be demonstrated in the in vitro oxygen-glucose deprivation experiments. when different doses of 17β-estradiol in analogy were tested on rats, higher doses rendered less protection than low doses  <cit> . while there is a multitude of narrative reviews covering the field of animal models of stroke and estrogens, to the best of our knowledge only one systematic review, except for the  <dig> article from our lab referred to in the background, has been published. the main finding presented in that article was that estrogens seemed to reduce ischemic damage in a positive dose-dependent manner  <cit> , a result that could not be corroborated by the current review. the previous review differed fundamentally from the current meta-analysis by not analyzing differences between studies reporting neuroprotection versus studies reporting increased damage from estrogens.

regarding hypothesis b, no impact of the use of elderly animals on estrogens’ effects in stroke was seen. in the preceding backward multiple regression analysis, the variable was the first one to be excluded, without even a trace of higher ec-ratio in elderly rats . if anything, the regression coefficient suggested more estrogenic protection in elderly animals, in contrary to hypothesis b.

similarly for hypothesis c, the second  variable to be excluded in the backward analysis was the wash-out category >14 days . in analogy with the use of elderly rats, the regression coefficient pointed in the negative direction, negating hypothesis c by indicating more protection from estrogen after longer hypoestrogenic intervals. it however deserves mention that since elderly rats or wash-out periods beyond 2 weeks were used in a low number of studies, conclusions about these variables should be drawn with caution . although no support for hypotheses b and c was found in the present analysis, researchers have previously suggested mechanisms for the detrimental effects of high age and long periods of hypoestrogenicity. for example in an article published  <dig>  selvamani et al. put forward that decreasing igf- <dig> levels in elderly rats and further suppression by estrogen treatment is associated with a decline in estrogens’ beneficial effects in the aging brain  <cit> . regarding the potential harm of a prolonged wash-out period, suzuki et al. proposed  <dig> loss of anti-inflammatory actions of estrogens as a possible mechanism  <cit> .

a few other variables were found to significantly affect the ec-ratio, however since these did not address the main hypotheses, we refrain from drawing conclusions about them, and refer to table  <dig> for the interested reader.

strengths and weaknesses
an inherent draw-back with linear regression analysis is that linear relations are assumed, which evidently is not always true. this imperfection must be kept in mind when assessing the results. another weakness of the current study is that the  <dig> group pairs were described in only  <dig> articles, which in turn were published by even fewer research groups. to be perfectly stringent, group pairs from the same article or the same research group should not be regarded as independent. however, creating dummy variables for each article or research group would have made the analysis totally devoid of statistical power, and thus impossible to perform.

the analysis presents a composite result of data gathered from  <dig> group pairs and more than  <dig> rats, handled in a rich variety of experimental conditions. the main strength of the current meta-analysis is that all factors that have been suggested to be responsible for the discrepant results were tested in parallel, thus potently correcting for confounders.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the discordant results regarding estrogens’ effects in rat models of ischemic stroke are a consequence of differences in estrogen administration modes, corroborating the earlier systematic analysis from our laboratory  <cit> . the clearly protective effects of silastic capsules and injections contrast the potentially harmful effects of estrogens delivered via the high-dose slow-release pellets. further, the relation between higher pellet doses and increased propensity for causing damage underscores the plausibility that delivered dose is the culprit, which is reflected in the concept of hormesis. the meta-analysis could not corroborate the hypotheses that  the age of the experimental animals nor  the length of hypoestrogenicity affected estrogens’ impact on stroke.

