BACKGROUND
the green fluorescent protein  has successfully been used as a marker gene in the past years. it was also applied to transgenic xenopus either to label grafts . the gfp derivatives cyan fluorescent protein  and yellow fluorescent protein  expanded the color range and were also successfully used in transgenic xenopus  <cit> . although both markers can be used independently by applying appropriate filter sets, there is some overlap of the emission spectra. therefore, to track more than one event in the same animal reliably, fluorescent markers that clearly differ in their emission spectrum are needed. the red fluorescent protein dsred has been isolated from discosoma sp. to be used as a new tracer with higher wavelength emission, but the long maturation time and poor solubility of the tetrameric dsred protein  <cit>  prevented its widespread use in transgenic animals. we also observed toxic effects in xenopus of dsred under the control of the ubiquitously active cmv promoter . nevertheless, some transgenic animals were made using dsred in zebrafish  <cit>  or its faster maturating derivatives in drosophila  <cit> , mice  <cit>  and rats  <cit> . progress was achieved a few years ago, when variants of monomeric molecules derived from dsred were generated giving rise to different color shades of red  <cit> . all derivatives are characterized by a shorter maturation time and an improved solubility as compared to the wild type dsred protein, with tdtomato showing the highest brightness and photo stability. to generate a new tool to label grafts we established in the present study a ubiquitous red fluorescent transgenic xenopus laevis strain using the cmv promoter driven tdtomato sequence.

we applied this newly established tool to track cell fate during xenopus tail regeneration. after tail amputation of the tadpole, a mass of proliferative cells is formed underneath the wound epidermis within  <dig> hours. this mass of cells is commonly called the 'blastema', and is able to regenerate to an imperfect copy of the amputated tail within a few days . although this regenerated tail has less well organized myotomes, the tadpoles are able to swim. recent studies suggest that v-atpase dependent proton flux  <cit>  and apoptosis  <cit>  are essential for blastema formation. however, nothing is known whether the blastema generates ectopic tails upon transplantation or whether the interaction with the surrounding amputated tissue is needed. we therefore performed transplantation experiments using the red fluorescent xenopus strain and followed the fate of the graft as well as of the surrounding host tissue.

RESULTS
establishment of a red fluorescent xenopus laevis strain
to label cells by red fluorescence we have chosen the red fluorescent protein tdtomato controlled by the ubiquitously active cmv promoter. transgenic animals for the pcscmv:tdtomato construct were generated. larvae showing homogenous red fluorescence were selected and grown to sexual maturity. the tom <dig> founder female could be identified to transmit the active transgene to the next generation resulting in 50% of the offspring expressing red fluorescence. animals of this strain exhibit strong and homogenous red fluorescent protein expression starting from neurula stage . this expression is maintained in the larval  and in the froglet stage in all tissues examined . the red fluorescence can clearly be distinguished from the cyan fluorescent protein . red fluorescence was also detected on the cellular level in sections from a variety of tissues .

ectopic tail regeneration due to blastema transplantation
to investigate the regenerative potential of the tail blastema, transplantation experiments were made using the tom <dig> strain to track cell fate. the tails of stage  <dig> larvae of the tom <dig> strain were amputated. after  <dig> hours, each newly formed blastema was transplanted under the skin of wild type host animals. we observed outgrowth of a tail-like structure in eight of  <dig> animals when the blastema was transplanted into the head  or the trunk  of the host animal. the regenerate consists of red fluorescent cells  indicating their origin from the transplanted blastema. we did not observe any fluorescent cells elsewhere in the host animal. in the case when no outgrowth was observed, we did not detect any red fluorescent cells at all. to further characterize the regenerated tail-like structure we stained the outgrowth with specific antibodies directed against muscle cells, notochord, or spinal cord . all three structures are present within the regenerate  and comparable to normal regenerated tails . however, the muscle is poorly segmented, and we did not observe that the tadpoles can move their ectopic regenerate.

to investigate whether cells of the host animal also contribute to ectopic tail regeneration, we used the tom <dig> strain to track these cells in transplantation experiments. we transplanted  <dig> hours old blastemas of wild type larvae into host animals of the tom <dig> strain. this led to outgrowth of a regenerate in  <dig> of  <dig> transplanted animals , but fluorescence of this regenerate could not be easily judged in the background of the strong red fluorescence of the host animal . therefore, we isolated the regenerate to monitor fluorescence. surprisingly, we observed in all ectopic regenerates cells of the host animal labeled by red fluorescence possibly located in the epidermis . we thus conclude that the ectopic regenerate is partly derived from the host animal.

discussion
in this study we established the red fluorescent transgenic xenopus strain tom <dig> expressing the cmv promoter driven tdtomato sequence. this is in contrast to the use of dsred as a transgene that is not compatible with normal development and thus precludes the establishment of a transgenic strain . we could recently confirm the value of tdtomato as stable transgene to mark a xenopus strain containing a functional cre recombinase  <cit> . adult animals of the tom <dig> strain show ubiquitous and homogenous expression of the red fluorescent protein indicating that the cmv promoter can be used to drive transgene expression also at later stages of development. therefore, the cmv promoter may be equivalent to the murine rosa <dig> promoter that has been proposed for widespread and persistent transgene expression in xenopus laevis  <cit> . this transgenic strain can thus be used to label grafts isolated at any time point in development. animals of the tom <dig> strain showing ubiquitous and strong expression of tdtomato developed absolutely normal suggesting that tdtomato has a high biocompatibility as proposed for a recently engineered noncytotoxic dsred variant, which has the drawback of a reduced brightness  <cit> . when we transplanted labelled blastemas obtained after tail amputation we found that cells marked by red fluorescence can form an ectopic regenerate, but do not migrate into the host tadpole. we even observed ectopic regeneration in the head pointing to a strong degree of self organization of the blastema. as an orientation of the blastema used for transplantation was not possible, we cannot exclude that transplants not properly orientated failed to outgrow. the regenerate contains the typical tail structures including muscle, spinal cord and notochord. this implies that the blastema formed  <dig> hours after amputation contains precursor cells to all these tissues and that their differentiation can proceed autonomously of the amputated stump. however, we cannot exclude that the transplanted blastema contained part of the terminal bulb of the spinal cord as well as of the bullet-shaped notochord cells that partially extend into the regeneration bud  <cit> . the fact that melanophores were present in all regenerates is consistent with a previous study  <cit>  showing that these cells are derived from neural crest precursors and further strengthens the concept of cell recruitment by the blastema. in all cases the ectopic tail lacks the broad tail fin present in the in situ regenerate . possibly the supportive structure of the stump is needed for the formation of the tail fin. furthermore, the ectopic tail is less well organized lacking proper segmentation and typically with a twisted appearance compared to the normal regenerate. this is reminiscent to the twisted tail regenerates observed upon spinal cord ablation in xenopus  <cit> . we assume that this deficiency in proper morphology but also the inability for movement of the ectopic tail are possibly due to the lack of a connection to the spinal cord of the host animal.

after tail amputation in xenopus a wound epidermis is formed by migrating cells within the first  <dig> hours. it is proposed that this wound epidermis signals to the underlying cells to form the blastema . our experiments using labelled host cells expand this model, because our data reveal that the transplanted blastema also recruits cells of the host to form the regenerate. the tissue identity of these cells as well as the underlying mechanism have to be determined in future studies.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the newly established red fluorescent tom <dig> strain offers a powerful tool to further investigate the process of regeneration in xenopus. in combination with the existing green and yellow  <cit>  fluorescent strains, three different cell types can now be labelled in transplantation experiments.

