BACKGROUND
the motor cortex of macaques is divided into four main regions: the primary motor cortex , the premotor cortex , the supplementary motor area  and the cingulate motor area . these regions have been subdivided further into distinct areas on the basis of anatomical and functional criteria. in the pm region, the dorsal  and ventral  areas have been distinguished on anatomical, histochemical and neurophysiological ground  <cit> . more recently, pmd and pmv have been proposed to contain distinct functional areas along the rostro-caudal axis, referred to as pmd-r, pmd-c, pmv-r and pmv-c  <cit> . they correspond roughly to areas f <dig>  f <dig>  f <dig> and f <dig>  respectively, in the nomenclature of matelli and his co-workers  <cit> . similarly, sma has been subdivided into a rostral part  and a caudal part   <cit> , also referred to as f <dig> and f <dig>  respectively  <cit> . finally, three areas have been identified within the cma on the basis of corticospinal projections  <cit> : a rostral area  and two caudal areas, one dorsal  and one ventral . these multiple subdivisions are illustrated in figure  <dig> 

the ipsilateral connections of these motor cortical areas with the other cortical areas have been extensively studied since many years, with renewed interest in recent years especially with respect to the posterior parietal cortex  <cit> . by contrast, callosal connections of most premotor areas have attracted less attention, despite their importance for understanding inter-hemispheric exchange of information necessary for coordinated actions of the two sides of the body  <cit> . it is thus of interest to know how each premotor area connects with the opposite hemisphere in terms of topography and strength of the connections. previous studies have described the callosal connectivity of m <dig> and sma-proper  <cit> . they have shown that the hand area of m <dig> receives a minor callosal input from its counterpart in the other hemisphere, whereas the hand area in sma-proper is more densely interconnected with the other hemisphere. more recently, liu et al.  <cit>  have contrasted the callosal connections of sma-proper and pre-sma and found that the two areas share common callosal inputs but the strength of the connections differs, with pre-sma more heavily connected with the opposite hemisphere.

callosal connectivity of the other premotor areas has been less investigated. only one recent study  <cit>  has described the callosal connections of the rostral and caudal dorsal premotor areas , whereas those of ventral premotor and cingulate motor areas are still lacking. we performed an extensive multiple tracing investigation of callosal connections of the lateral premotor areas, with emphasis on the distinction between dorsal  and ventral  sectors as well as the comparison between their rostral and caudal divisions. we compared data obtained from two groups of animals. in the first group, large injections of 3– <dig> tracers were performed in each animal  filling in most, if not the whole, extent of the pm sub-areas. in a second group of animals , we performed smaller injections in the pm sub-areas for comparison with other studies. the first group of animals was used to describe a fairly exhaustive picture of the origin of the callosal projection to the four sub-areas of pm, including the issue of overlap/segregation of the different projections, whereas more precise topographic aspects are described based on the second group of animals.

RESULTS
injection sites
the locations of the injection sites were confirmed on histological criteria. figure  <dig> shows the reconstruction of each injection site on surface views of the brain hemisphere. each monkey received 2– <dig> distinct tracers injected in different pm areas. as the figure shows, the injection sites varied in size and location within each pm sub-area and, sometimes, encroached on an adjacent area . a particular protocol was conducted in mks 1– <dig> in order to obtain large injection sites covering most of the injected pm sub-area. examples of such large injection sites are shown on photomicrographs , following injections of bda, dy, fb and cb. the injections were performed in such a way  to form a cylinder covering all cortical layers, from the surface down to the limit between the grey and the white matter.

x = no icms performed. ne: non-excitable site with icms.

conventions for icms: d = digits; e = elbow; f = face; s = shoulder; w = wrist.

tracers: biotinylated dextran amine , diamidino yellow , fast blue , fluoro ruby , cholera-toxin b subunit . arrows means that the injection site encroaches the adjacent area pointed by the arrow.  indicates that the injection site in pmd-c or pmv-c encroaches ml.

below each tracer, the three numbers between parentheses give the total volume injected, the number of syringe penetrations and the total number of sites where the tracer was infused.

in the following sections, we will describe the callosal labelling based on representative examples of the results obtained in mk <dig> and mk <dig> . individual variability is illustrated in figure  <dig> for  <dig> cases, and additional tables  and a figure  are presented as supplementary material. in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  we have chosen to superimpose the labelling from  <dig> different tracers for comparison reasons.

injections in pmd-r
five injections were made into pmd-r . figures  <dig> and  <dig>  illustrate the distribution of retrogradely labelled cells in the hemisphere contralateral to the injection site following large injections into pmd-r of two monkeys. as the figures show, pmd-r receives it main callosal projections from the premotor areas anterior to the level of the genu of the arcuate sulcus, and from prefrontal cortex. within this region, labelling was assigned to pmd-r, pfc dorsal to the principal sulcus extending to the cingulate sulcus, pre-sma and rostral cingulate cortex . in the cortex located laterally or caudally to the level of the genu of the arcuate sulcus, labelling was sparse or limited to small patches . this general pattern of transcallosal labelling was consistent with the data derived from a smaller injection of dy in pmd-r in mk  <dig> , although the labelling was less extensive.

injections in pmd-c
seven injections were made in pmd-c in  <dig> animals . figures  <dig> and  <dig> illustrate the distribution of labelling on coronal sections , and figure  <dig> shows the data for monkey mk <dig> on a 2-d map of the cortex. as after injections in pmd-r, injections in pmd-c yielded extensive labelling in the dorso-medial frontal cortex of the contralateral hemisphere. the main difference is that here, the labelling was relatively more caudal than following injections in pmd-r . analysis of the distribution of labelled cells in relation with areal borders shows that the strongest labelling was located in pmd-c, pmd-r and pre-sma. moderate or weak labelling was also found in the cingulate motor areas , sma-proper and m <dig>  the general pattern of labelling was the same in mk <dig> where large injections were made, except that the labelling was more predominant in pmd-c than in pmd-r . the results following a small injection in pmd-c are shown in fig.  <dig>  and they confirm the main observations made on the basis of large injection. the main difference is that the labelling was less extensive in rostral pmd-r following a small injection.

injections in pmv-r
six injections were made in pmv-r of  <dig> different animals . the key finding is that following these injections, most labelled cells in the contralateral hemisphere were found in the cortex located just behind the inferior arcuate sulcus, anterior to the level of the genu , which corresponds to the counterpart area pmv-r. as one moves anteriorly or posteriorly, the dense labelling in pmv-r moves ventrally, forming a long stripe within the bank of the lateral sulcus . at its caudal aspect, this labelling is probably in area s <dig>  additional labelling was found in pre-sma, cma-r and ventral pfc . note that labelling was observed in dorsal premotor areas , but this projection was not confirmed in the other cases with similar injections. finally, there was no labelling in pmv-c, i.e. behind the genu.

injections in pmv-c
five injections were made in pmv-c . these injections gave rise to strong labelling in the contralateral frontal areas, with the core of labelling in pmv-c and pmv-r in all cases. figures  <dig> and  <dig> illustrate two representative examples . as in the cases with injections in pmv-r, callosal labelling following injections in pmv-c is located mainly lateral to the genu of the arcuate sulcus and in mesial cortex. the most extensive labelling was found in the ventral premotor region , where it spanned the cortex caudal and anterior to the level of the genu of the arcuate sulcus . weak labelling was found consistently in pre-sma, cma-r and m <dig>  and in some cases in pmd-r, sma-proper, cma-v and cma-d and pmd-c .

comparison between pmd and pmv
the present study allowed a direct comparison between the callosal connections of the four premotor areas investigated. comparison can be made directly on coronal sections in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  and on a 2d map of the cortex in figure  <dig>  in monkey mk <dig> where we made small injections of  <dig> tracers .

it appears that, at a gross level, callosal projections to dorsal and ventral premotor sectors are organized along both the rostro-caudal and the medio-lateral axes . along the rostro-caudal axis, injections in rostral sectors  tend to yield stronger labelling in rostral frontal areas of the opposite hemisphere, i.e. anterior to the level of the genu of the arcuate sulcus . similarly, large injections in the caudal sectors  resulted in strong callosal labelling in caudal frontal areas , with however, important labelling in rostral regions overlapping with the projections to rostral sectors. this might be due to the large size of the injection sites, as small injections into pmd-c and pmv-c  led to less overlap. a similar pattern of labelling is also observed following injections into pmv-c . figure 8a shows the percentage of cells in different areas, organized a rostral and a caudal group.

superimposed to this trend, the organisation of callosal projections along the medio-lateral axis is even more striking. figures  <dig> and  <dig> show that callosal inputs to pmd arise almost exclusively from the dorso-medial regions , whereas those to pmv originate predominantly from lateral regions , with small zones of overlap in pre-sma, the cingulate motor areas, the border between pmd-c and pmv-c, and the most medial part of pmd-r. figure  <dig> illustrates more clearly the topography of callosal labelling after three small injections in monkey mk <dig> 

quantitative analysis
a quantitative analysis was conducted on data from  <dig> injections in  <dig> monkeys  following the procedure described in the methods section. this procedure provided a numerical estimate of the contribution of each area to the overall callosal afferent connectivity of pmd-r, pmd-c, pmv-r and pmv-c. the results of this analysis are represented graphically for each monkey in figure 8a .

discussion
we found that the four premotor areas receive homotopic callosal connections and have distinct patterns of callosal inputs from heterotopic areas. based on both qualitative and quantitative analyses, the overall results  can be summarized as follows:  callosal inputs to pmd and pmv are organized along a medio-lateral axis;  ventral premotor sectors receive callosal afferents from a limited number of contralateral frontal areas, whereas the dorsal sectors receive inputs from a larger set of areas;  the strongest callosal inputs to rostral sectors  were always found to originate from homotopic regions, irrespective of the size of the injection sites and the tracer injected. however, the results following injections into pmv-c and pmd-c varied depending on the size of injections. small injections yielded preferential labelling in homotopic areas, whereas large injections tended to results in strong labelling in rostral sectors as well;  pmd-r stands out as the lateral premotor area with the strongest inputs from the prefrontal cortex, extending from the principal sulcus to cingulate sulcus;  caudal sectors  receive weak callosal projections from m <dig>  which does not project to the rostral sectors. we will discuss these findings in relation with previous studies and their functional implication, and address two issues that might affect our interpretations and conclusions, the size of the injection sites and the definition of the borders between areas.

relation to previous studies
ipsilateral connections of premotor and motor cortex gained a tremendous interest in recent years, but callosal connectivity has received less attention, with the exception of m <dig> and the sma which were extensively studied. it was found that callosal afferents to m <dig> and sma depend on the somatotopic organization, namely with the hand area of m <dig> receiving much less callosal projections than proximal territories  <cit> . with the identification of finer subdivisions within the non primary premotor cortex, it is important to examine callosal connectivity of each discrete area in order to advance our understanding of their respective function. of particular interest is the comparative approach in the same animal, where the spatial distribution of the callosal projecting neurons and their respective contribution to the projection can be directly compared. two recent studies have adopted such an approach by making injections of two distinct tracers, one in each area, in the same brain. one has compared the callosal afferents of pre-sma and sma-proper  <cit> , the other compared those of pmd-r and pmd-c  <cit> . both studies reported that each of these premotor areas receives callosal inputs primarily from its counterpart area in the opposite hemisphere and, additionally, from other areas of the frontal cortex.

in the present study, we made comparisons along two axes within the lateral premotor cortex, the rostro-caudal axis  and the medio-lateral axis . we found that the general pattern of callosal connectivity described previously holds true, with however some surprising observations which we discuss later in this section. indeed, we found that the strongest callosal projections to pmd-r and pmv-r arise from their counterpart areas, as was reported for pmd-r  <cit> , pre-sma and sma-proper  <cit> , irrespective of the size of the injections. however, unexpectedly this was not systematically the case for pmd-c and pmv-c , which were found to receive their strongest callosal inputs from the rostral sub-regions, i.e. from pmd-r and pmv-r, respectively. this result contrasts with those of marconi et al.  <cit>  regarding pmd-c, which they reported to receive most of its inputs from its contralateral counterpart. whether this discrepancy is due to technical differences or the location of the injection sites in the two studies is not clear. one likely cause may be the size of the injections, which were much bigger in our mks 1– <dig> than in the  <dig> monkeys in the study of marconi et al.  <cit> . this interpretation is supported by our data in cases with small injections in pmd-c and pmv-c , showing a majority of labelled neurons in the counterpart area on the opposite hemisphere.

as in the case of pre-sma and sma-proper  <cit> , additional callosal projections to the four subdivisions of pm were found to arise from a number of heterotopic areas. interestingly, the strength and topography of callosal connections were found to vary along the antero-posterior axis. our findings indicate that, if all projections are taken into account , caudal areas  receive inputs from a larger set of areas than rostral ones , paralleled by a larger number of projecting cells. a similar result was reported by marconi et al.  <cit>  for pmd-r and pmd-c. furthermore, the caudal divisions tend to be connected with caudal premotor areas of the opposite hemisphere including sma-proper, dorsal and cingulate motor areas . callosal projections from m <dig> were rarely observed, and were weak. by contrast, the rostral divisions receive inputs from rostral premotor areas, such as pre-sma and cma-r, and from prefrontal cortex but do not receive projections from m <dig>  this general principle was also described for pre-sma versus sma-proper  <cit>  and for pmd-r versus pmd-c  <cit> . in particular, our observations regarding inputs from m <dig> are compatible with the findings of previous studies showing that contralateral m <dig> projects weakly to sma-proper and pmd-c, but does not project to pre-sma nor pmd-r  <cit> . likewise, the present findings are in agreement with previous reports regarding the callosal inputs from prefrontal cortex to other premotor areas. thus, it was found that pre-sma and pmd-r receive inputs from contralateral prefrontal cortex, but not sma-proper or pmd-c  <cit> .

finally, callosal projections to each area examined in the current study were found to arise from largely segregated populations of cells, but this segregation was much more striking between cells projecting to dorsal versus ventral sectors , than between rostral versus caudal sectors. in fact, following injections of different tracers, one in either pmd-r or pmd-c the other in pmv-c or pmv-r, large cortical regions contained neurons that were labelled with only one tracer. the zones of co-existence of cells labelled with one or the other tracer were limited to medial premotor areas. despite this co-existence, a fine examination indicates that the two cell populations were organised in separate patches. the situation is somewhat different for the comparisons between pmd-c and pmd-r on one hand, and between pmv-c and pmv-r on the other hand. callosal cells projecting to pmd-c and those projecting to pmd-r co-exist within several areas with the strongest overlap in pmd-r, pre-sma and cma-r. cells projecting to pmv-c and those projecting to pmv-r co-exist within pmv-r, cma-r and to a limited extent in pre-sma. these findings suggest that dorsal and ventral premotor areas belong to separate inter-hemispheric circuits, but their respective subdivisions belong to partly overlapping anatomical systems.

callosal and ipsilateral connectivity of dorsal and ventral premotor areas: a gradient between prefrontal cortex and motor cortex
it is important to examine callosal and ipsilateral connectivity of the lateral premotor areas before speculating on possible functional implications of the present results. ipsilateral cortical inputs to pmd and pmv have been the focus of recent anatomical studies . despite slight discrepancies between the findings of these studies, there is a general agreement that projections that arise from parietal cortex and prefrontal cortex are organized along the two axes examined in the present study: the rostro-caudal and medio-lateral axes. along the medio-lateral axis, it was found that parietal and prefrontal areas located dorsally and medially project to pmd-c and pmd-r, those located laterally project to pmv-r and pmv-c. hence, pmd receives inputs from the dorsal aspect of dorsolateral prefrontal  cortex  <cit>  and from the posterior parietal cortex  <cit> . by contrast, pmv is connected with the ventral aspect of dlpf cortex and the inferior parietal lobule  <cit> . along the rostro-caudal axis, it was shown, in particular, that areas located more caudally in the superior parietal lobule and the parieto-occipital sulcus project predominantly to rostral pmd, those located more anteriorly project mostly to caudal pmd. some of these parietal areas that project to pmd-r are directly connected with extrastriate visual cortex and are involved in early visuo-motor transformations  <cit> ; those that project to pmd-c are involved in somatosensory processing, and/or sensori-motor transformations  <cit> . on the other hand, pmd-c  projects to ipsilateral m <dig> and to the spinal cord  <cit> . the situation is less clear for pmv-c versus pmv-r in this respect. however, it is interesting to note that the general scheme where ipsilateral and callosal inputs converge remains valid. for example, inputs from the parietal lobe come from the second somatosensory area , among other areas  <cit> . in the present study, we found callosal inputs to pmv-c and pmv-r from s <dig> . functionally, s <dig> and pmv may share sensorimotor signals involved in grasping objects  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, lateral premotor areas that receive prefrontal inputs also receive projections from areas involved in early visuo-motor transformations; those that do not receive prefrontal inputs project to m <dig> and the spinal cord and receive projections from parietal areas involved in high order sensorimotor processing. it is known that rostral and caudal divisions are interconnected, supposedly allowing a functional gradient linking prefrontal cortex with motor cortex. this organization seems to hold true for callosal connectivity. rostral divisions of lateral premotor cortex, especially pmd, receive callosal inputs from prefrontal cortex, but not from m <dig>  and from their homotopic areas. caudal divisions, by contrast, do receive inputs from m <dig>  although weak, but have little inputs from prefrontal cortex. furthermore, pmd-c and pmv-c receive strong callosal inputs from pmd-r and pmv-r, respectively.

taken together, the anatomical data reviewed above suggest that the general principle of ipsilateral and callosal connectivity of premotor areas remains similar. this seems to argue that callosal connectivity provides similar but complementary information necessary for sensori-motor transformations and bimanual coordination. it is widely accepted that inter-hemispheric connections of motor areas are necessary for the execution of complex motor behavior that requires coordination of both limbs. as reviewed above and elsewhere , visuomotor information derived from the posterior parietal cortex may reach rostral premotor regions via ipsilateral projections, or indirectly through ipsilateral prefrontal cortex or through callosal fibers . these regions play a key role in high order motor planning, and have projections to caudally adjacent areas, which in turn have direct input to m <dig> and the spinal cord and their neuronal activity correlates with the kinematics of limb movements. their callosal connectivity might allow selection of which arm to use, as well as temporal and spatial coordination of bimanual movements. weak callosal connections of the m <dig> hand area could reflect the high degree of lateralisation of its neuronal activity during movement execution  <cit> . by contrast, callosal interactions between premotor areas may convey high order information independent from body representation. in fact, the rostral pmd is involved in spatial attention  and eye movements  <cit> . interestingly, callosal projections to pmd-r sites where eye movements are represented do not differ from those that result from injections at other pmd-r sites. furthermore, we noted that our injection at an eye movement-related site  did not lead to any callosal labelling in frontal regions where oculomotor areas would be expected to be located based on sulcal landmarks . this suggests that callosal connections of premotor areas investigated in this study mediate high order information necessary for action planning, independent of the motor effectors.

