BACKGROUND
the fidelity of the translation process depends on the aminoacyl–trna synthetase enzymes . these essential enzymes are responsible for the correct attachment of the corresponding amino acid onto the cognate trna, therefore organisms have at least  <dig> synthetases  <cit> . the enzymes are divided in two classes, each class having a conserved structure. the genes encoding the aars are easily detected within sequenced genomes  <cit> , and some species contain synthetase gene duplications, such as the glutamyl-trna synthetases  in acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and helicobacter pylori   <cit> . aars paralogs, predicted sequences with homology to fragments of synthetases, have also been identified, which is not surprising given the modular nature of the aars  <cit> . some of the paralogs may be pseudogenes while others have known functions. for instance hisz from lactococcus lactis, which has similarity with the catalytic domain of histidyl-trna synthetase, is involved in histidine biosynthesis  <cit> . a recent study in salmonella enterica has shown that poxa, encoded by poxa/genx, has similarity to the carboxy-terminal catalytic domain of lysine-trna synthetase and is required for posttranslational aminoacylation of bacterial elongation factor p. a poxa mutant has reduced colonization and virulence, possibly due to misregulated expression of proteins encoded by the spi- <dig> pathogenicity island  <cit> .

an escherichia coli glutamyl-trna synthetase paralog, glutamyl queuosine-trnaasp synthetase  has approximately 35% amino acid similarity with the catalytic domain of glurs. this includes the amino acids involved in recognition and activation of glutamate. although gluq-rs is missing the carboxyl-terminus domain responsible for the trna recognition, in e. coli this enzyme is able to activate the amino acid in the absence of the trna. further, once the aminoacyl-adenylate has been formed, the enzyme attaches the glutamate to the nucleoside queuosine present onto the trnaasp. therefore, this enzyme is involved in the synthesis of a new modified nucleoside glutamyl-queuosine  present in trnaasp <cit> . this modification is present in trna isolated under acidic conditions from bacterial cells grown in rich media. however, the enzyme is not essential for growth of e. coli in rich or minimal media  <cit> . queuosine is widely distributed in bacteria, and it is present in the first base of the anticodon of trnaasp, trnaasn, trnahis and trnatyr <cit> ; however in e. coli only trnaasp is a substrate for the gluq-rs enzyme.

the presence of modifications within the anticodon loop of the trna, could enhance the accuracy of the codon binding  <cit> . then the trnaaspq <dig> might improve recognition of both gac and gau codons  <cit>  and stimulate the binding of the gau codon to the ribosome  <cit> . in shigella flexneri it has been shown that mutations in genes required for trna modifications, miaa and tgt decreased virulence. miaa is required for 2-methylthio-n6-isopentenyladenosine modification at position  <dig> of the anticodon loop and tgt is involved in queuosine modification at position  <dig> within the anticodon loop  <cit> . in this study, we determined the role of the genome organization and its effect on the expression of the gluq-rs gene in the major human pathogen, s. flexneri.

RESULTS
genomic organization of the s. flexneri gluq-rs gene
gluq-rs is required for the synthesis of the modified nucleoside, gluq, present on trnaasp <cit> . by searching the bacterial protein database uniprot , we were able to identify gluq-rs in more than a hundred bacterial species, primarily proteobacteria . from the phylogenetic analysis we can distinguished the three subgroups of enzymes described by dubois et al.,  <dig>  <cit> , which are characterized by the presence of the signature hxgs, hxgn or hxgh in the adenylate binding site. a similar tree was obtained using the neighbor joining method. phylogenetic analysis within the subgroup of enzymes with the hxgn motif, included representatives from the firmicutes bacterial group  together with desulfovibrio vulgaris and truepera radiovictrix enzymes. from the alignment, these members have  <dig> characteristic amino acids, g70pdxggxx, that do not align with the other gluq-rs . further genomic analysis indicated that the gluq-rs gene is found primarily in two genomic arrangements, either alone or located immediately downstream of dksa. searching within the string database  <cit>  and genomenet  <cit> , we found that the dksagluq-rs gene organization was conserved in more than  <dig> different species, all of which were within the gammaproteobacteria group. these included species of aeromonadales, alteromonadales, enterobacteriaceae, including e. coli and s. flexneri, pseudomanadales, and vibrionaceae .


a bioinformatics analysis of the intergenic region between dksa and gluq-rs showed great variation in the distance between the two genes among these bacterial species. in s. flexneri the intergenic region between the stop codon of dksa and the first codon of gluq-rs is only  <dig> base pairs. therefore, we suspected that the transcription of gluq-rs was regulated by the previously characterized dksa promoter  <cit> . to test this hypothesis, we isolated total mrna and performed rt-pcr to identify an mrna that included both genes . the observation that there is an mrna species containing both genes  indicates that they are co-transcribed and that the expression of gluq-rs may be regulated by the dksa promoter.


s. flexneri gluq-rs gene is co-transcribed with dksa gene
although s. flexneri gluq-rs can be transcribed from the dksa promoter, this did not rule out the presence of an additional, independent promoter. therefore, the expression of each gene was measured by rt-pcr during different stages of s. flexneri growth in luria bertani  at ph  <dig> . the analysis of the dksa and gluq-rs transcripts shows that for both mrnas, the level is stable during the growth curve, with an increase of  <dig> -fold at stationary phase compared to the early mid log phase . however, the mrna that includes the intergenic region showed variation depending on the stage of growth, increasing 20-fold at stationary phase compared with its expression at early mid log phase . in order to confirm those results, a transcriptional fusion strategy was used. different segments of the operon were cloned and fused to the lacz reporter gene in pqf <dig>  and promoter activity was assayed by β-galactosidase activity  <cit> . kang and craig,  <dig>  <cit>  identified three promoters for dksa. by mean of bioinformatics tools, including bprom from the softberry software package , we identified those promoters in s. flexneri and included all three promoters in the constructs indicated in figure 3a. the plasmid containing a fragment from the dksa promoters to the beginning of the gluq-rs gene, with the first five amino acids of gluq-rs, named pvcpdt, represents the full length dksa gene with its native promoters . a second fusion construct, pvcdt, contains sequence from the beginning of the coding region of dksa through the beginning of gluq-rs and also included the first five amino acids of gluq-rs. because pvcdt does not have the dksa promoter region, it served as the reporter for transcription from an independent gluq-rs promoter. a third construct, pvcpd, contained the segment from the dksa promoter to the end of the dksa gene, hence this plasmid does not have the intergenic region, nor the first amino acids of gluq-rs . each of the recombinant plasmids was transformed into s. flexneri and the β-galactosidase activity was measured when the bacterial cells reached mid-log phase. analysis of the enzymatic activity of these reporter fusions showed that the strain carrying pvcdt had baseline levels of the enzyme , indicating that there is not an independent promoter for gluq-rs. thus, the promoter upstream of dksa is responsible for the expression of both genes, at least under the conditions assayed . therefore, these two results  indicate that dksa and gluq-rs form an operon, and gluq-rs lacks an additional, separate promoter. a surprising observation was obtained with the clone containing pvcpd, which showed a ten-fold increase in enzymatic activity compared to pvcpdt . this suggested the presence of a terminator or other regulatory sequence in the intergenic region that modulated the expression of gluq-rs.


-
-
ompt gal dcm lon hsds
b
afragments cloned are numbered based on the transcription start of dksa identified by  <cit> .

the s. flexneri gluq-rs gene has an upstream transcription terminator
in order to explain the difference observed in expression of lacz from the recombinant plasmids pvcpdt and pvcpd a bioinformatic analysis using mfold  <cit>  was performed to search for possible secondary structures in the mrna. a potential transcriptional terminator was found at the beginning of the gluq-rs gene, leaving the first predicted aug codon located on the bulge of this terminator . in order to determine the functionality of this terminator, we performed site directed mutagenesis to disrupt the structure in the predicted stem . as shown in figure 4b, the plasmid containing the mutations, pvcpdtmut had >2-fold higher enzymatic activity  than the plasmid containing the wild type sequence. this result suggested that the intergenic region upstream of gluq-rs contains a transcriptional terminator.


identification of the first methionine
the first methionine in the predicted gluq-rs protein corresponds to the one located on the bulge of the terminator structure , which also contains a possible shine-dalgarno sequence. however, in related species like escherichia fergusonii that also have the terminator structure, a methionine is not present at that location. in the s. flexneri sequence, there is another aug codon in the same reading frame  <dig> nucleotides downstream from the one in the terminator. in order to determine which methionine is the start site for translation of the s. flexneri gluq-rs, we constructed a vector that included the intergenic region from the stop codon of the dksa gene to the end of gluq-rs cloned into the expression vector pet15c. this allowed expression of c-terminal his-tagged gluq-rs under t <dig> promoter control. the protein was partially purified by affinity chromatography as described elsewhere  <cit> , and the sequence of the amino terminus of the gluq-rs protein was determined to be nh2-t-d-t-q-y-i-g-r-f-a-p, which corresponds to the amino acid sequence after the second methionine. therefore, the initiator methionine is not the one indicated in the database, and the protein is  <dig> amino acids. surprisingly, there is no obvious shine-dalgarno sequence adjacent to the initiator methionine we identified .


phenotype of the s. flexneri gluq-rs mutant
to determine the role of gluq-rs in s. flexneri growth and virulence, a deletion mutant of the gluq-rs gene was constructed in s. flexneri 2457t. the mutant was compared to the wild type by biolog phenotype microarrays . the major difference observed for the mutant was impaired metabolism when grown under osmotic stress conditions . the mutant had a longer lag and reduced growth compared to the wild type in the presence of increasing concentrations of potassium chloride, sodium sulfate, sodium formate, sodium benzoate, sodium nitrate and sodium nitrite. the phenotype was complemented with the gluq-rs gene cloned into an expression vector. no differences were observed in the growth or metabolism of these strains when they were incubated in presence of 1% sodium chloride, which was similar to lb .


because expression of dksa is required for s. flexneri virulence  <cit> , and growth of shigella in the intracellular environment may induce a stress response, we also measured invasion and plaque formation by the gluq-rs mutant. however, no significant differences were noted , suggesting that gluq-rs is not essential for invasion or intracellular growth of s. flexneri.

discussion
conserved dksa-gluq-rs genomic organization in gammaproteobacteria
gluq-rs, a paralog of glurs synthetase, is involved in the formation of gluq, the nucleoside located at the wobble position of trnaasp in bacteria. the protein is present in firmicutes, actinobacteria, cyanobacteria, alphaproteobacteria, betaproteobacteria, gammaproteobacteria and deltaproteobacteria . from the phylogenetic analysis we distinguished the three subgroups described previously  <cit>  based on the high motif that is present in the class i aminoacyl-trna synthetases  <cit> . as was described previously  <cit> , all gluq-rs enzymes are characterized by the replacement of a threonine in glurs enzymes, which is involved in the recognition of the amino acid and the terminal adenosine of the trnaglu  by isoleucine, leucine or valine at that position . this substitution is also conserved in all enzymes analyzed here, including those from the firmicutes group.

the gluq-rs gene is widely distributed in the bacterial domain; however, its genome organization is variable. we observed that only in members of the gammaproteobacteria, namely aeromonadales, alteromonadales, pseudomonadaceae, enterobacteriaceae and vibrionaceae, the gluq-rs gene is located immediately downstream of the dksa gene . a more detailed analysis shows that even within this genomic organization there are differences. in some species of pseudomonadaceae, such as p. aeruginosa, p. entomophila, and p. fluorescens, we observed the same genomic structure as in e. coli or s. flexneri, with a distinctive terminator between the genes. in contrast, while the dksa gene is also upstream of gluq-rs in some p. syringae, there are insertions of an encoded transposase or more than a  <dig> base pairs separating both genes without a detectable terminator. however, using bioinformatics tools we detected a possible promoter within this region in p. syringae , indicating that the expression of the gluq-rs gene may be under control of its own promoter, a question that remains to be addressed.

stringent response and trna modification
our bioinformatic analysis shows the presence of a transcriptional terminator and lack of a gluq-rs-specific promoter. this is consistent with our results, in which we did not detect any activity from promoters other than those upstream of the dksa gene . this unusual arrangement suggests that gluq-rs expression is dependent on dksa-regulated conditions. because dksa is a key member of the stringent response in bacteria and regulates a number of processes in the cell, including its own expression  <cit> , the data suggest that there is coordinate regulation of trna modification and other dksa targets. although we could not detect any promoter activity specific for gluq-rs in the growth conditions tested , we cannot discount the possibility that the gene is specifically regulated under some other conditions. the regulon database  indicates that the e. coli gluq-rs gene has a recognition site for the σ <dig> subunit of rna polymerase. from our analysis, this sequence is identical to s. flexneri, but there is no experimental evidence of this recognition. interestingly, when the gluq-rs gene was deleted in s. flexneri, the mutant showed impaired growth in the presence of osmolytes . a recent publication demonstrated that σ <dig> and σs proteins from salmonella enterica serovar typhi are important for the expression of several genes induced by osmotic stress in this bacterium  <cit> . moreover, the expression of the gene encoding σ <dig> in e. coli is regulated by the stringent response  <cit> . the possible role of σ <dig> on the expression of gluq-rs under osmotic stress might be interesting to study.

gluq-rs is an enzyme responsible for the formation of the gluq trna modification, and two independent groups  <cit>  have shown that this enzyme required a high concentration of glutamate to be activated and transferred to the queuosine base present on the trnaasp. interestingly, one of the first events to occur when bacteria are subject to high osmolyte stress is an increase in glutamate levels within the cytoplasm  <cit> . our observation indicates an important role of the trna modification for the growth of s. flexneri in the presence of osmolytes . other trna modifications might play a similar role in this stress condition. in e. coli, inactivation of the yfic gene, responsible for the modification at the adenosine  <dig> present on the trnaval, leads to a high sensitivity to osmotic stress  <cit> .

transcription of gluq-rs is regulated by a terminator
the results obtained in the present work show the presence of a terminator and suggested the functionality of this structure . to our knowledge, there are few examples of bacterial genes that have similar structures. there is a terminator structure upstream of the dna primase gene, dnag, which also has an unusual shine dalgarno sequence  <cit> . another example is the recx gene in e. coli, where readthrough accounts for approximately 10% of its transcription  <cit> .

the two characteristics of gluq-rs described in this work, co-transcription with the upstream gene and the presence of a terminator immediately upstream, allow us to propose that both the transcription and translation process could be regulated in the gluq-rs gene. it has been described, that the presence of terminators upstream of the coding region might be part of a regulatory system such as a riboswitch  <cit> . riboswitches for genes involved in queuosine formation have been described, in which the precursor preq <dig> is the ligand of the mrna structure  <cit> . using the riboswitch server , we did not identify any potential riboswitch . however we cannot discount that the terminator described here might be part of a regulatory circuit similar to a riboswitch, or that an unidentified protein might bind the terminator structure.

gluq modification and codon bias
trna modifications present at the anticodon loop might be important for the accuracy of codon reading during the translation processes  <cit> . morris et al.,  <dig>  <cit>  proposed, based on molecular modeling, that the trnaaspq <dig> might improve recognition of both gac and gau codons, consequently the interaction of the codon gau with the anticodon of trnaaspg <dig> could be less efficient. in fact, in s. flexneri there are a few genes such as sita, virf and prox  that have a bias toward those codons that favor the modified trna. thus, while there is no obvious loss of plaque formation in the gluq-rs mutant , the absence of gluq-rs may influence the expression of proteins such as sita that are required for fitness of shigella in the host  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we have shown that the expression of gluq-rs, a gene codifying an enzyme involved in the formation of gluq present on the trnaasp, is under the control of the dksa promoter. also, we show the presence of a functional terminator that controls the expression of gluq-rs. finally, we present data that suggest that the presence of modification of the trnaasp is important for survival of the human pathogen shigella flexneri under osmotic stress conditions.

