BACKGROUND
candidatus blochmannia species  are obligately intracellular, primary mutualists of ants belonging to the tribe camponotini  <cit> . blochmannia have been found in every species of camponotus surveyed to date, as well as other genera within camponotini, suggesting an ancient and stable association with the ant tribe  <cit> . the nutritional basis of the symbiosis was first suggested by the location of blochmannia in specialized host cells intercalated among epithelial cells in the insect midgut  <cit> . genome sequencing of b. floridanus and b. pennsylvanicus revealed biosynthetic pathways for all essential amino acids except arginine, further supporting the hypothesis that blochmannia provides important nutritional functions to the ant host  <cit> . the symbiont also recycles nitrogen from urea into glutamine via the activity of urease and glutamine synthetase  <cit> , which are encoded by the two previously published blochmannia genomes  <cit> . urease hydrolyzes urea to ammonia and carbon dioxide, and glutamine synthetase assimilates nitrogen from ammonia into glutamine, which feeds into other amino acid biosynthetic pathways  <cit> . this process may consume the nitrogenous waste products of the ant host and also urea in animal or bird waste collected and ingested by some camponotus species  <cit> .

similar to other primary obligate mutualists of insects, blochmannia genomes are extremely reduced in size , show strong at bias , and undergo accelerated rates of molecular evolution  <cit> . comparative analyses of buchnera, the primary mutualist of aphids, suggest that ongoing genome reduction proceeds primarily as a gradual erosion of individual genes, rather than by punctuated losses of large dna segments encoding multiple genes  <cit> . comparisons of the b. floridanus and b. pennsylvanicus genomes indicate a similar phenomenon in blochmannia  <cit> . the accumulation of substitutions, small indels and frameshift errors slowly degrades genes, and the resulting pseudogenes are gradually eliminated from the genome by the underlying deletional bias in bacteria  <cit> . the complement of genes lost by an endosymbiont genome is determined in part by chance events, such as the fixation of deleterious mutations due to small effective population sizes, and by the historical contingencies of gene loss in ancestral genomes, which influence the strength of selective pressure on remaining genes  <cit> . independent loss of the same gene from multiple lineages would suggest relaxed selection on gene function, rather than stochastic effects of drift.

the at mutational bias observed in obligate intracellular symbionts results in a high density of homopolymeric tracts of adenines or thymines in the genome, with some tracts as long as  <dig> bp. these polya or polyt tracts are prone to polymerase slippage during replication, which can introduce frameshift errors in the gene. in some cases, such frameshifts may constitute the initial events of gene erosion, leading to accumulation of mutations and eventual degradation to a pseudogene  <cit> . however, some frameshifts are conserved among geographically disparate symbiont populations and even between different species, with no detectable degradation of the gene  <cit> . full-length, functional protein products are generated from these frameshifted genes as a result of transcriptional slippage in the homopolymeric tract, which produces a mixed mrna pool of full-length and frameshifted transcripts  <cit> .

to better understand the nutritional symbiosis between blochmannia and camponotini and processes of genome reduction in this endosymbiont, it is essential to compare multiple genomes. expanding the set of completed blochmannia genomes may shed light on the 'core' genes shared across blochmannia and refine our knowledge of the functions that are required in this symbiosis. comparing multiple genomes within this group can also clarify the blochmannia pan-genome and let us reconstruct the likely gene content of ancestral genomes, thereby elucidating patterns of gene loss and erosion. finally, analysis of blochmannia genomes from different camponotus host species may help us understand how this symbiosis evolves in diverse hosts that occupy different habitats and geographic ranges.

here, we use illumina technology to sequence the genome of blochmannia vafer, the endosymbiont of camponotus vafer. the addition of this genome to the two previously sequenced blochmannia genomes lets us investigate genomic changes in a phylogenetic context. also, c. vafer occupies a different habitat and geographic range compared to c. floridanus and c. pennsylvanicus. whereas c. pennsylvanicus is widespread throughout much of the eastern and central united states, and c. floridanus is distributed throughout the southeastern united states as well as central and south america  <cit> , c. vafer is found in a more restricted range in the southwestern united states and northeastern mexico  <cit> . completion of the b. vafer genome allows us to investigate the nature of the mutualism in ecologically distinct camponotus species.

RESULTS
shared blochmannia genes include urease gene cluster
the b. vafer genome shares many features with the b. pennsylvanicus and b. floridanus genomes, including reduced size and low %gc content . genes shared among the three blochmannia include  <dig> intact genes,  <dig> of which are protein-coding . for the purposes of these comparisons of functional capabilities, we include as 'intact' those genes that contain a single indel within a homopolymeric tract, since the reading frame may be restored via transcriptional slippage  <cit> . b. vafer, b. floridanus and b. pennsylvanicus encode the same set of dna replication proteins and ribosomal proteins, with the exception of the  <dig> s ribosomal protein rpmd, which is absent in b. pennsylvanicus. all three blochmannia encode the same pathways for essential amino acid biosynthesis and sulfate assimilation, the latter of which contributes to cysteine biosynthesis. a urease gene cluster, which includes the structural genes ureabc and the accessory genes uredfg  <cit> , is also present in all three genomes. gene order and strand orientation is strictly conserved along all three blochmannia genomes. the set of genes encoded by each blochmannia genome is listed in additional file  <dig> 

 <dig> gene counts for b. floridanus include four protein-coding genes not identified in the original annotation that were detected by comparisons with b. vafer and b. pennsylvanicus.

 <dig> re-analysis of the b. pennsylvanicus genome revealed that the gly-gga trna pseudogene reported earlier is likely functional.

 <dig> we identified a rna-coding gene in b. floridanus and b. pennsylvanicus that was not previously annotated.

loss of glutamine synthetase in b. vafer
the most recent common ancestor of all three blochmannia had at least  <dig> genes . this reconstruction considers only genes that are intact in at least one of the genomes . at least  <dig> genes were lost or eroded along the branches leading from the common ancestor to b. vafer, compared to  <dig> genes for b. floridanus and four for b. pennsylvanicus. twelve genes are missing or eroded only in b. vafer . of these, glutamine synthetase  is perhaps the most startling. we confirmed the absence of glna in blochmannia from eight additional c. vafer colonies by sanger sequencing of this region. the sequences were identical, with the exception of one substitution and three indels. analysis of the trpe gene encoded by b. vafer revealed three distinct genotypes, demonstrating that glna is missing from different b. vafer strains.

in other blochmannia species, class i glutamine synthetase is thought to act in concert with the urease gene cluster  to recycle nitrogen into amino acid biosynthesis  <cit> . urease converts urea to carbon dioxide and ammonia, the latter of which is then assimilated into glutamine by glutamine synthetase. despite losing glna, b. vafer retains uredabcfg, which have high amino acid sequence identity  to the b. floridanus urease proteins. loss of glutamine synthetase in b. vafer disrupts the ammonia assimilation step of nitrogen recycling. in e. coli, glutamate dehydrogenase  encodes an alternative ammonia assimilation pathway  <cit> , but none of the sequenced blochmannia retain this gene. we searched the ncbi genomes database to determine whether any other completely sequenced bacterium possesses urease but lacks glutamine synthetase and glutamate dehydrogenase. of the  <dig> bacterial genomes encoding urease,  <dig> also have an ortholog of the b. pennsylvanicus class i glutamine synthetase. among the remaining  <dig> genomes, four have an ortholog of glna from bacteroides fragilis, which is the prototypical example of a class iii glutamine synthetase, and five genomes have an ortholog of e. coli glutamate dehydrogenase . in all,  <dig> of the  <dig> bacterial genomes with urease also encode an ammonia assimilation pathway catalyzed by either glutamine synthetase  or glutamate dehydrogenase. the three genomes lacking glna or gdha are all strains of ureaplasma, which uses high intracellular concentrations of ammonia to generate an electrochemical gradient for driving atp synthesis  <cit> .

the urease gene cluster in blochmannia
to determine whether loss of glutamine synthetase is correlated with relaxed selection on the urease genes in b. vafer, we compared evolutionary rates along the lineages leading to b. vafer and b. floridanus since their divergence from a common ancestor. for the  <dig> orthologs analyzed, the fold-increase in evolutionary rate along the lineage leading to b. vafer had a wide range , but a median value of  <dig> , indicating no systematic rate difference between the b. vafer and b. floridanus lineages . at urease genes, the rate increase in b. vafer varied from  <dig>  -  <dig>  for the three structural genes  and  <dig>  -  <dig>  for the accessory genes , indicating that the absence of glna in b. vafer is not correlated with consistent rate acceleration in the urease proteins.

we found no evidence to suggest that the urease operon in blochmannia was acquired by horizontal gene transfer from outside of the gamma-proteobacteria. blochmannia urease proteins were most similar by blastp analysis to those of other gamma-proteobacteria, including pseudomonas  and klebsiella . gene order in the urease gene cluster was conserved among the related free-living bacteria and blochmannia; however, the pseudomonas urease operon consists of eight genes , whereas the blochmannia urease operon lacks urease accessory genes uree and urej. for all three sequenced blochmannia, the intergenic sequence  between urec and uref is  <dig> -  <dig> bp, much larger than the other igss in this operon, which ranged from  <dig> -  <dig> bp. as described below, the longer igss suggest that uree and urej might have been present in the ancestor of blochmannia.

processes of genome reduction in b. vafer
 deletion hotspot near the origin of replication
genes missing or eroded in b. vafer were generally scattered throughout the genome, with the exception of eight missing genes near the putative origin of replication . because of the absence of a characteristic cluster of dnaa boxes, we identified the origin of replication based on the shift in gc skew occurring between yibn and hldd . similar to b. floridanus, the putative origin of b. vafer is located approximately  <dig> kb upstream of gida, which is the origin of replication of b. pennsylvanicus  <cit> . this  <dig> kb region contains three genes that are missing from both b. vafer and b. floridanus and were likely lost prior to their divergence, another gene missing from b. floridanus only, and four genes missing from b. vafer only, including glna.

 frameshifts within homopolymeric tracts
similar to other obligate insect endosymbionts, the genome of b. vafer is extremely at-biased . all three blochmannia genomes contain numerous long  polya tracts within protein-coding regions . indels in homopolymeric tracts and resulting frameshifts are considered key events in gene inactivation and loss in endosymbiont genomes  <cit> . however, some frameshifts may be corrected by polymerase slippage during transcription, allowing expression of full-length proteins  <cit> . eight b. vafer genes have short indels within polya or polyt tracts resulting in frameshifts, compared to four such genes in b. floridanus and four in b. pennsylvanicus . for the four genes that were frameshifted exclusively in b. vafer , we found no evidence of unusually accelerated evolutionary rates along the lineage leading to b. vafer. specifically, when compared to the lineage leading to b. floridanus, the fold-increase in evolutionary rates at the four genes in b. vafer ranged from 1- <dig> , well within the distribution for the  <dig> orthologs tested. although it is conceivable that these frameshifts are recent, it is also possible that the reading frame is corrected via transcriptional slippage, as demonstrated for other blochmannia and buchnera genes  <cit> .

of the eight b. vafer genes with frameshifts, three are involved in information transfer: dnax, dnag and pth. dnax encodes two subunits of the dna polymerase iii holoenzyme, which is the primary replicative enzyme in bacteria. in e. coli, expression of full-length dnax generates the tau subunit, whereas ribosomal slippage generates the shorter gamma subunit  <cit> . both of these subunits are thought to participate in assembly of the beta sliding clamp, which affects processivity of the pol iii holoenzyme  <cit> . the dnax frameshift reported here occurs downstream of the ribosomal slippage site, within the region exclusive to the tau subunit. comparisons of b. vafer and b. floridanus allowed us to identify the same frameshift in b. floridanus dnax, which was previously reported as truncated  <cit> . because this frameshift may be corrected by transcriptional slippage, we propose that expression of full-length dnax tau subunit occurs at some level in both b. vafer and b. floridanus. this frameshift is not found in b. pennsylvanicus dnax, possibly because the polya tract is interrupted by two thymines, which reduces the chances of slippage during replication or transcription . the two other frameshifted information transfer genes in b. vafer encode dna primase  and peptidyl-trna hydrolase  . dnag synthesizes short rna primers essential for lagging strand dna replication, whereas pth plays an important role in maintaining efficient protein synthesis by cleaving peptidyl-trnas released from stalled ribosomes  <cit> .

to provide a phylogenetic perspective on these indels within homopolymeric tracts, we confirmed that b. vafer and b. floridanus are more closely related to each other than either is to b. pennsylvanicus . based on this topology, two genes, erfk and ytfm, show evidence for independent frameshift events and/or a reversion to an intact reading frame . independent frameshift events in ytfm are supported by the different location of the indel in b. pennsylvanicus, compared to b. floridanus and b. vafer .

 convergent patterns of gene loss or erosion among blochmannia
in addition to examining the history of frameshifted genes, we also identified several examples of convergent gene loss and erosion among the three blochmannia genomes . three genes  were likely lost or eroded in independent events. quea was likely lost in the lineage leading to b. pennsylvanicus and degraded in the lineage leading to b. vafer sometime after b. vafer and b. floridanus diverged. visc is intact in b. pennsylvanicus but absent from b. floridanus. in b. vafer, visc has a single indel within a tract of  <dig> adenines. this frameshift might be corrected by transcriptional slippage, but it could, in principle, also represent very recent gene erosion that is independent from visc loss in b. floridanus.

in the case of yggs, no detectable relicts of the gene remain in either b. floridanus or b. pennsylvanicus, but the gene is intact in b. vafer. we found no evidence to support the hypothesis that yggs was acquired by b. vafer via horizontal gene transfer. the top blastp hits for b. vafer yggs were other gamma-proteobacteria, including the insect endosymbiont sodalis glossinidius, which is considered a close relative of blochmannia  <cit> . in addition, the corresponding intergenic spacer sequences in b. floridanus  and b. pennsylvanicus  were much larger than median igs lengths , suggesting the presence of a severely eroded gene remnant. finally, the gc content and codon usage of yggs is typical for the b. vafer genome . combined, this data strongly argues against recent horizontal transfer and are most consistent with yggs being present in the ancestral blochmannia genome. this gene was most likely lost independently in the lineage leading to b. floridanus, sometime after b. floridanus and b. vafer diverged, and in the lineage leading to b. pennsylvanicus.

yggs might be involved in osmotolerance  <cit> ; however, its exact function is unclear  <cit> . notably, this protein is encoded by a number of other bacterial endosymbionts of insects , including blattabacterium , buchnera aphidicola , hamiltonella defensa , sodalis glossinidius , and wigglesworthia glossinidia . of those endosymbionts lacking yggs, a few have severely reduced genomes, such as carsonella , hodgkinia  and sulcia .

although the three blochmannia genomes are severely reduced, most genome reduction occurred before their divergence. ongoing gene disruption and loss since they diverged has affected ‹10% of genes encoded in the ancestral genome. given this, the probability that continued gene erosion and loss would occur by chance in two different blochmannia lineages at the same gene is rather low. instead, independent loss or erosion, such as we observed at quea and yggs, suggests relaxed selective pressure on gene function. conversely, the retention of quea and yggs in b. floridanus and b. vafer, respectively, suggests that their functions may remain important for host-specific aspects of the symbiosis.

 longer intergenic sequences mark locations of gene losses
intergenic sequences in b. vafer and b. floridanus were significantly shorter than those of b. pennsylvanicus  . because gene order is strictly conserved in all three sequenced blochmannia genomes, we were able to identify igss spanning missing genes in each genome. for both b. vafer and b. floridanus, such igss were significantly longer than igss between conserved genes . we detected no significant difference in the lengths of igss spanning missing genes between b. vafer and b. floridanus , suggesting that deletion rates in these igss are similar in both genomes.

the importance of intergenic sequences in reduced endosymbiont genomes is largely unexplored. coding sequences, including protein-coding and rna-coding genes, occupy from  <dig>  -  <dig> % of the three blochmannia genomes , a lower fraction than many free-living bacteria  <cit> . non-coding elements within igss may play important roles in fundamental cellular processes. we searched the blochmannia genomes for long palindromic sequences, which may impact control of transcription or mrna stabilization  <cit> . we identified  <dig> large  palindromes in b. floridanus,  <dig> in b. vafer and  <dig> in b. pennsylvanicus; all but two were located at least partially in igss. palindrome lengths ranged from  <dig> -  <dig> bp in b. vafer , including four exceptionally long palindromes › <dig> bp in length. b. floridanus and b. pennsylvanicus palindromes ranged from  <dig> -  <dig> bp  and  <dig> -  <dig> bp , respectively. given the high rates of nucleotide and indel mutations in blochmannia  <cit> , intergenic palindromes would likely decay in the absence of selection favoring their presence.

discussion
like b. floridanus and b. pennsylvanicus, b. vafer retains several key nutritional functions that may benefit the ant host, including biosynthesis of all essential amino acids except arginine. however, the nitrogen recycling pathway proposed for b. floridanus and b. pennsylvanicus is not complete in b. vafer . although b. vafer encodes the urease gene cluster, which hydrolyzes urea to ammonia and carbon dioxide, it lacks glutamine synthetase or any other means of assimilating nitrogen from ammonia into glutamine, an important precursor to biosynthesis of other amino acids.

in b. vafer, ammonia might be exported into the host cell cytosol, where class ii glutamine synthetase encoded by the ant host  <cit>  may catalyze the assimilation of nitrogen and prevent the toxic accumulation of ammonia . alternatively, excess ammonia may be used as a nitrogen donor by carbamoyl phosphate synthase . this enzyme, along with argi, catalyzes the initial steps of arginine biosynthesis in all three sequenced blochmannia . the resulting product, citrulline, is exported to the host cell cytosol to complete arginine biosynthesis  <cit> . although glutamine is the preferred nitrogen donor for carab, ammonia can be used as a substrate in the absence of glutamine  <cit> . whether carbamoyl phosphate synthase plays a role in eliminating ammonia in b. vafer depends upon the concentration of glutamine in the endosymbiont cells . if glutamine is limiting, then carab may use the excess ammonia produced by urease as a substrate.

with the exception of ureaplasma, b. vafer is the only completely sequenced bacterium in the current ncbi genomes database that possesses urease but lacks the ability to assimilate ammonia into glutamine or glutamate. all other bacteria with urease also encode ammonia assimilation pathways catalyzed by either glutamine synthetase  or glutamate dehydrogenase. this includes the cockroach endosymbiont blattabacterium, which encodes urease and glutamate dehydrogenase  <cit> . the only exceptions are strains of the bacterial genus ureaplasma, a commensal and opportunistic pathogen that colonizes the human urogenital tract and belongs to the class mollicutes  <cit> . in ureaplasma, high intracellular concentrations of ammonia are thought to generate an electrochemical gradient that drives atp synthesis  <cit> . there is no evidence that this process occurs in blochmannia. with the loss of glutamine synthetase, b. vafer may have relinquished a component of the ancestral mutualism to the ant host. it is unclear whether or how the loss of glna affects the fitness of b. vafer and/or its ant host.

gene loss and erosion is accelerated in the lineages leading to b. vafer and b. floridanus compared to b. pennsylvanicus. the mechanism underlying the more extensive genome reduction in b. vafer and b. floridanus may occur at both the level of the endosymbiont and the level of the ant host. for example, the smaller size of intergenic spacers in b. vafer and b. floridanus suggest a faster rate of deletion mutations compared to the lineage leading to b. pennsylvanicus. elevated mutation may reflect differences in the natural history of the host species sampled. whereas c. pennsylvanicus and relatives in the subgenus camponotus typically live in temperate regions and hibernate for part of the year, c. vafer and c. floridanus and their relatives live in warmer climates and their colonies are more active throughout the year. these differences in host activity and life history could affect the number of symbiont replications per year and thus influence the mutation rate per unit time.

many genes missing in one or more blochmannia genomes are also missing from other insect endosymbionts , suggesting that the functions encoded are not essential across all intracellular mutualists. five genes showed evidence of independent instances of gene loss, erosion and/or frameshifts within blochmannia. particularly in the case of gene absence or erosion, these convergent patterns suggest relaxed selective pressure on gene function, rather than chance loss. these independent events may reflect the historical contingency of gene loss and erosion in the ancestral genome, which affects selective pressure on remaining genes.

we found frameshift errors in three genes involved in dna replication or protein synthesis: dnag, dnax and pth. these genes are considered essential for fundamental cellular processes in e. coli. although expression of full-length proteins may be restored by transcriptional slippage, previous work showed that full-length transcripts accounted for ‹30% of the transcripts produced from frameshifted genes  <cit> . therefore, it is possible that frameshifts lower the effective expression of these genes in b. vafer. the impact on dna replication fidelity and efficiency of protein synthesis is unclear.

the deletion hotspot detected around the putative origin of replication in both b. vafer and b. floridanus occurs in the  <dig> kb region between the b. vafer origin and the location of the origin in b. pennsylvanicus. given that the putative origin of replication in b. pennsylvanicus occurs at the same genomic location as the origins in e. coli and in other insect endosymbionts of the gamma-proteobacteria, it seems likely that the origin of replication shifted in the ancestral lineage of b. vafer and b. floridanus. although the mechanisms underlying this shift are unclear, it is interesting that relocation of the origin is correlated with a concentration of gene deletions in this region.

CONCLUSIONS
comparisons of the b. vafer genome with the previously published b. floridanus and b. pennsylvanicus genomes clarified the core set of genes and functions shared by this mutualist group. more broadly, these data inform studies of processes of genome reduction in intracellular bacteria.  the surprising loss of glutamine synthetase  from b. vafer, despite retention of urease genes, suggests a profound difference in nitrogen recycling within this species. in b. floridanus and b. pennsylvanicus, the ammonia generated by urease is assimilated during glutamine biosynthesis. in the c. vafer-blochmannia association, ammonia assimilation may occur by an alternative pathway, such as glutamine biosynthesis in the host or the initial steps of arginine biosynthesis catalyzed by the endosymbiont. database searches showed that lack of ammonia assimilation by glutamine synthetase or glutamate dehydrogenase in a urease-encoding bacterium is extremely rare.  evaluating blochmannia genome reduction in a phylogenetic context revealed instances of convergent gene loss or erosion at quea, visc, and yggs, which may be associated with changes in selective pressure on these genes.  a deletion hotspot in both b. vafer and b. floridanus occurs within a  <dig> kb region corresponding to the likely relocation of the replication origin.  eight b. vafer genes contain frameshifts in homopolymeric tracts, including two genes encoding dna replication proteins and one gene important for efficient protein synthesis. although such frameshifts may be corrected by transcriptional slippage, expression of full-length proteins is likely reduced compared to wild-type levels and has possible implications for efficiency and accuracy of information transfer.

