BACKGROUND
during the past  <dig> years, the amount of anthropogenic xenobiotics released into natural ecosystems has dramatically increased. although the effect of these chemicals on human health is intensively studied, their impact on other organisms remains poorly understood. because pollutants often accumulate in fresh-water bodies and sediments  <cit> , their impact on wetland fauna is of importance for these ecosystems. among aquatic arthropods found in wetlands, mosquitoes are distributed worldwide and are often exposed to anthropogenic pollutants and insecticides during their aquatic larval stage. indeed insecticides are often deliberately introduced into the mosquito habitat in the fight against the many human diseases they transmit   <cit> . as a consequence mosquito control programs are now threatened by the selection of mosquito populations resistant to these chemical insecticides  <cit> . differential gene transcription in insecticide-resistant mosquitoes has been frequently used to identify genes putatively involved in inherited metabolic resistance mechanisms  <cit> . for that purpose most approaches used cdna microarrays and were often focused on genes encoding enzymes potentially involved in the bio-transformation of insecticides molecules  <cit> , although recent findings suggest that the differential expression of other transcripts may also contribute to insecticide tolerance  <cit> . less attention has been paid to the short term transcriptome response of insects to xenobiotics, though this may lead to the discovery of novel molecular mechanisms contributing to insecticide tolerance  <cit> . we recently demonstrated that exposing mosquito larvae to low concentrations of pollutants for a few hours can increase their tolerance to chemical insecticides, possibly due to an alteration of the expression of detoxification enzymes  <cit> . in this context, understanding cross responses of mosquitoes to insecticides and pollutants at the whole transcriptome level may ultimately lead to improvements in vector control strategies by optimizing insecticide treatments in polluted areas  <cit> . moreover, deciphering transcriptome response of mosquitoes to anthropogenic xenobiotics may identify genes involved in chemical stress response that were not detected by standard toxicological studies.

today, quantitative transcriptomic methods are diversified and divided into two kind of technology: 'closed' and 'open' techniques depending on genome annotation constraints  <cit> . in 'closed' technologies, gene expression microarrays are the standard method used for transcriptome analysis. however, this type of technology does not allow the characterization and analysis of new transcripts and suffers from various technical biases such as non-specific hybridization and insufficient signal for low expressed genes. in contrast, 'open' transcriptome analyses based on the sequencing of either ests or short cdna tags, like serial analysis of gene expression   <cit> , longsage  <cit>  and massive parallel signature sequencing   <cit>  can measure the transcript level of both known and unknown genes  <cit> . the short cdna tags obtained by longsage or mpss can directly be mapped to the genome sequence, allowing the identification of new transcripts  <cit> . because these sequencing techniques do not target a defined portion of cdnas, these approaches are not optimized for the deep analysis of transcriptome variations  <cit> . recently, a combination of longsage and solexa sequencing technology, leading to the production and sequencing of millions of tags on a defined region of cdnas, has been used to characterize mouse hypothalamus transcriptome  <cit> . to our knowledge, this new method, called digital gene expression tag profiling  has never been used to compare whole transcriptome variations of a non-mammalian organism in different environmental conditions.

here, we used the dgetp approach to perform a deep transcriptome analysis of larvae of the mosquito aedes aegypti exposed to different anthropogenic xenobiotics. we examined the effect of sublethal doses of three pollutants likely to be found in wetlands  and three chemical insecticides used for mosquito control . this approach was suitable for investigating deep transcriptome variations in mosquitoes and identified several loci with high transcription signal not previously identified in mosquito genome. at the biological level, the transcript levels of many genes were affected by xenobiotic exposure. several genes and protein families responding to individual or multiple xenobiotics were identified, unraveling the complexity of xenobiotic-response in mosquitoes and identifying genes potentially involved in insecticide tolerance or biological interactions between insecticides and pollutants.

RESULTS
sequencing, mapping and clustering of cdna tags
by sequencing  <dig> cdna tag libraries from mosquito larvae exposed to different xenobiotics, a total of  <dig>  million reads  corresponding to  <dig>  distinct 20-mer tags were obtained . by removing any tag represented by less than  <dig> reads across all libraries, background filtering slightly reduced the total number of reads to  <dig>  million  but greatly reduced the number of distinct tags to  <dig> . among them,  <dig>  distinct tags were successfully mapped onto the ae. aegypti genome at a unique genomic location without mismatch, representing  <dig>  million reads . among successfully mapped tags,  <dig>  distinct tags  were mapped to  <dig>  predicted genes while the remaining reads  were mapped outside gene boundaries .

reads filtered from background represent tags showing >  <dig> reads across all conditions. reads mapped to genome represent tags mapped to a unique genomic location without mismatch. reads mapped to genes represent tags filtered from background and mapped to predicted genes. ctrl: controls; copper: exposed to copper sulfate; fluo: exposed to fluoranthene; atraz: exposed to atrazine; propo: exposed to propoxur; perm: exposed to permethrin; imida: exposed to imidacloprid.

clustering analysis of 20-mer cdna tags successfully mapped to mosquito genome allowed us to identify a total of  <dig>  distinct clusters including  <dig>  clusters associated to predicted genes. distribution of the total number of reads across genes, clusters and tags  spanned more than  <dig> orders of magnitude with most genes/clusters being represented by  <dig> to  <dig> reads. median total number of reads per gene, cluster, tag and cluster not mapped within predicted gene were  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> respectively.

quantitative transcription data obtained from cdna tags
analysis of transcription levels in mosquito larvae exposed to each xenobiotic was performed at the gene level for tags mapped within predicted genes  and at the cluster level for tags not mapped within predicted genes . this analysis identified  <dig> genes and  <dig> additional clusters with a mean transcript ratio  significantly > 2-fold in either direction in at least  <dig> condition . overall distribution of trs and their associated pvalues revealed a well-balanced distribution between over- and under transcription with trs ranging from 600-fold under transcription to more than 2000-fold over transcription compared with controls . cross-validation of trs with real-time quantitative rt-pcr on  <dig> genes  revealed a good correlation of trs obtained from the two techniques , although the dgetp method often produced higher trs  than real-time quantitative rt-pcr.

overall transcriptome variations across treatments
global analysis of transcriptome variations between mosquito larvae exposed to each xenobiotic revealed that the proportion of genes/clusters differently transcribed varied greatly between treatments . this proportion ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> % of all detected genes/clusters for permethrin and propoxur respectively. no correlation was found between the number of genes/clusters differentially transcribed in each treatment and the number of reads sequenced or the number of cdna tags successfully mapped to genome, suggesting an accurate normalization across all libraries. when considering organic xenobiotics , the number of genes/clusters differentially transcribed for each treatment was significantly positively correlated with the molarity of the xenobiotic used for larval exposure, . this overall positive correlation revealed that despite the different nature of xenobiotics, increasing the number of organic molecules lead to an increase in the number of genes/cluster differentially transcribed. principal component analysis  based on trs of genes/clusters differentially transcribed revealed similar transcriptome variations of mosquito larvae exposed to the two chemical insecticides propoxur and imidacloprid and the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon fluoranthene . conversely, transcriptome variations of larvae exposed to the insecticide permethrin, the herbicide atrazine and copper were more specific.

for each treatment, the number  of genes and additional clusters not mapped within predicted genes found significantly differentially transcribed are indicated. for each value, the associated percentage regarding the total number of genes , the total number of clusters not mapped within predicted genes , or the total of genes and additional clusters  is indicated. genes or clusters were considered significantly differentially transcribed comparatively to controls if their associated p value  was <  <dig>  after multiple testing corrections. copper: exposed to copper sulfate; fluo: exposed to fluoranthene; atraz: exposed to atrazine; propo: exposed to propoxur; perm: exposed to permethrin; imida: exposed to imidacloprid.

genes differentially transcribed across treatments
functional analysis of the  <dig> genes differentially transcribed in mosquito larvae exposed to xenobiotics revealed that genes responding to xenobiotics encode proteins with diverse functions, including a large proportion  of proteins of unknown function . among them,  <dig> genes were affected by both pollutants and insecticides. several genes affected by xenobiotics encoded enzymes, cuticular proteins and proteins involved in transport or dna interactions. as previously shown by pca, the two chemical insecticides propoxur and imidacloprid, and to a lesser extent the polycyclic hydrocarbon fluoranthene, induce similar functional responses. response induced by copper appeared distinct compared to organic xenobiotics, with a high proportion of enzymes being over transcribed. conversely, response to organic xenobiotics was characterized by the overproduction of a large proportion of transcripts encoding cuticular proteins. for these compounds, a positive correlation was found between their lipophilicity  and the proportion of transcripts encoding cuticular proteins being significantly over-produced . genes encoding cytoskeleton and ribosomal proteins were also affected by various xenobiotics with cytoskeleton proteins showing a marked repression in larvae exposed to the herbicide atrazine. finally, genes encoding proteins involved in transport were also differentially affected by xenobiotics. a negative correlation was found between the lipophilicity  of organic xenobiotics and the number of transcripts involved in transport being over-produced .

impact of xenobiotics on transcripts encoding enzymes
clustering analysis of genes encoding enzymes significantly differentially transcribed in larvae exposed to xenobiotics revealed that the transcript level of  <dig> enzymes was affected by one or more xenobiotic . the transcript level of these enzymes was strongly affected in larvae exposed to the insecticides propoxur and imidacloprid and the aromatic hydrocarbon fluoranthene. a gene tree based on transcript levels across all treatments revealed a distribution in  <dig> main different enzyme clusters mainly influenced by these  <dig> xenobiotics. twelve genes encoding enzymes potentially involved in xenobiotic detoxification were found differentially transcribed, including  <dig> cytochrome p450s monooxygenases ,  <dig> glutathione s-transferases  and  <dig> carboxy/cholinesterases . among them, the three p450s cyp9m <dig> , cyp325x <dig>  and cyp6m <dig>  were induced by multiple xenobiotics. interestingly, the cytochrome b <dig> , a co-factor associated with p <dig> detoxification systems, was also strongly induced in mosquito larvae exposed to insecticides and copper. among gsts, gstx <dig>  was strongly and specifically induced by the insecticide propoxur while the induction of gstd <dig>  appeared less specific. transcripts encoding esterases were mostly found under produced following xenobiotic exposure. finally, several transcripts encoding enzymes involved in the production of energy within the respiratory chain such as nadh dehydrogenase and atp synthase were over-produced in mosquito larvae exposed to xenobiotics while multiple serine proteases, amylases and peptidases were down-regulated.

discussion
analyzing transcriptome variations using digital gene expression tag profiling
following the genome sequencing of the dengue vector ae. aegypti,  <dig>  putative genes were identified and transcripts were detected for  <dig>  genes by combining cdna microarray, massive parallel signature sequencing  or est sequencing on several mosquito life stages  <cit> . by using the dgetp method, we sequenced  <dig>  millions 20-mer tags across  <dig> distinct cdna libraries obtained from 4th-stage larvae. this approach allowed us to detect significant transcription signals for  <dig>  predicted genes. considering that several genes may not be transcribed in 4th-stage larvae and that transcripts assayed by the dgetp method require the presence of a dpnii restriction site, such transcriptome coverage appears satisfactory. besides, sequence variations between the ae. aegypti strain used in our study  and the one used for genome sequencing , led to the rejection of numerous reads. within our mosquito strain, allelic variations were detected for numerous loci and also led to the rejection of a considerable proportion of reads as only alleles exactly matching to the reference genome sequence were considered in the analysis . however, we believe that such high mapping stringency is critical for generating accurate gene transcription data with short cdna tags. improving the number of reads by replicating sequencing libraries for each sample will allow a better assessment of biological and technical variations together with increasing transcriptome coverage. by sequencing  <dig> million random  <dig> bp cdna fragments from two cdna libraries of females drosophila melanogaster, sackton et al. detected  <dig>  annotated genes  <cit> . by targeting a defined region of cdnas, the dgetp method can generate wider transcriptome coverage together with a higher number of cdna tags per gene, leading to more precise gene transcription data. provided a reference genome is available and the aim is to quantify transcript levels between different biological samples, we confirm that methods based on the combination of longsage and next-generation sequencing technologies are perfectly suited for deep transcriptome analysis  <cit> . recent improvements in sequencing technologies  are now making sequencing-based approaches the methods of choice for whole transcriptome analyses.

among the  <dig>  20-mer cdna tags successfully mapped to ae. aegypti genome, 35% were not located within predicted gene boundaries extended by  <dig> bp at their 3' end . these tags could be gathered into  <dig>  genomic clusters with more than 40% of them showing significant transcription signal . these clusters may represent genes, exons or utr extensions not predicted by automated annotation. recent studies revealed that the genome of complex organisms produce large numbers of regulatory noncoding rnas  that can be antisense, intergenic, interleaved or overlapping with protein-coding genes  <cit> . in that concern, it is likely that a significant proportion of transcript signatures detected outside predicted genes represent ncrnas. the use of next-generation sequencing approaches specifically targeting insect ncrnas will help decipher their role in mosquito gene regulation and in the capacity of insects to adapt to different environmental conditions.

impact of xenobiotics on mosquito larvae transcriptome
global analysis of transcriptome variations associated with a  <dig> h exposure of mosquito larvae to low doses of insecticides and pollutants revealed their ability to adjust to modifications of their chemical environment. the number of transcripts affected varies greatly depending on the xenobiotic used for exposure. when considering organic xenobiotics , this number increased together with the molarity of the xenobiotics. our results also revealed that the lipophilicity of the xenobiotics affects the number of differentially transcribed genes encoding cuticular proteins and transporters. it has been demonstrated that lipophilic xenobiotics accumulate in biological membranes or lipid reserves, modifying their distribution across tissues and cells  <cit> . although our experimental design did not allow segregating between the quantity of xenobiotic and their inherent chemical properties, it is likely that molarity and lipophilicity are key factors affecting the magnitude and the specificity of transcriptome variations observed here.

our results demonstrated the similar strong transcriptome response of mosquito larvae exposed to the insecticides propoxur and imidacloprid. despite belonging to two different chemical groups, the carbamate propoxur and the neonicotinoid imidacloprid both potentiate the functioning of nicotinic cholinergic receptors  <cit> . although genes encoding the primary targets of these insecticides  were not found significantly differentially transcribed, the similar transcriptome responses to these two insecticides may be partly related to similar effects generated by the alteration of cholinergic neurons functioning  <cit> .

we previously demonstrated that exposing mosquito larvae to various pollutants for few hours can increase their tolerance to insecticides possibly through an induction of detoxification enzymes  <cit> . among the different pollutants tested, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons were often the most potent for increasing insecticide tolerance, possibly due to their ability to induce detoxification enzymes  <cit> . the present study detected a considerable number of genes encoding detoxification enzymes  including several genes showing transcription level variations. however, only a small proportion of them were found significantly affected by xenobiotic exposure, probably due to insufficient number of reads regarding our fisher's t test pvalue threshold. among them, members of cytochrome p <dig> families frequently involved in resistance to insecticides and plant toxins  <cit>  were over transcribed following exposure to fluoranthene, propoxur or imidacloprid. by revealing that several other genes with a broad range of biological functions are similarly affected by insecticides and pollutants, our results suggest that the impact of pollutants on the ability of mosquitoes to better tolerate chemical insecticides might also be the consequence of the induction/repression of other proteins involved in a wide range of functions. in this concern, several cuticular proteins were found over transcribed in mosquito larvae exposed to insecticides or organic xenobiotics. it has been suggested that mosquito may protect themselves from insecticides by cuticular protein thickening leading to a reduction of insecticide penetration  <cit> . other studies demonstrated that cuticular component deposition is stimulated by environmental stress  <cit> .

our results also suggest that mosquito larvae exposed to xenobiotics undertake a metabolic stress associated with changes of their chemical environment. global cellular stress response has been defined as all proteins over-produced due to environmental stress. this response initially named 'general adaptation syndrome' occurs together with increased mobilization of energy from storage tissues  <cit> . such stress response has been described for numerous stress factors including exposure to pollutants  <cit> . in insect cells, response to environmental aggressions can involve various proteins including heat shock proteins  <cit> , metallothioneins  <cit>  or p-glycoprotein synthesis  <cit> . although differentiating between xenobiotic-specific and general stress responses is difficult, we also highlighted such protein families including chaperonins, heat shock proteins and atp-binding cassette transporters . moreover, numerous genes encoding enzymes involved in the production of energy or in cellular catabolism such as nadh dehydrogenase, atp synthase, trypsin and lipases were found over transcribed in mosquito larvae exposed to xenobiotics, confirming a global stress response  <cit> .

significant transcript level variations were observed in response to anthropogenic pollutants though those compounds were not toxic for mosquito larvae . although we predicted the relatively important effect of the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon  fluoranthene on mosquito larvae due to known cellular effects on animals  <cit> , responses to atrazine and copper were unanticipated. in animals, the cellular impact of pahs has been associated with the uncoupling of mitochondrial respiration, direct genotoxic damages and the formation of reactive oxygen species  <cit> . the over transcription of nadh dehydrogenase and atp synthase observed after exposing larvae to fluoranthene confirm that similar effects occur in mosquitoes. although mosquitoes do not possess the protein targeted by the triazine herbicide atrazine   <cit>  and a very low concentration was used , this chemical affected the transcription of several mosquito genes. in plants, atrazine disrupts the electron transport in chloroplasts  <cit> . in mosquito larvae, several members of the oxidative phosphorylation pathway including nadh dehydrogenase and atp synthase were induced by atrazine, suggesting a compensation for partial uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation  <cit> . larvae exposed to copper sulfate exhibited a significant over transcription of  <dig> genes including a large proportion of enzymes while only  <dig> genes were under-transcribed. the induction of enzymes by copper might be the consequence of chemical interactions between cu2+ ions and metalloenzymes together with other metalloproteins involved in electron transfers, hydrolysis and oxido-reductions  <cit> . the strong induction of the hemo-protein cytochrome b <dig>  together with several serine proteases and oxidase/peroxidases support this hypothesis.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, despite low concentrations, short exposure time and no apparent phenotypic modification, the significant effect of pollutants and insecticides on mosquito larvae transcriptome raise important questions about the 'hidden impact' of anthropogenic pollutants on ecosystems, including mammals. this concern may even be underestimated considering the complex and unknown cross-effects generated by pollutant mixtures often encountered in polluted ecosystems  <cit> . in nematodes, it has been shown that by applying a realistic heat stress to both uncontaminated and polluted systems, the specimen from polluted environment showed a stronger response  <cit> . such effects are likely to occur in polluted mosquito breeding sites and are likely to affect the efficacy of chemical insecticides used for mosquito control  <cit> . although further experiments are required to fully characterize the molecular mechanisms by which pollutants affect insecticide tolerance in mosquitoes, the present study clearly demonstrate that similar response mechanisms are activated by pollutants and insecticides. finally, the persistent contamination of wetlands by anthropogenic chemicals and the role of phenotypic plasticity in driving selection mechanisms  <cit>  raise the question of the long-term impact of pollutants on the selection of insecticide resistance mechanisms. additional experiments combining exposure of mosquitoes to pollutants and their subsequent selection with insecticides will provide valuable biological material to answer this question and may later allow improving mosquito control strategies.

