BACKGROUND
small regulatory rnas  play key roles in modulating gene expression in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. in bacteria, numerous srnas that range in size from ~50- <dig> nucleotides in length act on independently transcribed mrna targets. in e. coli, approximately  <dig> such srnas have been validated  <cit> . the most extensively characterized class of bacterial srnas are the trans-encoded srnas that are encoded distant from the genes for their mrna targets and that typically have only limited complementarity   <cit> . trans-encoded srnas form imperfect base-pairing interactions with complementary sequences in their mrna targets, which are often located at or near ribosome binding sites , but can also be located upstream of the translation start site as well as deep in the coding regions   <cit> . such interactions generally result in a decrease in protein synthesis, either by stimulating mrna degradation or by inhibiting translation. other bacterial srnas, referred to as cis-encoded srnas, are present in close proximity to their targets, such as upstream, opposite of the 5′ utr of the target, or between two genes in an operon  <cit> . such srnas have extensive  complementarity to their targets  <cit> .

gaining a deeper insight into how srnas recognize and interact with their targets is crucial to understanding the mechanism of srna action and function in bacteria at a molecular level. for certain srnas , target recognition is structure-driven using c-rich stretches that are located within accessible loop regions  <cit> . for many other trans-acting srnas, however, the interacting region is not located in a structured region, rather in a single-stranded region that is often located at the 5′ end of the srna. like micrornas  in eukaryotes, trans-acting bacterial srnas appear to recognize their targets by a seed-pairing mechanism using seeds as small as 6– <dig> nucleotides. fusion studies have revealed that seed regions of rybb or micc srnas are sufficient to guide the recognition of targets  <cit> . moreover, as in mirnas, 3′ adenosine  residues have been reported recently to occur adjacent to the pairing region  <cit> .

in numerous bacteria, mainly gram negatives, the rna-binding protein hfq is required for the action and stability of many trans-encoded srnas  <cit> . the hfq chaperone binds to a/u rich regions of srnas that are often located near the stem-loop structures as well as to the poly  regions at the 3′ end of the srnas  <cit> . structural and binding studies have revealed several rna binding sites on the proximal as well as distal faces of hfq hexameric ring, which may facilitate the interaction of srna and their target mrnas  <cit> . hfq may assist duplex formation by enhancing local rna concentrations, changing rna structures and accelerating strand exchange and annealing. although most of the e. coli trans-acting srnas that have been characterized require hfq for base pairing, some in vibrio cholerae do not require hfq for pairing with target  <cit> . loss-of-function studies suggest that hfq is essential for virulence of several pathogens as well as symbiosis of sinorhizobium meliloti with plants  <cit> .

hfq interacts with rnase e to serve to recruit the rna degradation machinery once the srnas have base-paired with targets  <cit> . moreover, recent work has shown that a 5′-monophosphorylated srna seed both guides rnase e to its mrna target and also stimulates the degradation. hfq is needed for optimal rnase e activity in this srna-guided mrna cleavage  <cit> . rnase iii also participates in srna-mediated modulation of mrnas  <cit> . further, rnases also play an important role in generation of mature srnas. for example, 6s rna maturation involves multi-layered pathway involving endonucleolytic digestion by rnase e or g and exonucleolytic trimming at 5′ and 3′ ends  <cit> .

although hfq is known to bind to the c-terminus of rnase e and recruit it to srna-mediated interactions, much remains to be learned concerning the molecular mechanism and function of various rnases and other rna binding proteins during bacterial rna-interference. recent progress has offered insights into bacterial srnas that are recognized and loaded on to the hfq protein scaffold during their interaction with the target mrnas  <cit>  but the identity of the proteins that facilitate srna-mrna interactions in bacteria lacking hfq or facilitate the interactions of the srnas that are hfq-independent remains largely unknown.

striking conceptual parallels exist between the bacterial and the eukaryotic srna-pathways. in eukaryotes, numerous structural studies have revealed the molecular details of how the mirnas and sirnas are recognized by, and loaded onto, the argonaute proteins and then guided to the targets by the rna-induced silencing complex   <cit> . in contrast, considerably less is known about the molecular details of how bacterial srnas recognize their target mrnas or about the roles of hfq and other proteins in this process.

we have recently reported evidence that the highly conserved bacterial protein ybey  may play a major, previously unrecognized role in bacterial srna regulation  <cit> . ybey, which is one of the  <dig> genes that comprise the postulated minimal bacterial genome set  <cit> , is essential in some bacteria  <cit> . in contrast, in certain other bacteria such as escherichia coli and sinorhizobium meliloti, ybey is not essential but its loss sensitizes cells to a wide variety of physiologically diverse stresses and causes striking defects that affect ribosome activity, translational fidelity and ribosome assembly  <cit> . several observations had suggested that ybey might interact with rna. our mapping of 16s, 23s and 5s rrna termini in an e. coli Δybey mutant showed that ybey influences the maturation of all three rrnas, with a particularly strong effect on maturation at both the 5′- and 3′-end of 16s rrna as well as maturation of the 5′-termini of 23s and 5s rrnas  <cit> . furthermore, we demonstrated that there are strong genetic interactions between ybey and rnc , ybey and rnr , and ybey and pnp   <cit> .

we have recently shown that ybey is a previously undiscovered single-strand rnase with a combination of biochemical properties that distinguish it from all previously reported rnases  <cit> . additionally, we have shown that ybey plays in a key role in a previously unrecognized system of 70s ribosome quality control, in which ybey and rnase r act together to degrade defective 70s ribosomes but not properly matured 70s ribosomes or individual subunits. in addition, we discovered that there is essentially no fully matured 16s rrna in a ∆ybey mutant at 45°c, making ybey the first endoribonuclease to be implicated in the critically important processing of the 16s rrna 3′ terminus.

two key observations stimulated us to investigate the possibility of involvement of ybey in srna regulation  <cit> . first, we had observed that ybey displays high structural similarities to the mid domains of argonaute proteins. in silico modeling of substrate and protein binding suggested that ybey has the potential to bind to srna seeds and we identified a possible phosphate-binding center in ybey cavity. second, we noted striking parallels between the phenotypes of s. meliloti hfq and smc <dig>  mutants, an observation that suggested there might be an underlying mechanistic connection. to test this hypothesis, we carried out a limited study in s. meliloti in which we evaluated the accumulation of  <dig> target genes and  <dig> srnas in s. meliloti compromised for their expression of hfq or smc <dig> . we showed that both mutants exhibited similar deregulation of srnas and targets  <cit> . this study raised the possibility that ybey might play a role in srna regulation in bacteria whose importance is comparable to that of hfq.

to test our hypothesis that ybey plays an important role in srna regulation in addition to its key roles in 70s ribosome quality control and rrna processing, we have used an integrative biology approach to evaluate the ybey-dependent molecular response of e. coli cells exposed to hydroxyurea , a widely used inhibitor of e. coli’s class i ribonucleotide reductase. our results indicate that ybey plays an extremely important role in bacteria, modulating the levels of both hfq-dependent and hfq-independent srnas as well as their targets.

RESULTS
design of experiment and overview of microarray analysis
there were two reasons for why we chose hu as the stress in our studies evaluating the role of ybey is srna regulation in e. coli. first, we already knew that hu exposure elicits a very complex physiological response that leads to cell death and lysis and has been attributed to the production of reactive oxygen species  <cit> . second, we had noted that, even though an Δybey mutant exhibits an increased sensitivity to a wide variety of other types of stresses  <cit> , it is strikingly resistant to killing by hu . thus we hoped our analysis might also offer insights into the basis of this hu resistance.

to study the detailed changes in molecular profiles of e. coli mutated for ybey expression  during exposure to hu, and to evaluate global effects of ybey mutation on srnas and their targets, we adapted an integrative biology approach using microarray analysis, gene set enrichment clustering, database mining, literature mining and ‘context likelihood of relatedness’  based network analysis . we generated and compared gene expression profiles of wild type  e. coli and its corresponding Δybey derivative in two states, untreated and hu-treated . as in our previous study, we examined gene expression profiles of exponentially growing wt cultures following 1 hr of treatment with or without freshly prepared 100 mm hu  <cit> . at this 1 hr time point, hu-treated cultures have not yet shown decreased survival but do show growth inhibition. our hope was that we could gain insights into the early cellular events that lead to cell death and lysis by examining the expression profiles at this time during hu treatment.

when we performed the unsupervised hierarchical clustering, we were able to distinguish wt and Δybey mutant samples at both the states . equally, we were able to differentiate expression changes between untreated and hu-treated cells in both the genotypes with the help of cluster analysis . we have summarized the number of differentially expressed genes for all of the comparisons in table  <dig>  genes showing a Δz-score >  <dig> or < - <dig> in expression between comparisons , were regarded as differentially expressed.
ybey 
with or without  hu treatment

ybey 
ybey 
hu vs Δ
ybey 
ybey 
loss of ybey function results in changes in gene expression even in the absence of any stress, with  <dig> genes significantly differentially expressed;  <dig> genes were up-regulated in the Δybey mutant relative to wt and  <dig> were down-regulated . as we have previously reported  <cit> , treatment of e. coli with hu causes major changes in gene expression with  <dig> genes significantly differentially expressed upon hu treatment;  <dig> genes were significantly up-regulated upon hu treatment and  <dig> were significantly down-regulated . as we have noted previously, up-regulated genes include those associated with three classes of survival responses: ribonucleotide reductases , primosome components for replication restart , and the sos response . we had also noted that numerous genes associated with iron import were strongly up-regulated upon treatment of wt with hu  <cit>  . treatment of the Δybey mutant with hu also resulted in major changes in gene expression with  <dig> genes significantly differentially expressed:  <dig> genes were up-regulated upon hu treatment and  <dig> were down-regulated.

a comparison of the genes whose expression was altered when the wt strain was treated with hu with those whose expression was altered when the Δybey mutant was treated with hu revealed that  <dig> genes displayed a significant change in expression independent of the ybey status of the cells . genes in this category included many of those mentioned above that are potentially associated with survival when wt is treated with hu: ribonucleotide reductases  and the sos response . in addition, many of the genes associated with iron import were induced by hu regardless of the ybey status of the cells . thus, the presence or absence of ybey had only subtle affects on expression of these genes. however, many of the genes whose expression levels are altered by hu treatment are strongly influenced by the ybey status of the cells. in the case of the  <dig> genes whose expression was affected when the wt strain was treated with hu, the remaining  <dig> up-regulated genes and  <dig> down-regulated genes only displayed a significant change when the cells were proficient for ybey function. interestingly, the primosome/replication restart genes  were in this category, as were certain of the iron import genes . reciprocally, in the case of the  <dig> genes whose expression was affected when the Δybey strain was treated with hu, the remaining  <dig> up-regulated genes and  <dig> down-regulated genes only displayed a significant change when the cells lacked ybey function. thus the presence or absence of ybey function is a huge factor in determining how cells respond to hu.

ybey dependent reprogramming of srna and target expression
our pilot study of the role of the ybey ortholog, smc <dig>  in s. meliloti <cit>  suggested that ybey plays a previously unrecognized role in srna-mediated regulation whose importance is comparable to that of extensively characterized hfq. to gain insights into a possible role of e.coli ybey in regulating expression of srnas and their targets on whole genome scale in response to hu treatment, we followed the strategy illustrated in figure  <dig>  information on all the srnas was extracted for four comparisons: the three comparisons discussed above and also the hu-treated Δybey mutant versus hu-treated wt . in this fourth comparison, a total of  <dig> genes showed significant differences in levels of expression, with  <dig> genes expressed at a higher level in the hu-treated Δybey mutant than in the hu-treated wt and  <dig> gene expressed at a lower level. a total of  <dig> srnas were detected in our microarray analysis, of which  <dig> unique srnas showed a differential expression in at least one of the four comparisons;  <dig> srnas  showed a ybey-dependent change in expression . cluster analysis was able to discriminate successfully the changes in expression of individual srnas among  <dig> comparisons . our analysis of srnas suggested a complex pattern of change in expression of srnas when mc <dig> or Δybey cells were exposed to hu. comparison of unstressed states of Δybey and wt mc <dig> cells showed up-regulation of  <dig> srnas  and down-regulation of only  <dig> srna  in Δybey. exposure of wt to hu changed the expression of  <dig> srnas  of which nearly half were up-regulated  and the other half were down-regulated . exposure of Δybey to hu changed expression of  <dig> srnas , where  <dig> were up-regulated  and  <dig>  were down-regulated . on the other hand, when we compared the srna expression profiles of hu-treated Δybey and wt cells,  <dig> srnas  expressed at a higher level in Δybey whereas expression levels of only  <dig>  were lower in Δybey as compared to wt . thus, our analysis of srnas suggested that presence or absence of ybey during stress accounts for major changes in srna expression.

ybey 
ybey 
hu vs Δ
ybey 
ybey 
of the  <dig> differentially regulated srnas ,  <dig> srnas were hfq-dependent and  <dig> srnas were hfq-independent. hfq-dependent srnas that also showed a ybey dependence included oxys, dsra, cyar, arcz, rybb, mica, glmz, ryea, ryeb, cydc, ryjb and sgrs; whereas hfq-independent ybey dependent srnas are ffs, rygd, csrc, rdld, rdla, gady, psrd, rygc, ryfd, ryfa, ryba, ryrc, ryed, rydb, isrb, and isrc.

insights into the biological pathways regulated by ybey-dependent srnas during hu treatment in Δybey and wt genotypes were obtained by identifying bona-fide, experimentally inferred targets and genes that are associated with differentially regulated srnas using two databases, srnatarbase and srnamap, and by primary literature mining .  <dig> experimentally inferred genes associated with  <dig> hfq-dependent  and  <dig> hfq-independent  srnas were obtained. again, cluster analysis revealed the differences in expression of individual genes between the four comparisons .

in e. coli, srnas can both up-regulate or down-regulate expression of their targets  <cit> . therefore, for negatively regulated targets, expression levels of srna-mrna target pair should be inversely correlated i.e. for a given srna, if its expression was up-regulated, the level of expression of its target genes were down-regulated and vice-versa. similarly, for positively regulated srna-target pairs, levels of srnas as well as their targets changed in the same direction. a total of  <dig> srna-mrna interactions for  <dig> srnas were correctly correlated to change in expression of  <dig> experimentally inferred genes , indicating that these relationships are functional ybey-dependent-srna-mrna combinations during hu response.

combining the information on known experimentally inferred targets, obtained from srnamap, srnatarbase, and primary literature, as well as clustering of targets into functional groups revealed several important pathways that most likely changed in ∆ybey cells when they were exposed to hu . for example pathways related to envelope stress, redox stress and oxidative stress, porin synthesis, translocation of membrane protein and their assembly, signal recognition particles , anti-mutation response, metabolism, toxin-anti-toxin pairs, transporters, and cell survival  are altered in Δybey cells when they are exposed to hu. this analysis highlights the broad consequences of ybey-dependent srna regulation on cellular physiology in response to hu stress .

inferring ybey dependent srna-mrna interactions using clr
identification of at least  <dig> srna-mrna relationships that have been already experimentally inferred suggested a much wider role of ybey in regulating srna-mrna interactions. furthermore, experimentally evaluated targets for only  <dig> of  <dig> ybey-dependent srnas could be obtained from all the sources e.g. srnatarbase, ‘a database for experimentally validated targets’ and a literature survey  <cit> . therefore, in a complementary investigation, we also adapted a novel network-based systems biology approach   <cit>  to further estimate all the potential ybey-dependent targets for the  <dig> differentially regulated srnas . we have recently demonstrated the use of our network-based approach in the characterization of hfq-dependent srna-target relationships  <cit> . we applied the clr algorithm to an existing compendium of  <dig> rma-normalized e. coli expression arrays collected under different experimental conditions to reverse engineer and analyze the full regulatory networks for hfq-dependent and hfq-independent srnas. using this process, we were able to infer potential targets of each of these srnas with a highly significant false-discovery rate -corrected p value . the inferred network  consists of  <dig> putative direct and indirect targets for the hfq-dependent and hfq-independent srnas. based on our microarray analysis, there are  <dig> hfq-dependent srnas and  <dig> hfq-independent srnas showing statistical significance among four comparisons. using these significant srna as “seed” nodes, we particularly identified the ybey-dependent hfq-dependent srna-mrna sub-network  as well as ybey-dependent hfq-independent srna-mrna sub-network  from the clr reverse-engineered full srnas network . for these two srna-mrna networks, we have annotated those srna targets as the experimentally validated targets  and putative computationally predicted targets  respectively. these hfq-dependent and hfq-independent srna-mrna networks provide a valuable extension of our knowledge about all the srnas in general and ybey-dependent srna and their putative targets in particular.
e. coli
. clr algorithm was applied to  <dig> rma-normalized expression arrays to reverse-engineer whole-genome srna regulatory network at an fdr corrected p value <  <dig> .

physiological responses of ∆ybey cells to hu treatment and cell fate
functional clustering of genes was performed to gain insight into the biological processes that potentially changed after hu-treatment in mc <dig> and ∆ybey genotypes . our analysis of transcriptional reprogramming in ∆ybey against hu-stress suggested alteration of several pathways  that might possibly contribute to the resistance of a ∆ybey mutant to hu. for example, genes contributing to envelope stress as well as those responsible for synthesis and repair of cell wall, membrane, lipoproteins and polysaccharides were strongly altered in the ∆ybey mutant. similarly multiple two-component signal transduction systems that enable bacteria to sense, respond and adapt to environmental stresses were specifically regulated in the ∆ybey genotype. ∆ybey cells adjust their tca cycle and components of electron transfer chain in response to hu stress, alterations that could in principle contribute to a reduction in the production of harmful oxidizing radicals so that the damage to genetic material may be reduced  <cit> . intriguingly, components of base excision dna repair, which are employed by cells to repair dna damage due to oxidizing agents, were up-regulated only in ∆ybey cells . furthermore, components of non-coding rna biogenesis pathways were reprogrammed in ∆ybey genotype . moreover, components of drug resistance pathways were also evidently regulated only in cells with the ∆ybey genotype . ∆ybey cells displayed several molecular characteristics similar to those undergoing adaptation to antibiotic exposure  <cit> . exposure of wt to hu results in up-regulation of iron-uptake systems , which is highly detrimental to e. coli and since it could cause cell death during hu stress by promoting fenton chemistry  <cit> . most of these genes of iron uptake system  were expressed at lower level in hu-exposed ∆ybey as compared to hu-exposed wt mc <dig> . when the wt cells are exposed to hu treatment, genes like tonb, fhua, b, c, d are strongly up-regulated, whereas hu-mediated up-regulation of these genes does not occur in ∆ybey cells. these results are consistent with our earlier observation that loss of expression of tonb provides a protective effect in hu-exposed cells  <cit> .

our previous work has presented evidence that the cytotoxic effect of hu treatment of wt e. coli leads to an oxidative response that can be detected by the oxidation to the dye 3′--fluorescein , to a fluorescent derivative  <cit> . taken all together, our analyses of the of hu-induced changes of gene expression in a ∆ybey mutant relative to those in a wt, raised the possibility that a ∆ybey mutant might be resistant to killing by hu because this cytotoxic oxidative response does not occur. to test this hypothesis, we compared the oxidation of hpf in hu-treated wt cells  <cit>  to that in hu-treated ∆ybey cells . our results indicate that the hu treatment of the ∆ybey cells does not elicit the oxidation of hfp and thus that is possible that this lack of an oxidative response is the primary physiological reason that a ∆ybey mutant is not killed by hu. interestingly, in the course of our experiments, we noted that both the wt and ∆ybey cells filamented in response to hu. this is consistent with the induction of the sos-regulated sula gene, which encodes an inhibitor of septation, in both wt and the ∆ybey mutant and suggests that the induction of the sos network is a separate physiological response from the one that leads to the cytotoxic oxidative response.

discussion
taken together, our results indicate that the highly conserved bacterial protein ybey plays a major role in bacterial srna regulation. extending our more limited study in s. meliloti <cit> , our analyses suggest that ybey participates in both hfq-dependent and hfq-independent srnas-mediated interactions in e. coli. this means that ybey is a remarkably central protein in rna metabolism in bacteria, as we have additionally shown that ybey is also involved in 70s ribosome quality control and in rrna processing  <cit> . thus ybey can help a cell withstand stress both by modulating changes in gene expression through its role in srna regulation and by helping to maintain the fidelity of protein translation. ybey’s three distinct rna-related physiological roles offer an explanation for why it is one of  <dig> genes in the postulated minimal bacterial gene set  <cit> .

we have constructed a whole-genome srna-target interaction network to explore organism-wide interactions for most of e. coli srnas and evaluated the subset of network that is reconfigured in ybey-dependent manner during the response to hu. our results suggest novel mechanistic insights into how cells respond to hu and reveals that ybey and srnas play central roles. the complexity of e.coli’s response to hu that is evident in our experiments is fully consistent with a recent genome-wide screening study with hu that revealed a link between non-essential ribosomal proteins and reactive oxygen species  <cit>  and the subsequent demonstration that a trna thiolation pathway, which modulates the intracellular redox state, affects sensitivity to hu  <cit> .

srnas mediate adaptation of bacteria to environmental fluctuations: for instance their role in quorum sensing, biofilm formation, iron uptake and virulence has been well established  <cit> . yet, their involvement in cellular response to hu stress has not been addressed. a previous study from our group led us to hypothesize that exposure to hu causes cell death due to enhanced production of hydroxyl radicals that are generated as a result of increase in iron uptake, toxins, mistranslated protein and envelope stress  <cit> . in particular, we hypothesized that exposure to hu results in activation of cellular toxins that lead to improperly translated proteins, membrane stress, and disrupted respiratory chain activity, which causes an increase in superoxide production, eventually leading to production of excessive hydroxyl radicals  <cit> . however, the manner in which these processes are regulated remains largely unknown and the ultimate explanation will also needs to incorporate the recent discoveries for instance those by mahoney and silhavy that a cpxa
*
 mutation that constitutively activates the cpxr stress response leads confers a high level of resistance to hu  <cit> . further, kint et al. demonstrated the involvement of obge gtpase during hydroxyl radical toxicity and replication fork arrest  <cit> . our integrative biology-guided approach suggests a central role for ybey in which it acts by enforcing the regulation of srna-mediated interactions . loss of ybey resulted in up-regulation of several srnas  in response to hu that in turn affect several cellular processes central to adaptation to oxidative stresses. further analysis of functional clusters of genes that were differentially expressed in a ∆ybey mutant as compared to wt suggested that exposure of a ∆ybey mutant to hu causes elicitation of envelope-stress responses, reprogramming of constituents of two-component systems , changes in the tca cycle and electron transfer chain, and a reduction in iron-uptake. together, these changes could potentially down-regulate the fenton reaction that uses hydrogen peroxide and iron to generate free hydroxyl radicals . indeed our measurements showed a striking reduction in the level of reactive oxygen species in hu-treated ∆ybey cells as compared to hu treated wt cells , an observation that can help to explain why hu is not a severe cytotoxic stress for a ∆ybey mutant . in addition, in ∆ybey cells, components of base excision repair, among other dna repair pathways, were specifically up-regulated along with anti-mutation- anti-oxidative stress responses that are under the control of srna modules comprising of oxys. it is well established that oxys helps in protecting cells against oxidative damage imposed during oxidative stress by hydrogen peroxide as well as other cellular stresses  <cit> .

several toxin-antitoxin pairs encoded by e. coli genome were also differentially reprogrammed in ∆ybey, so was the srp machinery  that regulates synthesis of membrane proteins and their targeting  <cit> . we also observed differential expression of several srna modules that regulate porins and outer membrane proteins  e.g. mica, cyar and rybb and their targets . reprogramming of srp machinery along with srna-omp modules of regulation could help to reduce the amount of mistranslated membrane proteins, repair damaged membrane proteins, and help circumventing envelope stress, thus enhancing survival . our results suggest that oxidative and free radicals stresses pose a multilayered threat to cell and that ybey dependent srnas  have hitherto unappreciated roles in helping cells to adapt to such stresses.

although around  <dig> srnas have been estimated in e. coli, the targets and functions of many of them still remain unknown. we could obtain targets for only  <dig> differentially expressed srnas from literature and database sources . the deficiency in experimental information underscores the need to develop complementary approaches for identification of targets and functions of srnas as compared to standard, tedious biological and genetic protocols, and large-scale screens of mutant libraries. one such complementary approach has been recently developed in our laboratory that uses the ‘context likelihood of relatedness’  algorithm to infer the hfq-dependent srna regulatory network in e. coli <cit> . in our current study, we have used an e. coli compendium of  <dig> microarrays maintained in one of our laboratories  <cit>  to expand this algorithm to all the e. coli srnas . we have inferred potential targets of every srna with a very high q-value . our results suggest presence of a complex global regulatory network modulated by srnas  that would help the bacteria to program its response effectively to changes in their environment. it is not difficult to imagine that bacteria may elicit specific smaller sub-networks and srna-circuits in order to adapt to specific stresses. we indeed observed a similar situation as we were able to determine the ybey-dependent srna sub-network that responded to hu . our analysis is also significant as it demonstrates the relevance of integrative biology approaches to infer the global and specific regulatory circuits of srnas, as well as presents examples of different regulatory srna circuits. several models of srna circuitry modules have been proposed e.g. single input module, dense overlapping regulon, positive- and negative feedback modules, and feed forward modules  <cit> . all these modules were readily observed in our global network.

it is evident that srnas act post-transcriptionally and modulate gene expression through both extensive and limited base-pairing interactions with their targets. several of these require the rna chaperone hfq for pairing with their targets, with hfq assisting in the trans-annealing of the srnas to target mrna in an antisense manner  <cit> . recent progress has offered insights into how bacterial srnas are recognized and loaded on to the hfq protein scaffold during their interaction with the target mrnas  <cit> . however, hfq has not been identified in numerous sequenced bacteria, whereas ybey is extremely highly conserved. thus, our results raise the possibility that ybey may play an especially important role in srna regulation in bacteria that do not encode hfq.

the phenomenon of srna recognition and its guidance to target mrna is quite well understood in higher organisms, where mirnas and sirnas are loaded onto argonaute proteins and then guided and assembled on to the targets by the risc. structures of argonaute proteins include a ‘mid domain’ that specifically recognize 5′-phosphate of the srnas and anchors them on to the argonaute/risc, and a ‘piwi domain’ that have hydrolytic  capacity  <cit> . interestingly, it was our observation that ybey has structural similarities to the mid domain of argonaute proteins that stimulated us to consider the possibility that ybey might play a role in bacterial srna regulation and to carry out modeling studies indicating that it had the potential to bind a small seed rna.

in contrast, considerably less is known about how bacterial srnas are recognized to interact with their targets. although important recent work has shown that a 5′-monophosphorylated srna seed both guides rnase e to its mrna target and stimulates degradation, and that hfq is needed for optimal rnase e activity in this srna-guided mrna cleavage  <cit> , many mechanistic questions remain. furthermore, as noted above, many bacteria lack hfq yet exhibit srna regulation, while our results suggest that ybey-dependent, hfq-independent srna regulation may be considerably more important in bacteria that possess hfq than has hitherto been recognized.

it will be extremely interesting to determine how ybey participates mechanistically in srna regulation. ybey possesses a metal-dependent, single strand endoribonuclease activity that is relatively weak compared to many strictly degradative rnases  <cit> . furthermore, as its rnase activity on naked rna substrates is not particularly specific , yet its in vivo activities in rrna processing are highly specific, its rnase activity within living cells must be highly controlled  <cit> .

a particular biochemical characteristic of ybey that is potentially of interest with respect to its possible roles in srna regulation is that ybey can bind to and cut single stranded oligoribonucleotides as short as  <dig> nucleotides in length, but is not able to cut a  <dig> base oligoribonucleotide despite the presence of a site that is cleaved in the context of larger oligoribonucleotides  <cit> . this raises the possibility that ybey could play two possible mechanistic roles in srna regulation in bacteria. a possible non-catalytic role of ybey could be that it binds a seed rna and subsequently influences the interaction of that seed with its target mrna or with other proteins. a possible catalytic role of ybey could be that it participates in the degradation of the target mrna and/or the srna.

a particular structural characteristic of ybey is also of potential interest with respect to its possible roles in srna regulation. both the mid domain of ago and rnase e have a seed-binding site that is constrained at the 5′-end of the seed rna and, in fact, both particularly recognize the 5′-phosphate of the rna seed  <cit> . in contrast, the rna binding site of ybey is an open channel  <cit> . although our modeling studies suggest that ybey could bind a short seed rna and even recognize a 5′-phosphate, the nature of the ybey structure suggests that it could potentially interact with a seed sequence that is internal to the srna. since some seed sequences of srna are internal and thus are not expected to end with a 5′-phosphate  <cit> , ybey might possibly play a particularly important role in their regulatory action.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our study places ybey in the centre of srna-mediated gene regulation in bacterial genomes. our study also offers mechanistic insights into regulatory basis of response of e. coli to hu stress. along with demonstrating the role of ybey, this study places srna pathway at the center of cellular response to oxidative stress caused by exposure of cells to hu.

