BACKGROUND
phagocytosis and killing of microorganisms by phagocytes form an essential part of our innate immune system. the contact between the phagocyte and its prey triggers signaling to multiple intracellular events including cytoskeletal rearrangement, membrane traffic, and cytokine and chemokine responses . phagocytosis is important not only for killing of microorganisms, but also as a link between innate and acquired immunity by enhancing antigen presentation by dendritic cells  <cit> .

most knowledge regarding the maturation of a nascent phagosome into an antimicrobial phagosome comes from the study of macrophages. in neutrophils the process differs sufficiently as to still leave many questions unanswered  <cit> . in the neutrophil, granule-phagosome fusion is an integral part of phagosome maturation and a requirement for killing of ingested microorganisms. accordingly, some intracellular pathogens have evolved means to disturb the normal maturation of the phagosome  <cit> . for instance, streptococcus pyogenes bacteria of the m <dig> serotype can survive phagocytosis by neutrophils  <cit> , and have been shown to interfere with the fusion of azurophilic granules with the phagosome  <cit> .

techniques for the isolation and analysis of phagosomes are important experimental tools in phagocytosis research. current methods are dependent mainly on density-based ultracentrifugation as introduced by wetzel and korn in  <dig>  <cit> . such separation principles have been applied to latex bead-containing phagosomes from macrophages  <cit> , and dictyostelium  <cit> . l체hrmann et al. used a similar technique to isolate bacteria-containing phagosomes  <cit> . however, using centrifugation, isolating phagosomes containing real bacteria is a lengthy and cumbersome process  <cit> . introducing novel approaches, russell et al. used iron-containing latex beads  <cit> , and also performed magnetic isolation of mycobacteria-containing phagosomes using pre-loaded iron-dextran  <cit> .

in this paper we present a method where the attachment of magnetic particles to the prey allows rapid and gentle isolation of bacteria-containing phagosomes.

RESULTS
overview of method
the methods presented in this paper introduce refinements and novel approaches to several existing and proven techniques. the goal was an easy, rapid, gentle and generally applicable method for studying phagosome maturation in neutrophils. our approach is summarized in figure  <dig>  the first step was to covalently attach very small magnetite particles to the surface of the bacteria. for this, we developed two different protocols; one primarily used with live bacteria and the other with dead. bacteria made magnetic can be opsonized and bacterial aggregates can be removed by gentle centrifugation. once the bacteria are ready for use, the phagocytes, in this case differentiated hl- <dig> cells, are harvested, washed and resuspended in cell medium. to achieve synchronized phagocytosis, the bacteria are then presented to the cells by a short centrifugation, which may be repeated to increase interaction efficiency . after the presentation step, non-internalized bacteria are removed and a chase period at 37째c follows before the suspension is put on ice. in the cold, the buffer is changed to an isotonic sucrose buffer containing protease inhibitors and dnase. this solution is put inside a bomb cylinder and subjected to nitrogen cavitation in order to disrupt the cells. phagosomes are then retrieved magnetically. phagosome integrity is determined by staining with both fluorescent annexin v and an anti-prey antibody , as positive and negative phagosome markers, respectively. finally, phagosomes are analyzed by standard methods such as immunofluorescence microscopy, flow cytometry, or immunoblot.

preparing magnetic bacteria
central to the method is the ability to make bacteria susceptible to a magnetic field. for studies of phagosomal maturation, it is essential that this process will not change the bacteria in a way that influences the host cell-bacteria interaction. covalent linkage of nanometer-scale superparamagnetic particles at a proper ratio should satisfy these conditions. in the following, we refer to bacteria artificially made superparamagnetic as "magnetic bacteria". figure 2b shows an electron micrograph of a magnetic bacterium. the magnetic particles form clusters at the bacterial surface. these are also visible using phase contrast and differential interference contrast light microscopy, see top in figure 2b. to obtain particles of sufficiently small size we have taken advantage of the fact that commercial magnetite particle preparations may have a wide size distribution. by centrifugation it is possible to remove larger particles and aggregates. we developed two different approaches for the covalent attachment of magnetite particles to the surface of bacteria. both are based on protocols from bangs laboratories and are appropriate for beads/particles that have either amino or carboxyl groups on their surface. it should be possible to adapt the method for use with other commercially available or custom-made particles. initial development of the method was performed using the amino variant, where glutaraldehyde is used as a cross-linking agent to form pentyl bridges between the particles and the bacterial surface, see top in figure 2a. we obtained indirect evidence that the coupling procedure does not obstruct protein interactions at the bacterial surface to any significant degree. wild-type m <dig> streptococci have a tendency to form aggregates due to the presence of m and h surface proteins, and this characteristic was retained after the bacteria had been subjected to our particle attachment protocol. likewise, the lesser aggregation ability of a mutant strain lacking these surface proteins remained unchanged after particle coupling. after coupling, most of the bound particles remained attached to the bacteria after vortexing, needle-assisted shearing, or water-bath sonication.

conjugation of magnetite particles to live bacteria was also performed, in this case using magnetite particles that exposed carboxyl groups. with carbodiimide as a carboxyl activating agent, carboxyl groups will react with primary amine groups to form peptide bonds, see bottom in figure 2a. using a water soluble form of carbodiimide, conjugation of the carboxyl magnetite particles to the primary amine groups of live s. pyogenes bacteria was achieved within one hour, in ordinary pbs buffer. in control experiments using carboxyl magnetite particles that had not been activated with the carbodiimide a much lower degree of particle binding to the bacteria was observed. as indicated by a fluorescent viability probe, bacterial membrane integrity was unaffected by the conjugation procedure, see figure 2c. however, compared with the glutaraldehyde protocol, the particles appeared to be somewhat less resistant to dislodging from the bacteria by water-bath sonication or needle-assisted shearing.

magnetic purification
having established efficient conjugation protocols, the magnetic bacteria were next used in a biological system. neutrophils or differentiated hl- <dig> cells showed no difference in the interaction/uptake of modified bacteria in comparison with normal bacteria . after phagocytosis, nitrogen cavitation was used to disrupt the cells. figure  <dig> illustrates this and the effectiveness of magnetic separation. figure 3a shows intact cells that have phagocytosed bacteria, and figure 3b shows the sample appearance after nitrogen cavitation. figure 3c shows the retrieved material after a single magnetic purification.

phagosome integrity
to show the isolation of intact phagosomes, fluorescence microscopy was used. annexin v binds to phosphatidyl serine, a lipid normally present in the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane and in the outer leaflet of the phagosomal membrane. therefore, annexin v can be used as a marker for phagosomes. the impermeability of phospholipid membranes to most large molecules, such as antibodies, can also be utilized. to exemplify, an anti-human antibody can be used as a marker for non-sealed phagosomes and free bacteria when bacteria have been opsonized with human igg. by taking a small sample of isolated phagosomes, adding calcium, alexa 488-conjugated annexin v, and cy3-labeled anti-human fab fragments; the yield of intact phagosomes was determined, see figure 4a. any labeled anti-prey antibody can substitute for anti-human fab fragments. this approach is quick and simple, and provides valuable information about the quality of the phagosome sample. the quantitation presented in figure 4b shows that a substantial fraction of the isolated material consisted of intact or semi-intact phagosomes.

phagosome analysis
speed, ease of use, and the ability to use standard methods for analysis are the benefits of magnetic phagosome isolation. a particular advantage of the magnetic approach is that the isolated material can be concentrated in a gentle and rapid way. this is convenient for both immunofluorescence microscopy and western blot. figure 5a shows cd <dig> on isolated phagosomes. free bacteria and semi-intact phagosomes can be identified by the use of an anti-prey antibody. western blot analysis  of phagosomes shows that only the active form of myeloperoxidase  is present in isolated phagosomes. since this form of mpo is normally present in azurophilic granules, this shows that delivery of azurophilic granule content to the phagosomes has taken place. in contrast, one of the mpo proforms  <cit>  is notably absent from the phagosomes. the fact that prompo is normally present in the synthetic apparatus of the cells suggests that our isolated phagosomes are of high purity, in particular lacking er/golgi contamination.

discussion
several important human pathogens can use various mechanisms to manipulate the maturation of phagosomes. understanding the dynamic host-pathogen interactions occurring inside host cells is not a trivial challenge, and there is a need to develop novel technical solutions to be able to better study phagosome maturation.

the most commonly used technique for phagosome maturation studies is whole-cell fluorescence microscopy, but its results can be difficult to analyze and quantitate  <cit> . this is especially true for smaller-sized cells, such as neutrophils. transfection with fluorescent proteins in neutrophils is not an easy experimental approach either, since these cells are terminally differentiated and have a short life span. our magnetic method was not developed to analyze intact cells, but rather for the study of isolated phagosomes by microscopy, flow cytometry, or biochemical assays.

so far, the techniques most often used to purify phagosomes are based on differential ultracentrifugation of latex beads  <cit> . using this inert "model prey" allows investigation of model phagosome maturation, and many important findings have been made using this approach. however, the long centrifugation time is a problem when investigating dynamic processes such as phagosome maturation, even if performed at 4째c. speed and ease of use are obvious benefits of using magnetism as a selection principle, since separation steps are performed in terms of minutes rather than hours.

the use of magnetism as a tool in cell biology is not new, and has been successfully employed in cell separation  <cit>  as well as in protein chemistry  <cit> . using a different approach, magnetic isolation of bacteria-containing phagosomes has previously been performed by pethe et al.  <cit> . our approach differs in several aspects from their protocol. most importantly, since our magnetic phagosome purification technique does not rely on sequential endocytosis, i.e. the iron preloading followed by phagocytosis of the actual prey, isolation of early or maturation-halted phagosomes is possible and does not require fusion of other endocytic compartments with the forming phagosome. another benefit of the protocol is that, with the exception of the disruption step, it is readily adaptable for automation using commercially available robot systems. this is especially true for the magnetic separation steps where the standard microtiter format is already in use. the method, as described in the present publication, is a further development of a separation protocol that was published earlier as part of a book chapter  <cit> . besides being optimized with respect to parameters such as cell disruption, phagocytosis, and centrifugation speeds, several other major improvements have been added. these include an entirely new protocol for the attachment of magnetic particles to live bacteria and the introduction of steps to minimize the influence of bacterial aggregation. also, a quick and easy assay to monitor the integrity of each phagosome preparation has been added to the protocol. taken together, these refinements have greatly increased the reproducibility of the method, and also increased the obtainable phagosome yield and purity.

the efficient removal of contaminants is difficult to achieve in most methods of phagosome isolation  <cit> , and in this respect our method is probably no exception. particularly for biochemical analysis, purity is critically important. in our experience, the most critical steps in magnetic phagosome isolation are efficient presentation and phagocytosis, removal of non-internalized bacteria, and efficient and controlled cell breakage. for magnetic separation, purity largely relies on the effectiveness of the cell disruption. therefore, optimization of nitrogen cavitation parameters, such as pressure, equilibration time and cell density, is essential. also, as pointed out by l체hrmann et al., degradation of dna by the addition of endonuclease improves the yield during purification of phagosomes  <cit> . how our protocol compares to other techniques in terms of purity remains to be demonstrated.

the data presented here is based on the use of streptococci as phagocytic prey, but it should be possible to apply the method to other types of prey as well, independently of size, shape or density. in our experiments, phagocytosis was performed by differentiated hl- <dig> cells, but human neutrophils or other phagocytic cells, purified according to standard methods  <cit> , may also be used, without modification of the magnetic isolation protocol.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we present a method whereby the use of magnetic particles makes it possible to magnetically isolate phagosomes containing any type of prey.

