BACKGROUND
cgh  is a molecular cytogenetic method to detect chromosomal imbalances  <cit> . this technology has been widely used to study genomic imbalances with prognostic and therapeutic relevance in a variety of different diseases including cancer and mental disorders .

for cgh, test dna  and reference  dna are labelled with different fluorochromes and co-hybridised onto metaphase chromosomes from normal cells. test and reference dna compete for binding sites, with binding probabilities depending on the abundance of the respective dna. when hybridising the two differently labelled dna to a normal metaphase spread, imbalances can be detected as colour changes of the chromosomes. quantitative measurements of the colour ratio profiles along each chromosome yields the dna copy number differences between sample and reference dna. digital image processing and analysis of profiles is usually performed within commercially available cgh analysis software.

traditionally, cgh profiles have been classified according to the international system for human cytogenetic nomenclature   <cit> . iscn is a formal language for describing dna copy number changes, amongst others. it covers low level gains , high level gain  and losses . a loss of the chromosomal band 4p <dig> is e.g. specified as "rev ish dim". the transformation of cgh profiles into the iscn nomenclature is a tedious process that requires a trained molecular cytogeneticist.

here, we describe our programme cgh-profiler, which circumvents the iscn nomenclature by automatically assigning a median copy number ratio to each chromosomal band thus allowing for an automatic detection of losses, gains and high-level gains.

the program can also be used to analyse data from the more recently introduced technique called comparative expressed sequence hybridisation   <cit> . cesh reveals gene expression patterns according to chromosomal locations in a similar manner as cgh detects copy number changes. in brief, reverse transcribed test and reference rna are differentially labelled and co-hybridised to normal metaphase chromosomes. the resolution of cesh is low compared to microarray gene expression arrays but no prior sequence information of genes or cloning is required. furthermore, cesh can be performed by using existing cgh / fluorescence in situ hybridisation expertise, equipment and software. thus it appears that the cesh data format is appropriate for cgh-profiler.

implementation
the program includes the following processing steps:

• conversion of the cgh profile values to a meta format independent of the used cgh system

• profile cleansing, consistency check of the chromosomal length

• interpolation to a given length  by using cubic  splines

• calculation of the median copy number change from all metaphases of a given case

• user defined exclusion of certain regions 

• assignment of median copy numbers to chromosomal bands

profile transformation to a meta format
the cgh profile values have to be exported from a commercial cgh system. irrespective of the cgh system, the exported profile values are then transformed to a meta format using a perl script. a resulting meta format file includes all metaphase profiles for all chromosomes of all cases. each metaphase profile can have a different length.

the parsing and transformation of cgh profile values from two popular cgh systems, namely cytovision  and isis cgh , are supported. profiles from other cgh system vendors may be integrated using adapted perl scripts.

consistency check
a consistency check of all metaphases is performed to exclude wrongly assigned metaphases. we exclude metaphases from further analysis if the difference between its length and the mean length of the respective type of chromosome is larger than a user defined threshold . the consistency check may be switched off .

interpolation
the remaining metaphases are interpolated to a given length. this is a prerequisite for a consistent merge of all measurements. we used cubic akima and fritsch/carlson splines  for this interpolation implemented in the matpack library  <cit> . the number of interpolation points can be defined by the user, the predefined value is  <dig>  the predefined value of  <dig> is especially useful for applying a wavelet transform.

merging
from all metaphases of a given case and chromosome we calculate the median or mean copy number at each interpolation point. the choice of median or mean is optional to the user.

exclusion of bands
the cgh measurements of some chromosomal regions  are not reliable  <cit> , especially after pcr amplification of the probes. the measurements of certain regions should therefore not be used for an automatic analysis. we excluded all centromeres, some telomeric regions, chromosome  <dig> and the sex chromosomes. however, the user can specify all critical regions in a configuration file. the ratios of all excluded regions can be marked as na or balanced.

assignment of median copy numbers to chromosomal bands
the mean or median profile of each case and chromosome can be mapped to an iscn-400-ideogram without subbands  <cit>  so that a single mean value is assigned to each chromosomal band. according to the definition of the ideogram the profile values are combined to a mean value for each chromosomal band. the predefined mapping file is based on the iscn-400-ideogramm and a resolution of  <dig> interpolation points. e.g., band 1p <dig> is located from 1/ <dig> to 13/ <dig> on an ideogram. the mean value of this band is therefore the mean of the profile values  <dig> .., <dig>  this data representation is the starting point for a further analysis. using threshold values the median copy numbers can be readily translated into semantic expressions, namely losses , gains , high level gains  and balanced.

RESULTS
cgh is a well-established and still widely used method. more than  <dig> new cgh studies were published in  <dig> and referenced in medline.

here, we presented the program cgh-profiler that allows the input of profile values from different commercial cgh systems and transforms these values into a format that can be readily used for a quantitative analysis. notably, our program circumvents the widely used semantic notation in the iscn standard. thus, it provides a basis for a more accurate and reproducible interpretation of data from large-scale genomic aberration screens.

we compared losses and gains automatically detected by cgh-profiler with those described by conventional cgh analysis  for two data sets  and found a high degree of accordance. notably, conventional cgh evaluation often characterises large regions as gain or loss whereas the ratio value as determined by the programme cgh-profiler is only altered in part of the entire region.

data mining of cgh profiles requires a matrix representation of cgh profiles. an alternative to our approach is an iscn-to-matrix parser  <cit> . this is useful for large repositories of cgh studies . however, a direct transformation of profile values to a matrix representation is more efficient.

the program cgh-profiler has only been used for cgh-analysis in humans so far. an extension to cgh profiles in other species can be easily achieved by adopting the mapping file used for band assignment. cgh profiler can also be used to analyse comparative expressed sequence hybridisation  data.

CONCLUSIONS
cgh-profiler assigns to each chromosomal band a median copy number ratio by importing and processing data from different cgh system vendors. data analysis of these continuous variables is much more efficient compared to the semantic descriptions defined by iscn. cgh-profiler supports therefore the data mining process of cgh and cesh data and enhances the use of mathematical functions  on cgh and cesh profiles.

abbreviations
cgh-comparative genomic hybridisation

cesh comparative expressed sequence hybridisation

authors' contributions
sj and fs developed the method. fs and re drafted the paper. bt and fs implemented the method. re supervised the study. all authors prepared, read and approved the final manuscript.

availability and requirements
the program cgh-profiler is written in c++ while the preceding data transformation is done in perl. it is available under the gpl-license for non-commercial purposes.

-project name: cgh-profiler

-project home page: 

-operating systems: unix

-programming language: c++, perl

-license: gnu gpl

-restrictions to use by non-academics: on request

