BACKGROUND
the animal taxon rotifera comprises free-living and commensalic microscopic species of aquatic habitats that are traditionally grouped into the three subtaxa bdelloidea, monogononta and seisonidea  <cit> . bdelloids  inhabit freshwater, are capable of anhydrobiosis and reproduce strictly by parthenogenesis. monogononts  live in limnic, brackish and marine waters and have a lifecycle with alternating phases of parthenogenetic and sexual reproduction. thirdly, at least two of the hitherto three described species belonging to seisonidea are epibionts on marine crustaceans of the genus nebalia  <cit> . though bdelloidea, monogononta and seisonidea are subsumed as rotifera or rotatoria, the eponymous rotatory organ or corona, a seemingly rotating assembly of cilia at the anterior end of the animal, is absent in seisonidea. for this and other reasons bdelloidea and monogononta are often regarded as sistergroups of a taxon named eurotatoria  <cit> . in contrast to bdelloidea, monogononta and seisonidea, the acanthocephala are obligatory endoparasites with a complicated lifecycle. their definite hosts are vertebrates, while their intermediate hosts are insects, chilopods and crustaceans . along with the endoparasitic life cycle, the acanthocephalan subtaxa share a plethora of derived morphological characters  so that the monophyly of acanthocephala as a whole has never been debated. moreover, the grouping of acanthocephala, bdelloidea, monogononta and seisonidea into the taxon syndermata is widely accepted due to special features in epidermal and sperm ultrastructure , as well as congruent results from molecular approaches  <cit> . it is further undisputed that syndermata are part of a more comprehensive monophylum called gnathifera  <cit> . on the other hand, the phylogenetic position of syndermata beyond gnathifera as well as the relationships among the syndermatan subtaxa acanthocephala, bdelloidea, monogononta and seisonidea are still unresolved. so far, five competing hypotheses on the internal phylogeny of syndermata have been suggested . the lemniscea hypothesis goes back to lorenzen  <cit>  and favors a sister group relationship of bdelloids and acanthocephalans, with the monogononta and seisonidea placed basally to the lemniscea . morphological evidence for such grouping has been inferred from two lateral intrusions in the neck region and a retractable anterior body section in acanthocephala and bdelloidea  <cit> . the lemniscea hypothesis received additional support from 16s rrna, 18s rrna, 28s rrna, cytochrome c oxidase subunit  <dig>  and histone h <dig> data  <cit> . the second hypothesis suggests a sistergroup relationship of monogononta and bdelloidea  and of seisonidea and acanthocephala  and is herein called eurotatoria+pararotatoria hypothesis . besides presumed eurotatorian apomorphies such as the already mentioned corona, the eurotatoria+pararotatoria hypothesis is based on ultrastructural peculiarities that have been interpreted as synapomorphies of seisonidea and acanthocepahala . additional support for the monophyly of pararotatoria came from partial 18s rrna data  <cit>  as well as from a combined dataset of 18s rrna sequences, heat shock gene sequences , and morphological characters  <cit> . the third hypothesis reflects the classical view of monophyletic rotifera  and eurotatoria  and proposes acanthocephala as the sistergroup of rotifera . this classical concept has been formulated based on specific features of toe morphology, sensory and masticatory apparatus in rotifera and eurotatoria, respectively  <cit> , and was supported by 18s rrna data  <cit> . the fourth hypothesis has been proposed on the basis of hsp <dig> sequences, and groups acanthocephala and eurotatoria with exclusion of seisonidea  <cit>  . underlying the fourth hypothesis, the absence of acrosomal structures might represent a synapomorphy of eurotatoria and acanthocephala  <cit> . according to the fifth hypothesis, bdelloidea, seisonidea, and acanthocephala form a monophylum for which the name hemirotifera has been proposed . the hemirotifera hypothesis has been inferred from a combined dataset of molecular  and morphological characters  <cit> . this survey of competing hypotheses demonstrates that the question of phylogenetic relationships within syndermata and therewith of the evolution of the acanthocephalan endoparasitism is closely connected to the more basal question of monophyly of eurotatoria.

in the present study we analyse the phylogenetic position of syndermata within the spiralian clade as well as the phylogenetic relations among the syndermatan subtaxa. we particularly focus on the question whether eurotatoria are monophyletic and – if not – whether bdelloids or monogononts are more closely related to acanthocephalans. as ribosomal proteins are favorable tools for metazoan molecular phylogenetic analyses  <cit>  and easy to obtain from est libraries, we compiled a phylogenomic dataset comprising  <dig> ribosomal proteins. to this end, we generated est libraries for one monogonont  and two acanthocephalans  and sequenced  <dig> – <dig>  ests per library. the new sequences were complemented with ortholog data from public databases for the monogonont b. plicatilis, the bdelloid p. roseola and  <dig> additional metazoan taxa. data of seisonidea have not been included in the present analysis as it is extremely difficult to obtain sufficient material for the preparation of a cdna library. as a beneficial side effect, the present tree reconstruction cannot be disturbed by the observed long branch leading to representatives of seisonidea .

RESULTS
sequence analyses and ribosomal protein alignment
est sequencing was performed for three syndermatan species and complemented by sequences from public databases . a dataset containing the coding sequences of  <dig> ribosomal proteins was extracted, and derived amino acid sequences were concatenated. after cleaning the raw data from ambiguously aligned positions, the final alignment had a length of  <dig>  amino acids. fifteen to  <dig> species were sampled per protein type, resulting in a taxon coverage ranging from  <dig> to 100% outside syndermata , and  <dig> to 89% within syndermata, compared to the vertebrate reference. given the length of the complete dataset the minimum coverage within the syndermatan sample  still represents  <dig>  amino acid positions which is a considerable increase in data compared to previous analyses of syndermatan phylogeny . the total coverage of acanthocephala, however, is much higher than suggested by the e. truttae data alone, due to the additional 66% sequence coverage in p. laevis .

for brachionus and philodina the number of ribosomal proteins found in our est datasets is shown outside brackets, the number in the combined datasets is within brackets. a complete list of taxa and ribosomal proteins used in this analysis can be found in additional file  <dig> 

absolute number of amino acid positions used and relative coverage of the sequence alignment for the four syndermatan representatives analyzed in the present study.

likelihood mapping analysis determined a strong phylogenetic signal in the data. in detail,  <dig> % of the quartets were fully resolved and none of the quartet-trees showed a star-like topology . furthermore, we found no evidence for horizontal gene transfer in the bdelloid dataset, applying the test statistics proposed by gladyshev et al.  <cit> : as to be expected for ribosomal genes, the so-called alien index was <  <dig> for each protein. we therefore consider our dataset a sound basis for assessing the phylogenetic position of syndermata within spiralia, and for answering the question of eurotatorian monophyly.

phylogenetic reconstruction
maximum likelihood and bayesian phylogenetic inference consistently support a monophyletic origin of spiralia, although with partly moderate support values  . interestingly, only the phylobayes tree depicts the widely accepted monophylum ecdysozoa  so that bayesian inference might provide more reliable results than the maximum likelihood approaches employed, given the present data . irrespective of this detail, all three tree reconstruction methods yield maximum support for a monophyletic origin of b. plicatilis, p. roseola, e. truttae and p. laevis and, thus, for the monophyletic origin of the four syndermatan species covered by the present dataset . within the spiralian clade, syndermata either group with platyhelminthes   or with a clade comprising platyhelminthes, bryozoa, mollusca and annelida  . remarkably, none of the tree reconstruction methods supports a sister group relationship of monogononta and bdelloidea. instead, bdelloidea consistently appear more closely related to acanthocephala than to monogononta . the paraphyly of eurotatoria is further corroborated by results from hypothesis testing. thereafter, a grouping of bdelloidea+acanthocephala is much more likely than the alternatives monogononta+bdelloidea and monogononta+acanthocephala . final evidence for the robustness of the present analysis comes from testing for the effect of missing data in the full-length dataset on the results of tree reconstruction  <cit> . thus, the internal syndermatan phylogeny did not change when tree reconstruction was carried out on the basis of a shorter dataset  in which all ribosomal protein sequences had orthologs in acanthocephalans, bdelloids and monogononts. support for a grouping of bdelloidea and acanthocephala was even higher when underlying this shorter dataset . taken together our data suggest i) syndermata being spiralia with a close phylogenetic relation to platyhelminthes and ii) the paraphyly of eurotatoria, with iii) bdelloidea being more closely related to acanthocephala than to monogononta.



results from hypotheses testing based on the three alternative acanthocephala-sistergroup relationships covered by the present approach using the expected likelihood weight  test.

discussion
the phylogenetic position of syndermata within spiralia has been described previously based on molecular data such as 18s rrna and 16srrna  <cit> , 28s rrna and 18s rrna  <cit> , ribosomal proteins  <cit>  and on morphological characters like spiral cleavage, filiform sperm without accessory centriole and the subepidermal cerebral ganglion  <cit> . likewise, a close phylogenetic relationship of syndermata and platyhelminthes within the spiralian clade agrees well with results from previous molecular and morphological approaches on metazoan phylogeny . on the other hand, conflicting results from the present tree reconstructions indicate that even the analysis of up to  <dig> ribosomal proteins from up to  <dig> species cannot settle the question of the definite phylogenetic relationship of syndermata and platyhelminthes. in agreement with dunn et al.  <cit>  we recommend an enlarged taxon sampling and the incorporation of more closely related groups such as gnathostomulids and micrognathozoans for resolving the question of the sistergroup relationships of syndermata and gnathifera, respectively.

in contrast to the still contradictory results regarding the phylogenetic position of syndermata within spiralia, our tree reconstructions consistently depict bdelloidea as more closely related to acanthocephala than to monogononta, though with partly moderate support . as the moderate support values have been calculated on the basis of the full-length dataset, they might be due to missing data in one or more of the syndermatan lineages sampled. this is at least suggested by the higher statistical support for a clade bdelloidea+acanthocephala that could be inferred from the shorter dataset without these missing data . regardless of differences in the support, analyses of both datasets lead to the same topology among the syndermatan representatives, whichever algorithm was employed. we take this high nodal stability  as evidence for reliability of the found grouping of acanthocephala and bdelloidea . the future incorporation of est data from gnathostomulida and micrognathozoa, and especially their use as outgroup, will be necessary to yield improved nodal support for the implicit paraphyly of eurotatoria.

as another note of caution, one has to be aware that the present results as well as consistent results from more limited datasets  <cit>  could in principle be influenced by an acceleration of sequence evolution on the branch of the only monogonont sampled, i.e. b. plicatilis. it is thus conceivable that a deviating mode of sequence evolution in b. plicatilis  triggered an attraction of the bdelloid and acanthocephalan branches. on the other hand, this is not very likely as the tree reconstruction methods employed herein  are relatively robust to long-branch attraction. moreover, eurotatoria appeared paraphyletic in previous analyses comprising several monogononts  <cit>  which cannot be explained by long-branch attraction due to an accelerated sequence evolution in b. plicatilis. we therefore do not believe that a faster sequence evolution along the b. plicatilis branch is causative for the found clustering of bdelloidea and acanthocephala.

the present evidence for a paraphyly of eurotatoria is in apparent conflict with three out of the five competing hypotheses on the intra-syndermatan phylogeny, i.e. the eurotatoria+pararotatoria hypothesis , the classical rotifera+acanthocephala hypothesis , and the eurotatoria+acanthocephala hypothesis . at first sight, the observed grouping of bdelloidea and acanthocephala  rather supports the predictions of the lemniscea hypothesis of lorenzen . however, considering previous evidence from morphological  <cit>  and molecular data  <cit>  as well as from approaches combining both types of data  <cit> , it is still possible that seisonidea represent the true acanthocephalan sister taxon. however, it cannot be ruled out that seisonidea are the sistergroup of bdelloidea, pararotatoria or monogononta+acanthocephala .

given the uncertain phylogenetic position of seisonidea within syndermata, one has to be cautious when inferring the evolution of morphological characters. on the other hand, the well supported closer relation of bdelloidea to acanthocephala, with exclusion of monogononta , allows for some conclusions regarding the evolution of morphological characters that are not bound to the position of seisonidea within syndermata. it is thus very likely that the rotatory organ or corona underwent a  reduction before the separation of acanthocephala. a likewise reduction of a newly emerged character  has for example been described in stick insects . therefore the reduction of the rotatory organ only a few splits after its emergence at the base or within the syndermatan tree is not as unlikely as it might appear at first sight. another implication of the grouping of acanthocephala and bdelloidea is that a retractable anterior end – whether in the shape of a rostrum in bdelloidea or as a hooked proboscis in acanthocephala – probably evolved before the separation of the acanthocephalan stem lineage as well. the reduction of the corona as well as the evolution of a retractable anterior end can easily be explained by different life-styles and patterns of locomotion in the syndermatan subtaxa: free living/free swimming in monogononta; leech-like creeping/free living in bdelloidea; leech-like creeping/epibiontic in seisonidea; reduced motility/endoparasitic in acanthocephala . particularly the early evolution of a retractable anterior end might have represented a key event leading to the later evolution of the acanthocephalan endoparasitism, given the crucial role of the proboscis in the anchoring of adult acanthocephalans to the definitive hosts' intestinal wall  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
based on a dataset comprising sequences from up to  <dig> ribosomal proteins of up to  <dig> species, we provide evidence for the paraphyly of eurotatoria. irrespective of the tree reconstruction method and dataset used  we found bdelloidea to be more closely related to acanthocephala than to monogononta. although data for seisonidea have not been included in the dataset, the present findings allow for the rejection of three  out of the presently five competing hypothesis regarding the phylogeny within syndermata. on the other hand, additional data are needed to determine the actual acanthocephalan sistergroup . irrespective of these limitations it is very likely that a  reduction of the rotatory organ or corona occurred before the separation of acanthocephala. likewise, a retractable anterior end most likely emerged before the separation of the acanthocephalan stem lineage. considering the importance of the proboscis for the attachment of acanthocephalans to the definite host's intestinal wall, the latter step can be regarded as a key event towards the evolution of acanthocephalan endoparasitism.

