BACKGROUND
heterosis, or hybrid vigor, is the phenomenon by which the offspring of crosses of individuals from compatible but genetically distinct populations of the same or different species show enhanced characteristics valuable to breeders  <cit> . increases in fertility, biomass production, grain number and total yield have been described  <cit> . this effect has been known for a long time among breeders, and scientific descriptions date back to charles darwin  <cit> . one important aspect of heterosis is the difficulty of fixing the favorable properties of the hybrids into a true breeding line, making repeated crosses from inbred lines the most practicable method of harnessing the benefits of heterosis. hence the study of heterosis is of economic as well as biological significance. the phenomenon has long been utilized in the breeding of crops such as maize  <cit>  and is also known to be important in natural evolution, through inbreeding depression. recent progress in understanding the underlying genetic and metabolic factors have provided breeders with methods to predict levels of heterosis  <cit> . with the advent of cheaper genome-wide profiling technologies, both at the rna and proteomic level, a more quantitative picture of heterosis is emerging, with multiple studies reporting regulation of gene expression and protein levels that differs between parents and hybrids  <cit> .

nevertheless, heterosis remains difficult to predict in the absence of complete metabolic or transcriptomic profiles: not all divergent crosses produce heterosis and there is little correlation between heterotic effects observed for different biological traits. for some traits genetic distance is not a good a predictor of heterosis  <cit> .

the genetic mechanisms underlying heterosis are still controversial. in the first half of the twentieth century several hypotheses were put forward: according to the dominance model  <cit> , heterozygosity is advantageous because hybrids receive a beneficial dominant alleles  for a greater number of genes than either of their parents. in contrast, the model of over-dominance suggests that the presence of heterozygosity at certain loci is advantageous in itself  <cit> . according to the third model, pseudo-over-dominance, heterosis occurs if the hybrid inherits reciprocal linked pairs of beneficial dominant and harmful recessive alleles from its parents  <cit> . in this case, the advantage is conferred by the presence of both dominant alleles, but due to linkage, the dominant alleles cannot be readily recombined. in breeding, cases of pseudo-over-dominance will generate a very similar segregation pattern to over-dominance  <cit> . in addition, there may be epistatic effects  <cit> , where the effect of an allele at one locus depends on the allele or alleles present at other loci, e.g. an allele improves fitness only if a certain other allele is present at another locus.

these models are non-exclusive and all four mechanisms may contribute to heterosis  <cit> . their relative importance remains the subject of intense discussion and may differ between organisms  <cit> . whilst evidence suggests that all the above genetic models may play a role in heterosis, they may not provide a full explanation of the phenomenon. recently, some researchers have suggested putting them aside entirely, in favor of analyzing the quantitative traits that underlie heterosis using systems biology approaches, focusing on regulatory interactions and multigenic effects  <cit> .

accordingly, andorf and colleagues proposed a network model of heterosis which they initially presented in a simulation study and then successfully validated using experimental data  <cit> . their main hypothesis is that hybrids perform better than parents because there are more regulatory interactions in the hybrid networks representing the individuals than in those of the parent and this additional complexity increases adaptability in changing environments. they define the networks based on partial correlations between experimentally measured gene expression and metabolite levels and they demonstrate that these networks are more densely interconnected in hybrids. such findings relate the topology of the network  to heterosis.

simpler models considering the role of macromolecular complexes and dominant negative interactions have also been proposed as explanations for heterosis  <cit> .

unfortunately, large scale experimental studies over evolutionarily relevant timescales and with detailed network reconstruction for each individual are not feasible  <cit> . we have therefore produced a realistic simulation of such a study in which we aimed to reproduce the following well-studied experimental observations associated with heterosis  <cit> :the offspring of crosses of individuals from separate populations perform better than inbred offspring in several quantitative traits, i.e. they show heterosis.

the heterotic effect increases with increasing genetic divergence of the parents.

this increase occurs up to a limit after which divergence is too great and parents are not able to produce viable offspring.

the heterotic effect cannot be fixed in a genetic lineage by repeated intercrossing of heterotic hybrids.



inspired by literature on gene regulatory networks   <cit>  and evolutionary systems simulations  <cit> , we simulated evolution and hybridization of grns using boolean networks. boolean network modeling was first applied to the study of grns in the 1960s  <cit>  and has since been used extensively for the simulation of networks in molecular biology  <cit> . kauffman’s approach considered each cell to be represented by a random network and associated the attractors of the boolean network to the different cell-types, thus explaining how a single genotype  could lead to multiple phenotypes . recently, a three-gene boolean regulatory network was used to simulate a genotype-phenotype relationship in a study of multi-functionality in biological systems, demonstrating the potential of the framework  <cit> .

in our approach we similarly modeled the genome and regulatory interactions within an individual as a boolean network. the dynamics of this network, that is the changes of the network node states, represents the regulatory response of the network to environmental inputs, while the final stable state reached by the network – its attractor – represents the phenotype. the boolean model assumes that a gene is either on or off and that the quantitative changes seen in real world grns can be produced by the state changes generated by the regulatory interactions. we believe this is a reasonable simplifying assumption and the boolean logic used to simulate the dynamics of our networks can reproduce important characteristics of biological regulatory networks and allow the simulation of sufficient individuals to study evolutionary processes within reasonable computational time. we were able to model the evolution of reasonable size networks  in each individual of a population and allowed the population to evolve over thousands of generations. the quantitative fitness score that was used to select individuals that contributed to the next generation depended on their ability to respond to several sets of simulated environmental factors.

our simulation was successful in reproducing the four experimental observations outlined above. it was able to generate hybrid vigor for offspring of crosses between populations that had been allowed to diverge for several generations, and it also displayed a dramatic fall in fitness as the genetic distance between parents increased to the point of preventing the formation of viable offspring. we thus recapitulate the results of the model of andorf et al., which showed that there is a maximum level of heterosis that cannot be exceeded by increasing genetic distance between the parents  <cit>  and the related experimental observations that genetic incompatibility can cause reduced fitness of hybrids  <cit> . our model goes beyond this earlier work by demonstrating that hybrid vigor is quickly lost when members of the same heterotic hybrid population are crossed, a well-known biological phenomenon of great consequence for breeders. in addition, the architecture of our networks and our evolutionary algorithm are designed to more closely resemble the evolution of gene regulatory networks found in nature. our model thus allows us to investigate the different mechanisms underlying multigenic heterosis, including epistatic interactions. in summary, by simulating the evolution of gene regulatory networks in response to environmental inputs, we have constructed a tool for the in silico investigation of hybrid vigor and its determining mechanisms.

RESULTS
our model simulates evolution and hybrid formation for diploid organisms, using gene regulatory networks and their response to environmental inputs.

on the individual level, we simulated the genetic and regulatory characteristics of each diploid individual as a boolean network. each phenotype is defined as the regulatory steady state that is reached by a network in response to inputs from outside the network . we calculate fitness as the similarity of the network phenotype  to the ideal phenotype under certain environmental conditions.

in order to prevent the predominance of networks which simply reach the perfect output for a single specific condition, with no advantage in maintaining the regulatory dynamics, we subject each network to three sets of environmental factors , each requiring a specific response. the network fitness is a combined measure of the appropriateness of the responses to each set of environmental factors.

at the population level, we simulate the evolution of a set of individuals  through cycles of mutation, reassortment and selection in a set of specific environments. first, we allow several hundred generations for the population to adapt to the environments. then we duplicate all networks and then let them evolve separately, forming two, initially identical populations that diverge, since they are not allowed to interbreed . for the details of the simulation we refer the reader to the methods section and additional file  <dig> figure  <dig> 
scheme of the evolutionary algorithm and the hybrid formation. the initial network  is duplicated to form the initial population , which evolves over hundreds of generations by mutation, reassortment and selection, to form an adapted population . this population is duplicated, generating two initially identical populations . both populations carry on evolving, but do not interbreed, causing them to diverge  . at regular intervals, individuals are hybridized between the populations and the fitness of the hybrids is measured . the hybrid individuals are then discarded and are not used for further breeding. over time, the two parent populations diverge further  .



population fitness increases stochastically
at the beginning of the simulation the population fitness is close to zero, because the network dynamics of naïve individuals are entirely random. whilst we generate networks to display certain quasi-biological characteristics in their topology - such as a scale-free-like degree distribution  <cit>  and clustering  <cit>  - the state of each node is just as likely to be the correct response to a given set of environmental factors as it is to be the opposite. since fitness is averaged over nodes responding correctly and nodes responding incorrectly, they tend to cancel out in a network that has not undergone adaptation, leading to the observed fitness measure around zero. however, after mutations through evolutionary time, individuals are produced with a response closer to the optimal one. these individuals are selected to produce offspring, which increases the average fitness of the population over time.

as can be seen in figure  <dig>  the population fitness increases through evolutionary time, with a characteristic pattern of punctuated equilibria. this feature of the graph represents the fact that improvements in fitness are brought about by rare but important mutations that produce sudden increases, alternated by periods of more or less constant fitness where only neutral or deleterious mutations occur. the latter are quickly removed from the population by selection, causing them to have little effect on the fitness of the overall population. in the very beginning, all individuals in the population are identical, but during the adaptation period, the diversity increases. this causes the population fitness to become more variable over time in some runs of the simulation.figure  <dig> 
example of a typical adaptation graph, showing three stages. population fitness increased rapidly over the first five generations and more slowly over the next  <dig>  this is a stochastic increase that sometimes occurs in sharp jumps in fitness, reminiscent of punctuated equilibria. after this, the population fitness varied around an equilibrium value for  <dig> generations.



hybrids display higher fitness than intra-population crosses
after the networks have reached a fitness plateau with only infrequent increases in fitness , we duplicate the population and continue the evolution of both copies separately. although the environments of the two populations remain the same, these two sets of individuals start diverging, as there is no genetic exchange between them. the evolutionary algorithm continues on both populations in the same way as before the separation, so fitness increases may still occur in either of the separated populations. every few generations, we compared the fitness of offspring of crosses between individuals of the same population and separate populations, i.e. hybrids. the fitness of forty individuals of each parent population and eighty hybrid individuals was measured and averaged to generate the fitness values shown in figure  <dig> figure  <dig> 
population fitness over time. a) hybrids perform better on average than the separated parent populations for some generations. after a variable number of generations, the fitness of newly formed hybrids collapses and does not recover. b) if hybrid individuals that exhibit heterosis are crossed to each other, the fitness advantage does not persist. instead, the fitness of the offspring of hybrids collapses back to the same level as the parent populations. all fitness values are population averages of  <dig>  or  <dig>  individuals.



as seen in real-world heterosis  <cit> , the hybrid crosses displayed higher fitness than the intra-population ones in most, but not all cases and the amount of heterosis tended to increase through evolutionary time, presumably because the parent populations continued diverging from each other .

the fitness of hybrids collapses after prolonged separation of parent populations
after a variable number of generations of separation between the parent populations, the fitness of the hybrids starts decreasing . this precipitates a rapid collapse in hybrid fitness over the next few  generations. after this, the hybrid fitness remains at a stable level far below the fitness of the parent populations. the time at which this collapse occurs varied greatly, between  <dig> and several hundreds of generations after the separation of the parent populations.

heterosis does not persist when heterotic hybrids are crossed
we tested the fitness of crosses of between hybrids, to establish whether second and subsequent generation hybrids could preserve the increased average fitness. as can be seen in figure 3b, the average fitness was not preserved in the subsequent generations, and instead quickly decayed back to the levels of the original parent populations. this is consistent with what is observed in nature, where heterotic phenotypes cannot be easily fixed into true-breeding lines  <cit> .

categorizing the mechanisms underlying heterosis
dominance and over/under-dominance  involve mechanisms that operate at individual loci, whereas epistasis involves non-additive interaction between loci. in the dominance model, best-parent heterosis  requires the additive effect of dominance at several loci . over-dominance can produce best-parent heterosis even if it is only active at one locus. our algorithm measures the strength of local heterozygosity effects at each heterozygous locus and the strength of epistatic effects for each pair of loci. the simulation allowed us to test the role of these different theoretical mechanisms of heterosis in contributing to fitness.

the results of an example run of the simulation are shown in figure  <dig>  figure 4a shows the fitness performance of the two parent populations and the fitness of hybrids formed between them, while figure 4b and figure 4c respectively show the influence of local heterozygosity mechanisms and epistasis mechanisms on the fitness of the hybrids. local heterozygosity effects are calculated by adding up the fitness effects of individual loci . epistasis effects are calculated by adding up the effect of each combination of two alleles on separate loci . this is only to allow a comparison between the strengths of different local heterozygosity effects or different epistasis effects, and does not allow an absolute estimate of the influence of these mechanisms on fitness. therefore, we speak of ‘relative fitness effects’ in the following.figure  <dig> 
different mechanisms and their impact over time. a) performance of parent populations and hybrids in an example run. the parent populations evolved separately from generation  <dig> onwards. hybrids showed heterosis until generation  <dig> followed by the collapse of fitness in the hybrids. hybridization was performed every  <dig> generations; red and black: average fitness of parent populations, green circles: average fitness of hybrid population b) effect of local heterozygosity mechanisms relative to each other; light blue: over-dominance, orange: dominance, black: under-dominance. c) effect of epistatic mechanisms relative to each other; dark blue: positive epistasis, yellow: negative epistasis, gray: epistatic incompatibility.



relative contributions of local heterozygosity mechanisms to heterosis
figure  <dig> shows data from  <dig> runs of the simulation  for hybrid populations exhibiting heterosis, undergoing fitness collapse, and reaching a low fitness level after the collapse. the randomness of the process causes the collapse to occur very late in some cases . hybridisations were performed at 20-generation intervals.figure  <dig> 
relative effects of heterosis mechanisms on the fitness of hybrids. data of  <dig> runs is pooled. data from each run was shifted so the fitness collapse coincides after the 5th hybridization . a) effects of local heterozygosity mechanisms. b) effect of epistatic mechanisms. please note that only gene pairs were considered for epistasis, allowing multiple counting of effects in cases of epistasis involving several genes. for this reason, epistatic and local heterozygosity mechanisms cannot be directly compared.



we calculated the relative strength of the effects of dominance, over-dominance and under-dominance ; see methods for details on the calculation of each of these effects.

the effects of dominance are minor up until the point of collapse in hybrid fitness. during and after the collapse they become stronger, but remain very variable. in most networks, dominance does not contribute to the fitness at all. over-dominance has a very strong effect right from the start in almost all networks. under-dominance is absent at the start, but rapidly increases in strength  at the point of collapse. curiously, it then weakens again, but remains stronger than dominance and over-dominance combined.

relative contributions of epistatic mechanisms
when we calculate epistasis, we consider the interaction of the paternal allele of one locus with the maternal allele of another. the strength of the effects of epistasis cannot be directly compared to the values of dominance, over-dominance and under-dominance because epistatic effects can involve alleles on more than two loci. calculating the effects of epistasis between alleles on three or more loci would be prohibitively computationally challenging. in a case where there is a positive epistatic interaction between alleles on three loci , where two are from parent  <dig> and one is from parent  <dig>  losing just one of them would cause the loss of the function provided by their interaction. if only alleles on pairs of loci are considered for epistasis, this one instance of epistasis would be counted twice . therefore, summing the effects of epistasis of loci pairs is likely to overestimate the true strength of epistasis and its contribution to heterosis. however, the effects of different kinds of epistasis can be compared to each other .

positive epistasis  is weak before the collapse and remains at an intermediate level after. negative epistasis  is relatively weak throughout the simulation. epistatic incompatibility  starts off near zero, but becomes very strong during the collapse and then dissipates again to an intermediate level, following the same pattern as under-dominance.

in our simulation, positive epistasis is almost absent before the collapse and dominance is weak and over-dominance appears to be the main contributor to heterosis. the collapse of hybrid fitness is caused by both under-dominance and epistatic incompatibility.

early signs of hybrid fitness collapse
the collapse in hybrid fitness occurs very suddenly and there is no apparent slow build-up of deleterious mutations. instead, the patterns of under-dominance and epistatic incompatibility suggest that individual mutations cause the fitness collapse by sweeping through one of the parent populations. the mutation must be beneficial in the population in which it arose or else it would not be selected. in the hybrids, however, it causes strongly reduced fitness. the transition from high  fitness to low fitness is binary for each individual network. thus, even before the average fitness of the hybrids drops catastrophically, there are individual hybrid networks with very low fitness. these alleles would not normally be removed by selection, as their effects in the background of the parent populations are neutral or positive. the appearance of hybrid individuals with very low fitness can indicate imminent incompatibility, if the responsible alleles sweep through the parent population.

discussion
we have presented a model that can reproduce many biological observations associated with hybrid vigor  <cit> . this includes the observation that vigor increases as the parents diverge genetically up to a point where the parent populations become incompatible  <cit>  and hybrids between them are at a severe disadvantage, as well as demonstrating the difficulty of fixing the hybrid trait in a true-breeding line  <cit> .

our model considers diploid organisms and it implements independent reassortment of alleles. we take a similar approach to the network model of andorf et al.  <cit>  in that our phenotype  are directly related to the networks’ topologies. however, we have a more sophisticated definition of the regulatory interactions between the genes, which makes our model more biologically realistic. the main focus of andorf’s work evolves around the assumption that a significant component of heterosis is determined by structural properties of the network. we do not explicitly use this and actually trying to test this hypothesis we observed that for small networks, like the ones we can consider , the definition of network statistical properties is not particularly meaningful. furthermore, we have used simulations of entire populations of individuals evolving in time to explore the emergence of heterosis at the population level, allowing us to investigate the importance of the different genetic mechanisms that have been suggested to explain the phenomenon.

moreover, we have provided a novel definition of fitness, which is based on a combination of the individual’s genotype and environment. the approach represents a compromise between a very detailed simulation of the genotype or of the phenotype. for example,  <cit>  model the emergence of functional gene clustering explicitly considering the physical distribution of genes along chromosomes, accounting for linkage and other factors as well as considering the corresponding protein interaction network. however they employ a definition of fitness which is very different from ours and mostly focuses on the individuals’ network characteristics rather than their interaction with the environment . on the other hand, other interesting models have used a more sophisticated definition of phenotype, sacrificing accuracy in the representation of the genotype  <cit> , but these were not aimed at studying heterosis. our work focuses on a realistic representation of the gene regulatory dynamics, which gives rise to a natural definition of the phenotype, importantly, related to the environment.

although we don’t explore this here, this framework could be used to study the impact of different types of environment in shaping the phenotype. for example, the environments in which the individuals are selected could be changed periodically and the time scale of these changes is likely to affect the evolution of the populations and the extent of the hybrid vigor observed. further investigation should lead to the identification of features of the environment and of the regulatory network of the parents that determine the extent and robustness of the hybrid vigor. in addition, further work will aim to identify the signs of the impending collapse in hybrid vigor.

continued separate evolution produces a speciation-like event
we hypothesized that the two parent populations would diverge over time, as each accumulates unique mutations. while this genetic difference between the populations gives rise to heterosis  <cit> . yet, once two parent individuals have evolved to become so different that combining their regulatory networks causes problems, the fitness of hybrids will be reduced. we thus expected to see heterosis to decrease again after the parent populations had evolved separately for some time. in the simulation, we observed this decrease as a drastic collapse of hybrid fitness. it is worth noting that this is not an intended function of the simulation, but rather an emergent behavior of the evolutionary algorithm. the number of generations after the population split at which this collapse occurred varied widely, between ten and several hundred generations. in biological terms, this would describe an event akin to speciation  <cit> . hybrids that form between the two populations after this event would be at a severe disadvantage . although our model does not have a spatial component, the two populations are prevented from interbreeding, as they would be through spatial separation. after the collapse, the separation of the two populations would be reinforced by their genetic incompatibility, even if they were to mix again. it should be noted that the two populations, while being kept separate, were subject to the same environments and were under exactly the same selective pressure. this observation closely resembles the findings of the ecological study on the fitness of intra- and inter-population hybrids performed by drury and wade  <cit> . as in our simulation, individual genes that had emerged in the separated populations of red flour beetles had weak advantageous effects in the background of their own population, but caused a drastic fitness reduction in hybrids.

it is interesting to note the sharpness of the hybrid fitness collapse. in most cases, the average hybrid fitness dropped to a steady level far below the fitness of the parents in a space of less than ten generations. this suggests that a very small number of mutations cause the incompatibility between the parent populations. these mutations may be advantageous in one of the parent populations and sweep through it rapidly. in conjunction with genes from the other parent population, however, they disrupt the regulatory network, leading to low fitness. it is possible that some of the mutated alleles that cause heterosis are also involved in causing the fitness collapse, but our simulation does not presuppose this.

over-dominance is an important mechanism of heterosis in our model
in our simulation, over-dominance is the mechanism with the greatest contribution to network fitness during the generations in which heterosis is observed. we are aware that this result could be influenced by the assumptions of our model, such as the binary nature of boolean networks and our definition of fitness and environments. whether and to what extent overdominance contributes to heterosis observed in biology is a highly controversial topic  <cit> . experimental evidence in support of the overdominance model has been found in rice  <cit>  reviewed in  <cit> , sorghum  <cit> , tomato  <cit>  and oil palm  <cit> , among others. in the model, under-dominance and epistatic incompatibility both contribute to the observed collapse in hybrid fitness. positive epistasis and epistatic incompatibility almost always appeared together, with their increasing and decreasing fitness effects directly opposite to each other and in similar magnitude, with incompatibility normally being somewhat stronger. this observation mirrors the finding in the simulation of yukilevich et al.  <cit> , where mutations with large fitness effects caused both synergistic and antagonistic effects. the framework here introduced could easily be extended to simulate different evolution and selection scenarios to test the generality of our findings.

an experimental approach to heterosis research has been that of predicting the levels of heterosis using available genetic and phenotypic data about the parents, for example metabolic profiling  <cit> . this study showed that genetic markers, metabolic markers and more general phenotypes such as parental biomass carried complementary information necessary to predict heterosis  <cit> . this finding would confirm the role of epistatic effects in heterosis. another study using a metabolic network as a representation of the individuals also concluded that epistasis plays a fundamental role in heterosis  <cit> . further analysis of epistasis in our simulated hybrids could potentially shed more light on the importance of multigenic effects in determining vigour.

parallels between local heterozygosity effects and epistasis
the mechanisms of dominance, over-dominance and under-dominance can be considered at a single locus level . epistasis is the interaction between alleles of separate genes, and thus cannot be explained without at least looking at pairs of genes. however, there are notable parallels between the three mechanisms of epistasis and the local heterozygosity mechanisms. in both dominance and negative epistasis, at least one allele can be removed from the network without a loss in fitness, as the other allele of the pair compensates for its function. in both over-dominance and positive epistasis, the interaction between the two alleles leads to a greater fitness, while in the case of under-dominance or epistatic incompatibility, removing either allele increases fitness. as shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  the local heterozygosity effects show largely the same pattern as the epistatic effects, with the exception of over-dominance, which is strong from the start, contrary to positive epistasis.figure  <dig> 
fitness of the hybrid population in an example run. fitness collapse occurs after the 5th hybridization . just before then, individual networks with very low fitness appear, indicating imminent collapse. even after the collapse, a number of networks maintain high fitness, but the fitness average  has dropped to a low level.



robustness of the model to the choice of parameters
our simulation is based on a number of parameters governing the generation of the initial networks, the choice of modules for fitness calculation, the size of each network and the size of the populations, the relative rates of different mutation mechanisms and the overall mutation rate as well as the number of generations allowed for initial adaptation. we experimented with different values for all these parameters to ensure that the results we observed were not artifacts of the specific parameters we chose. because of the stochasticity at the center of our simulation and the computational challenge of running it under many different conditions, we have left a formal parameter space exploration as a topic for further publications.

one of the most interesting parameters is the overall mutation rate. it is very difficult to give a realistic estimate for this value in biological organisms, as it is likely to vary markedly between species  and because only the mutations that are not removed by selection are easily observable. when the same number of mutations was spread out over a greater number of generations in the initial adjustment period, the fitness equilibrium reached by the adjusted population was higher. we observed that lower mutation rates produced more pronounced heterosis, and we interpret this to there being more time for selection to remove deleterious alleles between the appearance of new mutations events, and even weakly advantageous mutations are able to spread through the population. also, the collapse in hybrid fitness took place within a similar number of generations, regardless of the mutation rate, suggesting that a single mutation, or a very small number of mutations, is responsible for the collapse, rather than a slow build-up of different alleles in the two populations.

we also performed simulations using two environments  which produced substantially the same results, except for a generally higher fitness level reached by the population. for more detail, see additional file 1: text s <dig>  figures s3a and s3b.

an interesting direction for future work will be the exploration of the role of the network topology and logic functions in determining the speed of adaptation, the levels of hybrid vigor achievable and the number of generations for which hybrid vigor can be sustained. given that our model produces hybrid vigour simply based on the network characteristics of the individuals, it could be used to test and refine models of how the topology features affect the levels of epistasis  <cit> .

validation of the simulation using biological data
although so far the model hasn’t been validated with biological data, the networks that we use to represent our individuals could be easily compared to regulatory networks for different species and parallels between real organisms and our networks could be established. the topological properties of our networks are in line with the currently available biological regulatory networks and the results we presented are likely to be general enough to provide insight on the real biological systems. reproducing in vivo the experiments performed in our simulation requires the breeding of separate populations of individuals in specific environments for hundreds or thousands of generations with repeated analysis of the operating genetic regulation networks, which would imply a near-impossible effort even in the simplest and fastest evolving organisms, such as bacteria. however, the analysis of the genetic makeup and phenotype in hybrids created by nature itself could be a first tool to verify how well our simulation reproduces biological hybrid vigor. for example, recent research has focused on the genetic and phenotypic characterization of large sets of wild isolates of yeast  <cit> . it would be interesting to identify within these collections sets of individuals that are the result of hybridization of strains at different points in time. this type of data could be used to establish a parallel between a real organism and our simulation, possibly leading to further biological insights.

although excellent results have been achieved in predicting heterosis levels with a combination of genetic and metabolic information  <cit> , simulations of the type presented here will be useful to test mechanistic explanations of the different aspects of hybrid vigour that underlie the observed metabolic changes. in our simulation, no specific assumption about the role of the nodes in the network is made. the general framework of the simulation can be used as a way to look for how the genetic and metabolic aspects of the organism fitness are related through a multitude of different regulatory interactions. for example, extensions to the simulation could specifically look for the role of genomic and epigenetic mechanisms that have also been implicated in heterosis  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our simulation is able to reproduce heterosis in evolving populations of gene regulatory networks. it predicts the rise in hybrid fitness as parent populations diverge, as well as the collapse in hybrid fitness due to allelic incompatibility and the instability of the heterotic fitness in subsequent crosses of hybrids. all these phenomena are observed in nature. the modelling framework allows us to measure the effects of different genetic mechanisms that may cause heterosis and shows overdominance and positive epistasis to be the strongest effects. our model is more detailed and less abstract than previous network-based models of heterosis and lends itself to modifications and extensions that could enable the study of haploid organisms, allopolyploidy and other aspects of evolutionary theory. the emergence of genetic incompatibility between diverging population means that the simulation might even be applied to model processes of speciation.

