BACKGROUND
over the last two decades significant progress has been made in heterologous protein production, particularly due to the initiation of the genomics era. the acquisition of profound knowledge and entire genome sequences of a number of expression platforms has lead to considerable success for the production of many pharmaceutical proteins or industrial enzymes  <cit> . nevertheless, understanding the mechanisms governing efficient production of very complex proteins as functional entities still remains a major challenge.

over the past recent years, it has been demonstrated that correct protein folding and secretion are highly interrelated with environmental stress factors  <cit> . while adaptive responses to such stresses have been studied in the model yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit>  little is known about their influence on the physiology of p. pastoris. furthermore, such studies have generally not been performed under heterologous protein production conditions. only recently, dragosits and co-workers  <cit>  described the impact of temperature on the proteome of recombinant pichia pastoris in a chemostat-based study. their data indicated that a decreased folding stress at lower cultivation temperatures  considerably favoured heterologous fab antibody production. some other studies described a similar effect of temperature on the yield of recombinant proteins in other hosts  <cit> , but without much information on the underlying physiological mechanisms. even less is known about the impact of oxygen availability on the physiology of recombinant yeasts. oxygen limitation strongly affects the core metabolism by causing energy deprivation. cells have to shift growth to biomass reorganization in order to cope with the strongly reduced availability of atp, and readjust their metabolic fluxes from cellular respiration to fermentation. the extent of such readjustment is certainly an important issue in facultative anaerobe yeasts with different capacities to ferment glucose . p. pastoris is 'crabtree-negative' and more sensitive to the availability of oxygen than the 'crabtree-positive' s. cerevisiae. since the protein expression machinery is a multistep metabolic process that requires atp, a shift to fermentative metabolism could also impact on the protein synthesis and/or secretion processes. while affecting growth and protein production, oxygen also influences cellular redox reactions, and these are interlinked with protein folding reactions within the cell. moreover, protein folding related oxidative stress has been described  <cit> .

paradoxically, we have recently demonstrated that hypoxic conditions in chemostat as well as fed batch cultures significantly increased the specific productivity of recombinant p. pastoris  <cit> . this yeast expression system has become increasingly popular as it represents a valuable and cost-effective tool for protein engineering studies with potential of performing many of the posttranslational modifications typically associated with higher eukaryotes . however, it is not straightforward to predict whether this "hypoxic effect" would be also observed in other expression systems like s. cerevisiae, as yeasts behave in a different way with regard to their capacity to secrete, to process and to modify proteins in particular cases. as a consequence, it is important to systematically identify the complex mechanisms ruling efficient protein production, and integrated 'omics' studies are a valuable tool for the study of biological processes. an appropriate cultivation system that allows for strictly controlled environmental conditions while changing one single parameter, like it is the case for chemostat cultivations, provides an excellent basis for such a systems biology approach. of particular importance is the maintenance of a constant specific growth rate in order to avoid growth rate related effects in the data  <cit> .

in the present study, an integrative multilevel analysis of the physiological response to oxygen availability in p. pastoris, with emphasis on its interaction with cellular processes involved in the recombinant expression of an antibody fab fragment, has been performed in carbon-limited chemostat cultivations with a fixed growth rate at different oxygenation rates. despite the availability of the strong methanol-inducible alcohol oxidase promoter  that is extensively used for foreign protein production in this methylotrophic yeast, we opted for the constitutive expression of our model protein  under the control of the glycolytic glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gap  promoter. the use of glucose as sole carbon source facilitates easier handling of a continuous cultivation, reduced heat production and oxygen demand, as well as minimizing cell viability loss and protease release  <cit> . furthermore, the use of the gap  promoter allows a direct comparison with other parallel studies on temperature and osmolarity  <cit> .

the aim of this work was to exploit the potential of a multi-level study integrating transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolic flux analyses as a powerful tool to comprehensively understand the physiological adaptation of p. pastoris to oxygen availability, as well as unravelling potentially distinct features of such adaptation as described for s. cerevisiae. in addition, the study pursues leading to new insights into the global mechanisms connecting protein production to environmental conditions, in particular those that lead to increased product formation under hypoxia, as previously reported  <cit> .

RESULTS
in order to study the global adaptive response of recombinant pichia pastoris to oxygen availability, we integrated transcriptome, proteome and metabolic flux data of cells grown in steady state cultures under normoxic and oxygen-limiting, and pseudo-steady state cultures under hypoxic conditions . special emphasis was given to the comparison between fully aerobic  and hypoxic conditions, given that this shift contributed to increased recombinant product secretion  <cit> . the macroscopic growth parameters for both control and fab-producing p. pastoris strains growing under the three different oxygen setpoints have been recently reported elsewhere  <cit> . a summary of these data for the expressing strain is given in table  <dig> 

o2
physiological parameters of the 3h <dig> fab producing strain grown at normoxic , oxygen-limiting  and hypoxic  conditions in glucose-limited chemostat cultures at d =  <dig>  h- <dig>  values represent the mean ± standard error from three biological replicas. ydm = yeast dry mass; glc = glucose; nd = not detected; our = oxygen uptake rate; cer = carbon dioxide evolution rate.

global transcriptional adaptation of recombinant pichia pastoris to hypoxia
the global transcriptional profile of p. pastoris grown in different conditions of oxygen availability was studied with samples from three individual chemostat cultivations each. at a first glance, the microarray statistics  of the approximately  <dig> annotated sequences for p. pastoris displayed more than  <dig> genes, independent of the strain, that were differently regulated  when comparing normoxic and hypoxic conditions. a log <dig> fold change threshold of  <dig>   was not included in this statistics given that also small changes in the gene expression were considered to be crucial for a global view .

microarray statistics including all genes that passed the adjusted p-value threshold . comparisons between oxygen setpoints within one strain  or between strains at a certain oxygen setpoint  are given. for pairwise comparisons, the type of gene regulation  always refers to the lower oxygen setpoint or to the expressing strain. c = control strain; e = expressing strain;  <dig> = hypoxia;  <dig> = oxygen limitation;  <dig> = normoxia

as illustrated in the venn diagrams , only around fifty percent of these genes were identically regulated in both the fab-expressing and the control strain, indicating a different behaviour under hypoxic conditions. a direct comparison of the gene regulation pattern between expressing and control strain at the lowest oxygen concentration , in contrast, revealed only six genes  to be differently expressed . for all of these six genes the log <dig> fold change was also greater than  <dig> . four of them showed higher transcript levels in the fab producing strain, specifically, genes involved in a non-classical protein export pathway , glycolysis , the ergosterol pathway  and in multidrug transport . on the other hand, a high-affinity cysteine-specific transporter  and a plasma membrane transporter of the major facilitator super family  were significantly downregulated in the producing strain. in general, these data point at a major impact of oxygen rather than a consequence of heterologous protein production on the global transcriptional response of p. pastoris.

list of differently regulated genes  in both strains under hypoxic  conditions. e/c  <dig> up corresponds to the upregulated genes in the expressing strain  as compared to the control strain , while the downregulated genes are referred to as e/c  <dig> down.

to gain an overview of the functional processes that are significantly correlated with a change in oxygen availability, we assigned all regulated genes that passed the p-value threshold to their respective go functional group . the percentage distribution of the genes in each category is shown in figure 2a and 2b. the most prominent biological processes that were exclusively induced under hypoxic conditions are chemical stimulus, cell wall biogenesis, heterocycle metabolism, protein folding and cellular aromatic compounds. the regulated genes in the go groups cofactor- and carbohydrate metabolic process, lipid metabolic process and vitamin metabolic process showed very similar profiles of up and downregulation at the same time. on the other hand, hypoxia decreased the activity of genes involved in conjugation, sporulation and pseudohyphal growth.

the global tendencies of regulated biological processes overlap quite concordantly in both strains, with some exceptions: interestingly, the number of upregulated genes in the go groups rna metabolism, protein catabolism, ribosome biogenesis, transcription and dna metabolism was higher in the control strain, while processes like cellular respiration, carbohydrate metabolism, cellular homeostasis and amino acid metabolism were more strongly enriched in downregulated genes. on the other hand, four go categories appeared to comprise more downregulated genes in the producing strain, namely cell cycle, meiosis, cytoskeleton biogenesis and nuclear biogenesis.

it has to be emphasized that these results were obtained just employing the p-value threshold, excluding the log <dig> fold change threshold, to provide a more comprehensive transcriptional profile including also low but significant gene regulation. thereafter, two selected go groups, namely stress response and lipid metabolism, were analyzed in more detail in such a way that all the genes that were significantly up- or downregulated under hypoxia by at least  <dig> -fold  were categorized according to their functions . the selection of these groups was either based on major differences between oxygen supply conditions or on the potential impact on protein production, as some of them appeared to be generally stronger regulated in the fab producing strain.

the microarray data were validated by quantitative real-time pcr  including  <dig> reference gene and  <dig> target genes, which we selected according to their relevance for this study. six of these genes were differently expressed between control and expressing strain under hypoxic conditions. we further selected six genes from the central carbon metabolism and compared their transcript levels between normoxic and hypoxic conditions in the expressing strain. qrt-pcr experiments also considered the genes encoding the light and the heavy chain of the fab fragment, which were also on the dna microarrays. from the expression data, the fab heavy chain seemed completely unregulated when comparing the fab producing strain versus the non producing strain. as suitable reference genes we chose β-actin . the results are highlighted in table  <dig> and indicate a good correlation between microarray and qrt-pcr data. in case of the fab heavy chain we were able to demonstrate a  <dig>  fold change when comparing mrna levels between hypoxic and normoxic samples, which is similar to the fold change of  <dig>   as seen for the light chain . the higher fab transcripts under control of the gap  promoter were also coherent with a transcriptional upregulation of glycolytic genes , as discussed later in section 'transcriptional regulation of metabolic enzymes and fluxes', and positively correlated with the observed increase in the specific fab titre.

quantitative real-time pcr results compared with microarray data. standard deviations  derive from triplicate measurements; all numbers reflect relative gene expression to the reference gene actin . pipa orf = pichia pastoris open reading frame ; 8/ <dig> e = pairwise comparison of hypoxic  and normoxic  conditions in the expressing strain ; e/c  <dig> = pairwise comparison of expressing and control  strain under hypoxic conditions

the effect of hypoxia on the proteome of pichia pastoris
in parallel to the microarray experiments, we employed 2d-dige gels to measure the relative protein abundance changes at different levels of oxygen availability. to assure accuracy of the measurements and unbiased data, the protein extracts were labelled with both cy <dig> and cy <dig> fluorescent dyes and assigned the samples randomly to the protein gels according to the scheme in additional file  <dig>  we detected  <dig> spots with a significantly  different abundance pattern comparing the expression under normoxic and hypoxic conditions, and a smaller number of spots when comparing the proximate oxygen set points with each other . a total of  <dig> spots could be excised from coomassie brilliant blue stained protein gels and identified by lc-esi-qtof tandem ms . some proteins showed more than one spot on the 2d gels indicating the existence of isoforms which probably derive from posttranslational modification  events such as phosphorylation, glycosylation or limited proteolysis . in order to obtain a simplified structure of the behaviour of all identified proteins under different conditions of oxygen availability, we subjected the relative protein abundances  to principal component analysis  and heat map clustering. pca projection demonstrates that the maximum variability in the dataset occurs between oxygen set points 21% and 8%  with the first component covering  <dig> % of the data variance. this result is also reflected in the heat map, where two major clusters separating the protein abundance profile at normal oxygen levels from that at limiting and hypoxic levels can be observed . all the identified proteins exhibited a similar expression profile when comparing the fab producing strain and the non producing control strain.
b: heat map presentation of a hierarchical cluster of the  <dig> proteins that show significantly different  relative abundances in both strains  and control  strain) at different oxygen concentrations in the inlet gas . the green colour represents low and pink colour represents high expression levels.

most of the proteins with a high abundance at low oxygen are involved in glycolysis, amino acid metabolism and general stress response. identified proteins with a low expression in hypoxic conditions mostly belong to the functional processes tca cycle, vitamin metabolism and oxidative stress response.

multi-level analysis of the p. pastoris central carbon metabolism adaptation to hypoxia
the impact of reduced oxygen supply on the core metabolism was readily observed, both in the biomass yields and the profile of secreted by-products such as ethanol and arabitol, reflecting the adaptation from a respiratory to a respiro-fermentative metabolism . since all cultivations were carbon-limited , the decrease in the biomass yield under oxygen-limiting and hypoxic conditions resulted in an increase of specific glucose uptake rates under such conditions.

biosynthetically directed fractional  13c-labeling of proteinogenic amino acids combined with 2d-nmr enabled the analysis of metabolic flux ratios . the metabolic flux ratios were calculated using the relative abundances  of intact carbon fragments arising from a single source molecule of glucose . the calculated flux ratios are shown in table  <dig>  as expected, the f-values obtained for this series of cultivations confirm that the proteinogenic amino acids are primarily synthesized in p. pastoris according to the pathways documented for s. cerevisiae, as previously reported  <cit> .

origins of metabolic intermediates during growth of p. pastoris in glucose-limited chemostat 13c-labelled cultures at d =  <dig>  h- <dig> at different fractions of oxygen in the chemostat inlet gas. values for both control and fab producing strains are given. ratios highlighted in bold have been used as constraints for metabolic flux analysis. n.a., not applicable; n.d., not determined. see main text for explanation.

in 13c-based metabolic flux analyses , the metabolic flux ratios determined by metafor were used as additional constraints for the stoichiometric equation system to be able to solve the metabolic flux distribution without including cofactors , o <dig> and co <dig> in the metabolite mass balances. the net fluxes for the fab-producing and control strains growing under different oxygenation conditions are shown in figure  <dig>  the net fluxes and their standard deviations are included in additional file  <dig> 

the most prominent feature, as already indicated by the metafor analysis , was the similarity in flux estimates between corresponding fab-producing and control strains datasets. nevertheless, as expected, clear differences were observed when comparing flux patterns corresponding to different oxygenation set points. in general terms, the metabolic adaptation from oxidative towards respiro-fermentative growth was accompanied by complex changes of carbon flux throughout the whole central carbon metabolism, as previously described in other yeasts .

glycolytic and pentose phosphate pathway  fluxes
the metafor analysis showed that in fully aerobic conditions up to 50-39% of phosphoenolpyruvate  was originated from the pentose phosphate pool. in contrast, the fraction of pep from the pentose phosphates assuming a maximal contribution of ppp was clearly lower under hypoxic conditions, only about 15%.

moreover, the 13c-mfa results  indicate that this decrease of the relative ppp flux was the result of both an increased glycolytic flux, and a decrease in the specific flux through the oxidative branch of the ppp. as previously observed in s. cerevisiae  <cit> , the glycolytic flux increased progressively as the oxygen availability decreased.

as already inferred from the macroscopic data, fluxes through some fermentative pathways were increased upon adaptation from respirative to respiro-fermentative metabolism, particularly the fluxes towards the formation of ethanol and arabitol. production of arabitol had a clear impact on the flux ratios and on the distribution of fluxes through the ppp: the fraction of pentose phosphates showing the reversible action of a transketolase reaction was generally high , with no clear trend, whereas the fraction of pentose phosphates showing the reversible action of a transaldolase clearly decreased at low oxygen availability. overall, the 13c-mfa results showed that under normoxic conditions there was an important net contribution of the ppp to glucose catabolism . in contrast, as oxygen availability was decreased and, particularly, when arabitol was produced, this contribution was clearly reduced or, even some of the reactions of the non-oxidative ppp branch showed inverted directionality under hypoxic conditions.

fluxes around the pyruvate node, intercompartmental transport and tricarboxylic acids  cycle
following the metafor analysis, distinct flux changes were observed for the different pathways utilizing pyruvate , that are, pyruvate carboxylase , pyruvate decarboxylase , and pyruvate dehydrogenase . the relative anaplerotic flux  was around 44-41% under normoxic and hypoxic conditions, while in oxygen-limiting conditions was slightly lower, 35-32%. hence, pyruvate carboxylase catalyzed reaction seemed to be the major anaplerotic reaction under all conditions, and it was accompanied by a substantial transport of carbon  from cytosol to mitochondria. nevertheless, an important relative carbon efflux from the mitochondria may be occurring, as only 66-63% of oaacyt appears to be directly synthesized from pep under oxygen-limiting and hypoxic conditions. as previously observed for p. pastoris  <cit>  and other yeasts , cells growing aerobically in glucose-limited chemostats show a bidirectional transport of oaa and/or other tca cycle intermediates across the mitochondrial membrane. however, calculation of flux ratios defining the fraction of oaamit from oaacyt and, oaacyt from pep under normoxic conditions was not possible. the labelling patterns of cytosolic and mitochondrial oaa pools are accessible through the observation of aspartate labelling patterns  and glutamate . strikingly, the fraction of intact c2-c <dig> bonds of oaa, which is often used to calculate these flux ratios, where approximately equal for oaacyt and oaamit . this could be explained by an extremely fast exchange between cytosolic and mitochondrial pools of tca cycle intermediates , resulting in identical labelling patterns in the amino acids synthesized from such pools. however, this possibility can be excluded, as the asp-cβ, thr-cβ and glu-cα labelling patterns under normoxic conditions were not identical . notably, the reversibility of the interconversion of cytosolic oaa to other cytosolic tca cycle intermediates  was clearly higher under normoxic conditions, suggesting that aspartate, oaa, and malate might be participating in a redox shuttle  for translocation of nadh across the mitochondrial membrane, as described by bakker et al  <cit> .

it is worth noting that, although the flux through the pyruvate dehydrogenase  bypass was not considered in our metabolic model , its activity should not be totally excluded since crabtree negative yeasts are reported to have activity on this pathway  <cit> : in contrast to s. cerevisiae, which does not synthesise carnitine de novo  to the mitochondria  <cit> ), a complete carnitine biosynthesis pathway has been characterized in candida albicans, and the corresponding  <dig> genes have been identified  <cit> . interestingly, the p. pastoris genome contains putative homologues to these genes  <cit> . moreover, it should be mentioned that we observed a strong downregulation of the mitochondrial acetyl-coa synthetase acs1p on the mrna  and protein level  when comparing hypoxic with normoxic conditions. acs1p is essential for the contribution of mitochondrial pdh bypass to the formation of mitochondrial acetyl-coa. also, a significant downregulation in expression levels of cat <dig> and yat <dig> homologues involved in carnitine transport to mitochondria was observed.

overall, carbon flux distributions at the pyruvate branching point  clearly show the shift from respiratory to respiro-fermentative metabolism: fluxes through the pyruvate dehydrogenase pathway decreased when decreasing oxygen availability, whereas the flux through the pyruvate decarboxylase pathway increased, reflecting the production of ethanol. also, the anaplerotic flux though the pyruvate carboxylase pathway drastically decreased when oxygen availability was reduced: under fully aerobic conditions the fraction of carbon flux to the tca cycle through this pathway was about 29% , whereas under oxygen-limiting and hypoxic conditions exchange fluxes decreased, resulting in lower net carbon fluxes into the tca cycle .

remarkably, although variations in the carbon flux distribution around the pyruvate branch and tca cycle activity were observed, mitochondrial transporters such as dic <dig>  oac <dig>  sfc <dig> showed no significant change on the transcriptional level. only yia <dig>  which is involved in nad+ transport into the mitochondria , was downregulated under hypoxic conditions. as already mentioned before, the carnitine transporters cat <dig> and yat <dig> were also downregulated under such conditions.

limitation in oxygen availability reduced the respirative net carbon flux through the tca cycle . nevertheless, the fraction of the net carbon flux in the tca cycle corresponding to the respirative carbon flux from α-ketoglutarate  remained between 60-70%, that is to say, the relative anaplerotic fluxes were between 30-40%. similar results have been previously observed in s. cerevisiae under aerobic conditions  <cit> . no significant contribution xzfor malic enzyme flux could be observed , so the pyruvate carboxylase pathway was the only anaplerotic supply to the tca cycle.

transcriptional regulation of metabolic enzymes and fluxes
a good qualitative correlation between both transcriptional and proteomic levels and the corresponding in vivo fluxes in the different oxygenation conditions was observed for glycolysis, fermentative pathways and tca cycle . exceptions were zwf <dig> and gnd <dig>  coding for enzymes involved in the oxidative branch of the ppp, which did not appear to be significantly regulated, in spite of the strong variation observed in the metabolic fluxes through this pathway. this was also the case for the gpd <dig> gene, coding for the enzyme involved in glycerol formation, which was significantly downregulated at the transcript levels, whereas the flux to glycerol excretion was very low or even zero under all oxygenation conditions.

following proteomic analyses, the glycolytic enzymes pgi1p, fba1p, tdh3p, gpm1p, eno1p and cdc19p were identified to be strongly induced, while tca cycle proteins aco1p, fum1p and mdh1p show very low abundance in hypoxic conditions, pointing at a redirection of the central carbon metabolism towards fermentation. these results were expected and are consistent with previously obtained data on yeast physiology under oxygen deprivation, where glycolytic activity in anaerobically grown s. cerevisiae was shown to be higher than in aerobiosis on the proteome level  <cit> . these studies, however, revealed a weak correlation between transcriptome and proteome data of this key cellular process in s. cerevisiae, which is in strong contrast to our results where the transcript levels indeed correlate with the proteome profile and in vivo fluxes of the central carbon metabolism.

notably, transcriptional levels of tdh <dig> under hypoxic conditions were  <dig>  fold higher in the fab producing strain than in the control strain. at the protein level, however, the average ratios were quite similar with  <dig>  for the expressing and  <dig>  for the control strain. tdh <dig> codes for glyceraldehyde-3-p dehydrogenase, an enzyme playing an integral role in glycolysis. interestingly, tdh3p has also been recognized to be involved in the initiation of apoptosis in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . furthermore, it has been also found in the yeast cell wall  <cit> , suggesting that tdh <dig> may indeed encode a multifunctional protein.

along with an adaptation towards a fermentative metabolism cells have to remove excess redox equivalents that accumulate during biomass synthesis and excretion of oxidized metabolites  <cit> . anaerobically grown s. cerevisiae produces glycerol in order to reoxidize accumulated nadh during amino acid biosynthesis  <cit> . in contrast, we have recently described that hypoxically growing p. pastoris cells secrete arabitol, a 5-carbon sugar alcohol, but not glycerol  <cit> . arabitol  accumulation has been previously observed in pichia anomala cultures during growth in high-salt environments and on highly concentrated sugar substrates  <cit> . dragosits and co-workers recently demonstrated intracellular arabitol accumulation in p. pastoris chemostat cultivations grown under conditions of high osmolarity  <cit> . in fact, it has been suggested that arabitol has the same physiological role as glycerol in the protection to osmotic stress  <cit> . similarly, arabitol might also be involved in maintaining the redox balance during fermentative growth.

there is no identified protein in our data clearly assigned to arabitol biosynthesis. d-arabitol 2-dehydrogenase, the only protein that is described to form arabitol from ribulose in p. pastoris, could not be detected in our protein gels. however, we speculate that ydl124wp, identified as a putative nadph-dependent alpha-keto amide reductase and described to have similarity with gre3p, the major aldose reductase in s. cerevisiae  <cit> , may be involved in the formation of the 5-carbon sugar alcohol. since d-ribulose and d-xylulose from the pentose pathway are the main precursors for the formation of arabitol in many fungi  <cit>  it may be assumed that ydl124w is involved in these reductive activities. the enzyme levels of this protein were significantly induced under hypoxic conditions, with an average fold change of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the control and expressing strain, respectively. at the mrna level this upregulation was even more apparent with log <dig> ratios of  <dig>  and  <dig> .

gut2p, a mitochondrial enzyme that is associated with redox balance maintenance via the glycerophosphate shuttle under aerobic conditions, showed significantly decreased abundance at the protein  as well as mrna level  under hypoxia, as it is not needed under this condition to transfer reducing equivalents to the respiratory chain. the same result was obtained for gut1p, which together with gut2p is responsible for glycerol degradation. fdh1p, a nad+-dependent formate dehydrogenase, is also downregulated when oxygen is scarce. singh and co-workers described a possible relation between pyruvate break-down and the production of formate  <cit> . since the pyruvate pathway is directed towards ethanol formation under hypoxic conditions, the synthesis of formate might be reduced and could explain the lower abundance of formate dehydrogenase.

although the methanol pathway is tightly repressed under growth on glucose, the basic level of aox1p was strictly downregulated under hypoxic conditions as has been shown previously in glucose-limited conditions  <cit> . a plausible explanation for the low abundance of aox1p is the higher glycolytic activity under low oxygen conditions and the repressive effect of glucose on aox <dig> transcription. this effect could also be responsible for the weak expression of the proteins acs1p, an acetyl-coa-synthetase, and ald4p, a mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase, whose expression is also glucose repressed.

other key cellular processes with important transcriptional changes
lipid metabolism and membrane biogenesis
lipid metabolism has successively become a focus of attention for linking many important pathways to its intermediate substrates. sterols for example, long time relegated as passive metabolites modulating the membrane structure, play an important role as primary sensors of environmental stresses by adjusting the fluidity of the plasma membrane to such perturbations  <cit> . the cellular lipid metabolism is highly susceptible to hypoxia since the biosynthesis routes for the most essential lipids - ergosterol and fatty acids - require molecular oxygen. anaerobically grown s. cerevisiae has an impaired ability to produce ergosterol, which consequently has to be added to the medium together with tween <dig> as a source for unsaturated fatty acids  <cit> . in this study the medium was not supplemented with either of these reagents since our chemostat cultures were run under severe oxygen limitation but not under strictly anaerobic conditions. as a consequence and due to the lack of exogenous ergosterol uptake, we observed increased transcript levels for a number of enzymes that catalyze oxygen-consuming reactions of the ergosterol pathway  which may be upregulated upon hypoxia for compensation of intermediate substrate deficit . ncp <dig>  a cytochrome p <dig> reductase that is reported to be uniformly regulated with the key enzyme erg <dig>  also demonstrated increased mrna levels under hypoxia. it has to be stated that the transcription of erg <dig> was not only induced by oxygen scarcity but also under recombinant protein-producing conditions.

besides ergosterol as one of the major plasma membrane components in yeast, sphingolipids represent another class of lipids with considerable importance, since they interact with ergosterol to form small platforms  in the cell membrane. along with the changes in the transcription pattern of the ergosterol pathway, we also observed a hypoxic induction of four sphingolipid synthesis genes  under hypoxic conditions . interestingly, similar as demonstrated for ergosterol, all of these enzymes need molecular oxygen as substrate, unlike others whose mrna levels remained constant . sld <dig> , des <dig>  and the c9-methyltransferase were recently identified and characterized by ternes and co-workers to be responsible for the synthesis of glucosylceramides  in p. pastoris  <cit> . in a similar study, a p. pastoris mutant strain deficient in the endogenous des <dig> gene was not able to produce glucosylceramides either  <cit> . this is in strong contrast to s. cerevisiae, who lacks this common class of sphingolipids.

lac <dig> and lag <dig> are the only ceramide synthases in p. pastoris. if the cells produced more ceramides  at low oxygen levels, at least one of these two genes would be upregulated. since this is not the case, we speculate that the cell activates the oxygen-dependent enzymes in order to sustain the sphingolipid metabolism and growth in spite of oxygen scarcity.

ypc <dig>  a ceramidase, might not fit in this picture since it also has a reverse, but minor ceramide synthase activity. its mrna level was increased to a similar extent  as lcb <dig>  responsible for the phosphorylation of long chain bases in a side-branch reaction of the sphingolipid metabolism. also csh <dig>  a probable catalytic subunit of a mannosylinositol phosphorylceramide  synthase, was upregulated under low oxygen. however, the genes encoding the subunits of serine-palmitoyltransferase , the rate-determining step of sphingolipid synthesis in s. cerevisiae, were not induced, and if we exclude any posttranscriptional regulations, this hypothesis about the upregulation of oxygen-consuming reactions might be true.

a mentionable induction upon hypoxic growth was further noted for the genes pdr <dig> , ypl206c/pgc <dig>  and pdx <dig> . pdr16p is a phosphatidylinositol transfer protein of the sec14p family  and was attributed a role in altering the lipid composition of the plasma membrane  <cit> . pgc <dig> regulates the phosphatidylglycerol  content by degradation of pg to diacylglycerol  via a phospholipase c activity, as recently reported  <cit> . pdx <dig> is closely related with sterol, fatty acid and cytochrome content in yeast cells  <cit> . the gene product pdx3p, a pyridoxamine phosphate oxidase, was additionally shown to have a significantly higher abundance at low oxygen. a similar positive correlation between proteome and transcriptome data for enzymes involved in lipid metabolism was observed for sam2p, an s-adenosylmethionine synthetase with a broad range of biological functions. besides its role in the methylation of proteins and lipids, s-adenosylmethionine  was further attributed a role in the synthesis of phospholipids  <cit> , which is also the case for ino1p, an inositol 1-phosphate synthase.

ole <dig>  a hypoxic gene encoding a key enzyme  in the synthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, was also significantly expressed under hypoxic conditions. along with this result, the breakdown of fatty acids was highly impaired by the strong downregulation of the oxygen-dependent β-oxidation pathway , and the genes required for peroxisomal division and metabolite transport, pex <dig> and ant <dig>  respectively.

since alterations in the sterol-sphingolipid balance not only result in defects in the physical properties of membranes, but also affect strongly related events like cell signalling  <cit>  or secretory transport to the cell surface  <cit> , we speculate that this imbalance might somehow also influence recombinant protein secretion. sphingolipids or sterols, similar to secretory proteins, are first synthesized in the er and then further processed in the golgi apparatus, where they are targeted for the proper distribution to the cell surface. in the trans-golgi network, where secretory vesicles segregate to exchange cargo proteins and lipids between membrane-bound organelles  <cit> , lipid rafts play a pivotal role as sorting point  <cit> . pma <dig> for example, an h+-atpase and abundant plasma membrane protein, is misrouted to the vacuole in a mutant strain of s. cerevisiae with an inability in sphingolipid acyl chain elongation  <cit> . gap <dig>  a general amino acid permease, meets a similar fate in the absence of sphingolipid neosynthesis and is also sorted to the vacuole instead of the plasma membrane  <cit> . the heterologous fab is a soluble protein and probably not directly affected by alterations in the sphingolipid metabolism as it is not targeted to the plasma membrane, however, the degradation of other integral membrane proteins might favour recombinant protein secretion.

recent experiments in our lab  demonstrated that tween <dig>  a non-ionic surfactant, stimulated the production of the recombinant extracellular fab fragment considerably. a similar result was also obtained by apte-deshpande and co-workers  <cit>  for a recombinant p. pastoris strain producing a human growth hormone upon methanol induction. this stimulating effect of surfactants has further been observed in other host organisms including filamentous fungi and bacteria, where authors speculate about a possible correlation with  changes in the electrochemical membrane gradients by an altered na+/k+ ratio  <cit>  and  an altered membrane stability, even in transport vesicles, leading to enhanced membrane fusion  <cit> . these explanations would support our hypothesis about a contribution of membrane properties to improved protein secretion.

stress response
in this study, p. pastoris was exposed to severe oxygen limitation as environmental stress factor. as a consequence and considering also the additional burden of heterologous protein production, the cellular stress responses were highly activated under hypoxic growth conditions. at the protein level we identified  <dig> stress-associated proteins that were significantly induced upon a shift to hypoxic conditions, namely pil1p, tsa1p and ssa4p. while pil1p is a component of the eisosomes that mark endocytic sites in the plasma membrane, tsa1p and ssa4p are molecular chaperones. on the other hand, rpn10p, a regulatory particle of the proteasome which is involved in the degradation of ubiquitinated proteins, had a lower abundance under hypoxic conditions. the same trend was demonstrated for  <dig> further stress-related proteins: ccp1p  and prx1p  are mitochondrial proteins and involved in oxidative stress responses, while ypr127wp is an uncharacterized protein that shows similarity to the schizosaccharomyces pombe pyridoxal reductase  <cit> .

at the transcript level there was a considerable upregulation of genes involved in oxidative  and osmotic stress responses , and of those encoding molecular chaperones . many chaperones are important assistants during the protein folding process and provide for a quality checkpoint so that only correctly folded polypeptides are released into the secretory pathway. tsa <dig>  one of the genes with the strongest overexpression  and with an increased abundance at the proteome level under hypoxia , is a peroxidase under normal conditions and only shifts to its chaperone function in response to stress  <cit> . it belongs to the so-called 'moonlighting proteins' that have multiple functions, which can vary as a consequence of changes in their proximate environment. tsa <dig> functions as antioxidant on actively translating ribosomes and thereby maintains the integrity of the translation apparatus. but it was also shown to suppress thermal aggregation by binding to unfolded proteins. stresses and other events that disrupt/overload the er folding mechanism can cause accumulation of such unprocessed polypeptides and provoke the unfolded protein response  . it was recently shown that antibody heavy chain fragments  were retained within organelles of the secretory pathway in a recombinant p. pastoris strain, indicating a major bottleneck in the secretion process  <cit> . in the same study, overexpression of heterologous hac <dig>  the transcriptional activator of upr in s. cerevisiae, clearly induced the upr-regulated genes kar2/bip and pdi <dig>  while the mrna levels of hac <dig> and pdi <dig> were significantly increased by hypoxia in our work, the transcription of kar <dig> was not affected. however, we observed a significant induction of lhs <dig>  a co-chaperone of kar <dig> and likely to be the kar <dig> nucleotide exchange factor. it is possible that the s. cerevisiae-derived hac <dig> exerts a slightly different function in p. pastoris than the homologous one by regulating other upr related genes  <cit> . in this context, also ire <dig>  a gene that senses misfolded proteins in the er through interaction with kar <dig> and activation of hac <dig> was not induced. interestingly, upr was also reported to be triggered upon lipid deprivation in order to coordinate membrane synthesis in s. cerevisiae, in which hac <dig> plays a role in mediating phospholipid biosynthesis  <cit> . this finding could be reasonably linked to the observed changes in the lipid balance during oxygen scarcity and may also explain a different regulation of upr related genes.

ero <dig>  which is well-known for its crucial role in protein disulfide bond formation and redox homeostasis in the er, was strongly activated under severe hypoxia . it interacts with pdi to initiate the transfer of oxidizing equivalents to folding proteins  <cit> . in the presence of oxygen, ero <dig> generates h2o <dig> while in conditions of severe hypoxia other compounds  serve as electron acceptors for ero <dig> thus reducing the accumulation of reactive oxygen species in cells with heavy loads of protein thiols in their secretory pathway  <cit> .

the overexpression of the upr genes pdi <dig>  ero <dig> and hac <dig> were previously reported as helper factors for enhanced recombinant protein secretion  <cit> , which provides the presumption that their heavy induction upon hypoxia could benefit protein expression in a similar way or even stronger by a more synergistic effect. another gene attracting attention due to its involvement in the translocation of soluble secretory proteins and insertion of membrane proteins into the er membrane was wsc <dig>  encoding a cell wall integrity and stress response component with a transmembrane receptor activity. unlike in a study by kimata and co-workers  <cit>  where wsc <dig> was mentioned to be downregulated by upr in s. cerevisiae, it was significantly induced under low oxygen conditions in our study, thus indicating a form of induction other than unfolded proteins.

it is also worthwhile mentioning that the stress related genes nce <dig>  a carbonic anhydrase, and pfk <dig>  encoding a gamma subunit of the 6-phosphofructokinase complex, were considerably upregulated not only in hypoxia but also in the fab producing strain, pointing at a certain protein-expression related regulation. pfk <dig> was recently reported as a novel form of the hetero-oligomeric enzyme 6-phosphofructokinase in p. pastoris, but with no similarity to classic pfk subunits  <cit> . in the same study it was shown that the gamma-subunit tightly regulates the glucose metabolism by fine-tuning pfk activity via amp and atp, providing a rapid adaptation to perturbations in the energy balance during environmental changes, like in the case of hypoxia. the enhanced transcript levels in the fab-expressing strain can be explained by the additional energy demand during protein producing conditions.

nce <dig> was regulated similarly to pfk <dig> in response to oxygen-limiting and protein-producing conditions. nce <dig> was described by cleves et al.  <cit>  to encode for a protein that is a substrate of a non-conventional secretion pathway in yeasts. in a later study a s. cerevisiae strain deleted in nce <dig> showed a growth-defect phenotype in the presence of oxygen and enhanced sensitivity to h2o <dig>  thus suggesting a protective function against by-products of cellular respiration  <cit> . this contradicts our results where nce <dig> was highly induced under hypoxic conditions. clark and co-workers  <cit>  also questioned the proposed antioxidant activity of nce <dig> and detected a functional carbonic anhydrase activity instead. they even suggested a correlation between nce <dig> activity and the supply of sufficient bicarbonate for lipid biosynthetic processes. this hypothesis might explain the higher nce <dig> activity under oxygen scarcity. its elevated induction in the protein producing strain could be explained by the anti-oxidative effect on er-oxidative stress derived from upr. more studies will be necessary to elucidate the proposed function in non conventional protein export.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we demonstrated that a systems biology approach integrating 2d dige proteome, dna microarrays and metabolic flux analyses, can serve as a valuable tool to investigate the impact of key environmental parameters on host cell physiology under recombinant protein-producing conditions. furthermore, the use of chemostat cultures allowed for well-controlled and reproducible culture conditions, essential for acquiring reliable data sets from different analysis levels. such an approach becomes particularly attractive when the given conditions are known to have beneficial effects on protein secretion, as in the case of reduced oxygen availability, which has a positive effect on fab 3h <dig> specific productivities in p. pastoris.

overall, the outcome of this comprehensive study led to new insights into cellular processes that are strongly regulated by oxygen availability. moreover, the relevance of the data presented in this study has been related to recombinant protein production, pointing out to potential genes or/and metabolic pathways that might be potential targets for strain improvement.

most notably, while some of adaptations of p. pastoris to oxygen availability were consistent with previous transcriptome, proteome and metabolic flux studies reported for s. cerevisiae, distinct traits were identified which were, to our knowledge, previously unreported. in particular, the integration of data from three different levels of information for the core metabolism of p. pastoris revealed a strong transcriptional induction of glycolysis and the non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathways, and the downregulation of the tca cycle under hypoxic conditions; such transcriptional changes showed a clear positive correlation with proteomic data and metabolic fluxes, indicating a strong transcriptional regulation of the carbon metabolism in p. pastoris. this observation is in clear contrast to s. cerevisiae, where no such correlation, at least for glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway, has been found  <cit> . therefore, it seems plausible that increased specific fab productivities under hypoxia may be -at least partially- the result of increased transcriptional levels of glycolytic genes .

additionally, a wide range of general stress responses and, in particular, stresses related to protein folding and secretion like the upr, were affected by oxygen scarcity. since fine-tuning of the translation machinery has been reported to be a successful tool to improve protein secretion - even it was only based on the modification of a single gene - further target genes for strain engineering might be identified from this study. an even more interesting result pointed to a strong interrelation of oxygen availability and the lipid metabolism. the biosynthesis of important membrane components like ergosterol and sphingolipids include a wide range of oxygen dependent reactions so that alterations in the lipid balance under oxygen scarcity are consistent with existing knowledge. detailed analyses of the impact of such changes on membrane fluidity, or the crucial role of many intercellular membranes in protein translocation to the cell surface might also led to new insights into the potential interrelations of membrane properties and protein secretion processes, making cell membrane properties and biogenesis a novel candidate for rational engineering of the expression system p. pastoris.

nevertheless, systematic extraction of information from the data presented in this study for future rational design of novel strain engineering strategies requires further integration of multi-scale data into a genome-wide metabolic model scaffold, together with the availability of well annotated genomes, thereby linking genome with phenotype.

