BACKGROUND
introduction
in a typical time course microarray study, a number of microarray experiments are carried out at biologically interesting time points and across different biological conditions. it is a frequent and challenging goal to try to identify which of these genes exhibit an interesting temporal behaviour, for example whether and when a gene becomes up- or down-regulated and, more importantly, whether its behaviour is significantly different across the biological conditions of interest.

various methods have been proposed in the literature to detect differentially expressed genes from time course microarray experiments. most of these methods aim at detecting genes whose temporal profile is significantly different from a control condition in which there is no change in expression. clustering techniques have been long used to analyse time course microarray data with the aim of finding clusters of genes with co-regulated and biologically interesting temporal patterns  <cit> . amongst the well known shortcomings of this technique, many clustering methods, like the commonly used hierarchical clustering and k-means, do not make actual use of the temporal order in the data. to address this problem,  <cit>  propose a model-based clustering method for time course data, where each cluster is generated by a vector autoregressive time series model. other model-based techniques to detect differentially expressed genes from time course microarray data include the use of linear spline functions for single gene profiles by  <cit>  and more specific periodic functions to detect periodically expressed genes by  <cit>  and  <cit> .

only few studies have looked at the problem of detecting genes with significantly different temporal profiles across a number of biological conditions.  <cit>  use a standard anova analysis.  <cit>  adapt the anova model to account for time ordering by adding three time factors corresponding to the time before, during and after some induction process. recently,  <cit>  have suggested a method which uses b-splines to model single gene profiles and an appropriate f-test to detect the genes with the fitted profiles significantly different across a number of biological conditions. they validate the method on a biological application to identify genes with different temporal behaviour between treated and untreated cells.

in this paper, we propose a statistical test to detect genes with temporal behaviour significantly different across a number of experimental groups. we account for the temporal order in the data by fitting polynomial models to single gene profiles for each of the groups. we derive a hotelling t2-statistic to detect the genes whose fitted profiles are significantly different from each other. we apply the method to the problem of finding genes differentially expressed in four different mouse strains which were profiled at different ages. the biological question and the statistical test are outlined below. the results are presented and extensively discussed in the results and discussion section and conclusions are drawn in the conclusions section the methodology and the data are described in detail in the methods section.

biological question
muscular dystrophies are a heterogeneous group of inherited neuromuscular disorders characterized by progressive muscle wasting and weakness. a distinct subgroup of muscular dystrophies is caused by mutations in the dystrophin-associated glycoprotein complex . the dgc is a scaffold protein complex connecting the actin cytoskeleton with the extracellular matrix, thereby contributing to the contractivity of the muscle and the stability of the sarcolemma during contraction. although genetic mutations in one of the dgc components result in destabilization of the entire complex, the clinical presentation of the diseases associated with these mutations is variable. dystrophin-deficiency leads to the lethal and highly progressive duchenne muscular dystrophy , whereas mutations in one of the sarcoglycans result in recessive forms of limb-girdle muscular dystrophies  that usually display a milder phenotype.

a possible explanation for the variable disease phenotypes could be that the proteins involved have other functionalities than just structural roles. it has been suggested that dgc components are also involved in signal transduction routes  <cit>  that may be differentially affected by the various deficiencies. to identify such differentially affected processes, we have globally analyzed gene expression profiles in wild-type control mice , and mouse models for dmd , lgmd-2c  and lgmd-2e .

this study follows up on a comparison of temporal expression profiles of mdx and wt mice  <cit>  where expression profiles were compared per individual time point and not over the whole time course. given the fact that there were many genes with expression levels gradually decreasing and increasing in time and a distinct subset of genes for which the expression peaked at the age of  <dig> weeks, in this paper we propose a statistical test that is more powerful to detect these patterns of expression. in addition, two different mouse models were added, allowing us to compare the disease progression in the different forms of muscular dystrophy. for this reason, the statistical test was developed so as to allow for the comparison of multiple biological conditions.

in order to capture the temporal expression patterns efficiently, a closed temporal loop design was used as a hybridisation design  <cit> . in these loops, consecutive timepoints were co-hybridised, the last time point being co-hybridised with the first. for each set of  <dig> individuals from different ages, a separate loop was used, resulting in two loops per strain, and a total of  <dig> loops and  <dig> arrays for all four strains.

temporal hotelling t2-test
given gene expression data on a biological system at a number of time points and under different biological conditions, we wish to detect genes with a temporal profile significantly different between the biological conditions.

normalised microarray data are summarised as log-ratios of the gene expressions between the two channels on the same array. depending on the experimental design used to generate the data, these ratios can be either of one condition with respect to a reference sample, if a reference design is used, or of one condition with respect to another, if a loop design is used. in the first step of the modelling process, a simple linear model is considered that converts these observed log-ratios into the parameters of interest that define the gene temporal profile, the true  gene expression with respect to the initial time point.

to account for the temporal order in the data, we model the gene temporal profiles using a polynomial function. as we are interested in detecting genes that peak at a certain time point or genes that are gradually increasing or decreasing over time, we choose to model the temporal profiles using a simple quadratic polynomial. another reason for using simple temporal models is that they facilitate the biological interpretation of the selected genes, especially when the number of biological conditions is high. note that, on applications where one is interested in detecting also other temporal behaviour such as periodic temporal profiles, the same methodology described in this paper can also be performed using a polynomial of higher degree.

the linear model on the log-ratios and the polynomial model on the temporal profiles are combined into one single model, from which the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters, i.e. the coefficients of the polynomials for each biological condition, are obtained. combining the two models into one, as compared to performing the two-steps sequentially, is an efficient way of obtaining estimates of the parameters of interest, whilst fully accounting for the variation in the data.

finally, we implement a hotelling t2-test to detect the genes for which the coefficients of the polynomial models under the different biological conditions are significantly different, i.e. the genes with a different temporal behaviour across the conditions. for the general case where more than two biological conditions are present, the test can be either done in a pairwise fashion, that is by performing a two-condition test for any pair of conditions, or simultaneously. we show in the results how both options can be successfully utilised to gain insight into genes with significantly different temporal profiles across the conditions. the simultaneous test has the advantage of returning one single list of differentially expressed genes, whereas the pairwise test highlights which pairwise comparison is particularly significant, aiding the discovery of potential biomarkers.

RESULTS
simulation study
the underlying assumption behind the statistical test proposed in this paper is that by including the knowledge of the temporal ordering in the data the test will aid the detection of genes with interesting and different temporal profiles across the biological conditions.

to test this assumption, we have performed a simulation study where we compare the temporal hotelling t2-test with an identical test which does not take into account temporal ordering. within our framework, this corresponds to performing a hotelling t2-test on the estimated gene expression profiles, without fitting a quadratic polynomial to these. this test is very similar to an anova-type of procedure, where the time variable is simply considered as one of the factors, but no knowledge of time ordering is considered.

we have simulated gene expressions for  <dig> conditions over  <dig> arrays and  <dig> genes. we have generated the data so that  <dig> of these genes are not differentially expressed between the two conditions, with their expression drawn from a n
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbamrthrhal1wy0l2yhvtyaehbnfgdovwbhrxajfwnaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabawaaegaeaaakeaaimaacqwfnevtaaa@383b@ distribution. the remaining genes are assumed to have different temporal profiles between the two conditions, with the temporal profiles linearly increasing in one condition and decreasing in the other. for all genes, the noise σ was varied uniformly between  <dig>  and  <dig> , whereas the slope of the linear profile for the differentially expressed genes was varied uniformily between  <dig>  and  <dig>  in absolute value. the range for the noise and slope were chosen to reflect the ones found in our real dataset.

analysis of muscular dystrophy dataset
we have applied the temporal hotelling t2-test with second order polynomials on microarray data from wild-type mice and three mouse strains with different forms of muscular dystrophy, to identify genes with differences in temporal expression profiles between the four strains. we compare the results from this test with an identical test that does not take the temporal ordering into account, as described in the previous section.

after benjamini-hochberg  correction for multiple testing, the temporal test selected  <dig> genes under 5% confidence. this is lower than the number of genes selected by the non-temporal test . p-value distributions for temporal and non-temporal tests are shown in figures 2a) and 2b), respectively.  <dig> genes are selected by both tests. in figure 2c), we show that the remaining genes selected by the non-temporal test display a wide distribution of p-values in the temporal test. we hypothesise that these genes show extensive biological variation in expression patterns over time, as was hinted by the simulation study. to demonstrate the validity of this hypothesis, in the next paragraphs, we report on genes which either were found significant by both statistical tests or which had extremely different outcomes in the two tests. we excluded the possibility that the observed differences in temporal profiles between the individual strains were due to technical artefacts arising from the microarray technology. we did so by determining the temporal expression profiles of this selection of genes by the independent quantitative reverse-transcription pcr  technique.

delta-like  <dig> homolog   was amongst the most significant genes according to both tests . there is a strong decrease in expression of this gene from the age of one week, with the rate at which the expression decreases in the different strains being significantly different . this is also apparent in the plot of the fitted polynomials . the trend was confirmed by the qpcr assay . however, in the qpcr assay, an even sharper drop in expression from the first to the second time point is observed, also explaining the differences in heights of the curves in the microarray and qpcr experiments. interestingly, also the gtl <dig> gene , which is imprinted reciprocally to dlk <dig>  demonstrates prolonged expression in mouse models for muscular dystrophies . in sheep, a mutation in the region between the imprinted dlk <dig> and meg <dig> genes gives rise to prolonged postnatal expression of dlk <dig>  and the callipyge muscular hypertrophy phenotype  <cit> . an elevation of hypertrophic fibres is therefore a likely phenotype of the mouse models analysed, and has been established as a hallmark of dmd  <cit> .

like dlk <dig>  calsequestrin  <dig>  is selected with high confidence according to both tests. the qpcr assay confirms its differential expression . however, as for the case of dlk <dig>  the similarity in the shape of the curves between the microarray and qpcr experiments is not comfirmed at the level of the ratio values themselves. this is probably due to differences in the assay set-up and normalisation procedures.

dipeptidylpeptidase  <dig>  was highly ranked in the temporal test  but not in the non-temporal test . this is likely to be caused by the fact that the changes in gene expression are minor but consistent in time . through evaluation of the pairwise comparisons between each strain utilizing the same temporal test, it appeared that the p-values for every comparison with the bsg model were  <dig> , whereas p-values in other pairwise comparisons were greater than  <dig> . this indicates that the behaviour of this gene in bsg is different from the other animal models, which would make it a biomarker for bsg-deficiency. the up-regulation of dpp <dig> in bsg but not in the other mouse models was confirmed by qpcr , and demonstrates the power of the test in the detection of small but consistent temporal changes. dpp <dig>  plays a role in antigen-specific t-cell activation  <cit> , a process which might contribute to the severe phenotype of bsg mice.

titin-cap  is not selected by the temporal test despite very low p-values  in the non-temporal test. tcap is a potentially important gene since tcap mutations result in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 2g  <cit> . we observed a gradual increase over time in all the animal models, including wild-type animals. however, a significant difference in temporal behaviour between mouse models was not found, and both microarray and qpcr experiments demonstrated high overall variability. this is smoothed-out in the fitted polynomials, which are highly similar for the four mouse models . we therefore think that differences in observed expression levels are caused by inter-individual variation rather than by the dystrophic process. similarly, myozenin <dig>  was confirmed to demonstrate high variability across time points in the qpcr experiment . the temporal test seems to be better able to filter out genes with high inter-individual variation when low numbers of replicates are used, as was the case for our study .

d site albumin promoter binding protein  and its downstream target periodically expressed  <dig>  were not identified as differentially expressed using the model with the second-order polynomial, but were significant when higher order polynomials were applied, and were also significant according to the non-temporal test. the wave-like expression patterns observed in the time series of mdx and wt mice were also found in the qpcr experiment . mentioned genes have been found to be regulated by the circadian clock  <cit> . they are not related to the muscular dystrophy but their differential expression is likely to be caused by the time of the day at which the animals were sacrificed. since littermates were used for most timepoints, the time point at which the animals were sacrificed was consistent for a certain strain and age, but variable for animals of different strains and ages. this example shows that our temporal test with higher order polynomials can be successfully used to find genes with more complex temporal expression patterns, if this is of interest to the experimenter.

the coefficients of the fitted polynomials can be used to identify biomarkers for muscular dystrophy in general and for the individual strains, by looking at genes with some interesting specified temporal pattern. as an example, we made a selection of significant genes with the quadratic coefficient less than - <dig>  in mdx, bsg and gsg but not in wt. when fitting a parabolic function, the quadratic coefficient reflects the extreme of the curve. when the quadratic coefficient is negative the extreme is a maximum, corresponding with  upregulation. we ended up with  <dig> genes that were all related to inflammation . without exceptions, these genes were found to be up-regulated in an independent comparative study of mouse models for muscular dystrophy  with bh-corrected p-values ranging from 4e- <dig> to 4e- <dig>  this observation confirms the important contribution of inflammation to the dystrophic phenotype in dystrophin-and sarcoglycan-deficient mice.

as an alternative to the use of the polynomial coefficients to filter out interesting genes amongst the significant ones, one can detect potential biomarker genes for a certain strain by looking at the genes that have significant p-values in the pairwise comparisons of this particular strain with all other strains. table  <dig> shows a list of potential biomarker genes identified at the 5% confidence level. gtl <dig> and dpp <dig> are found as potential biomarkers for mdx and bsg, as already observed above. fibulin  <dig>  is found as a biomarker for mdx. in contrast to wt, bsg and gsg, where the expression of fbln <dig> gradually decreases over time, mdx mice show an initial up-regulation, followed by a sharp reduction in expression at the age of  <dig>  weeks. this results in lower levels of expression in mdx mice than in the other strains from the age of  <dig> weeks. since fbln <dig> seems to be an inhibitor of vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration  <cit> , the observed profile in mdx may hint at increased vascular remodelling activity in these mice, contributing to the higher regenerative activity, compared to other models. atp5j, which encodes for a component of the mitochondrial atp synthase complex, demonstrates a sharp drop in expression in bsg mice at  <dig> and  <dig> weeks of age but not in other animals. this may be indicative of a temporal metabolic crisis in bsg. matrilin <dig>  is much higher expressed in gsg mice aged  <dig> week than in other mice, and remains more highly expressed than in wt mice over the whole time course. as also evident from the many extracellular matrix proteins, such as collagens, decorin, and biglycan, found differentially expressed in previous gene expression profiling studies in muscular dystrophies  <cit> , the differential expression of matn <dig> reflects the extensive ongoing extracellular matrix remodeling in the diseases.

CONCLUSIONS
in most of the analyses of temporal gene expression profiling experiments, the full power of the temporal relationship in the data is not exploited, because not many models include the information of temporal order. this paper describes a simple statistical method that incorporates this information, thereby enabling the identification of genes that show consistent differences in temporal behaviour between a number of biological conditions. the findings from the statistical analysis were extensively validated using a simulation study, quantitative pcr, and a review of the biological function of the identified genes.

the performance of the test was compared to the performance of an identical test that does not take temporal ordering into account. the latter test identified many more genes, but mainly genes that demonstrated more "noisy" temporal profiles, which may not be of much interest since they are mainly caused by large variability between animals and time points. in our study, the smoothing effect of the quadratic polynomial fit is probably essential to filter out these "noisy" gene profiles and select genes with consistent differences between strain. therefore, the described test makes it possible to capture simple trends in the expression of genes using a limited number of biological replicates. more difficult trends can be captured using higher order polynomials, but require more biological replicates and higher sampling rates to avoid overfitting of the data. the same is probably true for the fitting of non-polynomial functions like sigmoids or exponentials, which would have the advantage of better biological interpretability of the coefficients. in addition, non-polynomial functions would require a different type of statistics since the coefficients are not normally distributed and therefore violate the assumptions of the currently presented test.

the temporal hotelling t2-test presented in this paper can be used in any experimental design and for any number of conditions. in this study, however, we have applied it to data coming from a loop design in which subsequent time points were co-hybridized, thereby putting even more emphasis on the temporal relationships in the data. therefore, the described experimental design and data analysis method constitute an important step in the optimisation of temporal expression profiling efforts, both in terms of efficiency  and statistical performance.

