BACKGROUND
defects of the cartilage, as well as of tendons, have been known to be poor healing injuries, which treated by conventional surgical or pharmacological methods often do not lead to complete structural and functional tissue recovery and regeneration. for this purpose, transplantation of autologous or allogeneic pluripotent or terminally-differentiated cells that are expanded ex vivo have been attempted to cure such defects  <cit> . the majority of research concerning mesenchymal stem cells  has been done on rodents or humans. small experimental animals can be used to research the principles of stem cell transplantation therapy, but prior to transferring this technology to the therapy it is important to introduce it to a large-animal model, which is bio-mechanically more relevant to humans. athlete equines are considered valuable large-animal experimental models for osteoarticular and tendon disorders, since most of them can be considered similar to the corresponding human pathologies with regard to pathogenetic mechanisms and clinical outcomes. as a consequence, the application of cell therapy in the horse has attracted considerable interest not only as a new therapeutic approach for equine musculoskeletal diseases but also because it can provide numerous inputs for making progress in clinical application of msc to human medicine, especially in musculoskeletal health problems  <cit> . joint disease, and specifically osteoarthritis , is one of the most prevalent and debilitating diseases affecting both humans and horses. the equine as animal model is a potential donor of relatively large amounts of tissue and cells, and consequently leads to sufficient yield of isolated mscs, providing further opportunity to use them in numerous in vitro and in vivo experiments.

some of the challenges in stem cell research are the expansion, propagation, and genetic manipulation of functional adult stem cells. the clinical application of neural stem cells will be limited by logistic and ethical problems associated with their isolation and by potential immunologic incompatibility due to the requirement for allogeneic transplantation. on the contrary, adult stem cells derived from mesodermal sources, such as bone marrow and adipose tissue, can be obtained from patients with greater ease and because autologous transplantation obviates immunologic incompatibilities.

although most of the pioneering studies have been performed on bone marrow-derived msc, recently adipose tissue has attracted interest as a source of multipotent cells for therapeutic applications. adipose tissue is ubiquitous and uniquely expandable. most patients possess excess fat that can be harvested making adipose tissue an ideal source for clinical research. adipose-derived stromal cells  have been examined as an alternative to bone marrow stromal cells and have been shown to be comparable  <cit> . here, the transient and stable genetic manipulation of equine adscs  using viral and non viral systems was evaluated, thus providing the proof of principle of the ability of eadscs to potentially deliver bio-active factors in a paracrine manner to the site of the cell injection; moreover, the secreted antigen could metastatically, i.e. by blood stream, be delivered to other body sites following cell homing.

RESULTS
hcmv promoter is strongly activated in eadscs
although epigenetic regulation of a transgene is very important, transgene transcription is strongly dependent on the type of promoter employed to drive the expression of a desired monocistronic or polycistronic open reading frame . therefore, several promoters were tested in a transient transfection assay. to be able to quantify promoters transactivation by the pool of transcription factors made by eadscs, herpes simplex virus timidine kinase , phosphoglycerokinase , simian virus  <dig> , bovine herpesvirus  <dig> immediate early  and human cytomegalovirus immediate early  promoters were sub-cloned in front of the pgl <dig> vector luciferase reporter gene. the generated constructs , as well as pgl <dig> empty vector, used as a control, were co-transfected with ptk-renilla for data normalization into eadscs. twenty-four hours post-transfection, cells were lysed and luciferase activity was measured. hcmv gave the best expression , thus it was used for further experiments. although this experiment gave good information about the type of promoter better transactivated by eadscs transcriptional machinery, no information could be achieved in terms of efficiency of transfection, which is tightly dependent on the method employed to transfect cells. efficiency of transfection of eadscs was measured comparing  <dig> different methods of transfection. eadscs were transfected by calcium phosphate precipitation, lipofection and electroporation with pegfp-c <dig> plasmid containing the hcmv promoter, which was shown to be nicely activated into eadscs, and the enhanced green fluorescent protein  as a reporter gene. transfected cells were analyzed at  <dig> h post transfection by fluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry for egfp-expressing cells and the ratio between transfected and untrasfected cells was calculated on the base of three repeated experiments. electroporation gave the best efficiency of transfection, reaching the ~95%, respect to calcium phosphate precipitation and lipofection .

viral transduction of eadscs keeps stable transgene expression following differentiation
eadscs labelling is a very important issue when cell fate in terms of differentiation, bio-distribution and engraftment need to be monitored in vivo. as a first attempt to transgenize eadscs, two different viral vectors were employed: a self-inactivating replicating incompetent third generation lentiviral vector  <cit>  expressing egfp under the control of hcmv promoter and a newly developed bovine herpesvirus  <dig> -based vector  <cit>  expressing egfp under the control of hcmv promoter. eadscs were infected with both vectors and efficiency of transduction was monitored at  <dig> and  <dig> h post infection. although both viral vectors transduced eadscs with a very high efficiency,  <dig> % for the bohv-4-based vector  and  <dig> % for the lentiviral vector  respectively, eadscs were highly permissive for bohv-4-based vector replication. in fact, a strong cytopathic effect  developed in eadscs as far as  <dig> h post bohv-4-based vector infection, leading to an high cell free virus titer . lentiviral transduced eadscs were grown for  <dig> passages, transgene was constantly expressed for all passages tested , and differentiating properties were maintained when eadscs were induced to differentiate with osteogenic medium . the state of differentiation was confirmed with both alizarin and von kossa staining .

stably transfected eadscs keep transgene expression following drug selection and differentiation
starting from the assumption that the hcmv promoter was the best promoter to drive the expression of an heterologous gene in eadscs and that electroporation was the best physical method to transfect eadscs, a suitable combination between a reporter gene and a selectable marker integrated into the same vector to stably label and select eadscs was investigated.

as a selectable marker, the neo gene , due to its low toxicity and large window of concentration, was used. whereas egfp, due to its high stability and direct detectability in living cells, was employed as a reporter gene. although egfp and neo could be used as two independent expression cassettes integrated into the same vector, this kind of approach could not guarantee egfp and neo simultaneous expression. g <dig> drug selection could favour neo expression respect to egfp, leading to a certain number of stably transfected, g418-resistant but not green eadscs. therefore, two different strategies were applied. first, an expression vector, pcmv-egfp/neo , was generated by fusing the egfp orf in frame with the neo orf downstream the hcmv promoter. a second expression vector, pcmv-egfp-ires-neo , containing an internal ribosomal entry site  that allows the simultaneous translation of two proteins  from a single transcript, was generated. equal number of eadscs were electroporated  with equal amounts of pcmv-egfp/neo, pcmv-egfp-ires-neo and psp <dig>  as a mock-transfected control. following electroporation, cells were left to recover overnight and drug selection was applied with  <dig> μg of g418/ml of complete medium. selected g418-resistant cells were counted when all mock-electroporated eadscs died . as shown in fig. 5b and 5c, pcmv-egfp/neo leaded to a higher number of both g <dig> resistant and green eadscs, compared to eadscs electroporated with pcmv-egfp-ires-neo . furthermore, pcmv-egfp/neo stably transfected eadscs maintained osteogenic properties as well as egfp expression when induced to differentiate  . state of differentiation was confirmed with both alizarin and von kossa staining . thus, electroporated gfp/neo fusion peptide along with hcmv promoter could be considered an efficient and versatile system to generate stably labelled eadscs to be used in vivo.

paracrine delivery of secreted protein by transgenized eadscs in vivo
taking into account eadscs capability to stably allocate a transgene in vitro without detrimental effect on their physiology, such characteristic was further investigated in vivo.

as a general method to demonstrate the capability of transgenized eadscs to deliver a potential secreted factor, an immunodominant secreted antigen previously shown to elicit a strong immune response was adopted  <cit> . eadscs were transfected with a construct, psece <dig>  <cit> , expressing the viral secreted antigen bovine viral diarrhea virus glycoprotein e <dig>  and eadscs stably expressing the secreted antigen  were generated as previously described  <cit>  . immediately after the collection of the preimmune serum,  <dig> horses were intramuscularly inoculated with  <dig> ×  <dig> ge2-eadscs. an identical inoculation was performed  <dig> weeks later. blood samples were collected at  <dig> weeks following each inoculum from all animals for the assessment of antibodies against bvdv ge <dig>  furthermore, body temperature and development of any adverse reaction to the inoculum were monitored daily. none of the animals developed fever or other clinical signs during the time of observation . all animals developed a serum neutralizing antibody response against bvdv, detectable the fourth week after the first viral inoculation . it was therefore possible to conclude that eadscs were able to express and deliver an exogenous secreted factor, in the present case a viral antigen, able to elicit the humoral immune response into the inoculated animals.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
adipose-derived cells differentiate into several cell types  <cit> . although it is not clear if a single adipose-derived cell can differentiate into all of these lineages, in different labs adscs clones expressing four cell lineages   <cit>  have been generated, thereby demonstrating the presence of multipotent and oligopotent cells within adipose tissue. self-renewing and multipotent adipose-derived progenitor and stem cells have been shown to be the ideal candidates for the generation of induced pluripotent stem  cells by transduction with four standard reprogramming factors, c-myc, klf <dig>  oct <dig>  and sox <dig>  <cit> ,  <cit> . moreover, adscs exhibit high intrinsic expression of self-renewal supporting factors and can effectively serve as feeder layers of their own or as independent pluripotent cells  <cit> ,  <cit> . since equine ips  have not been generated so far, methods to genetically manipulate eadscs would be of great interest for a future generation of eips. therefore, the genetic manipulation of eadscs represents a prerequisite for the above-listed purposes.

transcriptional activity of different promoters was tested by dual luciferase reporter assay and hcmv promoter was proven to be the better transcribed by eadscs. although gene delivery was achieved with high efficiency by a vsv-g pseudo-typed self-inactivating replicating-incompetent third-generation lentiviral vector, as well as by bohv-4-based vector, a safer physical method to stably transfect eadscs was assessed, to avoid the concerns attributed to the use of integrating and non-integrating viral vectors. for instance, it is well known that integrating lentiviral vectors could lead to insertional mutagenesis, whereas the un-integrating bohv- <dig> induced a strong cytopathic effect on eadscs due to high viral replication. therefore, electroporation with optimized parameters was employed and shown to be as good as viral transduction in term of gene delivery efficiency. moreover, successfully transduced or transfected eadscs maintained their differentiating capability when induced to differentiate toward the osteogenic lineage. osteogenic differentiation property is widely accepted as the biological read-out for the differentiation of cells with a mesenchymal derivation, as is the case for eadscs.

expressing multiple transgenes within the same target eadscs could be required for multiple gene transfer and eadscs-based therapy application as well as for tracking eadscs engraftment and differentiation within a specific area of the animal body. gene function studies are best performed by expressing cdnas together with a marker gene; by means of this approach, genetically modified eadscs can be identified in vitro and in vivo. similarly, transgenized eadscs-based therapy applications can be improved by purification of gene-corrected eadscs before in vivo administration, taking advantage of coordinate expression of drug selectable markers or living colour reporter genes. coordinate expression of more than one transgene in eadscs is essential when the activity to be reconstituted by gene transfer depends on multiple subunits encoded by different genes, or requires the synergism of separate molecules. the co-expression of neo and egfp as a fusion protein  in eadscs was successfully obtained, since eadscs were simultaneously labelled and selected in a stable form and with high efficiency, compared to the inefficient ires strategy, in which re-initiation of the translation of the second cistron, in this case the neo orf, was highly inefficient and leaded to a low number of drug selected eadscs. however, a further alternative approach could be employed, which is based on 2a self-cleaving peptides of the foot and mouth disease virus  and other picorna-viruses  <cit> ; however, application of this technology has been limited until recently because it requires molecular engineering of both transgenes and introduces sequence changes that may affect the activity, stability and immunogenicity of their protein product.

mscs that act as trojan horses to deliver therapeutic factors could be one step forward to gene delivery in suitable diseases, for instance joint- and teno-ligament disorders and eadscs seem to have all the characteristics for such kind of objective. as a matter of fact, stably transfected eadscs with secreted antigen were able to immunize horses when eadscs were intramuscularly injected, showing that any kind of potentially therapeutic secreted factor could be delivered by eadscs upon transgenesis. for instance, neurotrophic and trophic factors , ciliary neurotrophic factor, vascular endothelial-derived growth factor, insulin-like growth factor- <dig>  and bone morphogenic proteins  have been demonstrated promising in recovery or delaying the onset of many diseases  <cit> . in the same manner, the use of phage display-based single-chain miniantibodies , which are small and consist of a single fusion polypeptide, has been applied. scfvs are often derived from natural or synthetic cdna libraries, but they can also be engineered from the sequences encoding the variable regions of individual hybridomas. in the latter case, scfvs retain the antigen binding properties of the parent monoclonal antibody  <cit> . however, clinical trials using neurotrophic factors or scfvs have been unsuccessful thus far because of problems with drug pharmacokinetics, dose-limiting toxicities and the potential for antibody inactivation. therefore, significant efforts have focused on optimal delivery methods for these factors. several studies have investigated pump-based delivery of recombinant proteins or direct gene delivery by viral and non-viral vectors, although with contrasting results, thus the transplantation of eadscs expressing these factors could represent an alternative and possibly winning strategy. interestingly, many works demonstrated that adscs not genetically-altered to express specific factors also showed a trend for increased neuromuscular function and increased survival, potentially through trophic factors that adscs themselves naturally provide  <cit> ,  <cit> . further study of eadscs based on these results is certainly warranted to advance their clinical application in individuals with specific diseases, as is the case of joint diseases and tendon injuries in horses. however, several key questions remain open: how many injections will be needed in a patient? will the therapy be a one-time delivery? will the cells survive, integrate, and express for long periods of time in animal tissues? will the cells migrate to other organs? in any case, this work represents an additional step for the development of therapeutic approaches for cell-based therapy in the horse itself and in the horse as a model for human diseases.

