BACKGROUND
growth in fishes is a complex physiological trait involving many interacting environmental and genetic factors. environmental factors act to both enhance and constrain the expression of underlying genes that may influence growth such that different environments may modulate growth phenotypes to the extent that seemingly identical genotypes may often yield opposite or opposing phenotypic outcomes. indeed such genotype x environment interactions can be common place in quantitative genetic studies making predictions of growth performance solely on genotypic indices difficult, or potentially flawed. identifying genes that may be key indicators of potential growth performance in fishes is even more complicated than in other vertebrate classes, given that fish muscle growth is influenced by genes that both regulate muscle cell recruitment and myogenic hyperplasia or cellular proliferation, as well as genes that regulate the growth and fusion of individual myotubes leading to myofibrillar formation and hypertrophy  <cit> . hypertrophy may be regarded as a growth stage in muscle development leading to an increase in muscle biomass. species within other vertebrate classes experience muscle growth primarily via hypertrophy after a period of early juvenile myogenesis of precursor satellite cells. environmental factors, however, may regulate both hyperplasic and hypertrophic cycles in fishes and understanding how the environment affects both of these processes is critical to understanding fish growth.

fish growth can be cyclic in nature especially in temperate species where seasonal shifts in both photoperiod and temperature can condition fish into faster growth phases  and slower growth periods accompanied by declining water temperatures and photoperiod regimes . additionally in certain groups of fishes such as the salmonids, it has also been demonstrated that individual fish can have variable growth cycles that differ significantly on a daily basis  <cit> , and may also exhibit rhythms dependent upon full and new moon cycles  <cit> . over-riding these cycles may be physiological ‘set points’ that can initiate developmental transitions from one life-history stage to another. for example, it is known that previous growth trajectories and lipid metabolic stores may trigger the onset of sexual maturation and smoltification events in species such as atlantic salmon  and chinook salmon  . as such, size thresholds reached by a fish during their early juvenile growth phases can initiate profound physiological changes among individuals at varying ages even within a single family.

many of the direct environmental inputs that can alter the growth expression of a fish are nutritional in nature and therefore are difficult, if not impossible to control unless studies are undertaken in a laboratory setting. even within a controlled laboratory or hatchery setting, where experimental lots of fish are fed identical diets, it is impossible to correct for intraspecific social interactions that establish social dominance hierarchies that may in turn influence feeding rates and growth unless fish are held in isolation. this in turn has confounding influences as well, as some species ) are known to inhibit feeding responses unless they are reared above certain stocking densities  <cit> . while it is acknowledged that no method of husbandry can produce exactly perfect rearing conditions in which to measure growth performance, insights into the genes that may be important in altering growth rates can be obtained by rearing fish under similar conditions related to biomass densities and feeding rates in controlled hatchery conditions, while altering only one or two environmental conditions to assess their influence.

we examined the influence of photoperiod as induced by seasonality on the gene expression profiles of white muscle tissue of large and small size-selected rainbow trout . two lots of fish derived from a commercial strain were made in september and december of  <dig>  but were tested when fish in both lots were approximately 15 months of age. the september lot was examined in december when the photoperiod was declining towards winter solstice while the december lot was examined in late february during a period of increasing photoperiod towards spring equinox . seasonality was found to have a profound influence on white muscle gene expression profiles in these fish. despite the strong influence of photoperiod regime on gene expression differences, many salient differences were also evident between large and small fish that were selected for the experiment, which appeared to be consistent patterns of gene expression across growing seasons. we regard the genes showing strong up-regulation of expression in either fast-growing or slow-growing rainbow trout across seasons as potential signature genes for growth differences in salmonid fishes and these genes may serve as a model for other temperate fish species having similar nutritional requirements to salmonid fishes.fig.  <dig> experimental design depicting the selection of size-matched differences of a large and small fish selected from  <dig> different paternal half-sib families in each of two seasonal spawning lots . september fish were sampled during a declining growth phase  while december lot fish were sampled during an increasing growth phase  when they were approximately  <dig> months of age.



RESULTS
on average each read aligned to  <dig>  possible contigs using the nextgene alignment parameters. following edger filtering  <dig>  contigs were detected as contributing to the expression profiles among the  <dig> fish tested for size and seasonal differences. box plots for the normalized rpkm values of these contigs among the  <dig> fish are shown in additional file  <dig>  seasonal sampling times had a far greater influence on differential transcriptome abundance patterns in the fish than did size differences between the fish. the reads from more than twice as many contigs were observed to be significantly more abundant  in either the september lot  or december lot  compared to small  and large  fish . mds profiles also indicate that expression profiles are more similar within either september or december lot fish rather than clustering based upon the size categories .fig.  <dig> number of contigs  with differential gene expression at the nominal p ≤  <dig>  and fdr  <dig>  level in large and small fish, and across seasonal groupings  out of  <dig>  possible contigs assessed 

fig.  <dig> multidimensional scaling plot  of gene expression profiles observed within december lot fish , september lot fish , large fish , and small fish 



size differences
genes differentially expressed between large and small fish are shown in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. results from the compilation of go terms into go slim categories and their revigo estimations indicate that  <dig> categories possessed higher gene counts in large fish, while  <dig> categories were more abundant in small fish . the greater variation in ontology classes upregulated in large fish is also supported by the panther-amigo  <dig> gsea analysis . in total,  <dig> biological process go terms were associated with over-represented gene classes in the large fish, while  <dig> go terms were related to genes having higher counts in the small fish . terms related to ‘carbohydrate’, ‘lipid’, ‘stress response’, ‘blood properties’, and ‘response to wounding’ were present in the large fish, while terms related to ‘muscle fiber organization’ were more abundant in small fish, terms such as  ‘nucleotide/nucleoside processing’ were common to both groups. broad institute gsea configurations obtained with bp, biocarta, kegg, and reactome pathway analysis yielded essentially the same results as those obtained from the panther-based analysis in that  <dig> terms were more highly represented in large fish , while  <dig> terms were more highly represented in small fish . this latter gsea emphasizes the expression of apoptotic pathway genes in larger fish. differences in the combined analysis relate to ’transport’ components. the gsea indicates genes within the ‘transport’ go category are more highly expressed in small fish, whereas the go slim categorizer compilations indicate that the terms ‘transport’ and ‘ion transport’ are more highly delineated in large fish.fig.  <dig> results from the revigo analysis analyzing significant differences in fdr corrected gene counts for biological process goslim categories. large and small fish differences are depicted in the two left-had panels, while differences between december vs. september fish are shown in the right-hand panels. gene ontology categories with significantly different higher gene counts between large vs. small fish and between december vs. september fish are indicated



to assess which gene classes could be considered to contain genes that provide a signature of enhanced growth capabilities we referenced the gsea broad institute analyses output as this gives a listing of signature transcripts aligned to each over-represented pathway category. within these groupings large fish possessed many transcripts with overlapping functions related to carbohydrate metabolism , lipid metabolism , and the stress response including immune response. this latter category included genes in the p <dig> downstream pathways, immune system, innate immune system, complement cascade, classical complement pathway, cmyc and cmyb activated pathways, and il <dig> pathways . pathway analysis also indicated that processes such as cell death, apoptosis, programmed cell death, regulation of programmed cell death, and pathways related to vascular processes such as complement and coagulation cascades, and lymph angiogenesis were more highly expressed in large fish.

smaller fish were characterized by higher abundance of gene transcripts related to several catabolic process pathways, as well as regulation of the nervous system, nucleic acids, and translation, several categories related to muscle development and protein metabolism, cardiomyopathy, and transport categories including protein transport . large and small fish shared genes belonging to regulation of biological quality, system process, organ development, system development, anatomical structure development, multicellular organism development, and reactome immune system suggesting that genes within these categories may not be the best predictors of growth differences between large and small fish. however, none of the  <dig> or  <dig> genes detected within large and small fish, respectively, and assigned to the reactome immune system category were shared between the size classes.

contigs from certain gene sets were highly expressed in both large and small fish. as an example, it was observed that although the repertoire of genes in the glycolysis pathway was greater in larger fish, two gene groups, glyceraldehyde phosphate −3-dehydrogenase , and phosphofructokinase muscle  were highly expressed in both large and small fish. these two gene classes were also shared in the cmyc active pathway between the two size classes. future research may still establish the utility of utilizing subsets of genes within gene set pathways shared by large and small fish in defining growth patterns between the size classes.

the single most abundant class of transcripts detected in the large fish were the g0/g <dig> switch  <dig> genes . these genes are involved in lipid metabolism in vertebrates via negative regulation of adipose triglyceride lipase enzyme  levels, and may also play a role in apoptosis and inflammation  <cit> . the transcripts from this gene were also discovered to be the most highly up-regulated gene in adipose tissue from a single large rainbow trout sampled from a commercial japanese strain  <cit> . the most abundant transcript class found in small fish where the creatine kinase muscle-specific  genes, with both mitochondrial  and cytosol  forms represented by several transcripts. creatine kinase genes are involved in energy metabolism in shuttling phosphate  equivalents from atp production in the mitochondria for storage as phosphocreatine  within the mitochondria and cytosol. both mtck and sck forms can interconvert atp and cr to pcr and adp. the location of these genes between the inner and outer mitochondrial matrix and throughout the cytosolic sarcoplasm facilitates and ensures a ready store of atp to fuel actin/myosin filament sliding and cellular transport functions  <cit> .

increased ck expression is also a physiological hallmark of endurance training regimes, although in the context of the current study the very high levels seen for both cytosolic and mitochondrial forms of this gene may also be indicative of reactive oxygen stress imbalance. abnormally high levels of these genes result from over-compensatory reactions to ros inhibition of ck functions  <cit> , which matches the gene expression profiles observed. large fish had much higher expression for many ros inhibiting enzymes such as glutathione peroxidases and reductases, indicating heightened stress response capabilities. calcium voltage-gated channel genes  were also more up-regulated in small fish and could signify greater imbalance in calcium signaling in small fish. these genes are also associated with kegg cardiomyopathy classifications .

the transcriptome profiles exhibited by large and small fish in this study share many similarities with exercise regime characteristics exhibited by athletes engaged in performance training. small fish present profiles that share similarities in part with endurance/aerobic muscle performance  <cit>  such as greater expression of genes related to β-oxidation of fats, higher pprc <dig>  camkii, and p <dig> expression. small fish also show profiles more consistent with lowered energy status  such as heighted expression of phospholipase c which is linked to activation of ampk. however, it should be noted that ampk levels did not differ between large and small fish, although levels of tsc <dig> were higher in smaller fish. conversely, larger fish show metabolic profiles that could be categorized as stress/resistance training-like. characteristic of this syndrome is a greater reliance on glycogen metabolism with increased levels of genes related to glycogen breakdown  and formation , and enhanced gluconeogenesis .

upstream signaling genes of akt activation such as pi3k were also more abundant in large fish, and cytoskeletal components  appear elevated in large fish. the repertoire displayed in large fish, however, is not entirely consistent with enhanced protein accretion given the fact that genes such as murf <dig>  calpain, nf-κb, tp53inp <dig>  and traf-tnf receptor-associated genes appear to be more highly expressed in this size class. this suggests cellular apoptosis/turnover would be elevated in larger fish. higher expression of cell cycle component genes such as cyclin d <dig>  and ap- <dig> complex genes  in large fish conforms to a stress training model. however, the functions of the jun component transcriptional activators is complex and may have both inhibitory and inductive influences on cell cycle progression dependent upon other physiological signals  <cit> . additionally, the higher activation of translational machinery subunits such as eif4e in large fish is indicative of enhanced akt signaling, however, a greater number of nucleobase processing components  reflecting elevated protein synthesis were in fact more abundant in smaller fish.

the observation that protein synthetic genes are expressed at higher levels in smaller fish is more consistent with gene expression profiles observed after eccentric muscle training regimes in humans  <cit> . four different categories of expression profile were noted in the study by kostek et al.  <cit>  examining load-balanced eccentric and concentric gene expression profiles in young exercise-trained human males. in  <dig> of these four categories , genes or gene family member expression patterns were more similar between small rainbow trout and human eccentric muscle profiles , and concentric patterns matched those for large fish . however, conflicting responses were also observed . in two of the four categories, many homologous gene families were detected that exhibited a high abundance in both small and large fish including the most highly expressed genes, the tetraspanins. one gene class, sine oculis homeobox  that showed marked upregulation during concentric exercise possessed a homolog that was also observed to be highly abundant in large fish . six genes are known to regulate myogenesis  <cit> , and although six <dig> is not currently recognized as a myogenic inducer, further research in fishes may reveal broader transcription factor functions for this family of genes. these findings match a model that suggests large fish may exhibit a greater affinity to concentric muscle contraction output. however, the second most highly upregulated gene detected during eccentric contractions  <cit>   was also more highly expressed in large fish.

our current knowledge appears to limit the ability to match muscle growth trajectories with performance type expression patterns, if indeed such a match can be made. however, if future research can more directly identify key indicator genes of eccentric vs. concentric muscle physiology, it may be possible to use these gene expression profiles to predict fish growth, and couple these predictions to exercise performance. large fish in general might be expected to show enhanced expression for both eccentric and concentric expression profiles as stress resistance training involves both types of movements. nonetheless, it is an attractive hypothesis that suggests small fish may be able to sustain prolonged swimming activity in captivity, which they are expected to display in order to avoid confrontations with larger fish, by utilizing enhanced eccentric contractions which generate increased muscle force while utilizing less energy  <cit> . the suggestion that titin, a major anchoring protein in sarcomere assembly provides the rigidity necessary to support eccentric stiffness  <cit>  also supports the hypothesis that small fish use enhanced eccentric force to drive their swimming given the fact that titin transcripts were more highly expressed in small vs. large fish .

caloric restrictions in fish, which likely afflict smaller fish to a greater degree than large fish, have also been observed to shift muscle fibre growth patterns leading to increased hypertrophy of fibres in transgenic coho salmon growth models  <cit> . however, larger fish appear to have greater white muscle fibre diameters than smaller fish since hypertrophy appears to minimize energetic costs during muscle growth  <cit> . maximal fibre diameter differences attained do not appear to differ more than  <dig> x between large and small fish within a species despite having body mass differences that could exceed an order of magnitude  <cit> . diffusion constraints of oxygen nutrient supply to growing fibres likely force higher hyperplastic fibre recruitment in large fish  <cit> , and increased hyperplastic growth in larger fish may in part be driven by greater expression of transcription factors   <cit>  that enhance muscle fibre formation rather than hypertrophy. the fact that most fish species including salmonids express hyperplasic fibre formation throughout most of their lives may confound their associated functions with normal muscle physiology.

seasonal differences
when comparisons were made between the gene expression profiles of large and small fish within each growing season compared to the profiles obtained across the growing seasons combined, large fish were observed to have greater similarities to dec. lot fish while small fish had greater similarities to sept. lot fish. of the  <dig> distinct contigs discovered with significant expression differences  across either size classes or seasons,  <dig> of these were shared between sept. lot and small fish, and  <dig> were common to both large and dec. fish. when dec. fish were compared to the combined seasonal profiles for small fish,  <dig> contigs were identified as shared between both groups, while  <dig> contigs were shared between sept. and large fish . these differences were highly significant .

the most highly abundant contigs in the dec. lot fish were those associated with carbohydrate metabolism , while sept. lot fish exhibited high expression levels for genes associated with transport , transport and defense , and signaling . ndrg <dig>  is of interest given recent findings that downregulation of this gene is linked to increased pip <dig> signaling leading to enhanced akt activation  <cit> . hence increased upregulation of ndrg <dig> may be coupled to growth suppression via dampened akt activation. many of the contig reads that were highly voluminous in both the dec. lot fish and large fish included many carbohydrate metabolism genes such as pfkm, pkm, gapdh, aldoa, fbp <dig>  gpi, and ldha as well as gadl <dig>  saa, apoe, myh and hspb <dig> indicative of transport, anatomical structure and stress response components. smaller fish shared many ckm, ckmt1a, and myh component contigs with sept. lot fish and also notably ndrg <dig>  foxl <dig>  and pon <dig> .

sarcomere assembly
to address one of the main objectives of the study, we compared the possible expression differences of genes involved in the synthesis of muscle myofibrillar components between large and small fish as well as sept. vs dec. lot fish. generally, greater differences were observed between the seasonal lots compared to the size categories of fish and these differences were also differentially portioned among the sarcomere components. for example, it appeared that a greater proportion of the z-disc component genes  were abundant in dec. lot, and large fish, while actin fibrillar components  were more plentiful in sept. lot fish. larger fish also appeared to have higher upregulation of several sarcolemma costamere anchor proteins such as pdz + pdlim proteins, itgb1/ <dig>  and hsp <dig> stabilizing proteins. myosin fibrillar components had different contig alignments that were up-regulated in both seasonal lots for genes such as myosin binding protein, myosin light chain, myosin heavy chain components, and titin . differences between large and small fish were not as pronounced as those present between sept. and dec. fish, although profiles in small fish suggest greater upregulation of the fibrillar components as evidenced by higher expression of mlc, titin, nebulin, and xin-actin compared to large fish. myotubule fusion may also be higher in this class as evidenced by enhanced cd <dig> expression  <cit> .

large fish showed enhanced abundance of the m- and z-line component gene reads which suggests that ‘scaffolding’ processes may be a general feature of faster growth, or perhaps more precisely during enhanced growth phases, as the m- and z-line component genes were also general signatures in the fish during accelerated spring equinox growth. conversely, the observation that certain myofibrillar component genes  appear more highly upregulated in small fish indicates that key i- and a-line component genes may assemble at different times or rates between large and small fish. these findings are somewhat paradoxical given that anatomically larger fish have far greater component assemblies for all these gene classes than do small fish, so it remains to be assessed when these gene products are more highly expressed in large fish. one possibility is that circadian cycling of sarcomere components occurs, whereby larger fish may have enhanced expression for the myofibrillar gene class components during scotic periods of the diurnal cycle, which is preceded by preparatory ‘scaffolding’  recruitment during the photic period of the cycle. however, many aquaculture strains of salmonids are reared under constant light conditions as juveniles given that this procedure has been found to increase growth rates. hence, if circadian rhythms influence growth assembly proteins then they may also be entrained by other external stimuli such as feeding schedules that need not necessarily be reliant upon differential light cycles.

although not firmly established, it is generally regarded that the m-line component is the last structure to assemble, while z-line components may initiate sarcomere assembly  <cit> . the addition of new sarcomere units appears to proceed bidirectionally within each myocyte through reorganization of costamere cytoskeletal sites along the sarcolemma  <cit> . key genes involved in this reorganization are desmins, β-integrins, α-actinin, α-actinin lim-associated proteins, and several heat-shock proteins and as indicated above, these classes have higher expression in larger fish suggesting that during the photic period which corresponds to peak energy acquisition phases of the diurnal cycle, scaffolding initiation is more enhanced in larger fish. an additional signature gene of increased z-line scaffolding   <cit>  appears to be more highly expressed in dec. lot fish, which would be indicative of an increased growth phase response. if z- and m-line formations represent the nascent and ultimate steps, respectively, in sarcomere assembly, then the current findings are difficult to interpret as large fish have enhanced expression for component genes in both of these anatomical clusters suggestive of simultaneous formation. whether fish differ from the mammalian model with regard to sarcomere assembly will require further research.

greater exploration of the circadian and circannual regulation of gene expression differences in rainbow trout would be beneficial as previous studies have indicated the possibility that several carbohydrate and lipid metabolic genes will exhibit circadian fluctuations in expression . circadian coupling to daily energy fluctuations and control of energy status through positive regulators of anabolic processes such as akt and pi3k, and catabolic processes mediated via ampk and pgc1α, has also been reported in mammalian models,  <cit> . determining whether these processes occur in the same way in fishes requires investigation. confirmation to expected profiles was evident in the current study, however, as noted by the postulated higher expression of pi3k in large fish and pgc1α in smaller fish. additionally, the expression profiles for major proposed seasonal regulators of growth  also match expectations as evidenced by the inferred higher expression of leptin-receptors in sept. fish based upon transcript reads.

comparison of rnaseq profiles with previous growth-related expression studies in salmonids
in a comparison of feed-restricted rainbow trout to control normal fed rainbow trout kondo et al.  <cit>  used both microarray data and quantitative pcr results to examine expression profiles between control or faster growing fish to those of restricted feed  or slower growing fish. microarray data from this study identified  <dig> contigs having > 3-fold expression differences between the two groups of fish, and qpcr retesting for  <dig> of these contigs supported the microarray dataset in three instances . in addition, qpcr data also indicated higher expression levels for both growth hormone receptors i and ii  in rf-fish. differential expression for  <dig> of the  <dig> genes was not evident within the current dataset, while for  <dig> of the  <dig> remaining genes faster growing fish had higher expression levels for g0s <dig>  aldoa, pfkm, pgam, tpi , fabp <dig>  fabp <dig>  and gapdh, while slower-growing fish had higher expression levels for ghr <dig> and ghr <dig> similar to the findings from kondo et al.  <cit> . for one gene, fbp, higher levels were detected in larger fish in the current study in contrast to higher levels found in rf-fish  <cit> . however, as mentioned previously, in the case of gapdh and pfkm, it should be pointed out that both large and small fish had higher expression levels for these genes within different contig classes. these likely reflect different duplicate copies and/or splice variants of the genes, and highlight the complex nature of expression profiles that may be obtained from genomes having undergone duplication events.

in a similar study using coho salmon  overturf et al.  <cit>  used  <dig> groups of fish to compare gene expression profiles among reduced ration  vs. full-fed  growth hormone-transgenic-crossed fish, domestic fish, and wild caught fish. the transgenic-crossed  families were produced from matings between a growth hormone-transgenic line and wild fish. growth rates of the domestic strain were very high and similar to ff-tc fish, and hence these two groups were considered models of faster growth compared to the rr-tc and wild fish. twenty-one different genes were evaluated using qpcr assays, and the majority of these genes did not display any differences between large and small fish in the current study. nine of these genes are regulators of early myogenesis, and their levels of expression were low in the current study. differences were detected in both studies, however, among  <dig> genes regulating tissue growth and turnover. calpain  <dig>  and fbp levels were higher in domestic fish and ff-tc fish  <cit>  which match the profiles found in large fish in the current study. murf and igfbp <dig> expression overlapped in  <dig> of the  <dig> coho salmon groups, and the data for igfbp <dig> in the current study matches this finding. we found higher expression for different igfbp <dig> contigs in both large and small fish in the current study, while murf expression for one contig was weakly higher in larger fish. the differential patterns found for igfbp <dig>  which are similar to those for gapdh and pfkm, alludes to the possibility that different duplicated gene forms may possess different functions. for two genes, long form of calpastatin  and atrogin , higher expression in domestic and ff-tc fish was reported  <cit> , while we observed higher expression in small fish. in contrast to the coho salmon study, however, it was found that capn <dig> and castl levels were significantly higher in restricted-feed rainbow trout compared to faster growing controls  <cit> . these differences reinforce the need for more studies on the functional and triggered transcriptomic states that may characterize physiological growth states in salmonids. furthermore, there is a need to interpret these findings using information from all gene copies within the genome.

sex
examination of the gene expression profile differences between female and male fish revealed fairly similar levels of contigs detected with significant  differences  . however, panther-gsea revealed a greater diversity of pathways in males . overall,  <dig> go terms were enriched in males, versus  <dig> in females . similar results were found from the microarray expression profile comparisons of all-female lots of rainbow trout compared to mixed-sex lots  <cit> . this led to the suggestion that greater variability in the expression profiles of males could be coupled to the more variable growth responses observed in mixed-sex lots compared to all-female lots derived from neomale  sires  <cit> . the broad institute-gsea indicated that both sexes had high expression of genes within muscle development, nucleotide/nucleoside processing, translation, transcription, apoptosis, cytoskeletal and anatomical development, and myofibril assembly pathways. males, however, appeared to have profiles that more closely matched those of faster growing or larger rainbow trout in that they have elevated components for lipid metabolism. enhanced representation of several component classes of genes related to transport were observed in females. notable in this regard were several genes involved with calcium metabolism  . enhanced calcium levels have previously been reported in female compared to male fish, as ca++ ion actively binds to vitellogenin and is important in egg development  <cit> . thus, even in 15-month old juveniles, calcium sequestration appears to differ between the sexes. this is also supported by the observation that calcitonin gene-related peptide  receptors were more elevated in male fish, which would serve to decrease ca++ levels. however, caution needs to be exercised in the interpretation of these findings as enhanced calcium metabolism was also a signature profile of smaller fish and our sampling of male and female fish was biased towards the inclusion of a higher number of small fish.

snp analysis
not unexpectedly, given the half-sib nature of the family origins within each seasonal grouping, the 1-cssc value neighbor-joining analysis revealed that fish within each seasonal grouping were more closely related to one another compared to fish from the opposite seasonal lot . the clustering of snp allele distances among the sampled fish did not correspond to their pairwise absolute differences  in expression levels when all transcriptome contigs were evaluated . however, when the mostly highly expressed contigs  were evaluated, it was apparent that the large fish from the december lot shared greater expression affinities to one another  which is consistent with the findings among shared transcriptome contigs between seasonal and size groupings . one of the small dec. lot fish was also included within this pad cluster suggesting stronger affinities in expression levels exist among seasonal grouping fish rather that size groupings.fig.  <dig> neighbour-joining tree depicting the snp allele genetic distances  of all  <dig> fish used in the analysis. september and december seasonal groupings are depicted as sept. and dec., respectively, while large and small fish are shown as l and s, respectively

fig.  <dig> pairwise absolute differences  expression levels based upon rpkm counts among all  <dig> fish sampled. rpkm values among  <dig>  contigs, following edger filtering, are shown in panel a, while panel b depicts results from the most highly upregulated   <dig>  contigs



the di analysis identified  <dig> snps with high levels of genotypic differences  between large and small fish in both seasonal lots. sixty of these snps could be identified as falling within coding genes from alignments to the bethelot et al.  <cit>  rainbow trout genomic sequences. comparisons to the differentially expressed genes within the current dataset indicated that  <dig> genes or member genes within families out of the  <dig> snp locations identified were also coupled to differential expression levels . interestingly, the majority of the snp locations identified were assigned to chromosomes  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  we were unable to ascertain the fdr permutation expectations for snps having di values greater than  <dig>  given the fact that the parental genotypes were unknown. however, it is highly unlikely that the snps matching this cut-off would cluster within adjacent chromosome positions, if they are generated by chance.

to assess the reciprocal proclivity of the currently identified snp locations and expression profiles to be coupled with reported snp locations for growth in rainbow trout, we compared the current findings within this study to previously catalogued snps linked to growth and stress  <cit> . predominant stress and disease resistance qtl have previously been reported to be located on chromosome  <dig>  in rainbow trout, as well as stress-resistance qtl on chromosome  <dig>  <cit> . ability to ameliorate the detrimental influences of stress upon growth should be coupled to the phenotypic size differences surveyed in this study. in the current study, three regions on the berthelot et al.  <cit>  chrun_ <dig> assembly contained snps with significant associations with size, and the latter of these regions at  <dig>  mb contained a rho-activated kinase gene  that may be coupled to the enhanced block of snps detected for stress resistance between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mb  <cit> .

the study by salem et al.  <cit>  cataloging growth-related snps utilized specific gene sequences and therefore we re-aligned the significant snps reported from that study to the rainbow trout transcriptome database. homology searches using nextgene were performed at 98-96 % identity allowing  <dig> mismatch seed. unmatched reads were then tested down to 70 % identity. of the  <dig> nuclear snps strongly coupled to growth differences in rainbow trout, we were able to match  <dig> of these snps to the contigs within the transcriptome reference database . the  <dig> snps that could not be aligned may be from intronic or utr regions close to the reported genes. several of these snps aligned to different positions within the same gene class such that only  <dig> different gene sets were notable. all of these snps except for three  were coupled to transcripts that expressed significant expression differences in the current study , or were representative of gene families that did exhibit significant expression differences . nine different mitochondrial genes were reported to possess one or more significant snps linked to growth differences in rainbow trout  <cit>  and all of these snps were matched to transcripts with significant expression differences , except for atp5j and mt-nd <dig>  atp5j did, however, possess two family members exhibiting significant up-regulation in large fish, while several mt-nd <dig> transcripts were up-regulated in both large and small fish and across both seasonal groupings .

genetic mapping of the growth-related nuclear snps indicated that several different chromosomes  harbour the snps localized with growth  <cit> , and along with chr- <dig>  <cit>  represent some of the strongest growth-related qtl locations in rainbow trout. in addition to these locations, growth-related qtl have also been reported on chromosomes − <dig>  − <dig>  − <dig>  − <dig>  − <dig>  − <dig>  − <dig>  and − <dig>  <cit>  with chr- <dig> and − <dig> qtl locations potentially spanning a large portion of the linkage group surveyed, suggesting the inclusion of several qtl. interestingly, the high number of snps localized to chr- <dig>  <cit>  may also relate to a body weight qtl region described on chr- <dig> by wringe et al.  <cit> . this region was, however, centered in a putative 300 kb homology region to medaka chromosome  <dig> containing  <dig> genes   <cit>  which all possess significantly higher expression in larger fish. the closest snp marker  was located 4 mb away from this region, but a more precise homology to the medaka  genome was difficult to assess as two mybpc <dig> genes were mapped to chr- <dig>  <cit>  while only  <dig> copy is reported from medaka chromosome  <dig>  in dec. fish, sec24c, glud and both myoz <dig> genes were upregulated along with synaptopodin 2-like protein  and protein phosphatase 1b  genes which also map to this region. this region shares homology to a region on stickleback  chromosome group v spanning from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mb.

CONCLUSIONS
gene expression patterns observed during active vs. declining seasonal growth periods in the life cycle of a fish may serve as a model in predicting size-related differences in gene expression patterns.  environmental regimes that are associated with elevated growth rates induce gene expression responses that have a greater overlap with those observed in faster growing fish, while periods of declining environmentally induced growth are more similar to gene expression repertoires observed in smaller fish.  for certain gene classes, different duplicate copies and/or splice variants may also exist  that have enhanced expression across both environments and size classes.  such differences make the identification of ‘key signatory genes’ regulating growth difficult to assess without greater fundamental knowledge of expression patterns of distinct copies within varying environmental contexts, fish ages, and family backgrounds.  several go classifications may distinguish either faster vs. slower-growing rainbow trout but the overlap of some of these categories across seasons confounds their utility in defining growth differences.  however, even though certain go groupings  overlap in their representation within the two size classes, the specific genes with higher expression within this go category differ between the size classes.  this suggests that evidence for distinct genes, or copies of genes within the same go classification coupled to alternate phenotypic classes may become apparent as more research is conducted.  repeated studies on the most highly up-regulated genes across environmental gradients  are needed.   similarly, the dynamics of muscle fibre growth itself requires more research as current findings suggest enhanced hyperplastic induction and sarcomere scaffolding in large fish versus hypertrophic enhancement in small fish during photic periods of the circadian cycle.  however, these processes may vary on a circadian and circannual basis.

