BACKGROUND
grafting is widely used in the agriculture of fruit crops. rootstocks are selected to provide resistance to soil-borne pests and diseases, to increase tolerance to environmental stresses and to improve crop productivity and/or quality . in viticulture, grafting is primarily used to facilitate grapevine growth in soils infected with the phylloxera, a soil-dwelling insect pest introduced to europe from america . the use of rootstocks, in which the entire root system of a plant is replaced, has a profound effect on scion development. rootstocks are known to alter various physiological processes in the scion such as vigor or biomass accumulation  <cit> , fruit quality  <cit>  and response to abiotic stresses .

despite the widespread use of grafting, we know little of how grafting with rootstocks confers differences to the vigor of the scion. rootstock conferred vigor in horticulture is generally described in terms of shoot biomass accumulation, i.e. stem biomass, yield or biomass allocation within the plant . various hypotheses explaining rootstock conferred vigor have been proposed including alterations in nutrient and water movement, hormone concentrations and the anatomy of the graft union . in apple orchards, the rootstocks used have dramatic dwarfing effects on the scion, reducing trunk diameter by up to 70% e.g.  <cit> . in cherry trees, rootstock-induced dwarfing  is caused by differential cessation of terminal meristem growth e.g.  <cit> . commercial rootstocks used in viticulture have much smaller effects on scion vigor. they are not associated with dwarfing phenotypes observed in fruit trees, but grapevine rootstocks are still important for fruit quality and yield. although vigor control mechanisms of different rootstocks are not necessarily the same for different scions, there is some degree of consistency with most commercial rootstock genotypes, being defined by viticulturists as high, moderate or low vigor e.g.  <cit> .

gene expression studies have been used to shed light on the mechanisms behind rootstock conferred vigor in fruit trees. gene expression in the shoot tip of apple trees was studied in response to a range of rootstock genotypes to correlate shoot tip expression to plant stature  <cit> . the gene ontology  terms enriched in the differentially expressed genes were response to stimulus and response to abiotic and biotic stress as well as unknown biological processes and other biological processes. jensen et al.  <cit>  identified  <dig> genes whose expression levels were correlated with plant size; the genes most strongly correlated with trunk cross sectional diameter were a sorbitol dehydrogenase, a homeobox-leucine zipper protein and a hevein-like protein. similarly, prassinos et al.  <cit>  used cdna amplified fragment length polymorphism to compare the effect of a dwarfing and a semi-vigorous rootstocks on gene expression in the scion and identified the differential regulation of a number of transcription factors and genes involved in signaling processes. however, auto-grafted control plants were absent from the studies of jenson et al.  <cit>  and prassinos et al.  <cit> , therefore the effect of grafting with a non-self rootstock on the gene expression of the scion remains to be determined.

our objective was to study the effects of grafting on gene expression in the shoot apical meristem of grapevine vitis vinifera cv. 'cabernet sauvignon n’  heterografts  and the auto-grafted control . the rootstock genotypes chosen were 'riparia gloire de montpellier’  and ' <dig> paulsen’ , these genotypes are known to confer low and high scion vigor respectively. our sampling strategy was designed to minimize the secondary effects related to rootstock physiology, such as, differences in plant water status, gas exchange and transpiration. therefore, shoot apical meristems were harvested at the end of the night when presumably plants are in a stable environment to reduce confusion of the direct and indirect effects of grafting with rootstocks. genes from the functional categories dna, chromatin structure, histones, flavonoids and leucine rich repeats  were enriched in the up-regulated genes.

RESULTS
in horticulture, rootstocks are often selected for their ability to alter the growth of the scion, or to confer differences in scion vigor. in viticulture, vigor is typically quantified by stem pruning weight at the end of the growing cycle and, in this work, conferred vigor was also quantified by using measurements of dry stem biomass. the objective was to associate differences in rootstock conferred vigor  with differences in gene expression in the shoot apex. shoot apex samples were harvested four months after grafting when presumably the stress associated with grafting and the formation of a successful graft union has been overcome. some of the genes differentially expressed in the microarray data were confirmed by qpcr .

rootstock conferred vigor effects on biomass accumulation in grafted grapevine
the rootstocks 1103p and rg increased stem biomass compared to the auto-grafted control at the end of the growth cycle , i.e. the rootstock genotypes conferred increased vigor to the scion. in addition, the rootstock 1103p increased leaf biomass relative to the auto-grafted control , whereas the trunk biomass was decreased by the grafting with the rootstock rg . root biomass was not significantly different between the three scion/rootstock combinations at the end of the growth cycle . however, there was a difference in biomass allocation between the shoot and the root . the shoot/root ratio of hetero-grafts was significantly higher than that of the auto-grafted control .

the shoot apex samples were harvested four months after grafting, before differences in scion vigor  became apparent . leaf biomass was also unaffected by grafting with rootstocks at the time of apex harvest . however, the root biomass of the auto-grafted plants was significantly higher than that of the hetero-grafted plants  and the trunk biomass was significantly lower with the rootstock rg than with the auto-grafted plants and plants grafted onto 1103p .

rootstock effects on gene expression in the shoot apex
hetero-grafting cs with american rootstock varieties, rg and 1103p, resulted in the differential expression of a large number of genes in the shoot apex when compared to the auto-grafted control cs/cs . in general, the differential expression of most genes was similar in both heterograft combinations:  <dig> and  <dig> genes were up- and down-regulated in both cs/rg and cs/1103p, whereas only  <dig> and  <dig> genes were specifically up- and down-regulated in cs/1103p, and only  <dig> and  <dig> genes were specifically up- and down-regulated in cs/rg. in fact, no genes were differentially expressed between the two hetero-graft combinations. the normalized expression values, gene expression comparisons, p values, adjusted p values and the gomapman annotation for all significantly differentially expressed genes are given in additional file  <dig>  the mapman functional categories  enriched in the genes differentially expressed between the hetero-grafts and the auto-graft control also highlight the similarity of response of the two hetero-graft combinations .

genes up-regulated in the shoot apical meristem by hetero-grafting with rootstocks
the mapman functional categories  <cit>  over-represented in the genes up-regulated in the shoot apex of hetero- compared to auto-grafts belonged to the functional categories cell wall, cell, cell organization, dna, chromatin structure, histones, lrr receptor kinases, terpenoids and isoflavonols . the go biological processes dna replication, dna metabolic processes and other cellular metabolic processes were also enriched in this gene list, along with the functions helicase, motor, hydrolase and pyrophosphatase activity and the compartments chromosome, organelle, nucleus and extracellular .

mapman bins enriched in the genes up-regulated by grafting cs with the rootstocks rg and 1103p in comparison to the auto-grafted control . contingency gives the number of genes in input list from the bin, the number of genes on microarray from the bin, the number of genes from input list not in the bin and number of genes on microarray not in the bin.

go term enrichment of genes significantly up-regulated  in the shoot apex in response to grafting with the rootstocks rg and 1103p in comparison to the auto-grafted control. contingency gives the number of genes in input list from the go term, the number of genes on microarray from the go term, the number of genes from input list not from the go term and number of genes on microarray not from the go term.

akey: p, biological process; f, molecular function and c, cellular compartment.

examination of the most strongly up-regulated genes  highlights the up-regulation of genes associated with dna and chromatin modification, such as, genes from the category chromatin structure  and genes annotated as being involved in replication control  as well as one set-domain transcription factor  and two chromatin remodeling factors  . in addition to the up-regulation of many genes involved in dna and chromatin regulation, numerous transcription factors , two sugar transporters , a developmental gene , vit_06s0080g00290), and genes involved in amino acid metabolism and cell wall modification were up-regulated .

genes down-regulated in the shoot apical meristem by hetero-grafting with rootstocks
the mapman functional categories  <cit>  over-represented in the genes down-regulated in the hetero- compared to auto-grafts belonged to the functional categories receptor kinases, hormone metabolism , secondary metabolism, pathogenesis related  proteins, redox and various miscellaneous genes . the go biological processes response to stimulus, cell communication and signaling and the functions transferase and oxidoreductase activity was also over-represented .

mapman bins enriched in the genes down-regulated by grafting cs with the rootstocks rg and 1103p in comparison to the auto-grafted control . contingency as described in table  <dig> 

go term enrichment of genes significantly down-regulated  in the shoot apex in response to grafting with the rootstocks rg and 1103p in comparison to the auto-grafted control. contingency as described in table  <dig> 

akey: p, biological process and f, molecular function.

examination of the most strongly down-regulated genes  highlights the importance of the down-regulation of many classes of transcription factors, particularly those belonging to the wrky class  . wrky transcription factors have wide roles in transcriptional activation and repressing plant development and stress responses .

grafting with rootstocks triggers the differential expression of many genes involved in dna and chromatin modification
grafting with non-self rootstocks induced the transcriptional reprogramming of many genes associated with chromatin modification. seventy genes assigned to the functional categories associated with dna were differentially expressed in the shoot apex in response to grafting with the rootstocks 1103p or rg  along with other genes potentially involved in dna or histone modification . the histone genes induced by the rootstocks were core histones genes ) except for one centromeric histone , whereas a h <dig> variant, a linker histone, was down-regulated. two nucleosome assembly proteins were also up-regulated ; these proteins are chaperones of the core histones h2a and h2b. five set domain proteins were also induced by the rootstocks ; the set domain is known to have methyltransferase activity targeted to specific lysine residues of histone h <dig> or h <dig>  <cit> . three dna methyltransferases were induced by the rootstocks ; these genes were all belonging to the plant-specific chromomethylase group responsible for asymmetric cytosine methylation in arabidopsis  <cit> . three werner syndrome-like exonuclease genes were down-regulated in response to the rootstock genotypes. in arabidopsis one werner syndrome-like exonuclease is known to be involved in post-transcriptional gene silencing  <cit> . one gene involved in rna processing  was also down-regulated, this gene is known to be involved in the  <dig> nt small interfering rna  pathway that modifies chromatin and directs dna methylation  <cit> .

differential expression of hormone related genes
grafting cs with the rootstocks rg and 1103p triggered the differential regulation of a number of genes associated with hormone metabolism: many genes from the functional categories iaa/auxin and gibberellins were both up- and down-regulated, whereas genes from the category brassinosteroids were generally up-regulated and genes from the categories aba, salicylic acid and ethylene were generally down-regulated . most of the differentially expressed genes from the category auxin were auxin responsive genes, however the expression of three auxin transporters were up-regulated,  and one aux1-like , and one protein ligase involved in auxin signal transduction  was down-regulated . six genes from the functional category brassinosteroids were up-regulated including two brassinosteroid receptor genes  .

differential regulation of receptor kinases
hetero-grafting with rootstocks rg and 1103p resulted in the up-regulation of many lrr containing receptor kinases and the down-regulation of many other classes of receptor kinases such as s-locus glycoprotein like, domain of unknown function   <dig>  wall-associated kinase  and wheat leaf rust resistance lrk10-like receptor kinases . globally,  <dig> receptor kinases were up- and  <dig> receptor kinases were down-regulated in the hetero-grafts compared to the auto-graft control .

discussion
sampling strategy
rootstocks are widely used in agriculture and rootstocks can have a profound influence on many aspects of plant development and plant responses to the environment . the sampling strategy selected in this study was designed to reduce the secondary effects of rootstocks on gene expression . shoot apical meristems were harvested 1 hour before sunrise  from plants growing outside in well watered pots. the shoot apices were harvested 4 months after grafting when presumably the scions were in a 'steady-state’; the plants had formed successful graft unions, had recovered from the grafting process, had presumably adapted to the presence of a rootstock but had not yet shown significant modifications of scion vigor.

rootstock effects on plant development
rootstocks are known to have a wide range of effects on scion development; the rootstocks used in this work are known to confer differences in scion vigor in the vineyard. the rootstock 1103p increases yields in comparison to the auto-grafted control when grafted with the scion shiraz, similarly rg increases the yield of the scion muscat gordo blanco in comparison to the auto-grafted control . in the work presented here on young plants grown in pots, the rootstocks rg and 1103p also affected scion biomass accumulation and root/shoot biomass partitioning during the first growth cycle. previous work has shown that these rootstocks alter secondary  rather than primary  shoot growth  <cit> .

in addition to affecting scion development, the rootstocks rg and 1103p affected the partitioning of biomass between the shoot and the root, this relationship was stable throughout plant development. the intrinsic differences in shoot/root biomass allocation are reminiscent of plants responses to a number of environmental factors, such as, nutrient availability, water availability and temperature  <cit> .

grafting with rootstocks induced changes in the expression of growth related transcripts
increased rootstock conferred vigor in apple trees has been associated with an increase in the number of genes up-regulated in the shoot  <cit> ; this was also observed in this work on grapevine in which grafting with vigor increasing rootstocks triggered the up-regulation, rather than the down-regulation, of gene expression. the transcript that best correlated with plant size in grafted apple trees was a sorbitol dehydrogenase  <cit> ; sorbitol is the primary transport form of carbon in apple and jensen et al.  <cit>  suggested that the shoot apex of vigorous trees were more effective carbon sinks and that this facilitated more vigorous growth. similarly grafting with rootstocks in grapevine  resulted in the differential regulation of many genes from the functional categories major and minor carbohydrate metabolism and sugar transporters, suggesting that a similar mechanism may exist in grapevine.

the up-regulation of genes from the functional categories cell, cell wall and cell organization could also be associated with the differences in scion growth observed in the hetero-grafted grapevines. the up-regulation of a tfl  <dig> gene  could be related to the non-self rootstock mediated increase in scion vegetative growth. in apple trees, the silencing of mdtfl <dig> is associated with decreased vegetative growth and reduced generation time  <cit> . the grapevine homologue of tfl <dig> is also known to delay flowering when over-expressed in arabidopsis and tobacco  <cit> .

grafting with rootstocks triggers the differential expression of many genes involved in dna and chromatin modification
in eukaryotes epigenetic mechanisms can regulation chromatin structure and gene expression, for example by dna methylation, histone modification and certain aspects of the sirna signaling pathway  <cit> . dna methyltransferases add a methyl group to a cytosine base to produce  <dig> methylcytosine; dna methylation is thought to repress transposons activity and in some cases gene expression  <cit> . the up-regulation of genes associated with dna methylation could be associated with the repression of transposon activity or gene expression in hetero-grafted plants. the up-regulation of many histones could also be related to alterations in the chromatin structure of hetero-grafted plants and could be involved in some of the gene expression differences observed between the hetero- and auto-grafted plants. both dna methylation and histone modification can be affected by sirnas  <cit>  and small rnas are known to be graft transmissible in plants . we propose the hypothesis that grafting with non-self rootstocks alters the small rna population of the scion and mediates epigenetics changes in the recipient tissue. however, chromatin modification is known to be induced in response to various stresses such as salt, drought and cold stress as well as being involved in a number of hormone signaling cascades . therefore, the differential expression of genes in response to hetero-grafting could be an indirect response of chromatin modification genes via grafting-related stress responses and/or a direct consequence of sirna trafficking between the rootstock and scion. in addition to possible epigenetic regulation induced by hetero-grafting, both post-transcriptional and post-translational modifications are also possible. numerous genes involved in protein synthesis, degradation and targeting were differentially expressed in the hetero-grafts. furthermore, six genes involved in rna processing and three genes involved in rna binding were up-regulated in the hetero-grafts .

the differential expression of receptor kinases in response to hetero-grafting with a non-self rootstock
plant genomes contain large numbers of receptor kinases with very divergent extracellular domains. the receptor kinases that were differentially expressed in response to grafting with non-self rootstocks included genes from the functional categories lrr, s-locus glycoprotein like, duf  <dig>  wak and lrk10-like. lrr proteins are the largest group of receptor kinases in plants and the motif is thought to be involved in signal transduction and to mediate protein-protein interactions. in this study, generally the receptor kinases from the lrr family were up-regulated in the shoot apex of the hetero-grafts . lrr domain containing proteins have been implicated in many developmental pathways and defense responses ; this could imply that grafting with rootstocks triggered a defense response throughout the plant. similarly, lrk <dig> receptor kinases were down-regulated in the hetero-grafts and lrk <dig> was first identified as a leaf rust resistance gene in wheat.

s-locus glycoprotein-like receptor kinases were first identified as being important in self-incompatibility responses in brassica flowers and have since been shown to be involved in plant defense responses . surprisingly, the s-locus receptor kinases were also down-regulated, rather than up-regulated as we would have expected. however, at least one s-locus receptor kinase in arabidopsis is a negative regulator of plant defense responses  <cit>  suggesting that the interpretation of differential expression of receptor kinases is more complicated that it may first appear. however, it is possible that the s-locus receptor kinases differentially expressed in response to grafting with a non-self rootstock genotype in order to suppress a self-incompatibility response throughout the plant.

the differential expression of hormone signaling related genes in response to hetero-grafting with a non-self rootstock
the differential regulation of genes from the functional category hormones could suggest the involvement of hormone signaling between the two different genotypes in a grafted plant. in agreement with this observation, differences in hormone signaling and the sequestration of hormones in the rootstock shank  have been proposed as mechanisms of rootstock control of scion growth .

many genes from the functional category brassinosteroids were up-regulated; brassinosteroids are known to interact with plant defense receptor signaling pathways and modulate signaling of the tradeoff between growth and plant immune responses  <cit> . this could suggest the grafting with a non-self rootstock alters defense responses in the scion. this idea is further supported by the down-regulation of genes from the functional categories aba, ethylene and salicylic acid, which could also be associated with plant defense response pathways  <cit> .

overlap between genes differentially expressed in the shoot apex and genes associated with hybrid vigor
hybrid vigor is the phenomenon in which hybrids have superior performances over their parents in a number of traits such as biomass accumulation, growth rate and fertility . the expression of circadian oscillator genes has been associated with hybrid vigor in arabidopsis  <cit> , although clock genes were not differentially expressed in this experiment, this could be related to the time of day of the harvest and the culture of plants outside under natural conditions. shen et al.  <cit>  showed that dna methylation is increased in hybrids across the whole genome, but especially in the transposable elements. seventy-seven genes sensitive to methylome remodeling were identified as being differentially repressed in the hybrids, including the down-regulation of genes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis and the up-regulation of two genes involved in auxin signaling . in the shoot apex, grafting with vigor increasing rootstocks also resulted in the up-regulation of many genes involved in dna and chromatin modification and the down-regulation of many genes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis. in addition, many genes involved in auxin transport, signal transduction and auxin responsive genes were differentially expressed in response to grafting with rootstocks. this could suggest that grafting with vigor increasing rootstocks induces a transcriptional response similar to that of hybrid vigor.

CONCLUSIONS
grafting v. vinifera with rootstocks originating from american vitis spp. had a profound effect on scion gene expression in the shoot apex. however, the choice of rootstock genotype did not appear to have a dramatic effect on gene expression; this could suggest that auto- and hetero-grafting was the major factor in the regulation gene expression in the shoot apex. the functional categories over-represented in the rootstock responding gene lists  could suggest that there is some degree of self- and non-self root recognition. many genes differentially expressed in the shoot apex between hetero- and auto-grafted plants are also known to be involved in defense responses supporting the idea that the scion can detect the presence of a non-self rootstock. the similarity between the transcriptional response at the shoot apex to vigor increasing non-self rootstocks and in the shoot of vigorous hybrids could suggest that similar mechanisms are involved.

