BACKGROUND
animal models are constantly built and utilized in medical researches as manipulable platforms for investigations of diseases. as self-evident, an appropriate experimental model is able to represent and reproduce the phenotypes of disease progression, thus promoting the studies of disease physiology as well as therapeutics. experimental models of mice have been usually applied for researches of leukemia, especially the acute myeloid leukemia . however, most of the leukemia models established/utilized in previous studies rely on protocols of pre-conditioning the recipients by myeloabative manipulations such as immunosuppressive agents, total body irradiation or xeno-transplantation . although these models are efficient in leukemia induction with short latency and complete penetrance  <cit> , obviously, leukemogenesis generally does not occur in myeloablated or immuno-deficient hosts albeit they are robust in terms of disease progression. for example, in a typically pre-conditioned model, leukemia is induced by irradiating the host via total body irradiation followed by transplantation of hematopoietic cells overexpressed some retrovirus-mediated oncogenic proteins . such manipulations destroy the normal hsc/hpc populations as well as the immune system in the recipients; and moreover, they pose a significant bystander effect on the transplanted cells in the marrow  <cit> . thus the resulted leukemic host will greatly deviate from the condition of native leukemia development; and therefore, the traditional models mainly benefit the researches for leukemic cells.

in recent studies, functional alterations of normal hematopoietic cells in the environment of leukemia has been highlighted . to study “normal” hematopoietic response to leukemia, the traditional models would be problematic as discussed above. hence, the study should be performed with an un-manipulated leukemia model in which a normal recipient mouse without any pre-conditioning is induced to develop leukemia, sustaining a physiological setting more comparable to that of native leukemogenesis. to this end, a robust non-irradiated  mouse model for aml has been recently established, with a 100 % penetrance of leukemia development  <cit> . thus intact normal blood cells without overt damage could be directly measured during leukemia progression. motivated by the value of this experimental model, we have digitalized it in the present work; the constructed computational model is able to mimic the cell kinetics of hematopoiesis under aml. thus foremost, our effort may be beneficial for saving experimental costs; and in turn, potentially facilitating further biomedical researches. meanwhile, results attained by the computational model have reaffirmed the progressive suppression of hematopoiesis under leukemia, as well as the increased quiescence of hscs in leukemic bm.

RESULTS
workflow
raw data of cell kinetics were generated by a non-irradiated aml mouse model, in which normal recipient mice without any pre-conditioning were induced to develop leukemia at a 100 % penetrance  <cit> . in the meantime, we assembled the knowledge of physics and cell biology and then conceived a theoretical model . using the experimental data as reference, we derived a computational model through parameter optimization, which was the key step in the procedures of modeling. aftermath, we conducted several in silico experiments based on the model mainly by means of parametric analysis and model selection, and then verified the computational results with additional experimental references. once the model was validated, its predictions  could be regarded as be credible .fig.  <dig> modeling workflow. adopting the cell kinetics measured from a non-irradiated aml mouse model, the computational model was established based on physics and biology knowledge via the procedures of parameter optimization . using the model, numerical simulations could be implemented, eg parametric analysis and model selection. furthermore, the model was validated with additional experimental results; and once the model validity was credited, the model could be of certain utilities



parameter optimization
model for the hematopoiesis dynamics of leukemic body
the counts of normal hematopoietic  and leukemic  cells in peripheral blood , spleen and bm were monitored and documented from the experimental mouse model at indicated time points   <cit> . as shown, gfp+ leukemic cells grew dramatically during leukemia development in all these tissues. the number of cd <dig> + normal cells in pb had obvious increase after day  <dig>  resulting in the elevation of white blood cell  counts at day  <dig> . meanwhile, the number of cd <dig> + cells in spleen slightly increased before day  <dig>  but reduced by day  <dig> . in contrast, the leukemic bm underwent a modest decrease in cellularity, and the number of cd <dig> + cells was gradually reduced, reaching a minimum at day  <dig> . uitlizing the experimental data as reference, we established a computational model that was able to mimic the tri-tissue hematopoietic dynamics under leukemia. the model variables corresponded to the normal and leukemic cell counts in the different tissues; and dynamics of the variables depended on the actions of cellular mechanisms , which were encoded by kinetic rate formulas and leukemic influences were considered. mathematical forms of the kinetic rates were adopted from previous studies , and parameters were fitted based on the reference data of experimental cell kinetics. effective optimization methods were adopted in the parameter fitting , and the high fitness illustrated that the model parameters  were reasonably estimated . therefore, the model was capable of simulating the cell counts in any/all tissues at arbitrary time points  for the leukemic body.fig.  <dig> cell kinetics simulations of the model with the optimized parameters. . computational dynamics of the normal and leukemic cells in pb , spleen , and bm  during leukemia development. these results were generated by the optimized parameters. exp, experimental data; sim, simulation results; d
 <dig> , model fitness degree .; s
 <dig> , sample standard deviation . . computational dynamics of hscs  and hpcs  with the optimized parameters



sub-model for the hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell  dynamics in the leukemic environment
because of the necessity for investigating the hematopoietic primitive cells , we also extended the computaitonal model to enclose the hsc/hpc in bm. although these cells might also reside and grow in other tissues, bm was undoubtedly the major location for hematopoietic primitive cells; and the bm hsc/hpc actually accounted for the large majority of hematopoietic functions  <cit> . again, we utilized the cell counts of hsc  and hpc , which amounted to a portion in the bm cd <dig> + population , as the reference data; and the extended model for hsc/hpc dynamics was established in the similar way as mentioned earlier . we estimated the model parameters and a high fitness was achieved, implying that the parameter optimization was successful . as shown in the cell kinetics, a suppression of hematopoiesis was indicated during leukemia development as both hsc and hpc in bm were reduced dramatically.

model validation
reproduction for control
a preliminary test for the model validity would be checking whether the model could correctly reproduce the normal  kinetics when the parts representing leukemic influences in the model were directly removed , which was supposed to be satisfied by a valid model in the first place. by simply removing the leukemic-effect terms from the model while keeping everything else unchanged, we could see that the normal kinetics, ie, hematopoietic cells as well as hscs/hpcs were maintained at nearly steady levels  <cit> , were reproduced . thus the model not only accurately represented the leukemia-conditioned hematopoietic dynamics; it could also faithfully reflect the situation under the normal condition. therefore, the risk of overfitting for the leukemia-conditioned dynamics had been lessened; in other words, the model was likely to have captured the generic characteristics of hematopoiesis, rather than artificially-fitted phenomena.

identifying the major cause of hsc loss in leukemia
the bm hsc  level was almost constant under normal conditions but decreased in leukemia . with the advent of the computational model, we could systematically investigate the relevant factor for the altered hsc kinetics computationally. hence, we intended to determine which cellular mechanism  was primarily responsible for the hsc loss during leukemia development. to this end, parametric analysis  was implemented to compute all action rates of hscs including cell expansion , differentiation  and death . the analysis revealed that fexpn and fdiff were large in both value and variation amplitude, whereas the value and variation amplitude of fdeath were small . therefore, the change in hsc level was mainly due to hsc expansion or differentiation but not cell death. as fexpn and fdiff are achieved or associated with “proliferation” via the cell cycle and cell death is mainly induced by apoptosis, we concluded that the major factor for hsc loss was an alteration in cell cycle rather than apoptosis. this analysis could be better visualized in a 3-dimensional form, displaying fexpn, fdiff, and fdeath on the three dimensions . noteworthy, the computed rate for hsc proliferation decreased with time, with rapid decline occurring around day 10; this suggested that hscs became much more quiescent as leukemia cells evolved as a dominant population .fig.  <dig> major factor of hsc loss validated by cell cycle and apoptosis analyses of hscs in leukemic bm. a computational decomposition of the hsc dynamics on the relevant processes. cell expansion , differentiation  and death . b flow plots  and histogram  show the apoptosis frequency of hscs  in leukemic bm  <cit> . c flow plots  and histograms  show the cell cycle status of hscs in leukemic bm. data are represented as the mean ± sem ; *
p <  <dig>   <cit> 



the computational prediction was consistent with the experimental results of flow cytometry analyses  <cit> . in fact, the annexin v and 7-aminoactinomycin d  staining, which was for the assessment of apoptosis, revealed that the ratio of annexin v+ cells in bm hscs  was nearly unchanged and actually accounted for a small percentage during leukemia development . in contrast, the intracellular ki <dig> and hoechst  <dig> staining, which was designed for analyzing the cell cycle of hscs in leukemic bm, showed that the cell cycle status of hscs changed significantly. notably, the proportion of hscs in the g <dig> phase  progressively increased during leukemia development, with a large climb occurring around day  <dig> , which coincided with the computational result of proliferation rate decline . interestingly, hscs in the late stages  of leukemia remained in a nearly non-proliferative state , as further confirmed by a brdu incorporation assay . taken together, our computational results on the deepened hsc quiescence were validated by independent cellular assays. therefore, we concluded that the suppression of hscs in leukemic bm was mainly due to the functional alteration of cell cycle, not apoptosis.

simulating the hematopoietic differentiation blockade
given the poor production of blood cells in the late stages of leukemia development, we further extended our parametric analysis to the hpcs. we computed the action rates of hpcs, namely, hpc generation , hpc differentiation  and death . the results showed that between the two factors having both large values and variations, fhsc->hpc overrode fdiff at all times and fdiff decayed much faster than fhsc->hpc, which occurred between days  <dig> and  <dig> . after day  <dig>  the hpc kinetics was largely dictated by the changes in fhsc->hpc, suggesting that fhsc->hpc was the major cause of hpc loss or exhaustion. therefore, a blockade of hematopoietic differentiation was implicated. meanwhile, fdeath rose moderately around day  <dig>  implying that there might be other cell death-related events contributing to the loss of hpc.fig.  <dig> hematopoietic differentiation blockade validated by reduction folds in different stem and progenitor subsets in the hematopoietic cascade. a computational decomposition of the hpc dynamics on relevant processes. hpc generation , hpc differentiation  and death . b absolute numbers of hscs differentiating towards hpcs in consecutive time intervals simulated by the computational model. t
i is  for i =  <dig>   <dig>  …,  <dig>  c reduction folds in different hsc/hpc subsets  and an experimental schema  showing the differentiation block from hscs to hpcs. numbers − <dig>  − <dig>  etc. indicate the fold decrease  <cit> 



to further demonstrate and visualize the blockade of differentiation, we computed the absolute numbers of hscs differentiating into hpcs in consecutive time intervals . notably, there were indeed fewer and fewer hscs differentiating toward hpcs during leukemia progression, and the number was almost vanished by day  <dig> . this clearly revealed the shutdown of hsc differentiation, which caused that hpcs could not be replenished in leukemic bm. on the other hand, bm hpcs need to produce mature blood cells; therefore, bm hpcs suffered a much sharper decline than bm hscs and ultimately became exhausted in leukemic bm .

if the above prediction were true, we should then expect that the reduction of hscs/hpcs was correlated with the hierarchy of differentiation in the hematopoietic cascade. to this end, data of the whole spectrum of different subsets of hsc/hpc were adopted  <cit> . as shown in the data, three subsets of lks+ hscs, namely, lt-hscs , st-hscs  and mpps , all suffered progressive decreases in absolute numbers during leukemia development . meanwhile, the absolute numbers of all four subsets of lks− hpcs in leukemic bm, namely cmps , gmps , meps , and clps , were greatly reduced during leukemia development . obviously, among all of the subsets of primitive cells, lt-hscs were the least reduced while the meps were the most reduced at different stages of leukemia . in addition, it was also confirmed that lt-hsc became much more quiescent in leukemia . therefore, the computational prediction here was confirmed; and altogether, these results demonstrated that leukemic bm resulted in a blockade of hematopoiesis in a differentiation-dependent manner.

further computational analyses
systematicity rather than individuality of modeling
in silico experiments revealed that cell mobility  was important for modeling the dynamics of both leukemic and normal cells. in fact, modeling revealed an improvement of fitness for the observed kinetics in both spleen and bm when cell mobility was included in the model ; whereas the plain models disregarding cell mobility, ie ignoring it or overlooking its effect as a constant unrelated with pb kinetics, exhibited significantly higher errors . hence, the strategy for modeling individual tissues stipulated in most of previous studies was unable or insufficient for reconstructing the complex multi-tissues dynamics in the leukemic body. in other words, the necessity of studying the diseased hosts by systematic approaches was reinforced.fig.  <dig> comparisons of model fitness between systematic and individual modelings. a inferior fitness of the plain models for the spleen cell kinetics, which ignore the inter-connections between tissues  or overlooking them as a constant  unrelated with pb kinetics. d
 <dig> , d
 <dig>  - fitness degrees for leukemic kinetics when cm =  <dig> and const, respectively; d
 <dig> , d
 <dig>  - fitness for normal cell kinetics when cm =  <dig> and const. s
 <dig> , sample standard deviation . b box plots illustrate a significantly higher fitness of the model including the cm as a function of pb kinetics , l - pb leukemic cells, n - pb normal cells) for the spleen cell kinetics . c inferior fitness of the plain models ignoring or overlooking cell mobility for the bm cell kinetics. d significantly higher fitness of the model including cm as a function of pb kinetics for the bm cell kinetics 



differential cell kinetics in three tissues
by parametric analysis of the model, the rate of each cell action was simulated; and we computationally found that the differences of cell kinetics in the respective tissues were underlain by the asymmetric leukemic influences on the cell actions in different tissues. in pb, the cell import rate  was larger than  the sum of export rate  and death rate  for almost all the time ; thus having explained the increase in the pb cd <dig> + cell number . the kinetics of hematopoietic cells in spleen exhibited a short increase at early stage of leukemia . in fact, the cell proliferation rate  and death rate  were nearly equal; and the cell import rate  was slightly larger than the cell export rate  in an early period of leukemia ; in addition, rimport,pb->sp decreased slower than rexport,sp->pb. thus the early increase of spleen cell counts was resulted in. here we could see that the pivotal underlying factor is rimport,pb->sp, since although rprolif,sp is increasing, rdeath,sp almost has the same trend. moreover, the facts that “rprolif,sp increased” and “rimport,pb->sp > rexport,sp->pb” supported a hypothesis that spleen might undergo a compensatory mechanism in response to leukemia. on one hand, it increased cell proliferation; on the other hand, the cell importation became larger as hematopoietic cells migrated from elsewhere via pb circulation  might be restored in spleen at the onset of leukemia.fig.  <dig> parametric analyses for differential cell kinetics in pb, spleen and bm. a action rates of normal cells at the tissue-level  in pb during leukemia development. as primitive blood cells rarely occur in pb circulation, the pb cells are regarded as having no proliferation. b actions rates of normal cells in spleen during leukemia development. upper panel: proliferation and death rates for total cd <dig> + cells in spleen; lower panel: cell export and import rates; red arrow: time point when the number of spleen cd <dig> + cells reaches maximal. c actions rates of normal cells in bm during leukemia development. upper panel: proliferation and death rates for total cd <dig> + cells in bm; lower panel: cell export and import rates



in contrast, the bm cell proliferation rate  decreased monotonously and the cell export rate  was greater than the import rate  during leukemia development . the decreased proliferation could be explained by the suppression of hematopoiesis in leukemic bm ; and the large rexport,bm->pb indicated that cells migrated out of the bm as the environment became worse during leukemia progression. notably, at late stages of leukemia, rexport,bm->pb dropped because bm cells were depleted as influenced by leukemia, thus fewer normal cells could escape the malignant environment.

altogether, the different cell kinetics in the respective tissues were due to the asymmetric influences that leukemia exerted on the cell actions; and as shown during the parametric analyses, the key factors were the cell export/import rates. therefore, because the rates of cell export/import were pivotal in shaping the different cell kinetics and cell mobility was of great importance to modeling , processes of cell trafficking between different tissues in the diseased host might also be valuable for studying the disease, in addition to the investigations of leukemic or hematopoietic cells themselves.

possible g <dig> re-entry of hscs for increased quiescence-implication from model selection
the apparent increase in the percentage of quiescent hscs in leukemic bm might involve two possible scenarios:  cycling hscs were selectively exhausted or  more cycling hscs became quiescent . since it was difficult to tackle the issue directly by in vivo experiments, we once again utilized computational modeling to evaluate which scenario was more likely . we found that the model fitness for the observed hsc cell cycle kinetics was improved when g <dig> re-entry was included , whereas the counterpart model without g <dig> re-entry exhibited larger errors and failed to represent the kinetics of quiescent hscs . therefore, the results showed that scenario  was better correlated with the experimental data, meaning that a mechanism causing cycling hscs to become quiescent was more likely in response to the leukemic stress.fig.  <dig> model-selection implication for g <dig> re-entry of hscs in leukemic bm. a failure of the plain model, which is not encoding g <dig> re-entry, for representing the kinetics of quiescent hscs. b success of the model including the g <dig> re-entry for representing the kinetics of quiescent hscs. here we show one specific example in which the g <dig> re-entry is formulated by the most common first-order kinetics, ie linear form. see also additional file 5: figure s <dig> for supplemental results where the g <dig> re-entry adopts other forms. c box plot illustrating that the fitness of the model with g <dig> re-entry is higher than the plain model . see also additional file 5: figure s <dig> for supplemental results in which models with  g <dig> re-entries uniformly have higher fitness degrees than the plain model. d gsea for bm hscs from day  <dig> leukemia and control mice. the up-regulation or down-regulation of quiescence-associated gene expressions  and proliferation-associated gene expressions  are shown. the normalized enrichment scores  and p-values are indicated in each plot  <cit> . e the histograms show cell cycle-related gene expressions in bm hscs at leukemia day  <dig> compared to control. ckis , cdks  and cyclins  were shown. data are represented as the mean ± sem , *
p <  <dig> , **
p <  <dig>   <cit> 



although direct experimental validation for the existence of g <dig> re-entry was difficult, gene expression profiling and gene set enrichment analysis  revealed that expressions of quiescence-associated genes were significantly enriched in the hscs from leukemic hosts, while expressions of proliferation-associated genes were markedly depleted . futhermore, qrt-pcr confirmed that in hscs from leukemic hosts, p19ink4d and p21cip <dig> were upregulated, and virtually most cdks and cyclins were suppressed   <cit> . therefore, we could conclude that normal hscs in leukemic bm were functionally suppressed during leukemogenesis as they were forced to be in a more quiescent status.

moreover, the recent work of miraki-moud et al. had also established an equal conclusion that aml did not demolish normal hscs but induced arrest or immobilization of cell cycle by impeding their differentiation  <cit> . thus it was actually equivalent to a further corroboration for our main conclusions  in overall.

discussion
researches of mathematical modeling for leukemia have been undertaken for years  <cit> ; while the previous studies are informative as they have shown the feasibility of quantitatively and dynamically modeling the cell kinetics in leukemia, there are also important issues overlooked that preclude better investigation for the system of a leukemic body. for instance, the large majority of previous studies focused on only leukemic cells or single tissues, whereas few  of them was able to simultaneously model the hematopoiesis fulfilled by both leukemic and normal blood cells in multiple tissues of a diseased host. with the aid of an un-manipulated animal model resembling the physiological condition of leukemogenesis , a comprehensive computational model that embodies the multi-tissue dynamics of both leukemic and normal cells in the leukemic environment, can be established via a systematic modeling approach. in this study, we proceeded the modeling in a hierachically-systematic manner; we first derived a model on the tissue-level , and then we used the derived model as a basis for building the sub-model of hscs/hpcs, with inter-connections of pb with spleen and bm fully considered. finally, the hsc sub-model had been splitted into a even more microscopic scale, in which quiescent and active hscs were distinguished so that hsc quiescence could be explored.

specifically, the key step in the modeling is parameter optimization. a model will be operational only after all its parameters are reasonably estimated, which means that the results produced by the model with the estimates fit the reference data. but rigorously, even a good model fitness is obtained , the model validity has not come into being, since the validations must be achieved by additional  experimental data. since hscs/hpcs are of the primary interests in hematology and experiments with respect to them are intensive, we therefore run parametric analyses on them to assess the influential factors for their suppression  during leukemia development. actually, parametric analysis is equivalent to decomposing the cell kinetics, ie net-effects resulting from actions of various factors, onto each particular factor. thus the major one for the altered hematopoietic kinetics under leukemia can be found. after performing the analyses on hscs/hpcs, ie simulating the action rates associated with them, the major cause for hsc loss was identified ; meanwhile, a hematopoietic differentiation blockade having explained the exhaustion of hpcs was observed . both predictions have been validated by additional experimental data  <cit> ; and moreover, another independent work has also supported our main conclusions  <cit> , thus our computational model can be credited for validity.

during the modeling, we have had several interesting findings from the computational viewpoint. first, by working with the recent data of multiple tissues in leukemic hosts, we found that the principle of individuality stipulated in majority of previous modelings no longer worked for a multi-tissue system. to reconstruct the correct cell kinetics in different tissues simultaneously, the pb circulation must be considered and explicitly modeled. for example, if we neglected it or simply assumed it to be constant term unrelated with the pb kinetics, large errors were resulted in. in contrast, if we considered this term to be a function of the kinetics of the pb leukemic/normal cells, even with the simplest form , the modeling errors were significantly reduced immediately, for the cell kinetics in both spleen and bm . second, parametric analyses for the cell actions on the tissue-level  indicated the reasons underlying the differential kinetics in pb, spleen, and bm. the computational findings that the activation of spleen hematopoiesis and increase of spleen cell influx , pb cell counts  elevation, and the continuous depression of bm hematopoiesis, suggested the possible response of the host to leukemia in general .

last but not least, we derived a hypothesis via model selection, which implied that the increased quiescence of hscs might be because of re-entry to the g <dig> phase under leukemic stress. nonetheless, it was not unaware of that the p-value for the model selection was not quite ideal ; this was because of the scarcity of data. as shown, there were only five data points to be fitted, and the first three were just nearly equal since the normal hscs still maintained steady levels at early stage of leukemia . therefore, even the false model could automatically have a fitness of three out of the five reference data; thus the visual discrimination between the superior and inferior models were not so impressive. but obviously, the inferior model could not describe the kinetic profile of quiescent hscs in total; thus we could speculate that if there were more data points existing, the contrast between the two models would be stronger. moreover, on the other hand, the modeling using only five data points generated the significance level of p-value <  <dig> *; we could well speculate that even if there were only one more data spot between day <dig> and day  <dig> and it had rising trend as that of day  <dig>  the p-value would be markedly lowered. hence, although we could not assert the existence of g <dig> re-entry based on only the modeling results herein, these results could still propose a testing method-we could re-perform the cytometry experiment to measure the hsc counts between day <dig> and day  <dig>  and if we found that the number of quiescent hscs rose above, the hypothesis of g <dig> re-entry would be strengthened. given the facts that the quiescent hscs are relatively insensible to environmental influences and also remained highly functional when transplanted into secondary non-leukemic hosts  <cit> , we believe that acquired quiescence of normal hscs represents a cellular protective mechanism in response to leukemia. naturally, more detailed studies for the quiescence of hscs must be subjected to future experiments.

on the other hand, our computational model might be of valuable utilities. for example, the model as well as its simulations could be stored in computers ; thus if an animal model of the same diseased condition is needed, we will not have to build it again or take the real measurements, we can just refer to the digitalized model to retrieve the data for a preliminary assessment or investigation. therefore, the experimental costs can be saved. moreover, such a digitalized model can also serve as a virtual platform for simulating the efficacies of drugs or interventions, facilitating the computer-aided researches for disease therapies.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have digitalized an experimental non-irradiated aml mouse model that is recently established. the computational model has been validated with additional experimental data from multiple aspects; and given its validity, it may be of potential utilities for future biology or biomedical researches. meanwhile, the modeling method can also be applied otherwhere. moreover, our computational conclusions, altogether with the experimental supports, provide evidences for the increased quiescence of bm hscs and hematopoietic suppression/blockade under leukemia, which is an attractive perspective in current hematology. these findings may also provide insights for more extensive studies, eg therapeutics of stem cells, or interventions for leukemia.

