BACKGROUND
proteins are macromolecules that preserve their structural integrity to perform functions. thermophilic proteins function at higher temperatures than normal life forms. although they are structurally, functionally and most instances sequentially homologous to their mesophilic partners, they have optimal catalytic activity above 60°c  <cit> . the comparative studies of thermophiles and mesophiles, to identify the factors contributing to the stability of the thermophiles, have been carried out at different levels from the genomic sequence level  <cit> , structure level  <cit>  to experimental elucidations  <cit> . these studies indicate that thermophilic proteins have good hydrophobicity with propensity towards branched side chains, better packing with fewer loops and less cavities, more helical content, increased hydrogen bonding, and high occurrence of charged residues resulting in high electrostatic interactions. although we have different views on the forces contributing to stability, we do not have a consolidated view of them  <cit> .

protein structure networks  have been used extensively to understand the stability in protein structures  <cit> . protein structure is a resultant of complex intermolecular interactions. psns are convenient because this complexity is simplified as edges between nodes. earlier, psns have considered contact based parameters to define edges  <cit> .

in this study we have used energies to construct structure networks, known as protein energy networks , for the first time. since different types of interactions manifest eventually as interacting energies, we have tried to remove the ambiguities of defining each interaction  separately, by considering energies calculated using classical force fields to define edges. we were also able to define lennard-jones dominant interaction and electrostatics dominated interaction regions in pens, details of which will be presented elsewhere .

in this study we have simulated twelve thermophile-mesophile pairs to obtain their equilibrium ensembles. these ensembles were then used to generate pens of each protein. parameters representing the whole protein network such as largest connected component, and parameters focusing on sub-graphs such as clusters, cliques and communities and node specific parameters like hubs are used to obtain structural insights on the stability of thermophilic proteins as compared to their mesophilic homologues.

in this comparative network study, we find that cluster population and clique population, along with community of cliques to be the major factors contributing to the stability of thermophiles. the thermophiles appear to have a highly packed hydrophobic core, by employing amino acid hotspots, thus increasing the enthalpy change between the folded and unfolded states, supporting previous studies  <cit> . the thermophiles seem to have low energy communities, and segregated high-energy electrostatic cliques, implying that they prefer to maintain a degree of conformation plasticity whilst increasing stability, probably for performing their functions. we have also seen global network connectivity change in some thermophiles, supporting earlier suggestions on global evolution for thermal adaptation  <cit> . thermophiles seem to employ more than one of these methods to increase their stability.

methods
dataset
twelve protein pairs with similar structure and function, one from thermophilic organism and the other from a mesophile was taken for further analysis. the dataset is derived from an earlier work by kannan n and vishveshwara s  <cit> . the information on this derived dataset is given in table  <dig> 

adenylate kinases
neutal proteases
glyceraldhyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenases
endo- <dig> -beta xylanases
the order of thermophile /mesophile pairs is the same as the order followed in generating all the additional figures .

protein energy network
the interaction energy is calculated as a summation of short range lennard-jones and coulombic interactions, averaged over an ensemble of structures generated by a constant temperature , explicit solvent md simulation performed for  <dig> nson each protein system, out of which the initial  <dig> ns was allowed for the system to equilibrate. the equilibrium ensemble from  <dig> ns to  <dig> ns was taken for further energy calculations  and  <dig>  . this result indicates that the simulation for  <dig> ns as carried out in this study is sufficient). the simulation and energy calculations were performed using gromacs  <cit> . the final graph we obtain is a complete weighted graph of the protein in which the weight of an edge is given by the interaction energy  between the amino acids, given in equation  <dig>    

where, vlj and vc are the potential energies due to lennard-jones interactions and coulombic interactions respectively, of residues i and j, averaged over the ensemble.

similarly, we have constructed pens in which we have considered only lj interactions ) and coulombic interactions ) respectively. the details of these graphs are not discussed.

the weighted pen can further be converted into an unweighted pene, where e is the highest energy that can exist between 'i' and 'j' to draw an edge between them. for example, pen- <dig>  is a graph where, there exists an unweighted edge between 'i' and 'j', if eij ≤ - <dig> kj/mol. the pene is thus mathematically represented as an adjacency matrix , where   

we use the term "low energy" to denote low negative energies  and "high energy" for high negative energies .

clusters
clusters are the connected components in a pene and can be identified using standard dfs algorithm  <cit> .

hubs
hubs are highly connected nodes in the network. in packing based protein structure network  studies, a node is declared a hub if its degree is at least  <dig>  <cit> . the same definition is being followed here because of similar packing constraints of the proteins analyzed.

cliques and communities
cliques are sub-graphs, having the maximum connectivity among them. for pene, we identify the k-cliques using cfinder  <cit> . for example, for a clique of size k, there will be k × / <dig> edges among the nodes. two cliques are said to be adjacent if they share k- <dig> nodes. a community is a collection of adjacent k-cliques.

size
the size of a graph/network or a sub-graph  is the total number of nodes in it.

RESULTS
pens are obtained for the proteins in the dataset as given in methods section. the interaction energies in pens mostly range from  <dig> kj/mol to - <dig> kj/mol, in which the low  energy region  is dominated by van der waals interaction and the higher  energy region  is dominated by electrostatic interactions . the pens are then analyzed for largest connected component size, largest community size, clusters, cliques and hub population changes, as a function of 'e'. the results obtained are compared between each thermophile-mesophile pair to obtain insights into their stability differences, from a network perspective. a comparison of different parameters for pene of each pair is given in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig> 

largest connected component  transition profile
the largest connected component is a very important parameter in network analysis since it provides information on the connectivity of the network  <cit> . the largest connected component  is obtained as a function of 'e'. the lcc is well connected at low energy regions but breaks up at the transition region . the lcc transition profile comparison shows that thermophiles of adenylate kinases  , subtilisins, carboxypeptidases, phosphofructo  kinases and endo- <dig> -beta xylanases  show a more connected lcc than mesophiles . from lcc profile we observe that global evolution from mesophile to thermophile is not a prominent contributing factor, nonetheless we observe certain thermophiles following this behavior .

cluster population
clusters are autonomously connected units in pens. they provide us information on what amino acids are interconnected to stabilize which part of the protein structure  <cit> . the more clusters there are in a pen, the more segregated the stability of the protein is. clusters for a pene are obtained using depth first search as given in methods section and the total number of clusters  is calculated as a function of 'e' . the cluster population profiles show a consistent pattern of thermophiles having higher number of clusters than mesophiles  . the profiles mostly show that  the population of clusters peaks higher for thermophiles than mesophiles ,  the thermophile cluster population peak is shifted towards higher energy ,  <dig> phosphoglycerate kinases ) or  the number of clusters at higher energies  are more than that of its mesophile counterpart . fig  <dig> shows an example of the cluster population profile of e14b xylanases where it follows all the three patterns mentioned above. the increased population of electrostatics dominated clusters at high energy levels , like in 3pg kinases, can highly stabilize the thermophile protein. in general the higher cluster population in thermophiles suggests enhanced stability due to increased number of segregated groups of interactions.

largest community transition profile
the cliques are rigid sub-graphs in a network  <cit> . and hence, a community is a collective rigid sub-graph of pene, thus giving stability to the protein. the communities in a pene are identified as given in methods section. the size of the largest community  is plotted as a function of 'e', where the community size is large at lower energies and breaks down as we decrease 'e' . from, the community transition profile comparison of thermophiles and mesophiles, we find that the thermophiles perform similar or better than the mesophiles, having larger community sizes in pens at lower energy levels. for example, the thermophilic carboxypeptidase has a larger community  at a lower energy regime  than the mesophile pair . an additional mesophilic carboxypeptidase  with high structural homology but a sequence homology of only 46% shows the same profile as the mesophile showing that the mesophiles indeed follow the same trend which is distinct to that of their thermophilic homolog . there are some exceptions like l dehydrogenases and signal recognition particle receptors  . the presence of communities only in the low energy region, suggests absence of electrostatic influence and hence the non-preference to electrostatic interactions aggregating to form very rigid networks.

clique population
although, communities provides insight into how rigid sub-graphs collate to provide rigidity to the protein, isolated cliques can also provide similar rigidity to parts of the protein, empowering islands in protein structures to withstand extreme temperatures. from profiling the population change of cliques with changes in 'e', we were able to capture this effect in proteins. analysis of the clique population profile in pene shows that almost all thermophiles with the exception of tim, shows increased population of cliques at low energies . unlike community transition profile, we see considerable number of cliques dominated by electrostatics ). conformational plasticity might be a possible factor influencing this behavior. the thermophilic proteins seem to employ low energy cliques and communities to maintain stability, but use only segregated high energy electrostatics dominated cliques to maintain rigidity. this strategy might help thermophiles to maintain stability but retain a degree of flexibility, enabling them to function.

hub population
hubs are node specific property in a network. in real world networks, hubs are considered to provide resilience to the networks against random attacks  <cit> , in the case of proteins against random mutations  <cit> . in a pene, it can represent the structurally and possibly functionally important residues in the protein. the number of hubs plotted as a function of 'e' can give us information on the amount of structural resilience a protein  can have against external perturbations. thermophiles show higher hub population than mesophiles  ). fig  <dig> shows that the hub population of thermophilic 3pg kinase is more than the mesophilic counterpart, both at the low energy and at the transition regions. an interesting observation is that most of the thermophiles have consistently higher number of hubs than mesophiles in lower energy region if we remove electrostatics from pen calculation ), supporting packing based psn studies by brinda kv and vishveshwara s  <cit> . the above observation suggests that the thermophiles may have more efficiently packed hydrophobic cores than mesophiles, supporting previous studies  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have used protein energy networks for representing interactions in protein structures, to compare a dataset of thermophile-mesophile homologues. network parameters like the largest connected component, sub-graph properties like clusters, cliques and communities and node specific parameters like hubs were compared across a range of interaction energies, to identify the factors contributing to the enhanced stability of thermophiles. in this work, we have consolidated all the interaction types by using their resultant interaction energies . this effort has eliminated ambiguities in defining and analyzing interactions separately. also, we have considered the complexity of amino acid interactions by representing them as networks.

from the results obtained for pens, we were able see that thermophilic proteins like adenylate kinases, subtilisins, carboxypeptidases, 3pg kinases and endo- <dig> -beta xylanases show enhanced global connectivity, as seen from their increased lcc transition profiles. but thermophiles seem to prefer more than one factor for stabilization. for example, adenylate kinases thermophile seems to employ large communities and increased clique population than the mesophiles, whereas e14b xylanase thermophile has a larger number cliques and hubs to enhance their stability. the lcc for thermophilic neutral proteases and lipodimide dehydrogenases are less connected than the corresponding mesophiles. hence, the notion that evolution may prefer a global change from a thermophile to a mesophile might be more case specific. this was further strengthened by our observations on increased cluster population in thermophiles, showing that they use more autonomous stabilizing units to enhance stability. also, increased electrostatic clusters in certain thermophiles, at higher energy ranges , suggest that they might play a vital role in imparting stability to them, supporting earlier works in this area  <cit> .

thermophilic proteins show a higher clique population than their mesophile homologues. but the clique population and largest community formation are at the low energy regime. pens have electrostatic cliques but they do not form community. these observations suggest that the thermophilic proteins may employ a higher number of low energy communities to gain increased stability, but refrain from introducing much rigidity to the protein by keeping the high energy electrostatic cliques isolated. this property might allow thermophiles to be more stable but retain flexibility, probably to perform its function.

the studies on hub population suggest that the hubs  in thermophilic proteins are higher than that of mesophiles. hence, the hydrophobic core connectivity  in thermophilic proteins is better than mesophile partners, probably enabling them to stay folded under harsh conditions. this observation supports many studies on improved core packing in thermophilic proteins  <cit> .

this comparative network based study suggests that global evolution of local enhancements has resulted in an increase in overall network connectivity and hence an increase in global stability of thermophiles. increase in clusters and hubs in thermophiles bring about these local enhancements. apart from these changes, thermophiles seem to employ low energy communities  to maintain a level of rigidity to the network. presence of electrostatic clusters, and cliques but absence of communities, shows localized electrostatic interactions, rather than global network influences. and thermophilic proteins seem to have evolved by exploiting more than one of the above-mentioned methods.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors' contributions
msv and sv have designed the experiments, analyzed the data and prepared the manuscripts.

supplementary material
additional file 1
network parameter comparison of pens in thermophilic and mesophilic proteins. figure s <dig> shows the comparison of the largest connected component as a function of 'e' between the thermophile/mesophile homologs. similarly, figure s <dig>  s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig> show such comparison for the cluster population, largest community size, clique population and hub population respectively. figure s <dig> shows the comparison of different network parameters between one thermophilic and two mesophilic carboxypeptidases. table s <dig> gives an overview of the different network parameters  across the whole dataset, along with some commonly analyzed pairwise interactions.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
department of science and technology  and department of biotechnology  is acknowledged for funding of the computing facility, which was used to perform md simulations. dhruba deb and brinda kv are acknowledged for their discussions and contributions.

this article has been published as part of bmc bioinformatics volume  <dig> supplement  <dig>  2010: selected articles from the eighth asia-pacific bioinformatics conference . the full contents of the supplement are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/11?issue=s <dig> 
