BACKGROUND
physical interactions between proteins are central to many cellular processes  <cit> . for example they are crucial to the functioning of the immune system and are involved in the regulation of enzyme activity. in order to understand how these interactions are related to biological and biochemical processes, structural information about the complex are essential as they reveal the underlying molecular mechanisms  <cit> . experimental studies, though, are faced with remarkable technical difficulties and the number of solved complexes deposited in the protein data bank   <cit>  is still relatively small. computational methods, if accurate and reliable, could therefore play an important role, both to infer functional properties and to guide new experiments  <cit> .

docking algorithms attempt to predict the native three-dimensional  structure of a complex starting from the atomic coordinates of its constituent proteins, solved in isolation   <cit> . it is a challenging problem which has attracted a great deal of interest in view also of its potential biomedical applications . a related problem of considerable importance is domain docking where the aim is to predict the structure of a multi-domain protein from the structures of its component domains. as domain interactions often determine protein function , an understanding of how domains combine and assemble is clearly necessary  <cit> . moreover, with the progress of structural genomics it can be expected that this question will acquire even more relevance. structural genomics projects are in fact determining a large number of structures, but focusing primarily at the level of individual domains. the structure of most domains will soon be known either directly from experiments or through accurate homology modeling. the challenge will then be to use them to model large, multi-domain proteins  <cit> .

most docking procedures treat the individual proteins  as rigid bodies and try to orient them so as to optimize their shape and/or chemical complementarity  <cit> . surface side-chain rearrangements and possibly some backbone flexibility are introduced only at a final refinement stage. this strategy can be effective in predicting the structure of the complex in cases where proteins undergo limited conformational changes upon binding. it is clearly inadequate in cases with substantial backbone displacement between bound and unbound forms. as highlighted in recent critical assessment of predicted interactions  blind trials  <cit> , this is one of the major limitations of present docking algorithms  <cit> .

in general, docking methods greatly benefit from some biological indications on the likely regions or residues involved in the interaction  <cit> . this information can be used to guide docking calculations, restricting the search of allowed complex configurations or filtering out wrong solutions  <cit> . information about interaction sites can sometimes be available from experiments, e.g. site-directed mutagenesis. alternatively, one can resort to computational methods. these methods are based on structural, physicochemical and evolutionary properties that distinguish binding sites from the rest of the protein surface   <cit> . although no single property is able to reliably locate the interface region in an unbound protein, a number of studies have obtained promising results by combining different features  <cit> .

it is known that some residues within the binding interface make a dominant contribution to the stability of protein complexes  <cit> . these residues can be identified experimentally by alanine scanning mutagenesis and have been named "hot spots". when hot spots are mutated a significant drop in binding affinity is observed whereas the effect is negligible for other residues  <cit> . their importance is also confirmed by an evolutionary analysis which shows that hot spots tend to be more conserved  <cit> . it has been observed that hot spots are preferentially located either on protrusions  or in depressions  of the protein surfaces and they are coupled across the interface in tight fitting regions that exclude solvent molecules  <cit> . interestingly, hot spot residues appear to undergo little conformational changes upon binding  <cit> , a property that might facilitate their identification in the unbound state  <cit> .

the picture that emerges from previous experimental and theoretical studies is that protein-protein interfaces are highly heterogeneous: they have many packing defects and are locally optimized at just few critical positions  <cit> . statistical analysis of entire interfaces might therefore be unable to capture significant differences between binding sites and the rest of the surface  <cit> . analysis focused on the residues important for binding might instead be more discriminating. these considerations suggest an alternative strategy to the docking problem: rather than considering the full three dimensional structure of the complex, it might be more effective to predict just few key contacts across the interface. these could then be used to infer the correct relative orientation of proteins.

in this paper we focus on the  domain docking problem and present a method to predict contacting residues between domain pairs. the method is based on a pairwise contact function  that combines structural, physicochemical and evolutionary information. we use a contact map representation to search for the configuration of contacts that maximizes the score. we show that the approach leads to some contacts correctly predicted and that predicted residues tend to be significantly closer to each other than other pairs of residues in the same domains. moreover we find that predicted contacts can often be used to discriminate the best model  among a set of  <dig> optimal solutions generated by a standard docking procedure. in the next paragraph we discuss our results, leaving technical details in the methods section, after the conclusions.

RESULTS
contact maps are convenient representations of protein structures that can also be used to describe the interaction between two protein domains . in this imaginary example, filled circles correspond to residue pairs in contact across the interface. within our framework, each contact is assigned a score and the score of a configuration is the sum over all contacts. for simplicity and because we are looking for a few important contacts, we consider maps with a fixed number of contacts, nc =  <dig>  the working hypothesis is that the map configuration that maximizes a suitable scoring function corresponds to the correct interacting residues.

there are a number of advantages in working with contacts maps: it is a simple representation and it should be possible to search the contact space in an efficient manner; a small number of changes on a map may correspond to substantial changes in three dimensions, therefore reducing computational times; in principle any interaction pattern can be represented even allowing for backbone flexibility upon docking. on the other hand, there are some difficulties and limitations: it does not produce directly a 3d complex and more than one structure may correspond to a given contact configuration; if precautions are not taken, many maps do not even correspond to a physically realizable conformation.

docking methods are generally tested on their capacity to predict the protein complex starting from the unbound components  <cit> . it is simpler but biologically less relevant to reconstruct a complex using the bound structures. the latter are in fact artificially biased toward the native solution. to address this issue, we have selected multi-domain proteins that have been solved experimentally in two conformations which differ for the significant displacement of one of the domains. one conformation can be denoted as "closed", the other as "open" . our data set consists of  <dig> non redundant domain pairs and the aim is to predict a subset of the contacts in the closed conformation starting from the structure in the open one .

as detailed in the methods section, the scoring function is constructed from five different terms: shape complementarity, residue pair potentials, interface propensity, residue conservation and correlated mutations. we have analyzed each scoring component individually and assessed its efficacy in discriminating native contacts from random contacts. in fig.  <dig> we report the z-score for each component averaged over the data set, together with the standard deviation . the z-score and standard deviation of the combined scoring function is also plotted.

residue conservation provides the strongest signal. this is in agreement with a recent study reporting that the number of conserved positions at the interface is significantly higher than on the rest of the protein surface  <cit> . it should be remarked that statistical analysis performed on the entire interface instead show marginal differences in average conservation between interface and non-interface residues  <cit> . this apparent discrepancy is likely to derive from the hot-spot organization of interfaces: the few residues important for binding are evolutionary conserved but when averages are taken over the whole interface their distinctive character does not emerge  <cit> . in our approach we consider only the top scoring contacts and this possibly explains the agreement with ref.  <cit> .

the five different components are combined linearly into a unique scoring function. the parameter space of weights has been explored "semi"-exhaustively, i.e. weights are iteratively varied by a factor  <dig>  given a set of weights, a z-score can be evaluated for each protein in the dataset. we use a leave-one-out cross validation strategy: in turn one protein is singled out  and the remaining ones are used as the training set. the optimal weights are selected as those that maximize the average z-score on a training set. in fig.  <dig> we report the mean and standard deviation of z-scores of the combined  scoring functions, calculated on test proteins. the average value is larger than for individual components although the improvement appears limited e.g. with respect to residue conservation. as a term of comparison we have tested the method with just the residue conservation term in the scoring function.

weights calculated for different proteins are consistent: the dominant contribution derives from evolutionary information . interestingly, correlated mutations have the lowest average z-score when considered individually  but play an important role in combination with other terms. the weight of residue interface propensity turns out to be negligibly small and accordingly set to zero in our calculations. it is likely that its contribution is already accounted for by the pair potential term. for  <dig> of the  <dig> proteins we obtain the same set of parameters: if surface complementarity is given a weight of  <dig>  pair potential, residue conservation and correlated mutations are weighted respectively  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  these weights are also obtained if the z-score average is taken over the whole data set . parameters differ in the remaining cases but confirm the importance of evolutionary information.

the scoring function is maximized directly in contact space using a simulated annealing algorithm. some constraints are set on the allowed configurations to avoid unphysical conformations . in fig.  <dig> we report the result for a specific example . of the  <dig> predicted contacts,  <dig> are correct ,  <dig> are within  <dig> Å and  <dig> are within  <dig> Å. the number of correct contacts expected by chance can be estimated from the number of real of contacts,  <dig>  and surface residues . the result is ~ <dig> × 10- <dig>  another quantity of interest is the number of residues that are correctly predicted to be at the interface even if the predicted contact is wrong. in the case of 2dri,  <dig> out of  <dig> residues are correctly at the interface in both domains  <dig> and  <dig> .

the results for each protein in our database are reported in table  <dig>  the average number of correct predictions is  <dig>  which should be compared with an average random expectation of ~ <dig> × 10- <dig> . in  <dig> cases at least one correct contact is identified; in one case   <dig> correct contacts are predicted. in general, predicted residues tend to be near the interface and often the binding site is reasonably well located. to illustrate this point we have calculated the average distance of the predicted contacts in the native  configuration, dpred. fig.  <dig> reports dpred for each protein  and compare it with the expected average distance of  <dig> pairs of residue  picked randomly. if all the predicted contacts were correct then by definition dpred <  <dig> Å. in our case we obtain that in  <dig> cases dpred <  <dig> Å  with a significant improvement with respect to random predictions. fig.  <dig> also reports the values of dpred for predictions obtained with just the residue conservation term . it can be noted that in most cases the results are acceptable but worst than those obtained with the combined scoring function.

a second more stringent test is to assess the predicted contacts in relation to the best solutions generated by a standard docking algorithm rather than a set of random contacts. the server gramm-x  <cit>  returns  <dig> possible models of a complex, corresponding to local optima of surface and chemical complementarity. the aim is to verify if the predicted contacts are useful to discriminate the native structure and/or the best available solution in the decoy set . to this end, given a prediction of contacts, we have calculated the average distance dpred on each model  and ranked the solutions in increasing order of dpred. the results for all the proteins in the data set are given in table  <dig>  the native structure has the lowest dpred in  <dig> cases out of 20; in  <dig> cases  it is ranked second; in  <dig> case  it is ranked third. for luae and 9aat the structures with lowest dpred correspond to the best models produced by gramm-x, which identify a consistent fraction of native contacts . for 1h9m instead the model ranked first has fnc =  <dig> but identifies correctly 35% and 40% of interface residues in the two domains; for 2dri the model with lowest dpred has fnc =  <dig>  .

for  <dig> targets out of  <dig> it is possible to define the best gramm-x model according to the parameter fnc . for  <dig> of these targets both the native structure and the best model are ranked within the first three positions in terms of dpred. this suggests that even if the right solution is not present in the decoy set, a solution close to it should be identifiable. in  <dig> of the  <dig> cases our contact prediction improves or confirms the gramm-x ranking; in the case that is worsened , the best model is re-ranked to second best. we report in additional file  <dig> the plot of dpred for each decoy set .

there are cases for which our method does not provide satisfactory results. two clear examples are pdb codes 1jmc and 1dpp. in the first case, none of the properties we consider or the combined scoring function are able to distinguish clearly between real and random contacts . as a consequence, real contacts do not have particularly high scores and in the search for the maximum are ignored. in the second case, instead, there are correct contacts with relatively high-scores and it is harder to understand the causes of the poor result. one possible explanation is that 1dpp is composed of  <dig> domains and in our approach we completely ignore one of them, more precisely the intermediate one connecting the n to the c terminal domains. this might introduce some spurious effects as additional interface residues  become effectively available for binding. indeed the predicted contacts appear clustered on the wrong interface. it should be underlined that both 1jmc and 1dpp are likely to be difficult targets. indeed also gramm-x does not perform well: none of the models generated for them has fnc>  <dig> 

there are other cases where the contact prediction method encounters difficulties, e.g. for 1a8e and 1ex <dig>  it is interesting though that in both cases the predictions, although inaccurate, provide useful indications for selecting an acceptable model among those generated by gramm-x. for 1a8e the native structure and the best available model have respectively the lowest and the second lowest value of dpred. for 1ex <dig>  the model ranked second according to dpred has fnc =  <dig>  with 75% and 42% of interface residues predicted correctly on the two domains respectively.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we have presented a novel method to infer contacting residues at domain-domain interfaces. the method attempts to dock protein domains in contact space finding the best configuration of contacts that suits an objective scoring function. it differs and it is complementary to other computational approaches for the prediction of physical protein interactions. in fact it works at an intermediate level between binding site predictions and standard docking algorithms. the former methods attempt to identify the interface residues on a protein without specifying the contacts they actually form, the latter aim to provide a detailed atomic model of the putative complex. combining and integrating these methods is likely to lead to effective prediction tools. for example, we have shown in this paper that contact predictions can be used in conjunction with the gramm-x docking server to discriminate acceptable models. other methods have also used physicochemical and evolutionary information to improve the ranking of docking solutions  <cit> . the emphasis of our work, though, has been more on producing a direct list of putative contacts . an interesting development would be to guide docking calculations by including from the start the predicted contacts. provided the predictions are reliable, this would significantly reduce the number of possible complex configurations to be sampled, with clear advantages e.g. in the case of large systems and genome-wide studies. a conceptually similar scheme has been recently proposed  <cit> , in which predicted interface residues  are used to drive docking calculations.

overall, contact docking appears feasible and worth considering further. the accuracy of the method is still somewhat limited but amenable to improvements. at present the scoring function is a simple linear combination of five different terms. it is generally recognized that non-linear machine learning algorithms  are more effective in combining heterogeneous sources of information achieving a far higher overall discriminative power. at the same time, some of the individual scoring components might be improved or additional terms included. for example, the description of the energetics of binding is far from adequate as it is based on statistical potentials derived from analysis of entire interfaces and does not include any characterization of binding hot-spots.

we have further shown that contact maps are convenient representations for the docking problem. contact maps have long being used in the context of single proteins, mainly for structure comparison purposes  <cit> . some partial success has also been obtained in applying contact maps to predict protein folds  <cit> . one of the main difficulties in using contact maps for protein folding is to restrict the search to physical maps, i.e. maps that can indeed be reproduced by a 3d protein structure. the same problem recurs in the context of docking as well, i.e. not all maps correspond to a 3d complex, but it is likely to be less severe. in fold prediction, one deals with the protein chain which is quite flexible and in principle can take many different conformations. in docking, although the two domain structures have some degree of plasticity, it is certainly more limited and some geometrical constraints on the allowed contact are easier to introduce. it is clear, though, that the more stringent the constraints the more limited the method will be in handling conformational changes. on the other hand, one can hope that by improving the scoring function, the geometric constraints can be relaxed.

in future work it is our aim to extend the contact docking approach beyond the modeling of multi-domain proteins. we plan to apply the method to the problem of docking two different proteins, though some additional issues will need to be addressed in this case. the correlated mutations analysis, for example, rely on the multiple sequence alignment of co-evolved proteins and on the identification of the correct interacting orthologs. this is a non trivial problem which will require careful consideration. in general, we expect the scoring function will need to be re-adjusted . it is also likely that protein conformational changes  will be more pronounced. another direction we plan to explore is the docking of protein models  <cit> . as the majority of individual protein structures in a genome are going to be models, docking methods will need to be able to handle structural inaccuracies. contact docking is essentially a low resolution approach and does not depend heavily on structural details. it might therefore be an ideal method for this task. interestingly, similar considerations could lead to reconsider some of the early docking algorithms  <cit>  which, contrary to subsequent developments, were not based on stringent steric match criteria.

