BACKGROUND
vertebrate genes consist of relatively short exons separated by considerably larger introns. the introns of lower eukaryotes, invertebrates and plants are much shorter. this difference may be explained by the preference for two possible mechanisms for recognition of the exon-intron boundaries by the splicing machinery. in the case of long introns, the exon definition mechanism initially recognizes pairs of splicing sites corresponding to one exon. vice versa, short introns are recognized by the intron definition that pairs splicing sites across introns  <cit> . historically, the intron definition mechanism seems to be the ancestral one, whereas exon definition likely is a relatively recent innovation that, in particular, created the possibility of regulated alternative splicing  <cit> .

these models yield different consequences of mutations that destroy splicing sites. errors in exon definition should lead to exon skipping or, if there are strong cryptic sites, the use of the latter, whereas errors in intron definition should cause intron retention. indeed, exactly this behavior was observed in vivo and in vitro experiments , and in early analyses of disease-causing mutations of human genes  <cit> . these predictions also agree to the distribution of alternative splicing types in different organisms. in vertebrates, where long introns are frequent, the prevalent type of alternative splicing is exon skipping  <cit> , while in plants, where the majority of introns are short, the most frequent type is intron retention  <cit> .

intron retention is the least studied type of alternative and aberrant splicing. in contrast with other types of alternative splicing, which involve the choice between different splice sites, intron retention represents complete absence of splicing. some specific features of retained introns have become clear in recent studies of human  <cit>  and plant transcriptomes  <cit> . retained introns were found to differ from other introns in gc content, that was lower than in exons but higher than in constitutively spliced out introns. retained introns were shown to be shorter on the average than constitutively spliced out ones and exhibited a tendency to occur in 5'- and 3'-untranslated regions  <cit> ; they also have weaker sites  <cit> .

in several cases intron retention clearly has a function. a considerable fraction of retained introns encode identifiable protein domains or parts thereof  <cit> . in some cases intron retention produces different functional isoforms ; isoforms with aberrant function ; truncated proteins that may be involved in regulation ; non-functional proteins ; proteins with unknown function ; or, finally, isoforms with no known functional differences between the variants  interacting protein calcyon  <cit> , mouse homeodomain transcription factor tgif <dig>  <cit> ). at that, intron retention may be conserved in vertebrates, e.g. intron  <dig> of splicing regulator of the sr family 9g <dig>  <cit>  or species-specific, e.g. intron  <dig> of tgif <dig>  present in the mouse gene, but not its human ortholog tgif <dig>  <cit> .

however, it is likely that many cases of observed intron retention were caused by errors of the splicing machinery. retained introns are the least conserved type of elementary alternatives  <cit> . moreover, large scale projects that aim at sequencing of full-length cdna use normalization procedures to enrich low copy transcripts, and these procedures seem to increase the fraction of underspliced transcripts that retain one or several introns  <cit> . traditionally such artifacts in cdna databases were treated as a nuisance and filtered out in attempts to create "clean" sets of alternative isoforms. we tried to look at introns retained in human cdna data from another angle, assuming that they capture intermediate states of the splicing process and thus provide a glimpse on the splicing mechanisms.

another way to look at this mechanism is to analyze consequences of mutations in splice sites. this also has been the subject of several very recent studies. such mutations have two major possible outcomes: exon skipping and activation of cryptic sites, whereas intron retention is relatively rare  <cit> . one of important determinants of the cryptic donor splice site phenotype is the presence of a strong candidate donor splice site in the vicinity of mutated sites  <cit> . cryptic acceptor splice sites are more frequent in exons than in introns, likely due to depletion of ag dinucleotides upstream of the original acceptor sites  <cit> . there are differences in the distribution of candidate exonic enhancers and silencers between skipped exons and exons with activated cryptic sites  <cit> .

here we systematically studied aberrant and mutated splicing. specifically, we compared lengths of affected and adjacent introns and exons, as well strengths of splice sites and distribution of predicted splicing enhancers and silencers in these and adjacent exons and introns. while confirming many earlier predictions, our study also provides a number of new observations that are largely consistent with existing models of the splicing mechanisms.

RESULTS
comparison of retained and constitutive introns
sets of retained  and constitutive  introns were constructed as described in data and methods and compared with the aim to identify possible determinants of intron retention. we considered the distribution of intron lengths and of lengths of the flanking exons, scores of intron splice sites and the distal sites in the flanking exons , densities of exonic cis-acting elements, intron positions within the gene. the results are summarized in table  <dig> 

* chi-square test

the distributions of the intron lengths of retained and constitutive introns were significantly different . the retained introns tend to be shorter than constitutively spliced out ones: 84% of the retained introns were shorter than  <dig> nucleotides, compared to only 40% of the constitutive introns. the median size of the retained introns was  <dig>  whereas the median size of the constitutive introns was  <dig> nucleotides. no significant differences between distributions of flanking exons lengths were observed .

scores of the intron splice sites and splice sites of the flanking exons for retained and constitutively spliced introns were calculated using a positional weight matrix as described in data and methods. splice sites of retained introns were weaker: the distributions of the splice sites scores for the retained and constitutive introns were significantly different for both acceptor and donor sites . the median scores for the donor sites of the retained and constitutive introns were  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively, whereas for the acceptor sites they were  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively.

the donor site scores of the 3'-flanking  exons were similar for the retained and constitutive introns, whereas the acceptor sites of the 5'-flanking  exons were considerable weaker for the retained introns compared to the constitutive ones, with medians  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively .

densities of cis-acting elements of both types of introns were calculated using three available programs, esefinder  <cit> , rescue-ese  <cit> , and pesx  <cit> , as described in data and methods. the results are described in table  <dig>  the densities of most types of predicted exonic splicing enhancers  were higher in the retained introns, whereas the density of exonic splicing silencers  was higher in the constitutive introns .

at that, the average densities of all four esefinder motifs were higher in the retained introns . the maximal difference between the median densities were observed for the sf2/asf sites , whereas the lowest difference was observed for the srp <dig> sites . the density of pese octamers  was also higher in the retained introns , whereas the density of pess octamers  was higher in the constitutive introns . in contrast, the density of ese hexamers predicted by rescue-ese was significantly higher in the constitutively splice introns than in the retained ones . all these differences were statistically significant .

the relative position of an intron in a gene was defined as the ratio rp = d/l, where d was the distance from the gene 5'-end to the intron 5'-end , and l was the gene length . since terminal exons and introns may have considerably different lengths , the distances were calculated in several different settings. firstly, we used unspliced genes, as annotated in refseq, and in this cases the distances were calculated using the genomic sequence. secondly, we considered spliced genes: all introns were removed and the studied intron was reduced to a single point, "intron shadow", and the distances were calculated using the mrna sequence. thirdly, we considered spliced genes with the last exon removed as well. finally, we defined relative position of an intron as its ordinal number divided by the total number of introns in a gene.

the constitutive introns  are shifted towards the 3'-end in the unspliced gene calculations , and towards 5'-ends in spliced gene calculations . this is consistent with decreasing intron density and increasing exon length in the 5'-to-3' direction  <cit> . indeed, when the last 3'terminal intron is removed, the distribution becomes almost uniform .

the situation with retained introns is dramatically different . the distribution of the retained introns  is considerably shifted towards the 3' in all settings, as compared to the constitutive introns. accordingly, the fraction of retained introns increases in the 5'-to-3' direction, leveling off at about middle of the gene .

comparison of skipped and cryptic-site exons
the sets of splice-site inactivating mutations were collected as described in data and methods. only mutations directly in the donor and acceptor sites were considered. the exons affected by the mutations were divided into skipped exons  and exons utilizing cryptic sites . the donor and acceptor site mutations were considered both separately and jointly, to increase the statistical power of the observations. the results are summarized in table  <dig> 

the s-exons were found to be significantly shorter than the c-exons . no significant differences were observed in the lengths of flanking introns .

scores of authentic splice sites and all splice sites in the adjacent exons and introns for the s- and c-exons were calculated as described in data and methods. unexpectedly, the authentic acceptor sites affected by mutations were significantly weaker in the c-exons than in the s-exons, with the median scores  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively . no significant differences were observed in the distribution of authentic site scores in the s- and c-exons with mutated donor sites, neither in the distribution of scores of all other considered sites.

the relative enrichment by potential cryptic sites near the mutated sites was estimated by calculating the distance to the closest equivalent splice site; the latter were defined as candidate splice sites of the same type as the authentic site and having the same or higher splice site score. the search for equivalent splice sites was limited to the adjacent intron and exon, and the cases when such sites were absent were not taken into account in calculations. both for the donor and acceptor site mutations, the s- and c-exons differed dramatically: the equivalent sites were located much closer to the authentic splice sites of the c-exons than for the s-exons.

the densities of esefinder sf2/asf and srp <dig> motifs, as well as pese octamers were significantly higher in the c-exons than in the s-exons with mutated donor sites, although the tendency was the same for most other types of eses and also in exons with mutated acceptor sites. the densities of pess in exons with mutated splice sites of both types were higher in the s-exons, but the difference was not significant even for combined sets .

discussion
the overall results of this study seem to agree with the existing biological models. the fact that retained introns are relatively short is consistent with the possibility that such introns are spliced out by the intron definition mechanism, as in this case splicing aberrations should lead to intron retention. when this study was completed, similar observations were made also in  <cit> .

the relative weakness of splicing sites in retained introns and the fact that exons skipped due to mutations of splice sites do not have strong cryptic sites in the immediate vicinity shows that the site scores are a reasonable approximation to site strength and may determine their functionality  <cit>  at that, unlike  <cit> , the relative dearth of cryptic candidate sites in the vicinity of the c-exons was not confined to exclusively to the exons with mutated donor splice sites. on the other hand, we could not confirm the observation that strong acceptor sites are a characteristic of the c-exons with mutated donor sites  <cit> .

in contrast to previous studies that were primarily interested in functional  alternative splicing of retained introns  <cit> , we did not enforce possible functionality. one of consequences of that is that the majority of retained introns studied here are unlikely to encode functional proteins, as only  <dig> % of them are frame-preserving . this does not preclude the possible role of such introns in regulation, either on the protein level  or on the mrna level ; some examples of such regulatory mechanisms have been mentioned in the introduction. however, both the procedure and the obtained results seem to indicate that the majority of retained introns in our study come from underspliced transcripts.

in line with this reasoning, the weakness of sites in retained introns may have two explanations. the retained introns might come from underspliced transcripts  or be instances of regulated alternative splicing. indeed, functional alternative splice sites are weaker than constitutive splice sites  <cit> . further, longer introns in general tend to have stronger splice sites; however, the latter trend becomes observable only for bona fide introns longer than  <dig> nt  <cit> , and thus should not influence the majority of retained introns studies here.

it has been demonstrated that both human and plant retained introns are more prevalent in the 5'- and especially 3'-untranslated regions, compared to the protein-coding regions of the mrnas mechanism  <cit> . this has been ascribed to elimination of abnormally spliced mrnas by the nmd mechanism  <cit> . however, this would not explain the observed prevalence of nmd-inducing retained introns in the 5'-regions. our results demonstrate monotonic increase in the fraction of mostly retained introns in the 5'-to-3' direction. this is consistent with some degree of co-transciptional splicing  observed in experiment  <cit> . however, this correlation is not straightforward. indeed, since we considered only introns bounded on both sides by internal exons, and required that the boundaries of the exon containing the unspliced intron coincided exactly with the boundaries of the corresponding exon-intron-exon chain in the refseq mrna isoform , all retained introns considered here are followed by spliced out introns. this means that the observed tendency may not be a simple consequence of completely unspliced 3'-termini.

the observed differences in the density of exonic splicing enhancers in the retained and constitutive introns as well as in the c-exons and s-exons also seem to have a natural biological interpretation. indeed, a high density of ese-like sites in an  intron may lead to misrecognition of this intron as a part of an exon together with the flanking exons. similarly, a high density of eses in an exon with a mutated site may force the splicing machinery to retain this exon and use a cryptic site, whereas esss might provoke skipping the exon. a puzzling observation that candidate enhancers predicted by rescue-ese were more abundant in the constitutively splice introns than in retained ones may be explained by the fact that this method, unlike pesx, is based on the comparison of oligonucleotide frequencies in constitutive and alternative exons and does not control for the distribution of these oligonucleotides in introns  <cit> . a similar observation was recently made in  <cit> . another coincidence between our study and  <cit>  is that not all selex-based esefinder candidate exonic splicing enhancers have different densities in the s-exons and c-exons: in  <cit> , the most pronounced effect was observed for sf2/asf, whereas in our study a more statistically significant difference was seen for srp <dig>  in retained introns, the most prevalent candidate splicing enhancers were those for sf2/asf and sc <dig>  trailed by those for srp <dig> and, marginally significant, for srp <dig> 

unfortunately, at present it seems impossible to repeat these analyses with intronic splicing enhancers and silencers, since no programs for their recognition are available. a more convoluted, but still plausible explanation may be found for the observed significant difference in the strength of authentic acceptor sites of the c-exons and s-exons: an exon with a weak splice site already contains more splicing enhancers than an exon with strong sites  <cit> , and thus it is more likely to become a c-exon if the site is disrupted by a mutation.

CONCLUSIONS
thus the analysis of retained introns in human cdna, exons skipped due to mutations in splice sites and exons with cryptic sites produced results consistent with the intron definition mechanism of splicing of short introns and the model of co-transcriptional splicing. retained introns tend to be short and contain a higher density of splicing enhancers. skipped exons contain more candidate splicing enhancers and less silencers, compared to exons with activated cryptic sites. skipped exons also do not have strong candidate splice sites in the vicinity of mutated ones.

