BACKGROUND
intracellular parasites represent a significant portion of human disease burden throughout the world. the apicomplexan parasite toxoplasma gondii is one of the most successful intracellular parasites and it is estimated up to a third of the human population has been infected  <cit> . this high infection rate results in approximately  <dig>  million new infections in the u.s. per year. fortunately, most infections do not result in debilitating symptoms as individuals with healthy immune systems are able to control the growth of the parasite, yet they are generally not able to eliminate chronic infection. toxoplasmosis has been an indicator disease for patients suffering from complications of aids since the advent of the hiv viral epidemic  <cit> . unborn babies can become infected in mothers who convert during pregnancy, resulting in 400– <dig>  new congenital toxoplasma infections in the u.s. per year  <cit> . also, the parasite can thrive in immune privileged areas of the eye, resulting in approximately  <dig>  symptomatic ocular toxoplasmosis cases in the u.s. every year  <cit> . major routes of human infection are via either the ingestion of undercooked infected meat or the accidental ingestion of oocysts shed into the environment, for example, by gardening or cleaning cat litter. recent estimates by the cdc indicate that of known etiological agents, toxoplasmosis is the fourth leading cause of hospitalization and the second leading cause of death by foodborne illness in the u.s today  <cit> . the ability of toxoplasma to infect such a large number of individuals, approximately  <dig> million in the u.s., results in meaningful disease burden in those individuals where the parasite circumvents normal modes of control  <cit> .

there are two aspects of the toxoplasma life cycle that allow it to be so prevalent, the ability to infect a vast number of intermediate hosts and the ability to produce millions of environmentally resistant oocysts through a single infection of a cat, the definitive host  <cit> . toxoplasma gondii has been found to infect virtually every warm blooded animal that has been assessed  <cit> . because of this, many animals used for food consumption have dormant bradyzoite cysts in their tissues, and if not properly cooked, these parasites can be passed to the consumer leading to infection. this points out a unique feature of the t. gondii life cycle, as permissive infection of intermediate hosts following ingestion of tissue cysts  <cit>  is normally only infective for the definitive host in related apicomplexan parasites  <cit> . upon infection, slow growing bradyzoites differentiate into rapidly growing tachyzoites that continue to divide and rupture infected cells causing cellular damage. once the immune system is triggered, parasite growth is controlled, and the parasite differentiates back into the dormant bradyzoite cyst effectively hiding from the immune system, often in immune privileged areas such as the brain. this bradyzoite-tachyzoite-bradyzoite progression can result in repeated rounds of infection in multiple intermediate hosts, without the need for sexual transmission. in order to complete the life cycle and differentiate into sexual stages, the parasite must pass through the gut of a felid. although, fortunately, cat predation of humans is extremely rare, cats can be exposed to the parasite by ingesting other infected intermediate hosts, such as mice. once bradyzoites pass into the intestine of a cat they can differentiate through the coccidian stages of development, or enteric stages, progressing from asexual merozoite forms into sexual stage micro- and macrogametocytes that eventually fuse to form oocysts which are shed into the environment where they mature into sporulated oocysts. sporulated oocysts can then be ingested by intermediate hosts, where infectious sporozoites liberated from oocysts differentiate into tachyzoites completing the life cycle   <cit> .figure  <dig> 
life cycle of
toxoplasma gondii
, and the harvest and hybridization of merozoite mrna.  life cycle of toxoplasma gondii  <cit> . green circle highlights stages for which microarray expression data exists  <cit> . red circle highlights merozoite stage harvested for this study.  we obtained intestines from three cats  that had been orally infected 5– <dig> days previously with the type ii parasite tgnmbr1strain in order to isolate merozoite stage parasites. to determine that the purified forms were indeed toxoplasma, a portion of sample c <dig> was labeled with mouse α-me <dig> . dapi stained nuclei .  mrnas for two merozoite c <dig>  samples and one for each of the c <dig>  and c <dig>  samples were labeled using the ambion messageamp kit and hybridized to affymetrix toxoplasma genechips. in order to control for possible strain specific expression we also hybridized two tgnmbr <dig> tachyzoite mrna samples . data were analyzed in combination with the recently published dataset covering oocyst ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ) to tachyzoite  to bradyzoite ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ) development in the type ii m <dig> strain  <cit> . boxplots of the rma normalized data show similar distributions and median values across the samples.



much work has been carried out to understand the biology of the asexual stages, tachyzoites and bradyzoites, which occur in the intermediate host. one reason for this is the relative ease in culturing these stages in the laboratory, both in tissue culture and the mouse model. tachyzoites grow well in various cell lines, such as human foreskin fibroblasts , and bradyzoites can be induced in vitro  <cit>  via cellular stresses  <cit>  or in vivo. these culturing methods have allowed researchers to develop an extensive molecular toolbox for toxoplasma, resulting in an increased understanding of its biology including host cell invasion and egress  <cit> , how the parasite modulates the intracellular environment  <cit> , and the identification and characterization of virulence factors that allow the parasite to evade host innate immune defenses  <cit> . culturing methods for stages beyond the bradyzoite, the merozoite and sexual stages, have not been developed, hindering the ability to study a large portion of the parasites life cycle and restricting such work to a few laboratories with the resources to house cats.

there are several reports describing various aspects of the enteric stages of t. gondii within felid intestinal cells . these studies used electron microscopy to observe ultrastructural features or performed immunohistochemistry  to determine the labeling of parasites with various antibodies, useful in characterizing the expression of a limited number of proteins in enteric stages. another report demonstrated the feasibility of isolating merozoite stage parasites from the intestinal mucosa of infected cat intestine  <cit>  and showed these parasites illicit unique antigenic responses  <cit> . based on this report, we undertook isolation of merozoites for genome wide expression profiling study in order to identify merozoite-specific genes.

RESULTS
isolation of merozoite stage parasites and mrna hybridization
to provide insight into gene expression of the enteric stage, we harvested intestines of three cats  infected with the type ii parasite, tgnmbr <dig>  <cit> . the harvesting process resulted in the removal of the majority of host cells and debris, leaving crescent shaped merozoite parasites. to determine that the purified parasites were indeed t. gondii, a portion of the sample was fixed and stained with sera from mice immunized with type ii me <dig> parasites . indeed, the crescent shaped purified parasites were labeled with the toxoplasma specific antibody. purified parasites from all three felid intestines were processed for mrna isolation and hybridized to the affymetrix toxoplasma genechip  <cit>  . in order to place the newly acquired merozoite gene expression in context of the life cycle, the data were analyzed in combination with a recently published dataset by fritz hm et al.  <dig>  <cit>  covering day  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> oocyst , day  <dig> tachyzoite , and day  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> bradyzoite  development . although the parasites used in the present study  and the fritz hm et al. study  <cit>   are both clonal type ii strains, they are of different origins; the former is from a guinea fowl from brazil, and the latter is from a sheep in united kingdom. to control for any strain specific differences in identifying merozoite specific genes, we also hybridized mrna from tgnmbr <dig> tachyzoites . plotting of rma normalized values for all the samples used in the analysis demonstrated that the medians of the distributions converge and that the ranges of extreme values across all samples were similar, lending weight that the samples from the current study and the fritz hm et al.  <cit>  study are comparable .

life cycle gene expression analysis
in order to verify that the purified parasites were enteric stage merozoites, and not morphologically similar tachyzoites, we used as a control a gene list for which the expression status at the merozoite stage had been determined using immunohistochemistry   <cit> . comparison of the ihc data on protein expression showed excellent agreement with the merozoite gene expression data . for example, ferguson dj  <cit>  reported that antibodies to surface antigen  <dig>  and many dense granule proteins  did not label merozoites, and the microarray data from all three merozoite samples  confirmed that these genes were not expressed at this stage. likewise, the expression pattern was consistent in both experiments for genes that were expressed in merozoites, such as enolase  <dig> and ldh <dig>  which were not expressed in bradyzoites but were expressed in the tachyzoite and merozoite stages . the agreement between these datasets support the conclusion that the parasites harvested from the infected felid intestines are indeed merozoites.figure  <dig> 
merozoite gene expression supports published data and forms a distinct grouping when compared with other life cycle stages.  heat map of expression  and binary indication of labeling by ihc  for genes that were assessed for merozoite stage expression previously  <cit> . there was excellent agreement when the two studies are compared, where, for example, gene products that did not label by ihc at the merozoite stage  were not expressed as indicated by the microarray data .  principal component analysis  highlighted the unique profile of the merozoite samples placing them approximately half-way on a continuum between the tachyzoite/bradyzoite and oocyst samples. the first two components described a combined 75% of the variance across the samples.



to determine the major trends across the samples we conducted principal component analysis  that highlighted the uniqueness of the merozoite samples , clustering them approximately half-way on a continuum between the tachyzoite/bradyzoite and oocyst samples. the distinct grouping of the merozoite samples was not the result of strain specific differences as the tachyzoite tgnmbr <dig> strain sample , the same strain used to generate the merozoite parasites, grouped with the tachyzoite m <dig> strain day  <dig> sample  interestingly, the pca analysis revealed that compared to the merozoite and oocyst stages, the tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages were quite similar and they all group together. although studies have shown there are gene expression differences between these two stages , the pca of global expression profiles indicates that bradyzoites resemble dormant tachyzoites when taken in context of the whole life cycle. lastly, the circular progression of samples, from the od <dig> to od4/od <dig> cluster, to the tachyzoite/bradyzoite cluster, and finally to the merozoite cluster, follows the progression of the life cycle .

we identified life cycle regulated genes by performing an analysis of variance test  on genes with expression above background levels in at least one sample. this analysis resulted in the identification of  <dig>  genes, a large proportion  of the genes in the toxoplasma genome. there were  <dig>  non-expressed genes  for which expression was at or below background in all samples, and  <dig> non-regulated genes  that were not significantly differentially expressed between the samples. although the life cycle regulated gene set  captures most of the t.gondii genome, a fifth of the genes represented on the array did not have detectable expression. some of these non-expressed genes may represent stage specific genes for stages which we do not have expression data, such as the micro- and macrogametes.

the regulated genes  were clustered into a heatmap revealing that the merozoite samples have a unique gene expression profile with hundreds of genes increased or decreased as compared to the other life cycle stages . this pattern was consistent for all three merozoite samples. many different expression patterns emerge from the heatmap , but one major theme is the large number of genes that were differentially regulated at the merozoite and oocyst stages as compared to the tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages. when a  <dig>  fold expression cutoff was applied on the mc <dig> sample,  <dig>  of the regulated genes  were specifically regulated at the merozoite stage, with  <dig>  being upregulated and  <dig> genes downregulated at this stage. to identify biological processes that may be life cycle regulated, we performed standard fisher’s exact tests on overlapping genes between the regulated gene list  and a comprehensive set of lists based on gene ontology . the two most significant go lists were cell growth & maintenance  and metabolism . more specifically, within these inclusive go categories, we found three sub-categories of interest; translation , transcription , and glycolysis & tca  . the heat maps show that many genes within these go categories are uniquely upregulated at the merozoite stage . especially striking were the large number of genes upregulated in the glycolysis/tca and purine/pyrimidine metabolic pathways. to further extend the metabolic analysis we mapped the expression of all the regulated genes for which there are kegg annotations  to the kegg metabolic pathways map , creating maps for each life cycle stage . two major themes were revealed in these metabolic maps. first, many pathways started from a downregulated state  at the od <dig> sample, progressively increased in expression through od <dig> and od <dig>  exhibited steady state expression in the tachyzoite and bradyzoite samples , and, finally, pathways throughout the metabolic map were upregulated at the merozoite stage . secondly, the expression of the fatty acid biosynthesis  and degradation  pathways oscillates throughout development . fab was downregulated in the od <dig>  od <dig> and od <dig> samples, steady state in tachyzoite and bradyzoite, and upregulated in the merozoite. in an opposite manner to fab, fad was largely downregulated in the invasive stages, the tachyzoite and merozoite, and upregulated in the encysted stages, the oocysts and bradyzoite. the regulation of the fad pathway through life cycle development may provide the encysted stages a poised state to utilize fatty acid stores that are present, for example, in the oocyst  <cit> . overall, the go and kegg analysis demonstrated that the merozoite has an elevated gene expression state for cell growth and metabolic related genes, indicating unique growth requirements of this stage.figure  <dig> 
clustering of significantly regulated life cycle gene groups.  heatmap of life cycle regulated genes. a total of  <dig>  genes were found to have significant expression differences .  heatmap of cell growth related genes. many genes with growth and/or metabolism related gene ontology were upregulated at the merozoite stage.  heatmap of apicomplexa specific genes. the rop, gra and mic gene families were downregulated as a class and many srs genes were upregualted upon entering the enteric stages.



we also looked at the expression of parasite-specific gene families in the merozoite stage. as seen in figure 2a, many of the annotated gra genes  are not expressed at the merozoite stage . genes in two other parasite specific gene families, the rhoptry   and microneme  , similarly lacked expression in the merozoite stage. for example, none of the annotated rhoptry neck  or apical membrane  genes, important for parasite invasion in intermediate stages, were expressed at the merozoite stage. one ron paralog, ron4l <dig>  <cit> , had slight expression in the merozoite, but the expression was downregualted as compared to the tachyzoite/bradyzoite stages. likewise, genes that have been shown to be important for host immune evasion, such as rop <dig>  rop <dig>  rop <dig>  gra <dig>  and gra <dig>  <cit> , were not expressed. although essentially half of the genes in these gene families were not expressed as merozoites, others had low constitutive expression, and a few were upregulated. those that exhibited upregulated expression include: gra family , rop family , and tgme49_ <dig> ) and mic family , tgme49_ <dig> , tgme49_ <dig> , and tgme49_ <dig> ), but even most of these were low abundance expressed genes. see additional file  <dig> for specific genes and expression values. the downregulated expression state upon entering the enteric stages for many members of these gene families is unexpected as many have been shown to play a role in host-parasite interactions in intermediate hosts, for example invasion  <cit>  or host immune modulation/resistance  <cit> , and suggests they are not needed during enteric development. converse to the gra, rop, and mic families, many members of the parasite surface antigen gene family  were upregulated  upon differentiating into the first of the enteric stages as a merozoite . although developmentally regulated expression of various srs genes has been shown for other stages, in comparison, quite a large number were upregulated at the merozoite stage. members of the srs gene family are involved in parasite adhesion, invasion, and virulence, possible roles they may have in allowing the parasite to develop effectively in the cat intestine  <cit> .

timing and control of life cycle gene expression
determining peak and valley points of expression for gene profiles that span continuous data sets has been useful in gaining insight into parasite biology  <cit> . by generating spline curves from expression values for all regulated genes  we were able to determine the points of maximum and minimum expression for each gene. as an example, we have graphed the curves for the sporosag and gra <dig> genes . the points of maximum expression for gra <dig> and sporosag were both between the sporulated oocyst od <dig> to od <dig> samples, and gra <dig> had a deep valley of minimum expression between the merozoite and unsporulated oocyst, which correspond to the known roles for these genes  <cit> . we ordered the maximum and minimum values for all regulated genes according to the life cycle and displayed the distribution as a histogram . there was a large shift in the number of genes at peak expression at the merozoite stage, mc <dig>  corresponding to the stage where the largest number of genes reached maximum expression. there were also a large number of genes that peaked throughout the oocyst stages, od <dig> and od <dig>  while fewer genes peaked at od <dig>  due to its similarity with od <dig> . by far, the tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages had the fewest number of genes peaking at those stages. a slightly different distribution emerged when genes were ordered by minimum of expression . many genes had minimal expression throughout the enteric stages, but there were also a large number of genes with minimum of expression between the tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages.figure  <dig> 
timing of life cycle gene expression.  example spline and f’ curves for two genes, sporosag and gra <dig>  the maximum and minimum expression values were determined from the spline curve . the maximum rate of synthesis and degradation were determined from the f’ of the spline curve .  number of genes with maximum or minimum expression across the life cycle calculated from spline curves for all  <dig>  life cycle regulated genes.  maximum synthesis and degradation rates across the life cycle calculated from f’ of spline curves for all  <dig>  life cycle regulated genes.  for each of the  <dig>  regulated genes the expression value  was subtracted from the respective synthesis value  to determine time to maximum or minimum expression. histograms displayed at half stage intervals for b-d.



by calculating the maximum and minimum values of the first derivate ) of the spline curve, one can determine the inflection points in the graph which correspond to the points of maximum rate of synthesis and degradation. for example, gra <dig>  had an upwardly trending inflection point just after the od <dig> sample corresponding to the maximum rate of synthesis just before the peak of expression between od <dig> and od <dig>  and a downward trending inflection point between the bd <dig> and mc <dig> samples indicating the maximum rate of degradation just before the gene is no longer expressed in the merozoite. there was a wave of synthesis throughout the life cycle starting with entry into the merozoite stage, mc <dig>  steadily tapering through the oocyst stages . this progression largely mirrored the maximum expression distribution where maximum rates of synthesis  precede maximum points of expression  by half a stage. the distribution seen for maximum rate of synthesis was shifted one stage down the life cycle when genes were ordered by maximum rate of degradation , reflecting the peak of expression that occurred between synthesis and degradation. lastly, we determined the time, or number of stages, to maximum or minimum expression by subtracting the maximum or minimum expression value  for each regulated gene from the corresponding rate value . for the upregulation of gene expression, most genes reached peak expression very rapidly, within one stage , indicating that once the cell commits to the rapid synthesis of a gene the expression peaks quickly in relation to the life cycle. this was also a result of the stage-specific expression for many genes. when genes were downregulated, many genes reached their minimum of expression rapidly, but there was also a group of genes that had a delayed minimum after the greatest rate of degradation, approximately four stages later . this delayed grouping indicates that the minimum of expression for a large number of genes was just before the upregulation of that gene, as there are only  <dig> stages represented in this analysis.

it has been demonstrated that promoter elements upstream of coding genes are critical for control of gene expression in toxoplasma, for both constitutive and developmentally regulated genes, and that minimal cis elements provide regulatory specificity . many of the life cycle regulated genes had dramatic periodicity of expression , suggesting that co-regulated genes may share common regulatory elements. we ordered genes by maximum or minimum expression  and examined the sequence  <dig>  bp upstream of the cds start to search for common regulatory elements using fire  <cit>  . when genes were ordered by maximum expression ,  <dig> conserved motifs were found in promoter regions of regulated genes . the tgcatg motif that was over represented in genes that span the merozoite stage is a trp <dig> cis element  <cit>  and was also found to be a major motif in a previous cell cycle expression study  <cit> , where tgcatg was overrepresented at the g <dig> phase of the cell cycle when genes were ordered by maximum expression . also, the gctagc motif overrepresented at the od <dig> stage was found in the cell cycle study, and a recent report described an ap <dig> transcription factor, tgap2-xi- <dig>  that binds the corresponding gctagc motif  <cit> . tgap2-xi- <dig> regulates hundreds of genes, including rop <dig>  which like many of the rhoptries, increased expression in the life cycle at od <dig> from a non-expressed state at od <dig> . lastly, the accatg motif, similar to the bag <dig> cis element ccagta  <cit> , was overrepresented at the bd <dig> stage, a cluster which contains the bag <dig> gene. ordering genes by the minimum of expression  found many motifs,  <dig>  overrepresented at points that together span the whole life cycle . the tgcatgc and gctagc motifs were found in the minimum expression ordered data, along with many other motifs that represent possible cis elements. this pattern may reflect a role for repressor mechanisms constituting a major portion of gene expression control in the toxoplasma life cycle. the fire analysis for the life cycle regulated genes  identified overrepresented motifs of known function tg) indicating that newly identified motifs may be functional cis elements. additionally, motifs were only identified when data were ordered in a biologically relevant manner.figure  <dig> 
motif discovery in promoter regions of life cycle regulated genes.  life cycle regulated genes  were ordered by point of maximum expression and the fire software package was used to find motifs over- and under-represented in sequence  <dig>  bp 5’ of the cds start. motifs over-represented at a particular point in the life cycle , those under-represented .  life cycle regulated genes were ordered by point of minimum expression and run in fire as in . the tgcatgc motif found in both  and  was also a major motif found in the toxoplasma cell cycle expression data set  <cit>  where, for example, it was over-represented at g <dig> for genes with maximum expression at that phase . no significant motifs were found across  <dig> fire runs when data in  or  were randomly ordered.



promoter control of merozoite specific expression
given that promoters have been shown to control developmental gene expression in the intermediate tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages and that a large number of motifs were found associated with the life cycle expression data , we were interested to test if promoters were sufficient to control gene expression at the merozoite stage. as part of the experimental design we also sought to drive the expression of a drug resistance gene only at the merozoite stage. a list of  <dig> merozoite-specific genes was identified by restricting the life cycle regulated genes  to those that were not expressed in tachyzoite or bradyzoite stages but were upregulated in the merozoite . the expression of many of these genes at the merozoite stage was quite high, some being regulated >  <dig> fold as compared to bradyzoites. for example, two of the srss, srs22b and srs22h, were among the highest expressed genes in this set, and tgme49_ <dig>  annotated as a megakaryocyte stimulating factor , was the highest expressed annotated gene across all merozoite samples excluding the srs genes. these three genes were chosen as candidates to use in cloning promoter regions into a gateway plasmid construct containing the drug resistance dhfr gene tagged with a ty epitope . we also cloned the gra <dig> promoter  in front of the dhfr-ty for use as a control, as gra <dig> is expressed in tachyzoites and bradyzoites and not in merozoites. all four constructs were individually electroporated in the me49-fudr parasites, as this is a type ii parasite and has been used successfully in various genetic crosses, and after selection and cloning we were able to obtain transgenic parasites containing the pgra <dig>  pmsf and psrs22b promoter constructs. the clones were screened by pcr for integration of the plasmid using primers that span the promoter of interest and the dhfr portion of the construct . the effectiveness of gene expression control by these promoters and of the drug resistance dhfr gene was tested by plaque assay . all three promoter strains grew equally as tachyzoites, creating plaques after 9 days of growth in hff monolayers cultured with regular media lacking pyrimethamine . only the pgra <dig> expressing strain grew to create plaques after 9 days in media containing the drug . the presence of plaques for the pgra <dig> expressing strain grown with pyrimethamine confirms that the dhfr-ty gene confers drug resistance, and the absence of growth for either pmsf or psrs22b expressing strains shows they lack dhfr-ty expression and remain drug sensitive. parasites expressing the pmsf and psrs22b reporters were grown for up to 18 days in pyrimethamine and no growth was observed by plaque assay or when the monolayers were screened under the microscope . we also conducted immunofluorescence assays  on the three strains to test for the expression of dhfr-ty at both the tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages. as expected, only the pgra <dig> expressing strain had detectable ty labeling at both stages, staining the nucleus of the cells . lastly, in order to test the developmental regulation of expression during enteric development, mature bradyzoite cysts of parasites harboring pmsf were generated in chronically infected mice and fed to a cat for the production of oocysts. at the first indication of shed oocysts, the intestine was harvested and processed for ihc. as a control we used an ihc prepared section of the intestine infected with the original tgnmbr <dig> strain that was used to harvest merozoite mrna . in contrast to tissue culture, where the pmsf driving expression of dhfr-ty was not detected, parasites in the gut labeled brightly with α-ty antibody . no ty labeling was seen in the tgnmbr <dig> sample . the labeling pattern seen for the msf strain in figure  <dig> b & c matches what was predicted from the expression data  and shows that upstream regions are sufficient to control expression of a merozoite gene. much like developmental regulation in the intermediate stages, cis elements and specific factors that bind them to control gene expression are active in the enteric stages.figure  <dig> 
promoter control of merozoite specific gene expression.  genes upregulated specifically in the merozoite stage . three candidate genes for use in cloning merozoite specific promoters are highlighted .  transgenic gra <dig>  msf and srs22b strains were assessed for expression of dhfr-ty at the tachyzoite  and bradyzoite  stages by ifa. strong nuclear expression of dhfr-ty was observed for the gra <dig> strain and lacked expression for msf and srs22b strains at both stages, which tracks with the microarray expression data .  the msf strain was assessed for enteric stage expression of dhfr-ty in the felid intestine . non-transgenic tgnmbr <dig> parasite was used as a negative control. expression of dhfr-ty was observed for the msf strain in the enteric stage, confirming stage specific control of expression by the promoter.
characterization of transgenic strains.  schematic of the dhft-ty expression cassette in the three pdest-p-dhfr-ty plasmids and the locations of primers used in .  pcr analysis of transgenic me49-fudr clones to detect plasmid integration: g <dig> and g <dig> – gra1p specific primers, ladder - 1 kb ladder , n , m , m + .  growth of transgenic me49-fudr clones with or without the drug pyrimethamine. all three transgenic clones grew, creating plaques, in normal d <dig> media without drug . only the me49-gra1p-dhfr-ty clone grew in d10 + pyrimethamine .



discussion
here we describe the global gene expression of the merozoite stage of toxoplasma gondii and analyzed this stage in context of the life cycle in combination with previously published array data from other life cycle stages  <cit> . we confirm that the expression patterns observed for the merozoite samples matched data on protein expression for enteric stage parasites  <cit> . we also substantially extend these prior studies by showing that many parasite specific gene families such as gras, rops and mics were downregulated at the merozoite stage. functions for many members of these families have been described for the intermediate stages of the parasite, and the regulation at the merozoite stage suggests that these genes are not needed during intraepithelial development in the definitive host. interesting, genes known to be critical for moving junction formation and thus parasite invasion during the intermediate stages are not expressed in the merozoite. although not much is known about how merozoites invade, the shared morphological characteristics of tachyzoites and merozoites suggests an active invasion process, which based on the expression data is not reliant on known ron/ama interactions. speciation of apicomplexan parasites may have occurred via evolutionary divergence of definitive hosts  <cit> . many members of the parasite-specific gene families are the result of gene duplication and expansion events, and those few members that are upregulated at the merozoite stage, the first stage the parasite differentiates into within the definitive host, may represent the ancestral copies from which the expanded intermediate stage expressed genes arose.

the merozoite occupies a unique place in the overall gene expression continuum of the t. gondii life cycle, clustering between tachyzoite/bradyzoite and oocyst samples as shown by pca. it will be of interest to isolate other enteric forms of toxoplasma, such as the micro- and macrogamete for global gene expression studies to determine if the missing forms will follow this progression, thus being placed between the merozoite and oocysts clusters. additionally, a large number of genes were regulated when the parasites enter coccidian development. many of these genes related to cell growth/maintenance  and metabolic processes  were upregulated at the merozoite stage. different than the intermediate stages, the merozoite divides by processes similar to schizogony termed endopolygeny, where multiple daughters are generated before the plasma membrane resolves the individual parasites  <cit> . it is possible that the merozoite specific upregulation of cell growth and metabolism related genes is a consequence or even a requirement for the endopolygeny form of division. on the other hand, the elevated expression of growth and metabolism related genes is reminiscent of the warburg effect, where, for example, cancer cells within hypoxic tumor microenvironments increase expression of metabolism related genes, such as glycolysis  <cit> . the merozoite preferably grows in the microaerobic environment of the small intestine and it may be the hypoxic nature of the small intestine  <cit>  that partially explains the unique expression pattern of growth and metabolic related genes in the merozoite.

we also demonstrate that promoter control of gene expression is conserved at the merozoite stage. quite a number of conserved motifs were found in co-regulated genes, whether when ordering genes by the maximum or minimum of expression. identifying conserved over-represented motifs by ordering genes in this manner may indicate regulatory control for a particular motif. for example, the large number of motifs overrepresented throughout the life cycle when genes were ordered by the minimum of expression indicates that these motifs correspond to points in the life cycle when expression is at the lowest and thus may be associated with repressor mechanisms. indeed, recently the ap <dig> transcription factor, ap2ix- <dig>  was shown to operate as a repressor by inhibiting bradyzoite-specific gene expression  <cit> , a role many of the  <dig> annotated ap <dig> genes, or other cis element binding proteins, in toxoplasma may share. in addition to identifying conserved motifs associated with gene expression patterns, we confirm that a merozoite specific promoter is sufficient to control the stage specific expression of a reporter gene.

the microarray data of toxoplasma merozoites provide a global gene expression dataset for this stage. not only will this information be valuable in understanding the life cycle of toxoplasma, it can be used to develop reagents and tools to further characterize the developmental biology of the sexual stages of coccidian parasites. for example, the transgenic parasites developed in this study, which express drug selectable markers only at the merozoite stage, will be used in forward selection strategies to screen for tissue culture conditions that are favorable to merozoite growth. as the merozoite is the first stage the parasite differentiates into within the gut of the definitive host, it is the first hurdle to better understand the sexual stages of the parasite. if we can determine the correct conditions that coax the parasite into the merozoite stage in vitro, those conditions may be sufficient to allow the parasite to complete sexual development.

epithelial gut stages are a common life cycle feature of apicomplexan parasites, and most often the sexual stages develop in the gut, whether the host be vertebrate or invertebrate. this shared tropism is the result of the passive route of ingestion with which the parasite can gain access to and exit from the host. the triggers and specific processes that control parasite differentiation within gut environments are relatively unknown for apicomplexan parasites. in large part, this is because there are no tissue culture systems for gut stages. for example, it is necessary to use mosquitoes to perform crosses in plasmodium  <cit>  and to use chickens to grow eimeria tenella  <cit> . it is not for lack of trying that efforts haven’t been successful in the past, but with the advent of -omic technologies these efforts can be re-explored. using genomic based technologies the unique molecular characteristics of gut stages can be acquired and assessed for possible drivers of differentiation. this strategy has recently led to a major advance in understanding the tsetse fly specific developmental stages of trypanosome brucei. analysis of transcriptional data allowed researchers to show for the first time that the expression of just one rna-binding protein in procyclics induced them in vitro into long and short form epimastigotes and eventually infectious metacyclics  <cit> . this approach has the potential to work in other systems, such as toxoplasma that has many tools already developed for study, and may reveal unique and/or shared aspects of apicomplexan gut stage development.

CONCLUSIONS
merozoites are the first developmental stage in the coccidian cycle that takes place within the gut of the definitive host. the data presented here describe the global gene expression profile of the merozoite stage and the creation of transgenic parasite strains that show stage-specific expression of reporter genes in the cat intestine. these data and reagents will be useful in unlocking how the parasite senses and responds to the felid gut environment to initiate enteric development.

