BACKGROUND
in humans missense variants that introduce amino acid substitutions in proteins have
received extensive study as the rich knowledge we have accumulated on protein function
and structure greatly facilitates such investigation. one intensive research area in
this field currently focuses on identifying and annotating variants associated with
important functional or phenotypic consequences  <cit> . in the latter, particularly for disease variant prediction, numerous
powerful predictive tools using a variety of feature sets have been proposed. for
instance, sift  <cit>  largely explored sequence conservation information, polyphen <dig>  <cit>  used physicochemical and crystal structure properties, snps&go included
functional information  <cit> , and mutpred  <cit>  integrated a comprehensive list of changes derived from protein sequence.
these tools all operate similarly, a classification model based on two curated data
sets, e.g., disease and neutral variant data  is constructed, or alternatively, from functional and non-functional
variant data. compared with the many efforts invested in predicting disease variants  <cit> , the prediction of missense pgx variants by similar approaches has not been
studied nearly as thoroughly.

pgx variants may affect one's response to a drug through influencing either pk or pd
machinery. the clinical procedure for identifying pgx variants usually involves
measuring drug concentration and several response parameters within a cohort, such as
blood pressure or body temperature, during a period of time  <cit> . also pgx variants can be identified from gwas studies or through candidate
gene approaches in large retrospective cohorts. however these approaches are either
time-consuming or resource-intensive, and computational alternatives are highly valuable
and may aid in characterization of whole genome sequence interpretation  <cit> . an attempt to build a counterpart to mutpred in making missense pgx variant
prediction revealed two issues.

the first issue revolves around the usefulness of the recognized features that have
proven to be beneficial in disease-neutral variant classification. one of the salient
distinctions between disease and neutral variants is that disease variants generally
occur on much conserved sites whereas the positions of neutral variants lack such
restriction  <cit> . therefore, it is not a surprise to see that protein sequence conservation
serves as the most important single feature in discriminating disease variants from
neutral ones  <cit> . additionally, structural information, especially conservation of neighboring
residues in 3d protein structures, has been demonstrated to be very useful in
classifying catalytic residues  <cit>  and other functional sites  <cit> . unlike disease or other functional variants, pgx variants have undergone
much less selective pressure as the corresponding evolutionary environment--modern
medicine--is relatively recent. hence, pgx variants may not possess the same strong
sequence conservation patterns as disease variants do.

the second issue is that it is not clear about what variants may constitute a
biologically sound non-pgx group. the selection of the negative set is potentially
affected by the presence of functional variants among the polymorphisms  <cit> . the most prominent data repository for pgx variants is pharmgkb   <cit>  which has curated about  <dig>  variants from more than  <dig> genes. only a small
portion of these variants is missense. the relatively small coverage of pharmgkb
suggests that available pgx variants are less representative and many variants outside
pharmgkb at present may exhibit pgx effect in the future studies.

to address the above issues, we collected a set of high-quality and likely causative pgx
variants from pharmgkb and performed comparison of pgx with neutral and disease
variants.

RESULTS
data description
we applied a rigorous process to search for high-quality and likely causative pgx
variants in pharmgkb , and identified  <dig> pd and  <dig> pk missense variants
with high confidence. due to the small size of these two variant sets, we merged them
into one group to increase statistical power in the analysis. one important issue in
the classification of functional variants is the selection of an accurate negative
set of non-functional ones. at the moment there is no common practice to address this
issue. thus, in this work we consider all the variants annotated in uniprot  <cit>  as "polymorphism" are functionally neutral. accordingly, in the rest of
the paper we use the word neutral to represent the missense variants
annotated in uniprot as "polymorphism".

in our analysis, we used a dataset composed by  <dig> pgx variants located in 64
proteins, from which we also selected additional  <dig> polymorphisms and  <dig> disease
variants annotated in uniprot database . it is noteworthy that 104
 of the pgx variants are labeled as polymorphism in uniprot, suggesting that an
annotation of polymorphism does not necessarily mean not pharmacogenetic. on the
other hand,  <dig> pgx variants from current data are labeled as disease in the same
database, suggesting some overlap between disease and pgx variants. we excluded these
overlapped variants from neutral and disease variant sets, respectively. the 64
proteins belong to  <dig> superfamilies and we further grouped them into six classes
based on their annotations . pgx variants differ from
disease variants in the distribution across six protein classes  but show a highly similar trend as neutral variants
. disease variants are most frequently in channel proteins with
a density of  <dig> variants per protein, whereas pgx and neutral variants both are
enriched in cytochrome p <dig> proteins with much smaller densities . counting number of proteins, we found that  <dig> proteins have annotated
neutral variants, while only  <dig> are associated with disease variants. such
observation is very similar to what we encountered previously in a much more
comprehensive data set  <cit> . from annotations in uniprot on amino acid modifications, we could only
identify five variants out of total  <dig>  ones with annotated phosphorylation or
methylation sites. as such a sparse coverage presents very limited variance among
variants, functional annotations were excluded from further analysis.

feature generation from protein structure and sequence
sequence conservation has been shown to be powerful in discrimination of disease and
neutral variants  <cit> . here, we measured sequence conservation for each amino acid site by
calculating a normalized evolutionary rate from a global multiple species alignment
in ucsc genome browser  <cit> . because an earlier version of such data had been successfully explored in
concentrating on benign with damaging missense variants  <cit> , we followed this approach but used the rate4site tool  <cit>  for higher accuracy of conservation estimation. through searching the
protein data bank   <cit> , we identified  <dig> proteins with x-ray structures that covered a total of
 <dig> variants . the following features based on
sequence conservation and protein structure were derived for  <dig> variants: average
conservation scores of neighboring residues in 3d, number of neighbors,
accessibility, and secondary structure. other features, which could be generated from
sequence, include predicted b-value, protein stability, hydrophobic property, and
change in molecular weight, where b-value is a normalized b-factor of c-α of
each residue and reflects the structural flexibility around it  <cit> . two sets of variants were created: a structure data set with  <dig> variants
and  <dig> features, and a sequence data set with  <dig>  variants and six features .

feature difference among three groups of variantsfeature across three groups of variants, e.g., neutral, disease, and pgx by the
kendall correlation test . compared to the pgx variants, disease variants
occur at the most conserved positions while neutral variants at less conserved ones
. one possible explanation for this observation is
that pgx variants were exposed to the environment of drug therapies relatively
recently in the evolutionary timeframe and thus have undergone little or very mild
selective pressure. similarly, disease variants have the most conserved neighbors and
are located in the most crowded environment, and neutral variants display no
conservation in neighborhood in 3d. in contrast, pgx variants stand in the middle on
both measures . interestingly, disease variants tend
to be less solvent exposed than pgx and neutral variants. such a reverse relationship
between the number of neighbors in 3d structure and solvent accessibility may be due
to that a residue with more neighbors around it provides less space for solvent
molecules to approach. there were no significant associations between variant groups
and b-value, protein stability, hydrophobic property, or change in molecular weight.
at the sequence level, only conservation displayed significant difference among the
three groups of variants and the same gradient trend observed in the structure data
set was maintained.

τ
abbreviations: conservation, conservation at the variant position; consng,
average conservation of 3d neighbors; nng, number of 3d neighbors; acc,
accessibility in number of water molecules; τ, kendall correlation
coefficient. p-value is computed from kendall correlation coefficient
test. the kendall test has been performed sorting the feature vector according
their average values in each class .
and pgx variants. in each box-and-whisker plot, the black lines denote
medians, boxes with gray background cover from the first to third quantile, and
notches connecting to the boxes with dashed lines cover close to 95% interval.
 disease variants show strongest conservation and fall within a
narrow score range; pgx variants are less conservative and the scores disperse
in a larger range but less broad than neutral variants do. 
accessibility is measured by the number of water molecules. disease variants
are the least accessible, and the accessibility distribution of pgx variants is
more similar to that of disease variants than to neutral ones, which scatter in
a significantly larger range.

three-group discrimination
a random forest was used to evaluate discrimination of neutral, disease, and pgx
variants. by assigning larger weights to the minority groups, the classification
algorithm was able to achieve more balanced overall accuracy  <cit> . in the three-group discrimination, we specified group weight
approximating the reciprocal of corresponding data size. in the structure data set,
an overall error rate of 42%, with 43% in neutral group, 34% in disease group, and
60% in pgx group was observed. thus, pgx variants are slightly more likely to be
misclassified as neutral than as disease . when we
increased the weight on pgx group to increase their penalty on misclassification in
random forest, we found a larger increase in the error rate in neutral variants but
less in disease variants with the decreasing error rate in pgx variants. this
challenge highlights that pgx and neutral variants are mostly overlapped in the given
feature space and the differences in conservation, neighbors, and other features are
not large enough to provide sufficient classification power for them. in the sequence
data, the discrimination was even less successful, although we got triple the data
points of the structure data set .
lines constitute the prediction decision boundary among three types of variant
in the neutral -disease  plane. the intersections in
both figures have a coordinate . the decision boundary consists of
three lines: y - x =  <dig>   <dig> - 2x - y =  <dig>  and  <dig> - x - 2y =  <dig> 
 distribution of three groups of variants based on structural
data.  distribution of three groups of variants based on sequence
data.

two-group discrimination
as multi-class classification is generally more difficult than two-class
classification, we turned to two-group discrimination to see whether a clearer
boundary among neutral, disease, and pgx variants could be observed. table  <dig> illustrates that by using a similar weighting strategy to that
of the three-group discrimination, a more accurate classification in both
disease-neutral and pgx-disease tasks was observed, with slightly improved
performance from structure data than from sequence data. once again, the inferior
performance observed in pgx-neutral classification signifies more than moderate
similarity between them. if we use any of the prediction accuracy measures as an
indicator of the similarity between data sets, then we find pgx variants stand
between neutral and disease variants.

allele frequency of three groups of variants
in addition to interspecies conservation, another way of assessing evolutionary
influence on variant sites is through comparing the minor allele frequency  of
the variants across representative human populations. the phase  <dig> data from the 1000
genomes project provided maf information for  <dig>  missense variants identified from
 <dig>  individuals from  <dig> populations worldwide  <cit> . here we extracted frequency information for all variants from dbsnp
annotations provided by the  <dig> genomes project. surprisingly, only 4% disease
variants could find maf data, indicating that the most majority of them were not
observed in such a global population sample and hence are likely to be rare in the
whole population. on the other hand, 57% neutral and 74% pgx variants were observed
at least once in the same population sample. furthermore, the average maf of disease
variants  is much lower than either neutral  or pgx variants . interestingly, pgx variants are significantly more
frequent than neutral ones  and it remains
to verify whether such a trend still holds in larger data sets.
neutral, and pgx variants. box-and-whisker representation of minor
allele frequency and pathogenesis among three groups of variants. note that in
 not all variants could find maf data due to being missing in the
 <dig>  individuals from the  <dig> genomes project.  sift uses a
threshold of  <dig>  to classify variants with scores lower than this value as
pathogenetic.  both polyphen <dig> and mutpred output
probability-like scores measuring pathogenesis of variants.

comparison of predicted pathogenesis among three groups of variants
although our sequence and structural feature-based random forest models are less
successful in classifying pgx and neutral variants than in classifying disease and
the other two groups of variants, it may be informative to bring in some
well-established tools for pathogenesis prediction to this task. we then applied
three widely-used pathogenesis prediction tools, i.e., sift  <cit> , polyphen <dig>  <cit> , and mutpred  <cit> , to all  <dig>  variants .
unlike polyphen <dig> and mutpred, sift outputs for each non-synonymous variant a score
measuring the level of tolerance and thus a lower score denotes higher probability of
being pathogenetic . we observed that both neutral
and pgx variants are significantly less pathogenetic than disease variants . both polyphen <dig> and mutpred generate probability-like
score in estimating how likely a variant is to be pathogenetic, and both tools show
similar score distributions among disease, neutral, and pgx variants , where scores for disease
variants are significantly higher than scores for either neutral or pgx variants.
across all three tools, the average score for pgx variants sits between those for
neutral and disease variants, and one plausible explanation is that pgx variants
could possess certain weak deleterious effects compared to neutral variants but these
effects are far less severe than effects of disease variants.

in a similar manner to the random forest models, we tested how accurate each tool is
in classification across three settings using its predicted scores and recommended
threshold. although all three tools have seen comparable or better performance in
distinguishing disease variants from either pgx or neutral variants, they suffered as
the random forest models did in discriminating between pgx and neutral variants
.

classification thresholds between pgx and neutral variants are unknown and thus
only auc was computed for each tool.

discussion
from this study pgx variants appear at sites with relatively low sequence conservation
and are common in global human populations, and their physicochemical properties
resemble those of neutral variants. an appealing explanation for such observations may
be that pgx variants have come to be under selective pressure very recently in
evolutionary history. the story, however, may be more complex than this as the finial
phenotypic effect of pgx variants is not as straightforward as that of disease variants.
while typically variants involved in mendelian diseases cause loss of function and
manifest narrow phenotypic spectra, pgx variants have subtler effects on the pk and pd
of drugs. for instance, only 6% of disease variants in current study have been annotated
with more than one disease, while about half of pgx variants are related to two or more
drugs and their effects depend on the very drugs and the conditions they target. another
thread to make things more complex is that the exact effects of a pgx variant may
largely depend on the drug dosage and increments in the plasmatic concentration of the
drug resulting from such a variant may have divergent effects.

imbalanced data are common in biomedical research. in our data, the ratio of the number
of variants from the most frequent group to the least frequent is  <dig>  in the structure
data set and  <dig>  in the sequence data set. without tuning the classification algorithms,
which by default assume a balanced training set, we observe a higher error rate in the
minority group. unbalanced performance on the two subsets is due to the higher
contribution of the most abundant class to the overall accuracy. in two-group
discrimination, we achieved approximately balanced sensitivity and specificity across
six classification settings by properly assigning higher weight to the pgx variant
group. the benefit of such weighting was more noticeable in three-group discrimination.
without modification to the default random forest, the pgx group in the sequence data is
almost completely misclassified, rendering the entire classification approach far less
sensible.

in current study sequence conservation and structural information have shown limited
capability in discriminating pgx variants from neutral variants. one approach to improve
classification without a dramatic increase in the size of the pgx variant dataset might
lie in integrating novel features, such as those derived from 3d structure. one of such
potential alternative features is free energy change  caused by a
missense variant, which can be well estimated by foldx  <cit>  through protein structural calculations. a recent study in the context of
dynamic pathway analysis found that ∆∆g calculated from foldx is directly
linked to cell growth and such link can be expressed in ordinary differential equations
accurately  <cit> . thus ∆∆g may serve as an indicator to the potential influence a
variant could cause. comparing with the classification of disease and neutral variants,
the similar problem between pgx and neutral variants is less amenable to otherwise
well-established methodologies. while structure-based features are not as accessible as
those derived from sequences, we did observe that they help improve the performance of
classification slightly. this observation may in turn suggest that exploring more
structure-related feature might prove to be profitable.

CONCLUSIONS
we have determined that pgx variants possess a higher degree of similarity to neutral
genetic polymorphisms than to disease variants in the feature space consisting of
residue conservation, neighboring conservation, number of neighbors, and accessibility.
such similarity poses a great difficulty in the classification of pgx and neutral
variants. future studies focusing on predicting pgx variants may need a better
definition of non-pgx variants or to explore novel features outside those that have been
demonstrated to be useful in disease-neutral variant classification.

