BACKGROUND
in natural environments, bacteria can adhere to surfaces forming a complex structure called a biofilm. when embedded in biofilms, microorganisms can be protected from several adverse factors such as temperature, low nutrients and the presence of biocides  <cit> . therefore, understanding the ecology of microorganisms in this structure is fundamental in order to obtain a comprehensive knowledge of real systems. in nature, biofilms typically consist of many species of microorganisms that can interact with each other either positively  or negatively   <cit> . one type of biofilm that has been widely studied is that formed in drinking water distribution systems  because of its role in the persistence of pathogens in drinking water and the consequent potential for impact on public health  <cit> .

legionella pneumophila is a waterborne pathogen that can cause legionnaires' disease or pontiac fever  <cit> . this pathogen is found naturally in fresh water reservoirs and can contaminate drinking water when disinfection is inefficient, being transmitted to man when contaminated aerosols are inhaled  <cit> . the mode of transmission of helicobacter pylori remains controversial but drinking water as a route of transmission has recently gained recognition  <cit> . although no cultivable h. pylori have ever been recovered from drinking water systems, molecular techniques such as pcr  <cit>  and peptide nucleic acid  probes used to target  <dig> s rrna in fluorescence in situ hybridization  assays  <cit> , have demonstrated the presence of this pathogen in dwds. this identification, in addition to epidemiological studies, point to different prevalence of h. pylori in the microbial population which is associated with the type of source water. this strongly supports water as a route of transmission  <cit> .

previous studies have demonstrated that both pathogens can be incorporated into heterotrophic drinking water biofilms and persist for at least  <dig> days  <cit> . in the case of h. pylori, although no cultivable cells were ever recovered, the presence of a high intracellular rrna content indicates that cells might be in a viable but non cultivable  state  <cit> . it is possible that the loss of h. pylori cultivability when associated with heterotrophic biofilms had been due to a negative effect caused by the presence of other microorganisms  <cit> . nevertheless, it is also possible that there were other microorganisms present in the biofilm that could have a beneficial effect on l. pneumophila or h. pylori, as shown by other studies where these pathogens were co-cultured with other microorganisms in liquid media  <cit> . however, for multi-species biofilms it is technically very challenging to determine which sessile microorganisms could have a positive or negative effect on these pathogens, particularly regarding the intimate associations that occur within biofilms. a particular type of interaction that can facilitate the formation of biofilm is the aggregation of cells, which can occur between cells of the same species  or between different species , and has been well described for isolates of dental plaque species in complex media and aquatic species in potable water  <cit> .

the aim of this work was to study the influence of different autochthonous microorganisms isolated from drinking water biofilms on the incorporation and survival of l. pneumophila and h. pylori in biofilms. for that, the first part of the work tested all the species used for auto and co-aggregation. subsequently, dual-species biofilms of l. pneumophila and h. pylori were formed with the different drinking water bacteria and the results compared with mono-species biofilms formed by l. pneumophila and h. pylori.

RESULTS
auto and co-aggregation of l. pneumophila and other drinking water bacteria
initially, the selected biofilm strains were tested for auto- and co-aggregation in test tubes as described by rickard et al.  <cit> , either alone or with l. pneumophila. no co-aggregation was observed for the strains studied, either alone or in pairs with l. pneumophila .

l. pneumophila in biofilms
for the experiments on biofilm formation on upvc coupons, an inoculum of l. pneumophila was prepared containing approximately  <dig>  ×  <dig> of total cells ml- <dig> . in comparison to total cells, 49% were cultivable on bcye agar and 50% were detected by pna-fish. the inocula of the strains isolated from drinking water biofilms had on average 75% of cultivable cells compared to syto  <dig> stained cells, except in the case of mycobacterium chelonae where the percentage was considerably lower .

for the experiments of l. pneumophila in dual-species it was observed that the numbers of l. pneumophila pna-positive cells and cultivable l. pneumophila did not change significantly with time after the first day . table  <dig> presents the data obtained for the quantification of sessile cells, giving the average values of the samples analyzed at all time points, for mono and dual-species biofilms. the data for the numbers of total cells, total pna-positive l. pneumophila and cultivable l. pneumophila in mono and in dual species biofilms were similar , except for the numbers of cultivable l. pneumophila when associated with acidovorax sp. which were significantly lower . figure 1b shows the percentage of pna-positive l. pneumophila in relation to syto  <dig> stained total cells; this was similar for both mono and dual-species biofilms . this indicates that l. pneumophila adhere well to upvc surfaces, either alone or in the presence of variovorax paradoxus, m. chelonae, acidovorax sp. and sphingomonas sp., although the morphology of the biofilm appeared to be different for the mono or dual-species . the relationship between cultivable and l. pneumophila pna-positive cells was higher  for cells recovered from the l. pneumophila - m. chelonae biofilm while the numbers of cultivable l. pneumophila decreased five-fold when this pathogen was associated with acidovorax sp. and almost four-fold when associated with sphingomonas sp.

n.a. - not applicable.

auto and co-aggregation of h. pylori and other drinking water bacteria
the same experiments were repeated using h. pylori instead of l. pneumophila. for the auto- and co-aggregation of h. pylori with drinking water isolates, the same strains were used as selected for the l. pneumophila experiments and an additional strain was also included: brevundimonas sp., a bacterium isolated on cba medium from drinking water biofilms. the results obtained in the test tube assay system showed neither auto nor co-aggregation of h. pylori with any of the species investigated.

h. pylori in biofilms
the biofilm experiments used the same strains indicated in the previous paragraph. it was observed that for the h. pylori inoculum, only 5% of the total cells were cultivable, a value similar to that obtained by azevedo et al.  <cit> , while 29% were detected by pna-fish. figure 3a and 3b show that h. pylori is able to form biofilms, despite the poor cultivability of the cells on agar media. however, while the morphology of h. pylori cells from the inoculum was predominantly spiral, after forming biofilms the cells were mainly coccoid shaped.

in terms of cultivable cells it was observed that no cultivable h. pylori were ever recovered from any of the mono or dual-species biofilms at any time point, with the exception of cells recovered from  <dig> day-old biofilms grown in the presence of m. chelonae or sphingomonas sp. .

discussion
auto and co-aggregation of l. pneumophila and h. pylori with drinking water bacteria
in a previous study several bacterial strains were isolated from heterotrophic biofilms formed on upvc coupons in a two-stage chemostat system  <cit> . for the present work, the selection of the bacteria used was based on the prevalence of these isolated strains in biofilms, i.e., the strains that were always present in biofilm samples when detected by culture were used rather than those only found intermittently.

in the aggregation studies it was observed that there was no auto-aggregation of any of the bacteria tested in this study, as demonstrated previously for brevundimonas vesicularis, acidovorax delafieldii and v. paradoxus  <cit> . no co-aggregation of l. pneumophila or h. pylori was observed with any of the bacteria isolated from drinking water biofilms, demonstrating that while all of the bacteria used in this study have the ability to form biofilms they are attaching to the upvc surfaces without aggregating in the planktonic phase with the other microorganisms  <cit> .

l. pneumophila in biofilms
the l. pneumophila cells from the inocula prepared for the biofilm experiments were quantified for total, pna-positive and cultivable cells. results showed that cultivable and pna numbers were similar but were only 50% of the numbers obtained by syto  <dig> staining. it is still controversial whether pna probes detect dead cells or if they just produce a detectable signal with viable cells. pna probes have been used to detect pathogens in mixed biofilms but it has not been well established if this technique can also detect non-viable cells  <cit> . however the similarity in the cultivable and pna-positive numbers, and the difference between pna-labelled and total cells , strongly indicates that the pna probe fails to detect dead cells. pna probes bind specifically to rrna molecules emitting a signal that can be visualized under microscopy. the intensity of that signal is related to the rrna content, i.e., the higher the rrna content the brighter the signal is  <cit> . a very low content of rrna would result in insufficient brightness and cells would not be visualized. after cellular death the content of rrna decreases significantly and therefore some authors have suggested that the emission of a bright signal is a good indication of cell viability  <cit> . the results obtained in the present study  support that there is a correlation between the number of viable cells and the number of cells that bind to the pna probe but further studies should be performed to correlate the pna-positive cells and their metabolic state.

as it has been demonstrated before by other authors  <cit> , the attachment of l. pneumophila cells to the upvc surface occurred on the first day of biofilm formation and the numbers of total and pna stained cells, from mono-species biofilms, did not change significantly . nevertheless, the numbers of cultivable cells increased in the first two weeks and decreased during the rest of the experiment. it has been demonstrated that l. pneumophila can survive in tap water for long periods without losing cultivability  <cit> , but is not able to replicate in axenic cultures in tap water or in low nutrient media, except when associated with biofilms or parasitizing amoebal species  <cit> . after two weeks the cultivability decreased but was not completely lost for the  <dig> days of the experiment which indicates that biofilms are a protective niche for l. pneumophila, even in axenic culture. conversely, pna-positive numbers with a high fluorescence intensity remained constant and, for the same reason explained before, this suggests that cells are still viable. moreover, the fact that total l. pneumophila and l. pneumophila pna-positive cells remained constant with time indicates that there is no damage to dna and rrna, respectively. conversely, the variation of pna-positive numbers in dual-species biofilms was used as an indicator of the variation of viable l. pneumophila cells inside of those biofilms.

the results of dual-species biofilms showed that when biofilms were formed in the presence of m. chelonae the percentage of cultivable l. pneumophila in relation to l. pneumophila pna-positive cells was slightly superior compared to mono-species biofilms or dual-species biofilms with the other strains isolated from drinking water. although the difference is not statistically significant this result indicates that this strain has a small positive effect on l. pneumophila cultivability. in contrast, the numbers of cultivable l. pneumophila decreased when this pathogen was associated with acidovorax sp. indicating that this species has a negative impact on l. pneumophila cultivability. it was also observed that the numbers of cultivable l. pneumophila when co-cultivated with sphingomonas sp. decreased and, although the statistical analysis showed that the difference is not significant, the fact that the cultivability was almost four-fold lower appears to reveal an antagonistic effect. conversely, it appears that both strains affect negatively sessile l. pneumophila cultivability, either by competition for nutrients or production of a metabolite toxic to l. pneumophila. the fact that these two species were isolated on r2a reveals that they have low nutritional requirements to grow and might even be able to grow in water, contrary to l. pneumophila which is not able to grow in absence of, for example, l-cysteine and high iron concentrations  <cit> . this is corroborated by the values shown in table  <dig>  where cultivable acidovorax sp. and sphingomonas sp. numbers are  <dig>  ×  <dig> and  <dig>  ×  <dig> cfu cm- <dig> suggesting that these two microorganisms could be metabolically active in the biofilm despite the poor nutrient concentration of the medium . another possible explanation for the lower numbers of cultivable l. pneumophila when biofilms were formed in co-culture with sphingomonas sp., can be related to the structure of the biofilm. figure  <dig> shows a  <dig> days-old biofilm formed by l. pneumophila and l. pneumophila associated with sphingomonas sp. the biofilm formed in the presence of sphingomonas sp. had a different morphology, and although the thickness of the biofilm has not been measured, the presence of microcolonies suggests the presence of thicker structures where anaerobic zones might occur. wadowsky et al.  <cit>  have demonstrated that in anaerobic conditions l. pneumophila loses cultivability and if biofilms formed by l. pneumophila and sphingomonas sp. have indeed anaerobic zones, then it is possible that l. pneumophila located in those places has become uncultivable. it would therefore be interesting to undertake further research to measure the thickness of different parts of the biofilm and the respective concentration of oxygen and relate those results to the cultivability of cells from those regions. however, the fact that the numbers quantified by the use of a pna probe remained constant, might indicate that these cells may still be viable and can probably recover cultivability in favorable conditions.

this work clearly demonstrates that l. pneumophila can be negatively or positively influenced by other microorganisms present in drinking water. it is important to note that this study was carried out under particular conditions and it will be important to perform more experiments in the future, in particular to study the effect of other drinking water bacteria, the formation of biofilms under dynamic conditions and the incorporation of a disinfectant, such as chlorine.

it is known that other bacteria can influence the growth of l. pneumophila either in nutrient-poor environments, such as drinking water, or in rich artificial media. toze et al.  <cit>  have demonstrated that some bacteria commonly present in heterotrophic biofilms, such as pseudomonas sp. and aeromonas sp., can inhibit the growth of l. pneumophila while wadowsky and yee  <cit>  demonstrated that flavobacterium breve can support the satellite growth of this pathogen on bcye agar without l-cysteine. a curious result was obtained by temmerman et al.  <cit>  who demonstrated that dead cells can also support the growth of this pathogen. although the mechanisms responsible for the influence of different microorganisms on l. pneumophila survival are unknown there is one aspect of l. pneumophila microbial ecology that has been already well-established: l. pneumophila is not able to grow in drinking water unless associated with biofilms or amoebal species  <cit> . hence, the knowledge of how microorganisms affect l. pneumophila cultivability is a key factor for the effective control of this pathogen in drinking water and associated biofilms, and requires further investigation.

h. pylori in biofilms
in this study the cells recovered from mono-species h. pylori biofilms were always uncultivable, for all the time points, which is in contrast to the azevedo et al.  <cit>  study, where it was demonstrated that after  <dig> hours sessile h. pylori cells were still cultivable. this might be due to the differences in the method of cell removal from the coupons, the quality of water or the type of upvc substratum. when the biofilm was formed in the presence of brevundimonas sp. no cultivable h. pylori cells were ever recovered either. however, for this case, care should be taken in the interpretation of the results. in fact, brevundimonas was able to grow on cba medium in a faster and more abundant way then h. pylori. as such, it is impossible to determine whether h. pylori is indeed uncultivable in the presence of this microorganism, or whether it could not be detected because it was overgrown by brevundimonas. we have attempted to solve this issue by using cba medium supplemented with antibiotics but, as shown by other authors  <cit> , available selective medium for h. pylori allows the growth of other species, including brevundimonas sp. the fact that there were no differences in the results for the pna-positive cell numbers obtained for h. pylori in mono-species biofilms and in dual-species biofilms with brevundimonas sp. suggests that this bacterium has little or no effect on the inclusion of h. pylori in biofilms.

cultivable h. pylori was never recovered from dual-species biofilms at any time point, independently of the second species used, except when h. pylori formed dual-species biofilms in the presence of m. chelonae and sphingomonas sp. for these two microorganisms, it was observed that h. pylori was able to retain cultivability for a period of between  <dig> and  <dig> hours. this suggests that both microorganisms might have a positive effect on the inclusion and survival of this pathogen in drinking water biofilms. the ability of h. pylori to adapt to different physico-chemical parameters has been studied by several authors  <cit> , however no studies about the influence of other microorganisms on the survival of this pathogen have been found in the literature except the coculture of h. pylori with the protozoan, acanthamoeba castellanii  <cit> . the interaction of microorganisms in biofilms has been widely studied and in this particular case could be the key for the survival of this microorganism in drinking water systems, even if in a vbnc state. more investigations should therefore be performed concerned with the influence of drinking water microorganisms on h. pylori metabolism and survival.

CONCLUSIONS
this work clearly demonstrates that, even in pure culture, both pathogens can adhere to surfaces and form biofilm. l. pneumophila can remain cultivable for at least  <dig> days although less cultivable when associated with acidovorax sp. and sphingomonas sp. the experiments with h. pylori demonstrated that this pathogen loses cultivability in less than  <dig> hours when in mono-species or in dual-species biofilms with v. paradoxus, acidovorax sp. and brevundimonas sp., while retaining cultivability for at least  <dig> hours when biofilms are grown in the presence of m. chelonae and sphingomonas sp. consequently, m. chelonae seems to have a positive effect on the cultivability of both pathogens and being a pathogen commonly found in drinking water systems  <cit> , can play an important role in the control of these two pathogens. control of this mycobacterial opportunistic pathogen and other biofilm species that can have a synergetic effect on l. pneumophila and h. pylori might provide an important contribution towards the supply of safe drinking water as both l. pneumophila and h. pylori have been found to be chlorine resistant  <cit> .

