BACKGROUND
trypanosoma cruzi, the protozoan parasite that is the etiologic agent of chagas disease  <cit> , undergoes four developmental stages during its complex life cycle: epimastigotes and metacyclic trypomastigotes, present in the insect vector, and intracellular amastigotes and bloodstream trypomastigotes, present in the mammalian host. this parasite must rely on a broad set of genes that allow it to multiply in the insect gut, to differentiate into forms that are able to invade and multiply inside a large number of distinct mammalian cell types and to circumvent the host immune system. to meet the challenges it faces during its life cycle, complex regulatory mechanisms must control the expression of the t. cruzi repertoire of about  <dig>  genes. among them, there are several large gene families encoding surface proteins, which are key players directly involved in host-parasite interactions .

the amastin gene family was initially reported as a group of t. cruzi genes encoding  <dig> amino acid transmembrane glycoproteins and whose mrna are 60-fold more abundant in amastigotes than in epimastigotes or trypomastigotes  <cit> . the differential expression of amastin mrnas during the t. cruzi life cycle has been attributed to cis-acting elements present in the 3’utr as well as to rna binding proteins that may recognize this sequence  <cit> . it is also known that amastin genes alternate with genes encoding a cytoplasmic protein named tuzin  <cit> . after the completion of the genome sequences of several trypanosomatids it was revealed that the amastin gene family is also present in various leishmania species as well as in two related insect parasites, leptomonas seymouri and crithidia spp  <cit> . it has also been reported that this gene family is actually much larger in the genus leishmania when compared to other trypanosomatids. predicted topology based on sequences found in the genomes of l. major, l. infantum and t. cruzi indicates that all amastins have four transmembrane regions, two extracellular domains and n- and c-terminal tails facing the cytosol  <cit> . moreover, comparative analyses of amastin genes belonging to six t. cruzi strains evidenced that sequences encoding the hydrophilic, extracellular domain, which is less conserved, have higher intragenomic variability in strains belonging to t. cruzi group ii and hybrid strains compared to t. cruzi i strains  <cit> . based on phylogenetic analyses of amastin orthologs from various trypanosomatids, it has been proposed that amastins can be classified into four subfamilies, named α-, β-, γ-, and δ- amastins. importantly, in l. major and l. infantum, in which members of all four sub-families are found, amastin genes showed differences in genomic positions and expression patterns of their mrnas  <cit> .

more than fifteen years after their discovery, the function of amastins remains unknown. because of the predicted structure and surface localization in the intracellular stage of t. cruzi and leishmania spp, it has been proposed that amastins may play a role in host-parasite interactions within the mammalian cell: they could be involved in transport of ions, nutrients, across the membrane, or involved with cell signaling events that trigger parasite differentiation  <cit> . its preferential expression in the intracellular stage also suggest that it may constitute a relevant antigen during parasite infection, a prediction that was confirmed by studies showing that amastins peptides elicit strong immune response during leishmanial infection  <cit> . amastin antigens are considered a relevant immune biomarker of cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis as well as protective antigens in mice  <cit> .

although complete genome sequences of two strains of t. cruzi  have been reported, their assemblies were only partially achieved because of their unusually high repeat content  <cit> . therefore, for several multi-gene families, such as the amastin gene family, their exact number of copies is not yet known. according to the current assembly  <cit> , only four δ-amastins and two β-amastins were identified in the cl brener genome. herein, we used the entire data set of sequencing reads from the cl brener  <cit>  and sylvio x- <dig>  <cit>  genomes, to analyzed all sequences encoding amastin orthologues present in the genomes of these two t. cruzi strains and determine their copy number as well as their genome organization. expression of distinct amastin genes in fusion with the green fluorescent protein, allowed us to examine the cellular localization of different members of both amastin sub-families. by determining the levels of transcripts corresponding to each sub-family in all three parasite stages of various strains we showed that, whereas the levels of δ-amastins are up-regulated in amastigotes, β-amastin transcripts are significantly increased in the epimastigote insect stage. most importantly, evidence indicating that amastins may constitute t. cruzi virulence factors was suggested by the analyses showing reduced expression of δ-amastins in amastigotes from strains known to have lower infection capacity.

RESULTS
the amastin gene repertoire of trypanosoma cruzi
in its current assembly, the t. cruzi  genome exhibits  <dig> putative amastin sequences. because of its hybrid nature and the high level of divergence between alleles, this genome was assembled as two set of contigs, each corresponding to one haplotype that were denominated esmeraldo-like and non-esmeraldo  <cit> . therefore, the  <dig> amastin sequences annotated in the cl brener genome database actually correspond to  <dig> pairs of alleles. based on the analyses of amastin sequences present in the genomes of different species of trypanosoma and leishmania, as well as in two related insect parasites , jackson   <cit>  proposed a classification into four amastin sub-families named α-, β-, γ- and δ-amastins. in the current annotation of the t. cruzi cl brener genoma two genes that belong to the β-amastin sub-family and four genes belonging to the δ-amastin sub-family can be identified. a phylogenetic tree constructed with all  <dig> amastin sequences annotated in the cl brener genome plus orthologous sequences obtained from the genome databases of the sylvio x- <dig> strain and from the partial genome sequence of the esmeraldo strain shows a clear division between β-amastin and δ-amastins sequences . the tree also revealed the presence, in all three genomes, of one divergent copy of δ-amastin which we identified, in the cl brener genome, as the two alleles annotated as tc <dig> . <dig> and tc <dig> . <dig>  named here as δ-ama <dig> and δ-ama <dig>  it should be noted that, in the phylogeny proposed by jackson   <cit> , a group of δ-amastins that include all t. cruzi amastins as well as amastins from crithidia spp, were grouped in a branch that was named proto-δ-amastins from which all leishmania δ-amastins subsequently derived. it can also be depicted from the analyses described by jackson   <cit>  and the phylogenetic tree shown on figure  <dig> that the two members of the β-subfamily, named β1-amastin and β2-amastin are highly divergent. whereas among the cl brener δ-amastins, if we exclude the two divergent alleles , the percentage of identity ranges from 85% to 100% , the average identities between the two cl brener β-amastins range from 25%  and 18% . analyses of additional sequences corresponding to δ-amastins, which were obtained from the individual reads generated during the cl brener genome sequencing , also show a sequence variability ranging from  <dig> to 100% when compared to the previously described δ-amastins. besides the low homology found between β- and δ-amastins, low sequence identity is also found between δ-ama <dig> and δ-ama <dig> with the other members of the δ-amastin sub-family. on the other hand, sequence identities between members of the β-amastins or between members of the δ-amastin sub-families range from 83% up to 99% even when we compare amastins from two phylogenetically distant strains such as cl brener and sylvio x- <dig> .

in spite of the sequence divergence, an alignment of polypeptide sequences belonging to all amastin sub-families shows increased amino acid conservation within the putative hydrophobic transmembrane domains. within the predicted extracellular domains, two highly conserved cysteine and one tryptophan residues, that are part of the  <dig> amino acid “amastin signature”  <cit> , may be critical for amastin function . on the other hand, the more variable sequences present in the two predicted extracellular, hydrophilic domains suggest that this portion of the protein, which, in amastigotes, are in contact with the host cell cytoplasm, may interact with distinct host cell proteins.

because the assembly of cl brener genome does not include its complete sequence, we conducted a read-based analysis to estimate the total number of amastin genes in this strain of the parasite. it is well known that the assembly of the cl brener genome is only accurate for non-repetitive regions, and for tandemly repeated genes, misassembles frequently occurred since most repetitive copies usually collapse into one or two copies. therefore, we used the entire dataset of reads generated by the tri-tryp consortium to select reads containing sequences homologous to amastin and, based on a  <dig> × genome coverage  <cit> , we estimated a total number of  <dig> copies of amastin genes,  <dig> β-amastins and  <dig> δ-amastins in the cl brener genome. similar analyses performed with sequencing reads generated by franzen et al.   <cit>  from the genome of sylvio x- <dig> indicated a comparable number of copies in the genome of this t. cruzi i strain.

in the current assembly of the cl brener genome, amastin genes are shown to be organized in three loci on chromosomes  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  forty one pairs of homologous chromosomes  have been assembled using the majority of the contigs and scaffolds generated by the tri-tryp consortium and inferences from synteny maps with the fully assembled t. brucei genome  <cit> . based on the chromosome assemblies described by weatherley et al.  <cit> , three copies of δ-amastins are presented on chromosome  <dig> as a tandem array with alternating copies of tuzin genes. interestingly, the divergent copy of δ-amastin  is found as a single sequence linked to one tuzin pseudogene on chromosome  <dig>  in a third chromosome, two copies of β-amastins are linked together without the association with tuzin genes. this gene organization is consistent with the analyses described by jackson   <cit> , who found tuzin genes associated only with δ-amastins. in order to confirm the proposed genomic organization in cl brener genome and also to verify whether similar pattern of distribution of amastin genes occurs in other t. cruzi strains, we performed southern blot hybridizations with chromosomal bands from cl brener  as well as from g, sylvio x- <dig> and dm28c strains  and y strain  separated by pulsed field gel electrophoresis. as shown in figure 2a, the presence of two copies of β-amastins in a  <dig> kb chromosomal band, which is similar to the predicted size of chromosome  <dig>  <cit> , has been confirmed in all t. cruzi strains. using a probe specific for the δ-ama <dig>  we detected a chromosomal band of  <dig> kb, similar to the size of chromosome  <dig> in all strains except for the sylviox- <dig>  where we detected two bands of similar sizes . since significant differences in sizes of homologous chromosomal bands in t. cruzi have been frequently described  <cit> , it is possible that the two bands detected in sylviox- <dig> correspond to size variation of chromosome  <dig> from this strain. compared to β-amastins, the pattern of distribution of δ-amastins appears to be much more complex and variable: similar to cl brener, in dm28c and g strains, a probe specific for δ-amastin sub-family, which does not recognizes either β-amastins or δ-ama40/ <dig>  hybridizes with sequences present in three chromosomal bands with approximately  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  mb . in sylvio x- <dig>  colombiana and y strains, these sequences were found in only one or two chromosomal bands. thus, our analyses indicates that, in addition to β-amastins, which are located in chromosome  <dig>  members of the δ-amastin sub-family are scattered among at least  <dig> chromosomes in this parasite strain. whether two of these chromosomes correspond to allelic pairs that have significant differences in size, still needs to be verified. this highly heterogeneous pattern of distribution of δ-amastin sequences is also in agreement with previous analyses described by jackson   <cit> , which suggest that δ-amastin sequences are apparently highly mobile. based on analyses of genomic position as well as the phylogeny of leishmania amastins, it was proposed that independent movements of δ-amastins genes occurred in the genomes of different leishmania species. also consistent with these previous analyses, when blots containing chromosomal bands were probed with a sequence encoding one of the tuzin genes, a pattern of hybridization similar to the pattern obtained with the δ-amastin probes was observed . thus, for most t. cruzi strains, our results are consistent with the existence of more than one cluster containing linked copies of δ-amastins and tuzin genes and an additional locus with two β-amastins linked together. however, a complete description of genomic organization of amastin genes could not be attained based solely on pfge analyses and gene copy number estimations. further analyses based on sequencing data generated from large inserts previously mapped on specific t. cruzi chromosomes are warranted to solve this question.

distinct patterns of amastin gene expression
because analyses of amastin gene expression have been limited to members of the δ sub-family and these studies have not been conducted with different strains of the parasite, we decided to evaluate by northern blotting the expression profiles of members of the δ- and β-amastin sub-families. we also decided to compare the expression levels of different amastin genes in parasite strains representative of t. cruzi i , t. cruzi ii  and in cl brener . as shown in figure  <dig>  the levels of amastin transcripts derived from δ- and β- sub-families are differentially modulated throughout the t. cruzi life cycle. most importantly, clear differences in expression levels were found when different t. cruzi strains are compared: whereas in cl brener , y and sylvio x- <dig> strains, transcripts of δ-amastins are up-regulated in amastigotes, as previously described in the initial characterization of amastins performed with the tulahuen strain   <cit> , the same was not observed with the g strain. even though it presents a more divergent sequence and is transcribed from a different locus in the genome, the expression of δ-ama <dig>  similar to other δ-amastins, is also up-regulated in amastigotes in all strains analysed except in the g strain. in contrast, in all parasite strains, the expression of β1- and β2-amastin transcripts is up-regulated in epimastigotes. similar to β2-amastin from cl brener, two distinct δ-ama <dig> transcripts with different sizes were detected in y and g strains. it can be speculated that transcripts showing different sizes derived from δ-ama <dig> and β2-amastin genes may result from alternative mrna processing events. recent reports on rna-seq analyses indicated that alternative trans-splicing and poly-adenylation as a means of regulating gene expression and creating protein diversity frequently occur in t. brucei <cit> . current analyses of rna-seq data will help elucidating mechanism responsible for the size variations observed for this sub-set of β- and δ-amastins. moreover, the striking difference in the expression of δ-amastins observed in the g strain is also currently being investigated. because g strain has been largely characterized as a low virulence strain  <cit> , we speculated that members of the δ-amastins sub-family may constitute virulence factors that contributed to the infection capacity and parasite survival in the mammalian host. this hypothesis has been recently verified by experiments in which we over-expressed one δ-amastin gene in the g strain and showed that the transfected parasites have accelerated amastigote differentiation into trypomastigotes in in vitro infections as well as parasite dissemination in tissues after infection in mice  <cit> . it is also noteworthy that both β-amastins exhibited increased levels in epimastigotes of all strains analysed, indicating that this amastin isoform may be involved with parasite adaptation to the insect vector. these results are consistent with previous reports describing microarray and qrt-pcr analyses of the steady-state t. cruzi transcriptome, in which higher levels of β-amastins were detected in epimastigotes compared to amastigotes and trypomastigote forms  <cit> . similar findings were also described for one leishmania infantum amastin gene , whose transcript was detected in higher levels in promastigotes after five days in contrast to all other amastin genes that showed higher expression levels in amastigotes  <cit> . the generation of knock-out parasites with the β-amastin locus deleted and pull-down assays to investigate protein interactions between the distinct t. cruzi amastins and host cell proteins will help elucidate the function of these proteins.

also, to investigate the mechanisms controlling the expression of the different sub-classes of amastins, sequence alignment of the 3’utr sequences from β- and δ-amastins were done. previous work has identified regulatory elements in the 3’ utr of δ-amastins as well as in other t. cruzi genes controlling mrna stability  <cit>  and mrna translation  <cit> . since we observed that the two groups of amastin genes have highly divergent sequences in their 3’utr , we are preparing luciferase reporter constructs to identify regulatory elements that might be present in the β-amastin transcripts as well as to identify the factors responsible for the differences observed in the amastin gene expression in distinct t. cruzi strains.

amastin cellular localization
in our initial studies describing a member of the δ-amastin sub-family, we showed that this glycoprotein localizes in the plasma membrane of intracellular amastigotes  <cit> . here we examine the cellular localizations of other members of the amastin family by transfecting epimastigotes of the cl brener strain with the ptrexngfp vector  <cit>  containing sequences of two δ-amastins as well as β1- and β2-amastins in fusion with gfp. using gfp fusion protein we were able to examine the cellular localization of each individual member of the family. also, since several attempts of expressing the recombinant form of the full length proteins have been largely unsuccessful, it was not possible to generate specific antibodies that could be used to detect unambiguously each member of the distinct amastin sub-families. confocal images of stably transfected epimastigotes, shown on figure  <dig>  demonstrated that, whereas gfp is expressed as a soluble protein present throughout the parasite cytoplasm,  gfp fusions of β1- and δ-amastins are clearly located at the cell surface . interestingly, a distinct cellular localization, with a punctuated pattern in the parasite cytoplasm of gfp fusion of δ-ama <dig> as well as a more disperse distribution within the cytoplasm of the β2- amastin gfp fusion, in addition to their surface localization was observed  although all amastin sequences present a n-terminal signal peptide domain, the δ-ama <dig> and δ-ama <dig> have a c-terminal peptide that is not present in other members of the amastin family . in spite of these differences, all amastin sequences showed a cellular localization pattern that is consistent with the topology predicted for leishmania amastins as transmembrane proteins  <cit> , as well as with our in silico analyses which confirm the presence of four hydrophobic regions, a hallmark for all amastin sequences . to further examine their cellular localization, particularly for the δ-ama40:gfp fusion, which may be associated with intracellular vesicles, we performed co-localization analysis with the glycosomal protein phosphoenolpyruvatecarboxykinase  in immunofluorescence assays. as shown by confocal images presented on additional file 3: figure s <dig>  the gfp fusion protein does not co-localize with anti-pepck antibodies, indicating that the vesicles containing δ-ama <dig> are not associated with glycosomal components. finally, we also performed immunoblot analyses of sub-cellular fractions of the parasite and compared the presence of gfp-fusions in enriched membrane and soluble fractions of transfected epimastigotes . in agreement with the confocal analyses, the immunoblot results show that all four amastins that were expressed as gfp fusion proteins are presented in membrane enriched fractions.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, the results present here provided further information on the amastin sequence diversity, mrna expression and cellular localization, which may help elucidating the function of this highly regulated family of t. cruzi surface proteins. our analyses showed that the number of members of this gene family is larger than what has been predicted from the analysis of the t. cruzi genome and actually includes members of two distinct amastin sub-families. although most t. cruzi amastins have a similar surface localization, as initially described, not all amastins genes have their expression up-regulated in amastigotes: although we confirmed that transcript levels of δ-amastins are up-regulated in amastigotes from different t. cruzi strains, β-amastin transcripts are more abundant in epimastigotes than in amastigotes or trypomastigotes. together with the results showing that, in the g strain, which is known to have lower infection capacity, expression of δ-amastin is down-regulated, the additional data on amastin gene expression presented here indicated that, besides a role in the intracellular, amastigote stage, t. cruzi amastins may also serve important functions in the insect stage of this parasite. hence, based on this more detailed study on t. cruzi amastins, we should be able to test several hypotheses regarding their functions using a combination of protein interaction assays and parasite genetic manipulation.

