BACKGROUND
for drug discovery, high-throughput screening is ultimately required. this is similar to those in various other scientific fields in which optimal conditions and combinations must be verified. the rising cost of reagents has motivated the development of microminiaturization technologies such as microarrays and microfluidics. for example, microplates have evolved from 96– <dig> wells to up to  <dig> wells, lowering assay cost owing to the reduction of the amount of reagents and samples  <cit> . however, even the 3456-well plate requires μl volumes for handling, due to adsorption and evaporation losses.

in recent years, many digital pcr systems such as the fluidigm and openarray systems have provided a leap toward the miniaturization of assay vessels by permitting gene expression analysis at the nl scale  <cit> . moreover, picoliter-droplet digital pcr system is capable of analyzing millions of picoliter-sized droplets for molecular genotyping  <cit> . however, these systems are highly specialized for specific purposes, requiring specific liquid handlers and digital pcr instruments  <cit> . in addition, multistep reactions are, in principle, difficult to perform on these platforms, confining their applicability to molecular genotyping and a few other assays.

microfluidics and bead-based technologies have been developed and are currently still expanding their possibilities  <cit> . these technologies have the potential to deal with minute amounts of sample and, particularly in microfluidics, support multistep reactions and detection. however, there are some difficulties in microfluidics in supporting the high density of parallel operations owing to the difficulty in supplying a uniform force to drive liquids  <cit> , avoiding losses from surface adsorption, and other operations  <cit> . in bead technology, parallel bead handling requires highly specialized machines that cannot be readily used for general purposes  <cit> , although they are useful for specific purposes such as random multiple sequencing  <cit> . in summary, current innovative methods have their own merits but require further development to reach their goal such as high cost performance.

here, we describe a reborn mmv-microarray technology, i.e., microarray with manageable volumes, operated without pipettes. pipette-free operation offers several benefits, for instance, rapid operation, handling of nanoliter volumes, avoiding adsorption and evaporation losses during operations, and dispensing with elaborate equipment. this technology was originally developed using polyacrylamide gel  <cit>  and had the main drawbacks of fragility and difficulty of accurate handling, although it has already enabled us to culture bacteria and perform pcr reactions  <cit> . the method reported here could overcome these defects, thereby strengthening the mmv technology.

microarray technology has permitted a high density of parallelism and the development of various methods  <cit> . however, this technology has the constraint that it essentially comprises surface reactions and is difficult to use for successive and independent multistep reactions. the mmv technology solves this problem and has a potential to support novel applications. in the present study, this potential to enhance the basic mmv technology is described.

RESULTS
sub-μl liquid handling technique
in this study, we developed novel necessary tools and principal technologies for pipette-free sub-μl volume handling in mmv, which were not available for mmv made from gel . the main principle of mmv is “aperture-to-aperture transfer.” parallel transfer of thousands of solutions was performed by centrifugation of a face-to-face stack of two mmvs with each well tightly contacting the other via an adhesive spacer . initial charging with sample was performed as shown in figure 1c. similarly, various operation techniques have been developed, including those described in our previous report  <cit> , and are collectively presented in table  <dig> .


a
pipette-free  or pipette-dependent .

for example, selective transfer of solutions  to specific wells was achieved by exploiting specifically patterned filters . in the mmv square transfer  method, different volumes of solutions were transferred using the mmv-matching thin filter device . although in general, “well-to-well transfer” had been adopted in the mmv technology and could accomplish most necessary operations, we also developed an automated liquid handling  system to achieve versatility and manageability, expanding the ability of the mmv system .

generation of replicas of cell-to-cell  and dna-to-dna 
to demonstrate the efficient multistep parallel transfer of solutions, mmvs containing dna and cells in desired patterns were fabricated and used to test replica generation . the mmv chip containing e. coli cells in a pattern  was subjected to successive five rounds of forward  and backward transfer  with replacement of each acceptor mmv chip. the vacant acceptor chips were then filled with davis media and incubated at 37°c for 21 h. as shown in figure 3a, every replica chip reproduces the original cherry blossom pattern beginning with the vacant state, demonstrating the effectiveness of the replica generation technique. as the original itself can be readily amplified, we can produce replicas perpetually. close observation of these patterns indicated that 1% or fewer of the wells stochastically failed to amplify cells within this incubation time. in an auxiliary experiment, a very small amount of aliquot  was shown to be left in each vacant well  and served as a seed for the next bacterial culture. therefore, although the current system is subject to stochastic errors at a level of  <dig> %, it can be used with careful monitoring of each well's state  under a microscope. otherwise, it can be safely used by making multiple copies  of each sample. this situation can be greatly improved with the use of a much finer, though more expensive casting mold to generate a next-generation mmv chip.

similar repetitive forward and backward transfer experiments were performed with dna solution, and vacant mmv chips were filled with a reaction buffer and then subjected to pcr. as shown in figure 3b, the 10th replica was completely replicated, showing that a dna replica array was also successfully generated. in an independent experiment, cross-contamination between wells was shown to be eliminated by the introduction of a packing spacer  . to our knowledge, this is the first success in perpetual dna microarray replica formation   <cit> .

generation of  <dig> conditions 
to exploit the array nature of mmv, we generated  <dig> different conditions by applying the “2n method”  <cit>  . to investigate the crystallization conditions of lysozyme, ten types of template mmvs were used to generate  <dig>  different conditions . the conditions ranged from ph  <dig>  to  <dig>  and from  <dig> to  <dig>  m nacl . typical crystal images that were obtained are shown in figure 2b and additional file 13: figure s <dig>  and they comprised type i , type ii , type iii , and type iv  crystals. this result showed the most optimal conditions  for generating the largest crystal  of lysozyme as well as the conditions under which other types of crystals can be obtained. this crystal size of lysozyme seems to be relatively large, although one of  <dig>  mm has recently been reported  <cit> . the sample amount required for a single condition was in the mg range for that experiment, but only 10 μg  for ours.

microbiome analysis without dependence on ngs
identifying all the members of microbiome found in an ecosystem is important for genuine understanding. accordingly, next-generation sequencing , which is a powerful, but expensive technique has been used for microbiome analysis  <cit> . the amount of information obtained using this method is often too great for the mere identification of organisms.

another method could identify the species of organisms with cost-effective performance, i.e., genome profiling   <cit> . in this study, we investigated the possibility of mmv-dependent gp analysis of microbiomes. its entire procedure is shown in figure 4a. several crucial features are included in this method; they are as follows: i) limiting the dilution of organisms constituting a microbiome entity into a single cell, ii) performing single-cell pcr by random pcr, iii) performing gp analysis using micro-temperature gradient gel electrophoresis , and iv) obtaining the sequence information of each cloned organism. the first feature can be achieved with the aid of multiple mmv microvessels to reduce the quantity of reagents required. in this study, dispersion of some of the flocculated bacteria was found to be a problem. however, this problem was substantially addressed, as shown in methods . the second feature addresses the difficulty of single-cell pcr  <cit>  and the lack of a common pcr primer for all microbes. fortunately, random pcr is in effect, which is a universal pcr that can be applied to any organism using the same primer  <cit> . thus, we could easily overcome this problem. much experience with single-cell pcr has been accumulated both worldwide  <cit>  and in our laboratory  <cit> .

thus, it is no longer difficult to perform single-cell pcr, if precautions are taken to avoid adsorption loss and dna contamination. the third feature  is supported by prior experience  <cit> . the final feature can be realized by another benefit of the gp method, i.e., the existence of easily assignable  and pcr-recoverable dna, namely, a commonly conserved genetic fragment   <cit>  that can be amplified from dna extracted from a gel band using the same primer adopted for random pcr.with solutions to each technical challenge, oral microbes were used as a test case and subjected to the entire ngs-non-dependent microbiome analysis  shown in figure 4a.

figure 4b clearly demonstrates that some mmv wells generated distinct genome profiles  by the gp method, suggesting a successful microbial cell distribution in different mmv wells and extraction and amplification of dna in each well. the dnas recovered from the μtgge gel as ccgfs were further analyzed by conventional cloning and sequencing analysis, and the resulting dna sequences were subjected to blast analysis . in this analysis, leuconostoc citreum, haemophilus parainfluenzae, rothia dentocariosa, r. mucilaginosa, aspergillus nidulans, cronobacter sakazakii, and psychrobacter sp. were tentatively identified based on sequence similarity with organisms in the ncbi database . because all these microbes can be assigned as stable or transient oral inhabitants, this finding strongly supported the inference that nnma analysis was performed without obstacles.

the genome profiles and species identification dots  that were obtained in this analysis  were subjected to clustering analysis , in which clones were assigned to possible species based on their own ccgf dna sequence .

in this experiment, not all but only some clones  appearing in an mmv plate were processed to test the feasibility of the entire nnma process because this number was sufficient to confirm experimental success. the same microbiome analysis was performed three times, with all tests performed using possible clones and their genome profiles  , thereby supporting the effectiveness of the nnma method.

discussion
in this paper, we have established the basic technology for the mmv handling and three typical applications of the mmv method: replica generation, generation of  <dig> conditions, and microbiome analysis. the original solution  can be repeatedly used for replica generation. according to the requirement, replicas containing defective wells can be repaired by the operation of a nanoliter-dispensing robot . in effect, this technology enables us to produce dna, cell, and even protein arrays easily and endlessly. the quality of the replica thus generated is sufficiently reliable if mmv is loaded with samples in multiples of  <dig> . in addition, the use of a higher-quality mmv chip mold  is empirically known to improve the defect rate greatly. moreover, monitoring the content of each individual well  is within our scope and achieved by semiconductor technology.

another important point is that the success of cell-to-cell  and dna-to-dna  replications implies that by combining cell-to-dna   and dna-to-peptide/protein   <cit>  , we can achieve c2d2p, thus beginning with cells and ending with a protein  microarray, an outcome that was never attainable before.

we generated  <dig> conditions for lysozyme crystallization. this application of mmv is unexpectedly powerful and widely applicable because it circumvents lengthy and time-consuming preparation processes and spares reagents. the crystallization study described here was performed only to demonstrate the utility and capacity of the 1024-well mmv technology , and to show that a high volume of information can be readily obtained with high performance. in this experiment, we obtained crystals that were larger than 200 μm in a much smaller volume  than that used in previous studies  <cit> , thus sparing samples and reagents by about 100-fold in comparison with conventional approaches, although a more competitive  reduction technique has been reported that employs  <dig> microwells and a specially fabricated apparatus  <cit> . additionally, we evaluated the reproducibility of the optimal crystallization conditions at the 50 μl scale, resulting in crystals that were around  <dig>  mm long . if necessary, a more statistically reliable and realistic approach can be applied to examine each condition in quadruplex or octuplex. even in an octuplex test, more than  <dig> conditions can be readily examined in a single mmv chip test, with only 4 μl  consumed per condition.

the conditions that can be examined are not only those for crystallization of proteins, but also those for the combinatorial effect of biological factors  on induction of cell differentiation such as ips  induction. in the field of medicinal chemistry, more effective drug combinations  may be easily found owing to the readiness in generating multiple conditions with ease and low cost. because chemical and biological experiments originally require surveys over a wide experimental range and multiple assays, the problems of cost, labor, and time-consuming processes, which have inhibited desirable experiments, can be revolutionarily solved by the mmv approach.

furthermore, the nnma system is a potential method for identifying the component species of microbiomes. to date, we have had no effective method to analyze a huge microbiome population mainly because we lacked an appropriate container to accommodate a large number of microbes separately and efficiently, i.e., accommodating a single organism per well and enabling a series of dna extraction processes, pcr amplification, and dna sequence analysis in multiples with an affordable cost in reasonable time. this situation was, for the first time, overcome by the advent of ngs, a technology worthy of the intensive attention of microbiologists. however, ngs is not always effective; it is very expensive, and the raw data generated is generally too difficult to process except by bioinformatics specialists. a significant amount of data accordingly remains unprocessed. in contrast, the nnma system enables microbiologists to design and complete their study on their own.

the following potential advantage of nnma over ngs further supports this approach: nnma can deal with an organism as a whole, whereas ngs yields a mixture of genome fragments for analysis. thus, the latter renders it impossible to further investigate the organism, as it is theoretically difficult to detect extreme minorities such as one or fewer in  <dig>  whereas nnma offers the possibility of detecting, in principle, a minority of  <dig> in  <dig> if twenty or more 1024-well mmv plates are used in the dilution with the expectation of  <dig>  cell/well. this is the essential difference between the ngs and nnma approaches.

a few points remain to be improved for the nnma analysis, including an increase in the output of μtgge with sample scale reduction. the realization of scale reduction will eliminate the scale-up step required in the current nnma process . another goal is to develop a means of complete deflocculation , because in the present experiment, flocs were still present , consistent with our observation that dnas from a single well of mmv are sometimes assigned to different species . this observation is noteworthy because the current nnma system, although it remains to be improved in techniques outside the mmv technology proper, has already succeeded in extracting dnas from microbes, from either single or flocculated cell, and amplifying, analyzing, and assigning them to species using mmv-based technology—a feat never achieved by conventional approaches such as microplate-based technologies.

in this study, all necessary basic skills and tools for the mmv operations have been described. moreover, highly usable application methods have been proposed.

in addition, there are other potentially powerful applications. among them are the function-based selection of possible drug molecules termed as panning on microarray mmv   and all-in-one and all-at-once  . the former  is a multistep reaction experiment, comprising pcr, replica formation, enzymatic reactions , and fluorescence detection supported by multiple operations of well-to-well transfers. the latter is simple and wide ranging, such that the diversities of its usage are open to researchers, particularly when pre-charged mmvs with various samples such as buffers, dnas, enzymes, bead-bound antibodies, and cells are available from commercial sources in the future. if necessary, all one has to do is to purchase a pre-charged mmv with diverse conditions and overlay it on an experimenter's mmv . similarly, an analyst can identify the optimal medium for culturing a particular cell  using an mmv of a combinatorial set of factors .

b

b
+++, successfully achieved; ++, whole process developed with tentative confirmation; +, system developed with successful preliminary experiment.

the mmv technology has the merits of simple operation, rapidity, economy, reduced error rate, and flexibility to both classical microscope-based technologies  and emerging semi-conductor-based technologies .

CONCLUSIONS
the plastic-based mmv chip enabled us to develop an easy-to-handle and quantitative system in handling sub-μl volumes. it also facilitated the development of a set of necessary unit technologies for mmv operation such as input, output, division, filtering of solutions, and others. this development has led to genuinely novel methods such as 1024-parallel cell-to-dna-to-protein/peptide  and nnma.

in addition, mmv can reduce experimental time and cost drastically .

