BACKGROUND
during evolution, plants and other organisms have developed a diversity of chemical defence lines, leading to the evolution of various groups of specialized metabolites such as alkaloids, terpenoids, and phenolics, selected for their endogenous biological function  <cit> . intuitively, a correlation between phylogeny and biosynthetic pathways is sometimes assumed  <cit>  and could offer a predictive approach enabling deduction of biosynthetic pathways  <cit> , defence against herbivores  <cit> , more efficient selection of plants for the development of traditional medicine and lead discovery  <cit>  as well as inform conservation priorities  <cit> .

several studies have confirmed the usefulness of specialized metabolites such as glucosinolates, iridoids, sesquiterpene lactones, flavonoids, and phenolics to support molecular based phylogenies contradicting morphologic patterns  <cit> . on the contrary, several studies have found inconsistency of specialized metabolite profiles at various taxonomic levels and indicated that specialized chemistry and anti-herbivore defence syndromes tend to be poorly correlated with plant phylogeny  <cit> .

lack of congruence between specialized chemistry and phylogeny may be caused by several different phenomena. one contributing factor is convergent evolution by which the same or similar traits originate independently in taxa that are not necessarily closely related, often in response to similar environmental challenges  <cit> . a striking example of convergent evolution is the common use of the sex pheromone -7-dodecen-l-yl acetate by over  <dig> species of primarily lepidopteran insects and female asian elephants, elephas maximus <cit> . in relation to plants, well known convergent morphological adaptations are the occurrence of prickles, thorns, and spines, which have evolved to avoid or limit herbivory  <cit> , succulence as adaptation to dry environments in both north american cactaceae and african euphorbia <cit> , and insectivorous plants, which have evolved several times in response to a nitrogen-deficient environment  <cit> . likewise, chemical defence lines may also have arisen independently in unrelated taxa, and convergent evolution in plant specialized metabolism appears to be surprisingly common  <cit> . for example, the ability to produce cyanogenic glycosides appears to have evolved independently in many different plant families  <cit> .

however, convergent evolution can be difficult to verify because absence of evidence is not evidence of absence and it is possible that some compounds presently considered to be limited to some lineages are indeed more universally found in plants  <cit> . specialized compounds are not continuously expressed, but may be produced as a response to herbivory or other damage, the expression may also be dependent on the environment  <cit>  and plants often use a combination of several defensive traits  <cit> . in addition, chemosystematic data are scattered in the literature and negative results are often not reported. absence or presence of a compound is also dependent on the amount of plant material investigated as well as the detection limit of the analytical methods  <cit> . finally, the existence of several different phytochemical methods can cause inconsistence in the results reported in the literature.

nevertheless, reports of incongruence between phytochemistry and phylogeny have questioned the degree of correlation between phylogeny and specialized metabolites, indicating that such a correlation cannot simply be assumed  <cit> . however, this relationship has rarely been tested because of lack of accurate estimates of phylogeny and corresponding chemical data; lack of tradition for interdisciplinary studies bridging botany, chemistry, and molecular systematics; and appropriate statistical tools. consequently, the potential predictive power is unknown  <cit> . in the present study, we use amaryllidaceae subfamily amaryllidoideae as a model system for testing the correlation between phylogenetic and chemical diversity and biological activity.

amaryllidaceae subfamily amaryllidoideae sensu apg iii  <cit>   is a widely distributed subfamily of  <dig> genera and about  <dig> species. amaryllidoideae has centres of diversity in south africa, south america, particularly in the andean region, and in the mediterranean, three of the recognized hotspots of biodiversity on earth  <cit>  . plants of the amaryllidoideae are used in traditional medicine to treat mental problems, primarily in southern africa  <cit> . the traditional use of plants of amaryllidoideae has been related to their unique and subfamily specific alkaloid chemistry . over  <dig> alkaloids have been described from various species and have been subdivided into  <dig> major types based on hypothetical biosynthetic pathways  <cit> . extracts or isolated alkaloids of amaryllidaceae species have shown activity in vitro in a range of assays related to disorders of the central nervous system, primarily alzheimers disease   <cit> , and anxiety and depression   <cit> . galanthamine is registered in a number of countries as an ache inhibitor   <cit> . another amaryllidaceous alkaloid, sanguinine , is shown to be a ten times more potent inhibitor of ache than galanthamine in vitro <cit> .

amaryllidaceae subfamily amaryllidoideae is therefore an ideal model system for comparing phylogenetic and chemical diversity with bioactivity. previous molecular phylogenetic studies based on plastid gene regions  have confirmed amaryllidoideae as monophyletic and resolved many taxa into geographically confined monophyletic groups  <cit> . the african tribe amaryllideae has been well supported as sister group to the remaining taxa. however, the relationship among several other early diverging lineages, in particular the african tribes haemantheae and cyrtantheae, and the australasian calostemmateae are not well supported by previous studies and remain problematic  <cit> . in a study by meerow and snijman  <cit>  based on parsimony analysis of plastid ndhf sequences, amaryllideae also resolved as sister to the remainder of the subfamily. the next major split resolved a clade with american and eurasian subclades, and an african/australasian clade with cyrtantheae as sister to a haemantheae/calostemmateae clade. however, this african/australasian clade was not supported by bootstrap analysis.

the objectives of the present study were:  to produce a comprehensive and well supported phylogenetic hypothesis of amaryllidaceae subfamily amaryllidoideae based on total evidence from dna regions from all three plant genomes;  to test for correlation between phylogenetic and chemical diversity and central nervous system  related activities.

RESULTS
phylogeny
the its region was the most informative region followed by the matk region . the trnlf and the nad <dig> regions resolved 10% or less of the clades with strong support defined as ≥ 90% bootstrap support. there were no strongly supported conflicts among any regions . the number of resolved clades  and the number of resolved clades supported by ≥ 90% bootstrap  was highest in the total evidence analysis, which was also the only analysis that resolved all the major lineages. the bayesian analysis of the total evidence matrix provided the same overall topology as parsimony analysis and all major clades were strongly supported by bayesian analysis .

1ppi: potentially parsimony informative characters. 2ci: consistency index. 3ri: retention index. 4percent of resolved clades in the bootstrap consensus tree with > 50% bs  and with ≥ 90% bs are proportions of the possible number of clades .

the topology  of the total evidence analysis largely supports previous studies  <cit> . the african tribe amaryllideae  is sister to the remainder of the amaryllidoideae , and this is strongly supported by all analyses. the next major split resolves an american clade  and a eurasian clade  as sisters  and a clade  with the african monogeneric tribe cyrtantheae , and tribe haemantheae  as sisters , and the australasian tribe calostemmateae  as sister to these.

in the its analysis , tribe amaryllideae  is sister to the remainder of amaryllidoideae . within the remainder of amaryllidoideae, tribe calostemmateae  is sister to a clade  including tribes cyrtantheae , haemantheae 95% bs) and the american and european amaryllidoideae. tribes cyrtantheae and haemantheae are sisters . in the combined plastid analysis , cyrtantheae is sister to the remainder of amaryllidoideae except tribe amaryllideae . in both the matk  and the combined plastid analysis tribe calostemmateae is sister to tribe haemantheae .

the low bootstrap support  for the eurasian clade in the total evidence analysis  may be caused by uncertainty in the placement of the genus lycoris. the remainder of the eurasian clade is strongly supported in all analyses except trnlf and nad <dig>  which are the two regions providing the least resolution and support in general .

relationship of phylogeny to chemistry and bioactivity
the relationship of individual types of compounds and biological activity could be assessed using the d metric developed to deal with discrete binary characters  <cit> . d is equal to  <dig> if the observed chemical component has a random distribution . d is equal to  <dig> if the component is distributed exactly as would be predicted under a brownian motion model of gradual divergent evolution . see materials and methods for details. of the seven alkaloid types which are found in more than one species we found evidence for some phylogenetic signal of five types   <cit> . with the exception of tazettine and galanthindole, d values were significantly different from that expected under a random distribution of the components across the phylogenetic tree . inhibition of acetylcholinesterase  and binding to the serotonin re-uptake transporter  were used as proxies for biological activity. both measures of bioactivity, ache activity and sert activity also displayed significant phylogenetic signal . however, in none of the above cases was the phylogenetic signal sufficiently strong to be considered as indistinguishable from a brownian motion model of evolution, where traits are strongly ‘clumped’ on the phylogeny   <cit> .

d is equal to  <dig> if the observed chemical component has a random distribution . d is equal to  <dig> if the component is distributed exactly as would be predicted under a brownian motion model of gradual divergent evolution . p values represent the probability that the observed d value is equal to  <dig> or  <dig>  respectively .

there was a statistically highly significant correlation between differences in chemical profile and phylogenetic distance, indicating that closely-related species tend to have more similar chemical profiles than more distantly-related species, although the effect was not strong . there was also statistically significant correlation between chemical profile and phylogenetic distance in the genus level comparison , although the effect was also weak.

discussion
phylogeny of amaryllidoideae
for the purpose of the present study, we consider the total evidence approach to provide the best estimate of phylogeny and all major lineages are supported by both parsimony and bayesian analyses. the present study has doubled previous sampling of amaryllidoideae from  <dig> species  <cit>  to  <dig> and from combined analysis of two dna regions  <cit>  to four dna regions representing all three genomes. the only previous study resolving relationships among basal lineages was based on plastid ndhf sequences  <cit>  and resolved calostemmateae and haemantheae as sisters and tribe cyrtantheae as sister to these. however, in the present study , the african tribes cyrtantheae and haemantheae are strongly supported by both bootstrap and bayesian posterior probabilities as sister clades. tribe calostemmateae is sister to these, although this was only weakly supported by the bootstrap, but strongly supported by bayesian posterior probabilities. a sister group relationship of the two african tribes cyrtantheae and haemantheae and the australasian tribe calostemmateae as sister to these appears more convincing than the alternative based on biogeography. however, in terms of morphology there may be some room to question this relationship. the indehiscent capsule of calostemmateae has more in common with the indehiscent baccate fruit of haemantheae  than with the dehiscent capsule of cyrtanthus.

phylogenetic signal of chemical diversity and bioactivity
our approach to quantify overall correlation between chemical and phylogenetic diversity has previously been applied to show positive correlations between pheromone differences and nucleotide divergence in bactrocera fruit flies  <cit>  and phylogenetic correlation of cuticular hydrocarbon diversity in ants  <cit> . we have now shown the potential application of this approach to explore correlations between phylogenetic and chemical diversity of medicinal plants.

we found significant phylogenetic signal for five out of seven tested individual alkaloid types and for both ache and sert bioactivity proxies, although the signal was not strong enough to be indistinguishable from a brownian model of evolution, where traits are strongly clumped on the phylogeny  <cit> . there was also a highly significant correlation between differences in chemical profiles and phylogenetic distance in both species and generic level analyses. despite this, there was often still considerable difference in chemical make-up even between phylogenetically very close species  with the average number of alkaloid types differing between congeners being  <dig> . whereas members of some genera such as crinum and galanthus have generally similar chemical profiles, other genera such as hippeastrum and narcissus have striking diversity.

an explanation for the moderate correlation found could be either methodological artefacts or underlying ecological or genetic differences  <cit> . we minimized methodological artefacts by using the same plant accessions for both phylogenetic, chemical, and bioactivity studies, and by analysing our data with consistent methods. chemical profiles were based on types deducted from hypothetical pathways and could be an oversimplification of the chemical diversity contained by over  <dig> individual alkaloid structures known from the subfamily  <cit> .

the strength of correlation could be dependent on taxonomic scale. whereas alkaloids derived from norbelladine and its derivatives are almost exclusively restricted to the subfamily amaryllidoideae  <cit> , and alkaloids with ache activity appear to be phylogenetically constrained within narcissus  <cit> , the considerable variation at the species and genus level found in this study corresponds well with within species variation of alkaloid profiles in for example galanthus  <cit> .

evaluation of extensive historical drug data, marine natural products, medicinal plants and bioactive natural products suggests that drugs are derived mostly from pre-existing drug-productive families that tend to be clustered rather than randomly scattered in the phylogenetic tree of life  <cit> . zhu et al.  <cit>  further suggest that efforts to identify new potential drugs can therefore be concentrated on exploring a number of drug-productive clusters. however, based on our results, such a strong presumed correlation between phylogeny and bioactivity appears to be an oversimplification, at least at the taxonomic scale tested in our study. based on our data for the medicinally important plant subfamily amaryllidoideae, it appears that phylogeny can predict chemical diversity and bioactivity, but considerable caution must be emphasized. we also suggest that phylogenetic correlation of chemical traits of interest may need to be assessed for a particular phylogenetic framework before it is used for prediction of occurrence in un-investigated taxa.

application of phylogenetic prediction and in silico data mining
a predictive approach could enable deduction of biosynthetic pathways, defence against herbivores, more efficient selection of plants for the development of traditional medicine and lead discovery as well as inform conservation priorities as outlined in the introduction. a plethora of data on phylogenetic relationships, chemical constituents and bioactivity are available through public databases  and in the literature. systematic in silico data mining could enable more efficient use of predictive approaches to speed up all of the above applications  <cit> .

however, a methodological framework still needs to be developed. in the present study, we have suggested an approach for testing correlations between phylogenetic and chemical diversity and biological activity using experimental data generated for this purpose. one method for subsequent identification of specific nodes in phylogenies with high bio-screening potential has been proposed by saslis-lagoudakis et al. <cit>  using tools from community ecology. in this approach, a matrix of ethnomedicinal use was composed and used to identify nodes in a phylogeny of pterocarpus , which have more medicinal taxa related to a specific category of use than expected by chance. this approach could be useful for identifying alternative resources or substitute taxa in cases where supply of a medicinal plant or natural product of interest is limited or where species in use are subject to conservation concerns  <cit> . however, for the purpose of increasing the chance of making truly new discoveries such as new compounds and/or new activity profiles, it may be more relevant to identify clades that possess activity of interest and at the same time do not correspond to well known compounds with well known activity profiles  <cit> .

other methods for predictive in silico data mining may be combined with a phylogenetic selection approach, e.g., exploration of natural product chemical space as developed by backlund and co-workers  <cit> . another computerized geospatial tracking tool linking bioactive and phylogenetic diversity has been developed for microorganisms  <cit> . the concept of virtual parallel screening developed for natural products by rollinger  <cit> , which simultaneously enables fast identification of potential targets, insight into a putative molecular mechanism and estimation of a bioactivity profile, could allow for optimal selection of relevant targets.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have shown significant correlation between phylogenetic and chemical diversity and biological activity in the medicinally important plant subfamily amaryllidoideae. however, a correlation cannot be assumed for other study systems without considerable caution or testing. this has implications for the use of phylogenies to interpret chemical evolution and biosynthetic pathways, to select candidate taxa for lead discovery, and to make recommendations for policies regarding traditional use and conservation priorities. phylogenetic prediction of chemical diversity and biological activity may provide an evolutionary based tool alone or in combination with other recently developed tools for in silico data mining of natural products and their bioactivity.

