BACKGROUND
eutypa dieback, botryosphaeria dieback, phomopsis dieback, and esca are the most important trunk diseases of grapevines . they are common in vineyards worldwide, where they are responsible for significant reductions in productivity and longevity . the causal fungi are taxonomically-unrelated ascomycete species that infect primarily through wounds  and colonize the permanent woody structure of the vine . damage to the wood from the localized infection  compromises the translocation of water and nutrients throughout the vine, which eventually leads to death of the shoots or the woody tissues that give rise to new shoots  <cit> . some symptoms  are shared among different trunk diseases , whereas others are unique . fungicides can be applied to protect pruning wounds or pruning can be delayed to a time when wounds are less susceptible, but these approaches are neither effective against all trunk pathogens nor are they economically-feasible for all vineyards  <cit> . once a vine is infected, the only means of eradicating a trunk pathogen is by physically cutting out infected tissues and retraining new vines. as vines age, they accumulate wood cankers and yield losses build to the point at which management costs outweigh returns  <cit> .fig.  <dig> disease symptoms caused by grapevine trunk pathogens. images showing the variety of disease symptoms associated with the different ascomycete and basidiomycete pathogens studied in this work. wood cankers or discoloration reflect the actual fungal infection ; this is the localized section of wood where the trunk pathogen resides. the foliar and canopy symptoms that develop distal to the wood canker are due to fungal degradation of the wood   and/or translocation of fungal toxins to the shoots . detailed descriptions of the symptoms are provided in table  <dig>   cross-section of a diseased vine with an extensive wood canker  that spans most of the cordon.  typical foliar symptoms due to e. lata infections.  berry spotting  associated with esca.  typical foliar symptoms of esca in a red variety .  black streaking  caused by wood colonization of esca pathogens.  discoloration of the wood caused by white-rot fungi


e. lata

dip. seriata, n. parvum

dia. ampelina

t. minima, p. chlamydospora, f. mediterranea, s. hirsutum
the fungi selected for this study are the most widespread and/or virulent species associated with each trunk disease; this table is not an exhaustive list of all trunk pathogens associated with each trunk disease



when colonizing the wood, trunk pathogens are thought to rely on their ability to enzymatically digest the plant cell walls and/or produce toxins to overcome the host’s preformed and inducible defenses . indeed, the chemical structures of secreted toxins, as well as of the products of cell wall degrading activities, have been described for some trunk pathogens . for example, degradation of cellulose and xyloglucans, and secretion of oxidases that might participate in the breakdown of wall-bound lignin, were detected in wood colonized by the eutypa dieback pathogen eutypa lata. e. lata is the only trunk pathogen that has been categorized as a wood-decay fungus, specifically a soft-rot, which is the type of wood decay caused by ascomycetes  <cit> . metabolites with phytotoxic properties, such as naphtalenone pentaketides, polyphenols, and extracellular polysaccharides, have been found in the secretomes of eutypa dieback, esca and botryosphaeria pathogens  <cit> . although this knowledge is valuable to infer the hypothetical proteins involved in pathogenesis and virulence, there are no documented candidate sequences for any of the potential virulence functions associated with trunk diseases to date. only scarce molecular genetic information is available for trunk pathogens, compared to other better-studied pathogens of grape . given that multiple trunk pathogens often co-occur in mixed infections in the vineyard, coupled with the fact that they are taxonomically unrelated, there is a limited understanding of the mechanisms that each trunk pathogen employs to first colonize wood and then cause symptoms  <cit> .

recent advances in sequencing and genotyping technologies, along with computational tools, offer an unprecedented capability to rapidly generate genomic and transcriptomic resources for plant pathogens  <cit> . we recently released the first draft genome sequences of the trunk pathogens e. lata , togninia minima  and neofusicoccum parvum . unique to this study are sequences and analyses of the genomes of other common trunk pathogens : diaporthe ampelina , diplodia seriata , and a californian isolate of phaeomoniella chlamydospora . the analysis of functional annotations of their predicted protein-coding genes provided us with a first glimpse of the complex repertoire of potential virulence functions. we identified many genes associated with lignocellulose degradation, toxin production, and nutrient uptake, some of which are known virulence factors in other plant pathogens . comparative analyses also revealed a broad range in the number of members of gene families with potential virulence functions.table  <dig> assembly statistics of the grapevine trunk pathogen genomes analyzed

species1









1the name of the isolate that was sequenced is shown in parenthesis


2based on cegma analysis  <cit> . percentages refer to complete kogs mapped onto the scaffolds


3
dia. ampelina is also the causal agent of phomopsis cane and leaf spot, a fruit and foliar disease that affects green tissues



modifications of gene family size, as a result of the differential duplication and deletion of chromosomal regions, have been shown to provide selective advantages and contribute to adaptation in a variety of organisms, including fungi  <cit> . gene duplication can be advantageous by increasing the amounts of protein synthesized  <cit>  or by promoting evolutionary novelty of one of the duplicated genes through subfunctionalization or neofunctionalization  <cit> . in the case of fungal pathogens, variations in gene family size have been associated with the evolution of virulence functions and host adaptation . differential expansion of gene families involved in host cell wall degradation, transport functions, and melanin biosynthesis has been found in pathogenic fungal lineages  <cit> . adaptive gene family expansion has also been associated with the shift in host preference from plants to animals in the onygenales  fungi  <cit> .

in this study we employed a stochastic birth and death model to discover gene families that have undergone significant expansion/contraction during the evolution of the trunk pathogens. we first generated a time-calibrated phylogeny using a subset of conserved single-copy protein-coding genes  <cit>  and time of origin estimates from fossil records  <cit> . the resultant tree was then used to identify those gene families whose size significantly diverged from an estimated random birth-death rate expectation. we identified  <dig> gene families expanded in the ascomycete trunk pathogens. these gene families were also significantly enriched in putative virulence factors, including cell wall degrading enzymes and genes involved in secondary metabolism. we then applied phylogenetically-aware principal component analysis to detect differences and similarities in the repertoires of putative virulence factors from the significantly expanded gene families.

RESULTS
genome sequencing and gene prediction of diaporthe ampelina, diplodia seriata, and phaeomoniella chlamydospora
a diagram describing the experimental workflow of the study is provided in fig.  <dig>  to perform genome-wide comparisons of virulence factor repertoires across grapevine trunk pathogens, we first expanded the available genomic resources to the haploid genomes of dia. ampelina , dip. seriata , and p. chlamydospora . genome assembly statistics are reported in table  <dig> and table s <dig> . on average  <dig>  ±  <dig>  % of the reads were assembled into  <dig>  ±  <dig> scaffolds  with total assembly sizes of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  mb for dia. ampelina, dip. seriata, and p. chlamydospora, respectively. on average only  <dig>  ±  <dig>  % discrepancy was observed between the assembled scaffold lengths and genome size estimates based on dna k-mer distributions  <cit> , which suggests that the shotgun sequencing approach delivered nearly complete genomes . cegma  <cit>  and trna analyses also indicated a high degree of completeness of the assembled gene space . transposable elements  represented only a small fraction of the total assemblies , confirming observations in ascomycete genomes with similar architecture . long-terminal-repeat  and non-ltr retroelements were the most abundant tes in the three genomes.fig.  <dig> workflow of the study. schematic diagram depicting the steps of the analysis , the bioinformatics tools applied , and their output 



gene models of the core eukaryotic genes reconstructed using cegma were used to train augustus  <cit>  for ab initio gene discovery. a total of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  complete protein-coding genes were identified in the genomes of dia. ampelina, dip. seriata, and p. chlamydospora, respectively . a similar number of protein-coding genes  was previously reported for a european isolate of p. chlamydospora  <cit> . statistics of exon, intron, and intergenic space sizes are reported in table s <dig>  and figure s <dig> . overall, genes appear to be evenly distributed on the scaffolds of the three genomes, with no evident clustering in gene-rich islands . most of the predicted protein coding genes in the three assemblies  displayed similarity with other ascomycete sequences in the ncbi non-redundant database , indicating that the large majority of the predicted genes are bona fide protein-coding genes.

transcriptome sequencing and improvement of the protein-coding gene models in the togninia minima genome
a hybrid gene prediction approach, using both ab initio and rna-seq based gene discovery, was performed to improve the previously reported gene models of t. minima . rna-seq libraries were prepared from mrna extracted from t. minima colonies growing on different carbon sources to maximize the number of detectable expressed genes . ninety-nine percent of the  <dig> million paired-end rna-seq reads were assembled de novo into  <dig>  contigs using trinity . open reading frames extracted from the assembled transcripts were used to train augustus for ab initio prediction and, together with  <dig>  uniprot ascomycete curated proteins, were used for evidence-based prediction using the maker pipeline  <cit> . as a result,  <dig>  complete protein-coding genes were obtained , a larger number compared to the  <dig>  genes described previously  <cit> . the integration of rna-seq with augustus and maker gene discovery did not only increase the number of protein-coding genes, but also improved the predicted gene structures, evidenced by wider alignment coverage  and greater percent identity when aligned to the proteomes of other ascomycetes .

annotation of virulence functions in the predicted proteomes
the proteomes of the six ascomycete grapevine trunk pathogens were annotated, with a focus on key functions likely to be associated with:  wood degradation and host colonization, such as carbohydrate-active enzymes , peroxidases, cytochrome p450s;  cellular transporters; and  secondary metabolism, including toxin production . software, databases, and parameters used for annotation are listed in table  <dig>  the predicted proteomes of the two basidiomycete fungi, fomitiporia mediterranea and stereum hirsutum  <cit> , and two additional ascomycete fungi, saccaromyces cerevisiae and botrytis cinerea, were also annotated using the same pipeline . f. mediterranea and s. hirsutum are white-rot fungi that sometimes secondarily colonize grapevines with esca. they are part of the ‘esca disease complex’ , although they are not considered as the causal pathogens of esca. the inclusion of b. cinerea and s. cerevisiae in this analysis allowed us to highlight differences between trunk pathogens and other fungi with different lifestyles. b. cinerea is a necrotrophic pathogen of grapevine fruit and foliage, but not woody tissues. s. cerevisiae was also chosen as a negative control for the analysis, because it does not cause disease in grapevines and does not feed on plant tissues and, thus, it is expected to have the least number of potential virulence factors. in total,  <dig>  protein-coding genes were annotated and the number of proteins in the trunk pathogen genomes were assigned to each functional category . all proteins were also surveyed for homologous genes in the pathogen-host interaction database , which contains experimentally-verified pathogenicity, virulence and effector protein coding-genes from fungi  <cit> .fig.  <dig> counts of protein coding genes annotated as secreted cazymes, p450s, or part of gene clusters involved in secondary metabolism. the heatmap includes only the annotations with the greatest number of genes across all genomes


dia. ampelina

dip. seriata

p. chlamydospora

e. lata

t. minima

n. parvum

f. mediterranea

s. hirsutum

b. cinerea

s. cerevisiae

1values in parentheses correspond to predicted secreted proteins


2number of genes inside secondary metabolism clusters. genes from the class “others” are not included in the count


3annotations based on genetic perturbations resulting in reduction of virulence or pathogenicity



cazymes are proteins with predicted catalytic and carbohydrate-binding domains involved in the degradation, modification, or creation of glycosidic bonds  <cit> . because secreted cazymes can participate in the disassembly of plant cell walls during colonization by pathogens, cazy annotation, together with prediction of protein secretion, has been used extensively for the identification and classification of cell wall degrading enzymes of plant pathogens  <cit> . on average  <dig>  ±  <dig>  % of the putative secreted peptides in the genomes of the eight trunk pathogens were similar to proteins in the cazy database, indicating a complex repertoire of cell wall degrading functions . glycoside hydrolases  represented the largest superfamily, ranging from  <dig> genes in p. chlamydospora up to  <dig> genes in e. lata. gh subfamilies involved in the degradation of cellulose and hemicellulose were the most abundant in all genomes , and included endo-β- <dig> -cellulases , β-glucosidases , xyloglucan transglucosylase/hydrolases , and β-xylosidases   <cit> . the highest numbers of gh <dig> were found in e. lata, followed by the botryosphaeriaceous fungi dip. seriata and n. parvum. similarly, e. lata and n. parvum were the species with the highest numbers of gh <dig> and gh <dig>  respectively. compared to all other trunk pathogens, a greater number of proteins with cellulose-binding domains  was found in the e. lata genome.

auxiliary activity  cazymes are enzymes with redox activity that participate in conjunction with other enzymes in the deconstruction of lignocellulosic material  <cit> . aa <dig> genes were particularly abundant in n. parvum  and s. hirsutum , whereas the largest number of aa <dig> genes was found in e. lata . among the ascomycete trunk pathogens, aa <dig> genes were particularly abundant in n. parvum  and dip. seriata . large numbers of genes encoding aa <dig> were found exclusively in e. lata  and dia. ampelina .

p450s have a broad spectrum of functions in fungi, from housekeeping activities, such as synthesis of essential membrane lipids, to synthesis of secondary metabolites, and detoxification of xenobiotic compounds  <cit> . p <dig> families were classified in clans according to  <cit> . differences in the number of genes belonging to the different p <dig> classes were observed among species, particularly between the ascomycetes and basidiomycetes . for example, cyp65s, cyp531s and cyp58s were abundant in the genomes of the ascomycete trunk pathogens , but were not detected in the genomes of the two basidiomycetes. conversely, the genomes of f. mediterranea and s. hirsutum presented large numbers of genes encoding cyp5150s  and cyp5139s , which were mostly absent from the ascomycete trunk pathogens . also, cyp <dig> was the clan with the highest number in the basidiomycetes , whereas only a few were detected in the ascomycete trunk pathogens  .

fungal peroxidases are oxidoreductases involved in numerous and diverse processes, such as lignin breakdown and detoxification of reactive oxygen species produced by the host, which may be associated with virulence  <cit> . the number of peroxidases identified in the trunk pathogens, based on similarity with proteins in the fungal peroxidase database , ranged from  <dig> in p. chlamydospora to  <dig> in dia. ampelina . potential class ii peroxidases  were found only in the basidiomycete white rotters, consistent with the hypothesis that these enzymes evolved after the divergence between ascomycetes and basidiomycetes  <cit> .

in plant pathogens, cellular transporters are responsible not only for export of compounds involved in pathogenesis and virulence, but they also may play an essential role in protection against plant defense compounds  during pathogenesis, possibly by exporting host-derived antimicrobial compounds out of the cell . in this study, the transporter classification database  was used to annotate cellular transporters . the electrochemical potential-driven transporters were the class with the highest number of genes across all species , followed by primary active transporters . mgte  involved in the transport of mg2+ and co2+, ppi  related to the import of proteins to the peroxisomal lumen, and the major facilitator superfamily  were the most abundant transporter families in all trunk pathogens.

annotation of secondary metabolism gene clusters
products of secondary metabolism, such as toxins and pigments, have been shown experimentally to be important in the development of some symptoms of trunk diseases  <cit> . genes involved in the same secondary metabolic pathway are often physically clustered on fungal chromosomes  <cit> . these gene clusters typically comprise a central biosynthetic gene surrounded by other genes encoding transporters and other enzymes involved in post-synthesis modification of the metabolites, such as cytochrome p450s, dehydrogenases, and fad binding domain proteins . a total of  <dig> gene clusters involved in the synthesis and secretion of secondary metabolites were identified in all eight trunk pathogen genomes . the mean cluster size was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  kb, containing on average  <dig>  ±  <dig>  genes per cluster . the total number of genes related to secondary metabolism per species ranged from  <dig> in dip. seriata to  <dig> in dia. ampelina. dia. ampelina was also the species with the highest diversity of classes, including  <dig> types of secondary metabolite clusters. the majority of the clusters belonged to type  <dig> polyketide synthases , followed by terpene synthases  and non-ribosomal peptide synthetases  in the trunk pathogens . examples of t1pks, nrps and ts gene clusters are shown in fig.  <dig>  in general, e. lata, n. parvum and dia. ampelina had the highest number of genes related to secondary metabolism, especially t1pks and nrps clusters, compared to the other ascomycete trunk pathogens . in contrast, t3pks clusters were found only in e. lata, t. minima, dia. ampelina. ts clusters were particularly abundant in the basidiomycetes , compared to only  <dig>  ±  <dig>  genes in the ascomycete trunk pathogens.fig.  <dig> examples of gene clusters associated with secondary metabolism. each panel shows loci containing similar set of genes in the ascomycete trunk pathogens associated with synthesis of  terpenes,  non-ribosomal peptides and  polyketides. the loci shown in the figures were not chosen based on their potential orthology across genomes, but solely on the basis of their similar gene cluster composition. arrows correspond to genes coding for biosynthetic genes , nrps , and t1pks), p450s , transporters , and fad-binding proteins . gray arrows correspond to genes predicted to be part of the clusters, but with other annotations, while white arrows correspond to genes outside of the secondary metabolism clusters. expression levels of t. minima genes measured using rna-seq are reported as mapped read pileups in each panel 



estimation of gene family expansion and contraction
the computational analysis of gene family evolution  computer program was utilized to identify gene families that had potentially undergone significant expansion or contraction in the genomes of the analyzed trunk pathogens. cafe relies on a stochastic birth and death process to model the evolution of gene family sizes for a specified phylogenetic tree using the gene family sizes in the extant species. to apply cafe, first a clock-calibrated phylogenetic tree was constructed  based on the multiple alignments of seventeen conserved peptides previously used to characterize phylogenic relationships across fungi . to strengthen our analysis,  <dig> additional fungal species with known phylogenetic relationships were included . after gblocks parsing  <cit>  of the concatenated alignments generated with muscle  <cit> , a total of  <dig>  amino acid positions were imported into beauti  <cit> . monophyletic partitions of data were specified and dated following  <cit>  and  <cit>  . branch-length estimation based on fossil records was carried out using the beast software package  <cit> . branch lengths and tree topology were consistent with previous literature  <cit> . our tree also confirmed the topology of recent divergence within the dothideomycetes and diaporthales, previously described  <cit> , and the phylogenetically-distant relationship of p. chlamydospora and dip. seriata, as described in  <cit> .fig.  <dig> estimation of gene family expansion and contraction using cafe.  clock calibrated phylogenetic tree showing the number of gene families significantly  expanded , contracted  and their average pattern .  venn diagram showing the number of proteins significantly expanded in each group of fungal species.  bar plot showing the counts of genes annotated in each group of significantly expanded functional category. only categories significantly overrepresented  in the  <dig> gene families expanded in the ascomycete trunk pathogens are shown



to compute the sizes of protein families, the  <dig>  proteins of the  <dig> fungal genomes were clustered into gene families based on sequence similarities  using the tribe-mcl algorithm . using as input the gene family sizes and the clock-calibrated phylogenetic tree, cafe identified  <dig> gene families  across all fungal species with significantly higher-than-expected rate of gains/losses . mean gene gains and losses estimated by cafe for each branch of the phylogenetic trees are shown in fig. 5a. among these significantly-expanded gene families,  <dig>  were expanded in the ascomycete trunk pathogens, whereas  <dig>  were expanded in the two basidiomycetes s. hirsutum and f. mediterranea. seventy-two  and  <dig>  gene families were exclusively expanded in the ascomycete trunk pathogens and in the basidiomycetes, respectively. seven gene families  were significantly expanded in b. cinerea . cafe analysis did not detect any gene family exclusively expanded in s. cerevisiae. a list of the genes from the  <dig> gene families significantly expanded in the ascomycete trunk pathogens, with all annotations carried out in this work, gene family groupings, is provided in table s <dig> .

a hypergeometric test was performed to determine if specific functional categories were significantly overrepresented in the  <dig> families that were significantly expanded in the ascomycete trunk pathogens . thirteen of the  <dig> functional categories were found to be significantly enriched in these  <dig> families . enriched categories included cell wall degradation, secondary metabolism, protein catabolism, oxidative processes and cellular defense, all of which have been often related to fungal virulence . cazymes, transporters, and p450s represented the largest functional groups that were overrepresented in the expanded families . expanded cazyme families were particularly abundant in e. lata and n. parvum, whereas most of the expanded families of transporters in the trunk pathogens were found in the t. minima genome. p450s were the only category enriched in the expanded families of all species, including b. cinerea . genes of the fe-dependent oxygenase superfamily , as well as cazymes and peptidases, were enriched in the expanded families of all ascomycete trunk pathogens and the basidiomycetes. among the  <dig> families expanded exclusively in the ascomycete trunk pathogens, there was a significant enrichment in genes associated with secondary metabolism, such as ketoacyl-synthases and fumarylacetoacetate  hydrolases . further evidence in support of a differential expansion of families associated with potential virulence processes comes from our finding that  <dig>  % of the  <dig>  genes in the expanded gene families in the ascomycete trunk pathogens shared homology with proteins in the phi-base database .

phylogenetically informed principal-components analyses of potential virulence factors in the expanded gene families of ascomycete trunk pathogens
to visualize the diversity of significantly-expanded families of virulence functions in the ascomycete trunk pathogens and to identify similarities between species, a phylogenetically informed-principal components analysis  was applied. members from the  <dig> expanded gene families in the ascomycete trunk pathogens were grouped into functional categories obtained from the specialized databases mentioned above  and pca was carried out using the phyl.pca function, part of the phytools r package  <cit> . phyl.pca takes into account correlations among species due to phylogenetic relatedness, while correcting the correlation matrices for non-independence among observations. four separate analyses were conducted using the clock-calibrated tree described above and the matrices of the number of genes classified as pfam , cazy , secondary metabolism , and p450s .fig.  <dig> phylogenetic principal component analysis  of the expanded gene families grouped by pfam annotations. only vectors of the largest loadings are shown

fig.  <dig> composition of secreted cazymes in the  <dig> significantly expanded gene families of ascomycete trunk pathogens.  number of genes in each cazyme superfamilies. gh: glycoside hydrolases, gt: glycosyl transferases, pl: polysaccharide lyases, ce: carbohydrate esterases and aa: auxiliary activities.  ascomycete trunk pathogens are plotted on the first two principal components based on phylogenetic pca of cazymes in the expanded gene families. only vectors of the largest loadings are shown.  bar plot showing the counts of aas gene in expanded gene families in the ascomycete trunk pathogens

fig.  <dig> secondary metabolism related proteins in the  <dig> significantly expanded gene families of ascomycete trunk pathogens.  bar graph of genes divided by secondary metabolism cluster types according to antismash classification. t1pks: type  <dig> polyketide synthase, ts: terpene synthase, nrps: non-ribosomal peptide synthetases, t3pks: type  <dig> polyketide synthase, upks: unusual polyketide synthase pks, ls: lantipeptide synthase .  ascomycete trunk pathogens are projected on the first two principal components based on phylogenetic pca of genes encoding  proteins involved in secondary metabolism and  p450s in the significantly expanded gene families. only vectors of the largest loadings are shown



pcas showed that species associated with similar symptoms presented more similar repertoires within the expanded gene families, which often did not correlate with the phylogenetic relationships between species. for example, the two esca pathogens, t. minima and p. chlamydospora, were consistently grouped together in all four biplots , suggesting that the two species possess similar virulence repertoires. this is in spite of the fact that t. minima is more closely related phylogenetically to dia. ampelina, and p. chlamydospora to the two botryosphaeriaceae n. parvum and dip. seriata . nonetheless, these two unrelated esca pathogens cause similar leaf and fruit symptoms, which are unique compared to symptoms of the other trunk pathogens. expansions of gene families associated with sugar transport were mostly responsible for the tight clustering of the two esca pathogens in the biplot based on pfam annotations . all four pcas revealed similar repertoires within the expanded gene families for e. lata, dia. ampelina, and n. parvum, which were consistently separated in the biplots, on the other side of the y-axis , from dip. seriata, p. chlamydospora, and t. minima. indeed, e. lata, dia. ampelina, and n. parvum cause similar wood symptoms , and they all cause shoot dieback and dead spurs. expansions of families annotated with pfam glycoside hydrolase  <dig> , duf <dig>  proteinase inhibitor i <dig> and peptidase  <dig> were mostly responsible for the clustering of e. lata and dia. ampelina . similarities between these two species, particularly in larger numbers of aa cazymes, mainly aa9s , genes associated with polyketide synthesis  , and p450s genes, primarily cyp <dig> and cyp <dig> , resulted in their clustering. clustering of n. parvum and dip. seriata was observed when gene counts based on pfam annotations and cazyme homologies were analyzed. n. parvum showed a distinct expansion of aa <dig> cazymes  and genes encoding secondary metabolic functions, with  <dig> genes  compared to 16 ±  <dig>  in e. lata, dia. ampelina and dip. seriata, and only 11 ±  <dig>  in the two esca pathogens . a similar pattern was observed when counts of genes coding for p450s were used as input for phylogenetic pca : while pc <dig> clearly separated the esca pathogens from the rest, pc <dig> separated n. parvum, dia. ampelina, and e. lata.

discussion
in this study we describe the draft genome sequences of three grapevine trunk pathogens, causal agents of phomopsis dieback, botryosphaeria dieback and esca. this genomic information, together with the previously-released draft genome sequences of other important ascomycete trunk pathogens  and two basidiomycetes associated with esca  <cit> , provide the genomic resources necessary to begin analyzing the complex repertories of potential virulence profiles of these destructive fungi  <cit> . all genomes in this study showed a comparable degree of completeness in relation to both genome size estimates, based on k-mer distribution and representation of conserved genes  <cit> . genome sizes, as well as number of protein-coding genes and repetitive dna content, were similar to those of other common plant pathogens with a necrotrophic life style, such as b. cinerea  <cit>  sclerotinia sclerotiorum  <cit>  and colletotrichum spp.  <cit> . as observed in  <cit> , p. chlamydospora has a relatively smaller genome  compared to the other species analyzed. the application of third generation sequencing technologies will help improve these draft assemblies that despite their estimated completeness suffer from limitations due to the use of short reads, which in addition to fragmentary assemblies may include chimeric contigs, erroneous copy numbers and collapsed repetitive regions  <cit> . we cannot rule out that some protein-coding genes may be missing from the final transcriptomes predicted from the shotgun-sequenced genomes because of  inaccessibility of certain genomic regions to illumina sequencing,  incomplete assemblies, and  possible errors in the ab initio gene discovery  <cit> . further studies of in planta gene expression using rna-seq may refine the predicted gene models  <cit> . the effectiveness of integrating transcriptome sequencing with comparative and ab initio approaches for gene prediction is evidenced in this work by the significant improvement of the predicted genes in the genome of t. minima.

functional annotations of the genomes of the  <dig> trunk pathogens confirmed the complex array of virulence factors that these organisms may utilize during colonization of grapevines. we observed remarkable variation in the number of genes assigned to specific functional categories among the trunk pathogens, which in some instances  reflected lineage-specific, gene family expansions and contractions. gene family expansions result from the retention in a fungal population of duplicated genes, which provide adaptive advantage  <cit> . gene duplications can arise from events of genome or chromosomal duplications, te retroposition, or unequal crossing-over  <cit> . gene duplication can lead to functional diversification or increase in protein synthesis, which can play a role in fungal adaptive divergence  <cit> ). an increase in the number of paralogous genes in families associated with virulence and nutrient uptake has been described in the case of obligate parasites . larger family sizes of virulence factors were also found in species with broader host ranges, compared to host-specialized pathogens in the metarhizium genus  <cit> . copy number variations  within species have also been described not only as a mechanism underlying host adaptation , but also in the development of resistance to antifungal compounds in fungi  <cit>  . the extent and frequency of adaptive cnv in trunk pathogen populations has not been investigated. nonetheless, as whole-genome sequences of more isolates of each trunk pathogen species become available, comparative approaches can be applied to scan the genomes for cnv loci and determine whether they encompass any of the genes in the significantly-expanded families we identified.

because natural selection is the major force behind the differences in gene family size between species  <cit> , focusing on families with faster rates of gene gain can help identify functions that may be associated with host adaptation, pathogenicity, or virulence  <cit> . among the ascomycete trunk pathogens, we identified  <dig> gene families that have undergone significant expansion. the expanded families in the ascomycete trunk pathogens were enriched in genes that, at least based on in silico annotations, are expected to contribute to virulence and nutrient uptake. the overrepresentation of phi genes, as well as of secreted cazymes, p450s, and genes involved in secondary metabolism, supports the role of gene duplication and consequent gene family expansion in the evolution of trunk pathogens. furthermore, results of phylogenetic pcas of the sizes of expanded families highlighted similarities between pathogens that did not correspond to their phylogenetic relationships. instead, pathogens were grouped more often according to similarities in disease symptoms, which suggests there is convergent evolution.

the predicted secretomes of all trunk pathogens encompassed functions that can potentially target all components of primary and secondary plant cell walls . unlike pathogens that thrive on pectin-rich tissue, such as b. cinerea  <cit> , which possesses high numbers of pectolytic enzymes, overall the ascomycete trunk pathogens showed a wider array of enzymes that target cellulose and hemicellulose, such as endo-β- <dig> -cellulases , β-glucosidases , xyloglucan transglucosylase/hydrolases , and β-xylosidases . as these are wood-colonizing fungi, we might expect their genomes to include a range of genes encoding for wood-degrading enzymes, especially e. lata, which is a known soft-rot fungus, and n. parvum, which colonizes grapevine wood more rapidly than most trunk pathogens  <cit> . in agreement with the observation that glucose-rich polymers are degraded in wood colonized by e. lata  <cit> , we found significant expansion of genes coding for cazymes containing the cbm <dig> domain, a carbohydrate-binding module that strongly binds to crystalline cellulose and that is required for full activity of fungal cellulases. e. lata is a soft-rot fungus and has a similar gene family expansion pattern to the white-rot basidiomycete phanerochaete chrysosporium, in which expansion of cbm1s was also found  <cit> . indeed, cellulose-degrading systems of some soft-fungi are as advanced as those of typical white-rot fungi  <cit> . in contrast to e. lata, p. chlamydospora underwent the least amount of expansion in secreted cazymes, which is consistent with past findings of no detection in vitro of xylanase or cellulases and no visible degradation of lignified cell walls in wood colonized by the latter  <cit> .

the predicted secretomes of the ascomycete trunk pathogens were also rich in auxiliary enzymes , which catalyze oxidative processes that facilitate the enzymatic disassembly by other cazymes of recalcitrant plant cell wall components, including lignin  <cit> . soft-rot fungi degrade lignin, but to a lesser degree even than brown-rot fungi; they can degrade enough lignin to access other cell wall components that are more efficiently degraded . the expansion of aa7s was common in all trunk pathogens, with the exception of p. chlamydospora. aa7s are gluco-oligosaccharide oxidases that can oxidize a variety of carbohydrates and can contribute to lignin degradation acting in conjunction with peroxidases  <cit> . aa3s were expanded the most in n. parvum, and aa9s in e. lata and dia. ampelina, suggesting that specific oxidative processes are associated with these different dieback pathogens. indeed, the aa3s -- extracellular hemoflavoenzymes and known components of the secretomes of lignocellulose-degrading fungi  <cit>  -- are involved in degradation of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin  <cit> . aa9s are copper-dependent lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases, previously classified as gh <dig>  and are commonly found in genomes of fungal wood decayers. aa9s enhance the breakdown of lignocellulosic material in combination with cellulolytic enzymes by catalyzing the oxidative cleavage of cellulose, which increases substrate accessibility to other cazymes  <cit> . n. parvum together with dip. seriata also showed expansion of aa <dig> genes that encode multicopper oxidases, including laccases, which could also participate in lignin breakdown  <cit> .

secondary metabolites with phytotoxic activity  are integral components of the battery of virulence factors of grapevine trunk pathogens . although toxins secreted by some grapevine trunk pathogens have been chemically characterized and tested for virulence, none of the genes involved in their synthesis have been identified to date. in fungi, genes involved in the synthesis and transport of secondary metabolites are typically clustered together with the gene coding for the key biosynthetic enzyme  <cit> . large numbers of secondary metabolic clusters were observed in the ascomycete trunk pathogens, mostly associate with the synthesis of  polyketides and fatty acid-derived compounds ,  terpenes , and  non-ribosomal peptides and amino acid-derived compounds . while nrps may be responsible for the synthesis of toxic polypeptides  <cit> , clusters centered around the key enzyme polyketide synthase may participate to the production of naphtelenone pentaketide toxins found in t. minima, p. chlamydospora, dip. seriata and n. parvum  <cit> . a remarkable expansion of genes associated with non-ribosomal peptides and amino acid-derived compounds was found in n. parvum, while the greatest expansions of families involved in polyketide synthesis  were found in genomes of e. lata and dia. ampelina. the differences between the botryosphaeria dieback pathogens n. parvum and d. seriata in gene counts of these secondary metabolite clusters reflect their different rates of wood colonization  <cit>  and the more rapid rate of wood necrosis caused by the former  <cit> .

our results also showed that grapevine trunk pathogens possess a large number of p450s as found in other wood-rotting organisms  <cit> . p450s are crucial components of multiple processes ranging from the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites such as toxins and hormones  <cit>  to degradation and detoxification of antimicrobial plant defense compounds  <cit> . interestingly, basidiomycetes and ascomycete trunk pathogens show very distinctive expansions of specific cyps. of particular interest are the cyp65s which were more abundant in the ascomycete trunk pathogens  compared to b. cinerea  and were not detected in the two basidiomycete analyzed and s. cerevisiae. cyp65s are p450s predicted to participate in pathways of secondary metabolism, including toxin biosynthesis  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
as part of this study we expanded the currently available genomic resources for grapevine trunk pathogens and incorporated this information with previously released genomes in a comparative analysis to catalogue genes and gene families with putative virulence functions. the draft genomes and their annotated protein-coding genes presented in this paper provide not only the necessary references for in planta expression profiling and whole-genome re-sequencing for genetic diversity and association studies, but also the molecular information required for targeted knock-out mutations, overexpression or gene tagging as protocol for genetic transformation of some of these species are available  <cit> . comparisons between in planta and in vitro transcriptomes will define the expression dynamics of the proposed virulence factors during the interaction with the host. whole genome re-sequencing of multiple isolates will determine the pattern of sequence polymorphisms  <cit>  and structural variations  <cit>  in pathogen populations and their association with pathogen aggressiveness and host range. the functional validation of these potential virulence factors by reverse genetic approaches will ultimately lead to a more comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms underlying the different grapevine trunk diseases, which will enable the development of more accurate diagnostic tools and novel effective control methods.

