BACKGROUND
the classical view of gene regulation is that transcription factors  bind to enhancers and promoters. this leads to recruitment of rna pol ii to the promoter and initiation of transcription. another aspect of transcription is that several histone post-translational modifications are preferentially located in the promoter region of genes and are associated with gene activity  <cit> . this led to the hypothesis of the histone code  <cit> , which suggested that gene activity is directed by the presence of histone modifications . however, this theory has been debated  <cit> . the idea that tfs instead are the main determinants of gene activity is supported by different data e.g. by the observation that regions with inter-individual differences in chromatin marks are enriched for tf motif-disrupting single nucleotide polymorphisms   <cit>  and that disruptions of several motifs are associated with differences in hms  <cit> .

gene transcription by rna pol ii is a complex process involving several layers of regulation and is coupled to changes in the chromatin structure  <cit> . additionally, most promoters initiate transcription in both directions from the tss on the opposite strands  <cit> . upstream antisense rnas produced by this divergent transcription are often short and quickly degraded  <cit> . however, 10% of the protein-coding genes in the human genome have a bidirectional orientation separated by <1000 bp   <cit>  suggesting that divergent transcription may have been evolutionary advantageous  <cit> . the presence of antisense transcription should therefore be considered in the analysis of gene-regulatory marks.

in an earlier study  <cit>  we observed that the histone  <dig> acetylation  signal upstream from the transcription start sites  was lower in unidirectional compared with bidirectional genes whereas both groups had approximately equal signal downstream of the tss. this observation suggested that the upstream signal might be associated with whether a gene is bidirectionally transcribed. this was the main motivation for this study in which we carefully evaluated  <dig> publicly available datasets describing the genomic distribution of hms, tfs, and rna pol ii for any association with the transcriptional direction. apart from hms we have also studied many tfs including the ccctc-binding factor  and rad <dig>  ctcf is known for creating boundaries between enhancers and promoters and acting as a chromatin barrier  <cit> . rad <dig> is a subunit of cohesin which is found at most regulatory elements  <cit>  and has been shown to co-occur with ctcf to regulate gene expression  <cit>  and to link regulatory regions to their targets  <cit> .

in this study we compared bi- and unidirectional protein-coding genes with respect to hms and tfs in the promoter region. the genes were annotated as bi- or unidirectional based on tsss identified from cap analysis of gene expression  data and genes retrieved from the ensembl database. the hm and tf signals were obtained from publicly available chip-seq data within the encode project and the comparison was done in six different cell lines. we found a significantly higher signal of the well-known hms h3k4me <dig>  h3k9ac, and h3k27ac upstream of the tss of the bidirectional genes. similarly, the tfs nelfe and taf <dig> were significantly more enriched upstream of the tss of bidirectional genes. notably, we found well-positioned ctcf and rad <dig> peaks 60-80 bp upstream of the tss that were specific for unidirectional genes, suggesting that ctcf and cohesin are involved in directing the transcription. supporting this idea, we showed that the ctcf signal in this peak is negatively correlated to h3k4me <dig>  h3k9ac, and h3k27ac upstream of the tss.

in conclusion, we have shown that tss-specific hms mainly occur in transcribed regions and could be a consequence of transcription. in addition, we have identified ctcf and cohesin as possible players in the direction of transcription initiation.

RESULTS
identification of bi- and unidirectional genes
in this study we considered different types of promoters for protein-coding genes. many genes are unidirectional and transcribed in one direction  whereas a fraction of promoters are bidirectional and initiate transcription in both directions from the different strands . some genes have alternative tsss on the same strand  and this promoter structure was also evaluated.figure  <dig> gene promoter types. genes were subdivided into  unidirectional,  bidirectional and  unidirectional genes with an upstream alternative tss. the arrows represent tsss and the figures are centered at the gene tss.



to identify bi- and unidirectional genes, we started from all  <dig>  protein-coding genes in the ensembl database  <cit> . we focused on protein-coding genes since they are sufficiently many and generally higher expressed than other types of genes, such as long non-coding rnas  <cit> . the cage technology may be used to identify tsss across the genome. cage clusters were downloaded from the encode repository  <cit>  at ucsc and filtered to contain likely promoters. genes with a cage cluster nearby the tss were defined as actively transcribed. using this definition, the number of active genes included in the study varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  for different cell lines and cage rna isolation conditions . table  <dig> also provides an overview of the cell lines and datasets used for this study. for each dataset only the genes active in that cell line were included for further analysis.table  <dig> 
number of active genes annotated as bi- or unidirectional



cell line
location
extract
total
ensembl
cage
ens+cage
agreement
bi
uni
bi
uni
bi
uni

the number of active protein-coding genes for each cell line and rna isolation condition . these genes were annotated as bi- or unidirectional using cage, ensembl, or both methods. the agreement between the cage and ensembl annotations is provided for each dataset.



the active genes were annotated as bidirectional based on either the presence of cage clusters on the opposite strand or the presence of a gene listed in the ensembl database on the opposite strand within a short distance. the agreement between the two annotation methods was computed. on average,  <dig> % of the active genes received the same annotation using both cage and ensembl data . this combined annotation was considered more certain and these genes were therefore the primary genes included in the subsequent analysis. to compare gene activity across cell lines, all protein-coding genes were subdivided based on the number of cell lines in which they were active , revealing an enrichment of genes active in all or none of the cell lines. since we considered several different cage rna isolation conditions for some cell lines , we used the dataset resulting in the highest total number of active genes for this comparison. in total 95% of the genes active in at least two cell lines had the same directionality in all cell lines where they were active .figure  <dig> overlap between active genes and gene annotations across cell lines.  all protein-coding genes  were subdivided based on the number of cell lines in which they were active .  protein-coding genes active in at least two cell lines were divided into three groups: unidirectional in all cell lines ‘uni’, differently annotated ‘mixed’, and bidirectional in all cell lines ‘bi’.



to validate the annotations we compared the rna pol ii and rna-seq signals between the two groups of genes. for each gene we consider the upstream direction to be the 3′ to 5′ direction on the coding strand and the downstream direction to be the 5′ to 3′ direction. this definition is applicable also to genes defined as bidirectional, since each individual gene still has its coding sequence in only one direction of the tss.

as expected, the rna pol ii-signal was higher upstream of the tss in the bidirectional genes compared with the unidirectional, which agrees with higher antisense transcription in the bidirectional genes . the presence of a weak rna pol ii peak upstream of the tss suggests that a small amount of divergent transcription may still take place for some genes in the unidirectional group, although the genes with the highest level of divergent transcription would have been generally detected as bidirectional using the cage data. using strand-specific rna-seq we confirmed that both bidirectional and unidirectional genes had rna-seq signals downstream of the tss, but that only the bidirectional genes had a signal upstream of the tss . these findings were consistent across all cell lines and cage rna isolation conditions .figure  <dig> gene annotations validated using rna pol ii and rna-seq signals. results shown for k <dig> .  the average number of rna pol ii reads  in a region ±1 kb from the tss based on  hudsonalpha and  yale chip-seq data.  strand-specific rna-seq signal. the sense strand  and antisense strand  are shown separately.



differences in hm and tf signals are related to the direction of transcription
to investigate whether the hm signal upstream of the tss was affected by the antisense transcription we computed the average hm signals for the bi- and unidirectional genes, respectively. we focused on genes annotated equally using both ensembl and cage . encode hms and histone variants from ‘broad’  and ‘uw’  were included. the analysis was done for each combination of cell line and cage rna isolation condition separately. the promoter marks h3k4me <dig>  h3k9ac, and h3k27ac showed significant differences between the groups . the signal upstream of the tss was almost equally high as the downstream signal in the bidirectional genes whereas the upstream signal was significantly lower than the downstream in the unidirectional genes. the highest difference was observed for the h3k4me <dig> mark, which is known to be present around active promoters  <cit> . furthermore, more than 91% of all pol ii regions correlate with h3k4me <dig>  <cit> . our results show that most of the h3k4me <dig> signal upstream of the tss derives from genes with antisense transcription  suggesting that h3k4me <dig> is mainly deposited in sequences transcribed by rna pol ii.figure  <dig> differences in hm and tf signal between bi- and unidirectional genes. results shown for k <dig> . the average signal  is shown in a region ±1 kb from the tss. the signal shown is either hms typical for  promoters,  promoters and enhancers,  enhancers, or  tfs.



additionally, we observed differences between the enhancer marks h3k4me <dig> and h3k4me <dig> . h3k4me <dig> is a signal associated with both promoters and enhancers. small differences in the h3k4me <dig> signal were observed in the same direction as for the promoter marks . h3k4me <dig> had an opposite pattern  with higher signal upstream of the tss in the unidirectional genes. since the monomethylation signal was one order of magnitude weaker than the h3k4me2/ <dig> signal, we speculated that instead of being enriched in the unidirectional genes it was rather depleted in the bidirectional genes due to the bi- and trimethylation of the same residue. furthermore, some promoters may act as enhancers  <cit>  and it is possible that promoters of unidirectional genes have a higher tendency to act in this way.

next we compared the tf binding between bi- and unidirectional genes including  <dig> encode chip-seq datasets for tfs. the tf datasets are listed in . ctcf, taf <dig>  nelfe, and rad <dig> showed significant differences between uni- and bidirectional genes . the patterns for taf <dig> and nelfe were very similar to the pattern for rna pol ii with a higher peak upstream of the tss in the bidirectional genes compared with the unidirectional ones . a small tendency towards an upstream peak is still visible in the unidirectional genes, and it may be attributed to divergent transcription  <cit>  that was not identified using the cage clusters.

taf <dig> is a subunit of tfiid , which is one of the general tfs that constitute the rna pol ii preinitiation complex. taf <dig> is associated with active promoters and related to gene expression levels  <cit> . this association is driven by specific binding of the plant homeodomain  in the tfiid taf <dig> subunit to h3k4me3-modified nucleosomes and enhanced by coinciding h3k9/14ac  <cit> . the pattern for taf <dig>  is therefore consistent with the observed differences in h3k4me <dig> and h3k9ac .

nelfe  is a part of the nelf complex that binds to rna pol ii after initiation and causes pausing of pol ii elongation proximal to the promoter  <cit> . nelf has been shown to be present both downstream and upstream of the tss, which indicates pausing in either direction  <cit> . we observed a higher nelfe signal upstream of the tss of bidirectional genes , corresponding to higher rate of antisense transcription.

surprisingly, we also found a well-positioned ctcf peak centered 60-90 bp upstream of the tss of the unidirectional genes . this peak was observed in the unidirectional genes for all cell lines and cage rna isolation conditions, but it was not present in the bidirectional genes. ctcf bound upstream of the tss may thus act as a marker of unidirectional transcription. since ctcf is known for creating boundaries, e.g. between enhancers and promoters or to act as a chromatin barrier  <cit>  we hypothesized that the function of ctcf in the unidirectional genes may be to block the initiation of antisense transcription. alternatively, ctcf may act by stalling the rna pol ii  <cit>  upstream of the tss and thus increasing the likelihood that the antisense transcription is terminated. increased ctcf binding  has previously been related to increased levels of h3k4me <dig>  <cit> , which agrees with our observed differences in h3k4me <dig> between the two groups .

interestingly, this upstream ctcf peak in the unidirectional genes was observed both using the combined  gene annotations  and using only the cage-based annotations . however, using only the ensembl-based annotations there was no significant difference between the two gene classes . this suggests that the ctcf binding is related to the initiation of transcription measured by cage rather than the gene organization measured using ensembl.

to verify that the ctcf peak was not the result of a few outliers among the genes, we subdivided the ±1 kb window into  <dig> segments of length 153-154 bp. this particular subdivision was chosen to give the highest precision, without covering multiple nucleosomes in the same segment. we defined a ctcf peak to be at least a 100-fold enrichment of chip-seq signal over the background. the segment with the largest difference in prevalence of ctcf peaks covered the expected ctcf peak site  and held a significant enrichment  of ctcf peaks in the unidirectional genes compared with the bidirectional ones . the choice of enrichment threshold to define a ctcf peak may influence the results and several different thresholds  were applied with similar results .

similarly to ctcf, we found a rad <dig> peak upstream of the tss in the unidirectional genes . rad <dig> is a cohesin subunit and has been shown to function together with ctcf  <cit> . in embryonic stem cells rad <dig> is typically positioned at the 5′ end of the ctcf motif and 73% of the rad <dig> binding sites have been found to overlap with ctcf  <cit> .

we repeated the comparisons presented here using either annotations based solely on cage  or ensembl . for the hms and most tfs we observed no differences as compared with the combined analysis. however, for ctcf there was a small upstream peak also in the ensembl-bidirectional group as discussed earlier , illustrating that the absence of antisense cage was the main feature that defined the upstream ctcf peak.

results for all hms and all tfs for all the tested cell lines and rna isolation conditions studied are available in  and . we made interesting observations on the h2a.z histone variant. h2a.z is enriched mainly upstream of the tss in human  <cit> , both upstream and downstream in mouse and yeast  <cit> , but mainly downstream of the tss in drosophila  <cit>  and arabidopsis  <cit> . in unidirectional genes we found that h2a.z showed strongest signal upstream of the tss but in bidirectional genes the signal was stronger downstream of the tss . thus, high levels of h2a.z downstream of the tss may be indicative of antisense transcription in human, but since the positioning of h2a.z differs in other species it may not be a causative relation.

alternative tsss do not affect the signal upstream of the tss
we speculated that the peak upstream of the tss, which was observed for several hms, could be influenced by genes with an upstream alternative tsss . within the previously annotated groups of unidirectional genes we identified genes without any upstream cage clusters on the same strand. then the hm and tf signals were compared between this subgroup of unidirectional genes without upstream alternative tsss and all unidirectional genes . noticing only very small differences between these groups, we concluded that the occurrence of upstream tsss did not significantly affect the analysis.

uni- and bidirectional genes are transcribed at similar levels
next, we speculated that the observed differences in hm and tf signal between the bidirectional and unidirectional genes might be associated with overall differences in transcription between the two groups. to test this idea, we subdivided the genes into four equally sized transcription level bins  prior to the gene annotation, and computed the signal for each bin separately. had the observed differences been related to overall expression differences, then we would have expected e.g. bidirectional genes to preferentially fall into the highest expressed bin and unidirectional genes into the lowest expressed bin. however, the distribution of genes was nearly uniform across the expression bins for all cell lines . computing the rna pol ii and rna-seq signal for the transcription level bins confirmed that the ‘highest’ bin also had the highest pol ii and rna-seq signal .

to test if the identified differences in hm and tf signals between bi- and unidirectional genes were associated with the gene expression levels, we reanalyzed the hms and tfs with the genes subdivided into bins according to their transcription level . although there are small variations in the signal, all qualitative results were preserved. notably, the well-positioned ctcf and rad <dig> peaks were clearly present in all transcription level bins of the unidirectional genes, whereas they were missing in all bidirectional bins.figure  <dig> differences between bi- and unidirectional genes subdivided into four gene expression bins. results shown for k <dig> . the average hm and tf signal  is shown in a region ±1 kb from the tss. the signal shown is either hms typical for  promoters,  promoters and enhancers,  enhancers, or  tfs.



hm and tf signals are related to the level of antisense transcription
to verify that the choice of thresholds used to divide the active genes into the bi- and unidirectional groups did not affect the results, we reanalyzed the data in a threshold-independent way. in each cell line, all active protein-coding genes were subdivided into five groups based on level of antisense transcription . the same hms and tfs as earlier were analyzed confirming the previous observations . notably, the hm and tf signals were related to the level of antisense transcription, represented by the different bins. for instance, the height of the upstream ctcf peak was negatively associated with the level of antisense transcription . subsequently, the highest ctcf peak was observed for the ‘none’ group without any antisense cage-tags, a slightly lower peak was observed for the ‘lowest’ group, and so on.figure  <dig> differences in hm and tf signal for genes grouped by the level of antisense transcription. results shown for k <dig> . the average signal  is shown in a region ±1 kb from the tss. the signal shown is either hms typical for  promoters,  promoters and enhancers,  enhancers, or  tfs.



since there is still a small peak upstream of the tss, e.g. for h3k4me <dig> in the ‘none’ group, this association between the level of antisense transcription for a bin and its signal strength is important in illustrating that most of the upstream signal may indeed be explained by the antisense transcription. the part of the signal that is not explained may be due to small levels of divergent transcription that are not detectable by cage.

ctcf is negatively correlated to h3k4me <dig>  h3k9ac, and h3k27ac in genes with an upstream ctcf peak
to further study ctcf we compared the ctcf motif distribution between uni- and bidirectional genes. motifs within 1 kb from the tsss were identified. an enrichment of motifs was found for the unidirectional genes in k <dig> with a peak 81 bp upstream of the tss , but no enrichment was observed in the bidirectional genes. similar patterns were found for each individual cell line .figure  <dig> position of the ctcf motif in k <dig> . the per-bp motif coverage was computed in a region ±1 kb from the tss for uni- and bidirectional genes separately. the signal shown was averaged over a ±20 bp window and the position with the highest motif enrichment marked.



using the identified motif site, we selected unidirectional genes that had both a ctcf motif close to the motif peak and a chip-seq peak supported by at least  <dig> reads. these genes were defined as the ‘ctcf’ group of genes and the rest of the unidirectional genes were defined as the ‘non-ctcf’ group. for both groups we computed the correlation between the ctcf signal in a ±1 kb window from the tss and the hm and tf signal upstream or downstream of the tss, respectively. the results  showed that the ctcf level was negatively correlated to the upstream signal of h3k4me <dig>  h3k9ac, and h3k27ac in the ‘ctcf’ group, whereas the signals were uncorrelated in the ‘non-ctcf’ group. conversely, the downstream signals of h3k4me <dig>  h3k9ac, and h3k27ac were positively correlated to the ctcf signal, with a higher correlation in the ctcf genes. rad <dig> was positively correlated to ctcf in both groups of genes and both upstream and downstream of the tss, illustrating a strong co-occurrence of rad <dig> and ctcf.figure  <dig> correlation between the ctcf signal and the hm or tf signal. the results are shown for several cell lines annotated using cage from different subcellular locations . the genes were subdivided into genes with a well-positioned ctcf peak upstream of the tss and those without . the ctcf signal was computed for the whole region ±1 kb from the tss, whereas the hm and tf signals  were subdivided into the signal upstream and downstream of the tss. the correlation between the total ctcf signal and the hm or tf signal up- and downstream of the tss is shown on a scale from dark red , to white , to dark blue .



ctcf co-occurs with cohesin and is associated with unidirectional transcription
to illustrate the co-occurrence of ctcf and cohesin we clustered all active protein-coding genes in k <dig> into two clusters using ctcf and rad <dig> chip-seq data. the first cluster held  <dig> genes with co-occurring ctcf and rad <dig> signal, whereas the second cluster held  <dig> genes without the co-occurring signals . the ctcf and rad <dig> cluster represented  <dig> % of the active genes including  <dig> % of the unidirectional genes but only  <dig> % of the bidirectional genes, demonstrating that co-occurring ctcf and rad <dig> was significantly associated with unidirectional genes .figure  <dig> co-occurrence of ctcf and rad <dig>  active genes in k <dig>  were clustered into two clusters based on ctcf and rad <dig> signal within 1 kb from the tss.



discussion
several post-translational hms are associated with gene activation or repression but the mechanisms are not fully understood yet. if this association is causal, the hms may either be deposited there first to regulate the transcription or, alternatively, deposited as a consequence of the gene being transcribed. different mechanisms have been discussed in the past and correlation has often been interpreted as causality  <cit> . however, since no sequence specificity has been observed for the histone-modifying enzymes, other mechanisms must be involved in identifying genes to promote or repress transcription. another option is that both gene transcription and hms are a result of the action of sequence specific tfs. in this model, the hms, once established, could function as a cellular memory in a more complex regulatory machinery, but would not be the underlying cause of transcription themselves. nevertheless, hms are often referred to as ‘activating’ and ‘repressing’, implying a causality  <cit> .

the study of how tfs and hms affect gene regulation is complicated by the presence of antisense transcription. for instance, h3k4me <dig> has been reported to be located around the promoter of active genes  <cit> . in our study, however, we observed that the h3k4me <dig> signal upstream of the tss mainly appeared in bidirectional genes, suggesting that it does not mark a region around transcriptional initiation as previously reported, but rather the transcribed sequences.

here, we identified bi- and unidirectional genes and compared them with respect to hms and tfs in the promoter region. we found that the promoter marks h3k4me <dig>  h3k9ac, and h3k27ac had higher signal upstream of the tss in bidirectional genes compared with unidirectional. a similar observation was made for the promoter/enhancer mark h3k4me <dig>  these differences in hm enrichment were consistent in six different cell lines using cage data from several rna isolation conditions. we showed that the hm differences were not linked to differences in gene expression between bi- and unidirectional genes and that the differences increased with higher levels of antisense transcription. these findings agree with a previous observation of weaker h3k4me <dig> and h3ac signals upstream of the tss in genes without a significant divergent transcription  <cit>  measured in imr <dig> cells using gro-seq. unfortunately, we did not find any published gro-seq data for the cell lines we studied to compare our results with.

had the studied hms occurred outside of the actually transcribed region their gene-regulatory role would have been supported since it would have suggested that a process separate from the transcription must add the hms. by contrast, we observed differences in the hm signal upstream of the tss between bi- and unidirectional genes, suggesting that the transcription either causes the hms to be deployed there, or that they both have a common cause. furthermore, roughly equal levels of sense and antisense rna have been observed for a majority of active promoters using gro-seq  <cit> . this would suggest that genes with similar levels of hm marks both upstream and downstream of the tss could be expected. indeed, the hms both upstream and downstream of the tss had similar enrichment in the group of genes that were defined as bidirectional.

additionally, analysis of tf occupancy in the two groups of genes revealed some tfs with interesting differences in enrichment. taf <dig> and nelfe had chip-seq signals similar to that of rna pol ii with higher signal upstream of the tss of the bidirectional genes compared with the unidirectional ones. both tfs are tightly coupled to the transcriptional initiation. taf <dig> is a subpart of tfiid, which is part of the pol ii preinitiation complex  <cit> . nelfe binds to pol ii and is involved in pausing of the initial elongation  <cit> . the tfiid subunit taf <dig> has been shown to bind specifically to h3k4me3-modified nucleosomes that is also enhanced by coinciding h3k9/14ac  <cit> .

interestingly, ctcf and rad <dig> were found to have a well-positioned peak approximately 60-80 bp upstream of the tss in the unidirectional genes but not in the bidirectional ones. the peak height was associated with the level of antisense transcription. since ctcf is known for creating boundaries between different regions  <cit> , we speculated that the function here might be to block the initiation of antisense transcription. cohesin forms circular structures around the dna molecule e.g. keeping two sister chromatids together. the cohesin ring has been shown to be mobile and it has been suggested that cohesin is pushed away by the transcription complex  <cit> , which would cause it to be depleted upstream of the tss of bidirectionally transcribed genes. however, since ctcf was strongly co-localized with cohesin upstream of the tss of unidirectional genes, ctcf may be involved in the positioning of cohesin instead. ctcf and cohesin have been shown to stall the rna pol ii  <cit>  and transcription in the antisense direction may be more likely to terminate due to rna pol ii stalling, which could be the mechanism linking these two factors to the direction of transcription.

we have previously analyzed h3k4me <dig> and using k-means clustering verified the existence of several subgroups of promoters with distinct signals that differ significantly from the average of all genes  <cit> . in the present study we subdivided the actively transcribed genes into uni- and bidirectional genes and found that the hm signals highly differed between the groups, observing promoter-associated modifications located in essence in transcribed sequences. had the hms located there been the main force to decide transcription level there would have had to exist a specific process to place the hms on these nucleosomes prior to transcription. the molecular details of such a putative mechanism are far from clear. another alternative is that the enzymes adding the promoter-associated hms are part of the rna pol ii complex. the main force to regulate gene activity would then be the binding of tfs, which is consistent with encode data  <cit> . nevertheless, the hms are important by creating a memory in chromatin making it easier for new rounds of transcription to occur  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the hms h3k4me <dig>  h3k9ac, h3k27ac, and h3k4me <dig> were identified to be more enriched upstream of the tss in bidirectional genes compared with unidirectional genes. these observations are compatible with promoter-specific hms being deposited as a consequence of transcription, although a deeper understanding of the biological mechanisms is still needed. furthermore, binding of the tfs nelfe and taf <dig> were shown to be related to the rna pol ii signal, which differed between bi- and unidirectional genes, and a potentially new role of ctcf and cohesin in regulating the direction of transcription was found.

