BACKGROUND
the dengue virus  is classified to the flavivirus genus of the flaviviridae family, which also consists of additional human pathogenic viruses such as yellow fever , west nile , japanese encephalitis  and tick borne encephalitis , which cause potentially lethal diseases  <cit> .

denv transmission, primarily caused by infected aedes aegypti and aedes albopictus mosquitoes, has been vigorously emerging in a growing number of countries over the last decades. the infection caused by denv is widely recognized as a major public health concern, being endemic in over  <dig> countries, with 50- <dig> million infections worldwide a year, leading to half a million hospitalizations with about  <dig>  - 5% mortality rate  <cit> . despite the overall increase in dengue incidence, which turns the virus into a significant burden for the health systems of the affected countries, currently no specific antiviral treatments exist. similarly, there are no approved denv vaccines, although extensive research has been conducted in this area over the past few decades, resulting in several candidates in various stages of development  <cit> .

four different dengue serotypes widely appear in nature. these serotypes are closely related and cause very similar diseases in humans, although it was suggested that in terms of sequence similarity they are no more similar than some different species of flaviviruses  <cit> . within each serotype the genetic diversity is significantly more restricted, but still sufficient to produce distinct viral genotypes  <cit> .

the denv genome is a positive polarity single stranded rna of approximately  <dig> kb. it contains a type i cap structure, located at its 5´-end, and lacks the polyadenylation at its 3´-end. the genome is composed of  <dig> distinct functional parts: the unique coding region, and two flanking untranslated regions . the utrs contain important structural and functional elements required for viral translation and replication. during the viral life-cycle, the coding region is translated into a single precursor polyprotein, which is eventually processed co- and post-translationally by cellular and viral proteases, to produce  <dig> mature proteins  <cit> .

three dengue structural proteins, c , m , e , serve as the main parts of the virion architecture and determine many of its morphological and functional properties; other seven nonstructural proteins, ns <dig>  ns2a, ns2b, ns <dig>  ns4a, ns4b and ns <dig>  are involved as enzymes and/or other regulatory factors in different stages of the viral life cycle  <cit> 

denv and other viruses undergo a rapid evolutionary selection to evade the host immune system, and to efficiently compete with endogenous transcripts of the host cell over the gene expression machinery. mechanisms that facilitate an efficient and selective viral replication are inherent in the nucleotide composition of the viral genomic sequence itself, and can involve the recruitment and/or modification of specific host factors. non-synonymous mutations which alter the amino acid sequence provide a distinct evolutionary advantage due to selective pressure, allowing viruses to escape from innate defense mechanisms and acquired immune surveillance of the host, and to rapidly adapt to new cell types, tissues, or species. yet, genomes , both viral and of other organisms, not only code for protein products but also carry additional information encrypted in the composition of alternating codons  <cit> . being related to different biophysical and evolutionary characteristics, this information can be induced by synonymous mutations which preserve the underlying protein and may play an important regulatory role in different viral replication stages.

one specific feature of the genetic material  which is encoded in synonymous  aspects of its nucleotide composition is its structure/conformation which is formed by the molecule folding upon itself as a result of hydrogen bonds  acting between pairs of nucleotides. the number and strength of these bonds determine the minimum free folding energy , which is related to the folding strength of a structure: more negative mfe indicates possibly stronger and more stable folding, while less negative mfe corresponds to weaker and less structured conformations. extensive work has been directed to study mrna structural elements in the 5' and 3' utrs of denv genomes revealing their critical role for regulation of translation and replication in host cells  <cit> . yet, less attention so far has been paid to investigating the folding within the coding regions: previous works involving denv  <cit> , as well as other viruses  <cit>  and organisms  <cit>  have revealed some evidences for important functional secondary structures therein; however, they usually focused either on the viral untranslated regions or on very specific and limited regions at the beginning of the coding sequences, in a limited number of strains, and without considering evolutionary selection.

these and other studies suggest that besides the information determining the amino acid sequence, denv coding regions may also encode additional important signals associated with the folding strength of structural elements, which can be involved in different steps of the viral life cycle.

in the current study we present, for the first time, a comprehensive, large scale, comparative genomics analysis of denv coding regions, based on hundreds of different viral genomes from each of the four serotypes, aiming to identify significant signals encoded by synonymous information which are related to mrna folding. these signals may indicate the presence of local evolutionary conserved cis-regulatory elements possibly performing important functions in different regulatory processes via their effect on various stages of gene expression, such as translation, rna editing, rna replication, and transcript degradation, and play a crucial role in viral efficiency and fitness.

RESULTS
the different general stages of the study appear in figure  <dig> :

 <dig>  coding regions of different genomes from four denv serotypes were downloaded and aligned .

for each coding region we generated reference sets of  <dig> randomized variants that maintain some of the fundamental properties of the original sequences  as follows:

to assess accurately the statistical significance of the predicted folding energies we employed a reference model that promises that the reported results cannot be explained by the amino acid composition of the encoded proteins and/or the evolutionary, phylogenetically dependent pressure on synonymous codons along the coding regions . to this aim, we designed randomized variants  that preserved both the amino acids order of the wild type sequences and the column-wise frequencies of synonymous codons at each position along their alignment .

in addition, to make sure that the obtained folding signals were not mainly a consequence of disrupted stacking base-pairs we compared our results with a randomization model designed to maintain both the encoded protein and the distribution of frequencies of pairs of adjacent nucleotides .

local minimum free folding energy profiles  were computed for each wild-type and randomized sequence .

to identify positions along the coding regions that were possibly selected during the course of viral evolution for significantly strong/weak folding , we investigated the position-wise statistical differences between the mfe-profiles corresponding to the wild type sequences and mfe-profiles of their randomized variants . for each sequence we considered the "suspected" positions for which the mfe values were found to be lower/higher than in 5% of the corresponding randomized variants  and analyzed their tendency to maintain the folding related signals across different viral strains ; in addition the role of sequence variability in this phenomenon was investigated .

to assess the expected number of suspected positions in randomized variants we designed the following procedure, named one-versus-rest  model: in each randomized mfe-profile, the suspected folding related signals were identified by a position-wise comparison to the rest of the randomized mfe-profiles from the same wild-type origin . conceptually, the average number of randomized suspected positions  obtained in this procedure evaluates the expected number of false positive signals and therefore can serve for an empirical false discovery rate estimation.

in addition, the suspected positions identified in randomized variants  were used to obtain a null model for mfe signal conservation analysis.

here we showed that all  <dig> denv serotypes are likely to undergo an evolutionary selection on synonymous positions related to the local folding strength in numerous regions along their coding regions. we demonstrated that in these positions, mfe related signals tend to be conserved across different viral variants. by comparing with evolutionary and dinucleotide constrained background models we testified that the discovered signals are statistically significant and are not likely to be attributed to factors such as mutation bias of amino acid composition in the investigated sequences. we also showed a very low/not significant correlation between the levels of mfe related signal conservation and corresponding sequence variability values, demonstrating that conserved selection for local folding strength across different genotypes cannot be trivially explained by lowly-variable patterns in the synonymous codons and/or nucleotides preferences.

in the following sections we present a detailed analysis of our findings. a comprehensive description of the methods employed in the study can be found in the methods section.

evidence that the denv coding regions contain hundreds of positions that are likely to be selected for conserved strong or weak local folding structures. folding energy was estimated in all genomic windows of length  <dig> nt  within the coding region of each viral genome, and the resulting values were used to construct local mfe-profiles: each position in a profile contained an mfe value computed in a window starting at this position.

mfe-profile of each wild-type sequence was compared in a position-wise manner to the mfe-profiles of the corresponding evolutionary-constrained randomized variants ; positions with p-value <  <dig>  were defined as "suspected" to have significantly more/less negative mfe in comparison to random .

at the second step, aiming at distinguishing signals that are due to mutation bias from signals that undergo an evolutionary selection, we went further to identify positions along the coding region which tend to maintain mfe related signals in different viral variants. such positions may belong to the same orthologous functional elements  and could have important implications for viral fitness.

to quantify the tendency of a particular position in the coding region to maintain a conserved signal, we computed the percentage of different sequences for which at least one suspected folding related signal was identified within a  <dig> nucleotides neighborhood of this position . for convenience we termed this measure folding signal conservation index . the fsci values range between  <dig>  and  <dig> .

to assess the statistical significance of mfe signal conservation, we compared the wild-type fsci values to a reference model based on  <dig> randomized alignments in which selection conservation was computed with respect to the randomized suspected signals detected via the ovr procedure. as a result, we identified positions with a statistically significant mfe signal conservation ; those of them with conservation levels higher than  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>   were defined as positions that are likely to undergo a conserved evolutionary selection for strong / weak folding .

profiles of fsci values along the coding regions are shown in figure 2a. positions with a significantly conserved strong folding signal were found to constitute  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> different clusters in serotypes  <dig> -  <dig> correspondingly; likewise, weak local folding signal was identified as conserved in positions grouped in  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> clusters. each cluster was comprised of positions with significantly conserved mfe related signals predicted in intersecting  <dig> nt genomic windows ; these positions could be possibly attributed to the same or partially-overlapping folding elements. analysis of enrichment of specific denv genes with clusters of positions with a significant conservation of folding energy signals and distribution of these clusters over different genes can be found in additional file  <dig> 

the resulting conservation levels were found to be spread over a wide range of values; specifically 20%-90% of mfe-selected positions  possessed fsci values greater than  <dig>  ; in 2%-7% of mfe-selected positions the conservation levels where higher than  <dig>  .

the total amounts of mfe-selected positions in all serotypes were found to be significantly higher  than those obtained in the randomized variants . moreover, as was stated above, the maximal fsci value achieved in random is  <dig> - <dig>  while in wild-type 35%-100% of mfe-selected positions possessed higher conservation levels .

finally, to estimate the robustness of our results with respect to the folding window size we calculated the mfe-selected positions basing on sliding windows twice as large as initially . as a result, we found that as many as 80%, 77%, 90%, 92% of significantly conserved signals related to strong folding and 80%, 82%, 85%, 80% of significantly conserved signals related to weak folding  overlapped with conserved signals identified with respect to  <dig> nt folding window size , and this overlap was found to be on average  <dig>  -  <dig> folds higher than in random which was based on conservation levels  in  <dig> randomized alignments .

conserved selection for strong / weak folding related signals cannot be explained basing only on dinucleotide composition. arguably, the dinucleotide content is important when assessing the predicted free energy of rna secondary structures  <cit> . in particular, it was suggested that disruption of naturally occurring biases in dinucleotide frequencies in genomic sequences of different organisms have been common sources of erroneous conclusions in previous studies  <cit> . to make sure that the presence of excess local secondary structure in coding regions of mrna is not merely an artifact resulting from the failure to control for dinucleotide composition we verified the robustness of our findings by analyzing a dinucleotide-constrained randomization model controlling for the distribution of dinucleotide frequencies .

we found that as many as 60%, 52%, 49%, 34% of positions with significantly conserved signals related to strong folding and 62%, 58%, 43%, 44% of positions possessing weak folding signal conservation  overlapped with mfe conserved signals identified with respect to dinucleotide-preserving randomization model , and this overlap was not likely to appear in random .

this result is further supporting the conjecture that dinucleotides alone cannot explain the majority of obtained mfe signals identified with respect to the evolutionary-constrained model, and thus at least some of them undergo a conserved evolutionary selection for strong/weak folding and are not just artifacts of disrupting natural occurring biases in pairs of adjacent nucleotides.

the regions with significantly conserved strong / weak folding signals cannot be explained based only on sequence conservation. although the nature of the evolutionary-constrained model excludes the possibility of significant mfe signal conservation in regions with a low sequence variability across different viral variants  we decided to additionally explore the plausibility that conservation of folding signals may be a 'side effect' of a conserved nucleotides composition or a preference for specific synonymous codons .

to this aim we quantified the variability among different sequences along the coding region, once with respect to a preference for synonymous codons and once with respect to nucleotides content, by considering an entropy based measure in each position in the coding region ; this measure returns a value which ranges between  <dig>  and  <dig> .

to assess the relationship between the conservation levels of mfe related signals and sequence variability therein, we calculated spearman correlations between: 1) the signal conservation profiles and 2) the nucleotide / synonymous variability profiles constructed by locally averaging the corresponding variability values in all 44nt genomic intervals ; we also calculated, in a similar manner, the correlations between 1) the signal conservation profiles and 2) the variability profiles which were normalized with respect to their randomized variants  to obtain z-score values .

we found that the correlation between the mfe signal conservation, and nucleotide and synonymous variability / z-score normalized variability is too low to conclude that regions with lower variability tend to have higher tendency for mfe signal conservation. specifically the correlation values were found to be confined in a narrow  interval around zero for different types of variability profiles ; i.e. less than 10% of the variance in signal conservation variable can be explained by the variability values.

these results support the conjecture that the conservation of mfe related signals is not necessarily and only due to a preference of specific synonymous codons or conserved nucleotide content, and cannot be solely explained by the low sequence variability, thus supporting the evidence for a direct, conserved selection on positions for strong / weak folding.

discussion
in this study, we analyzed the coding sequences of  <dig>  genomes in four different denv serotypes in order to identify regions that are selected for strong or weak mrna folding, and thus are possibly involved in the regulation of different stages of the viral replication cycle.

we suggested that positions along the coding region with a significant conservation of folding associated signals are grouped in  <dig> -  <dig> clusters related to partially overlapping local genomic regions that may tend to undergo an evolutionary selection for a strong or weak folding. in addition, in certain cases up to 7% of these positions were found to be conserved in more than 90% of the sequences.

we showed that positions with significantly conserved strong/weak folding signals are not likely to appear in random, thus suggesting that they were possibly selected in the course of viral evolution to fulfill certain biological functions. we also demonstrated that the identified folding signals overlap significantly with signals obtained by doubling the sliding window supporting the conjecture that the results presented in this study are robust to the size of local genomic regions in which the minimum free folding energy is predicted.

the statistical significance of the selection for strong/weak folding was tested with respect to an evolutionary constrained null model that maintains the mutational bias and protein content of the viruses; in addition the possibility that the obtained signals were mostly due to disruption of naturally occurring biases in pairs of adjacent nucleotides was rejected by a comparison to the dinucleotide-constrained randomizations. both randomization models were designed to preserve the essential organizational principles of genomic sequences including certain non-random features and naturally occurring biases. it should be noticed that these 'non-random' properties of the randomization models does not contradict the fact that the corresponding randomized sequences may have strong/weak folding in some arbitrary regions; however, these false positive signals are expected to be filtered out in signal conservation analysis described above.

finally, we found no significant correlation between the levels of sequences variability and the levels of conservation of mfe signals, supporting the conjecture that positions with a conserved selection for strong/weak folding may be related directly to biophysical attributes of gene expression regulation and/or viral replication via folding. this result also means that the reported conserved mfe related signals are not necessarily a consequence of other  constraints imposed on specific sequence patterns, and/or formation of particular secondary structures. nevertheless, we would like to emphasize that the analyses performed in this study neither cannot eliminate all alternative explanations for the emergence of the reported folding signals other than a direct evolutionary selection nor they are enough for a full understanding of the possible functional/evolutional properties of the folding strength along the viral mrna. to this goal additional biological validations are required.

it is important to note that in our analysis we didn't require the preservation of the structure architecture itself, but analyzed a preference for folding strength while permitting unconstrained variability in the underlying secondary structure . this approach was motivated by the fact that often the level of mfe embodied in the element, rather than the specific structure itself, plays a significant role in the viral life cycle. this assumption is based on previous studies that have demonstrated that the local folding along the mrna affects various aspects of gene expression; specifically, it was suggested that in certain contexts and positions along the transcript, both strong and weak mrna folding can have positive effect on gene expression and organismal fitness  <cit> . research on the conservation of specific rna structures is deferred to future studies.

rather than performing a global analysis of the entire mrna , we predicted the folding energies in local windows along the genome. this approach was motivated by several considerations. to date, it is believed that the structured rna elements identified as being involved in different regulatory processes are often discrete, and usually involve short-range watson-crick base-pairing which span no more than 100nt  <cit> . such local structures are more likely to be formed in vivo in actively translating mrnas. furthermore, in a cell, most rna molecules, and in particular messenger rnas, interact with a wide variety of proteins, further limiting the predictability of long-range effects  <cit> . moreover, there are specific cases of long range rna-rna interactions in dengue  <cit> ; however, usually the interactions between the rna, and the replication and translation machinery are expected to prevent 'long range' rna folding , but still enable generating local mrna structures.

from the computational perspective, current folding prediction algorithms provide meaningful predictions from small-medium scale sequences, while long sequences suffer from a degrading accuracy  <cit> . thus, in our opinion, the local folding framework, advocated both by computational and biophysical reasoning, enables a more accurate modeling of the dynamic, location dependent nature, of in vivo structure formations, while minimizing unfavorable computational inaccuracies and biases.

in contrast to previous works  which provided evidence for existence of rna structures throughout  genomic fragments, our local approach also enables a high resolution identification of positions selected for strong/weak folding energy. moreover, our comprehensive statistical analysis based on a carefully chosen randomization model discussed above, enables to target evolutionary selected regions where the selected positions are significantly conserved across different viral strains.

as we have already noticed before, previous studies have discovered several structural elements at the 5' end of the capsid gene  and proposed that they take part in replication and translation regulation  <cit> . it is important to emphasize that since the underlying sequences are relatively conserved these regions were not detected by the proposed evolutionary-constrained randomization since in this case permutation of lowly-variable columns doesn't produce enough variability in randomized variants. nevertheless, this fact doesn't derogate from the ability to identify many additional/novel folding elements with a variable underlying sequence suggested to be under selection related directly to their possibly functional mrna folding.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we presented a large scale comparative genomic analysis based on hundreds of viral variants in each one four different denv serotypes. we suggested that positions along the coding region with a significant conservation of folding associated signals are grouped in  <dig> -  <dig> clusters related to partially overlapping local genomic regions that may tend to undergo an evolutionary selection for a strong or weak folding. we showed that the reported signals of conserved mfe selection cannot be explained basing on amino-acid, dinucleotide, or mutational bias only and are not necessarily a consequence of other  constraints imposed on specific sequence patterns, and/or formation of particular secondary structures. we believe that further molecular biology studies guided by the computationally predicted positions may promote discoveries of novel regulatory mechanisms of the denv and other viruses; some of them may help developing new vaccination strategies.

