BACKGROUND
since key biological processes such as antigen-antibody recognition, hormone-receptor binding and signal transduction are regulated through association and dissociation of proteins, characterizing the physico-chemical properties of protein-protein interactions has always been a primary aim of molecular biology. several studies have systematically addressed protein-protein interactions and their applications ranging from rational drug design to structure prediction of multimeric complexes  <cit> . among these  <cit>  some focused on the complementarity of chemical and structural features  at the binding interface as major contributors to intersubunit interactions. typically, these can be well characterized by using a single reference configuration for the interacting subunits, that is, by treating them as if they were rigid molecules. in recent years, thanks to the increasing availability of computational resources and more refined theoretical models, it has been possible to systematically investigate the role of a complementary physical effect, namely the internal dynamics of the interacting subunits. a number of studies  <cit>  have shown that even in the absence of the partner subunits, the dynamical properties of amino acids at the known interface region can differ from those of other amino acids at the protein surface. although the results have been established in a limited number of contexts they may point to a general mechanism, namely that protein regions that are capable of binding a specific partner could present not only specific shape and chemical composition but also a specific fluctuation dynamics in the free form.

this effect would represent a non-trivial generalization of the mechanism recently proposed by aden et al.  <cit>  according to which the internal dynamics of certain enzymes is innately predisposed to assist, even in the absence of the substrate to be processed, the conformational changes required by the enzymatic catalysis, such as the formation of a transition-state structure  <cit> . in several single-molecule experiments and in computational studies various enzymes in the apo form have been shown to be capable of interconverting between the rest and catalytically-competent conformations  <cit> . this view presents an alternative to the induced-fit mechanism, where it is the tight interaction of the partners that profoundly modifies the free-energy profiles thus triggering the conformational change between the competing biologically-relevant conformations.

recent studies have shown that comparisons of salient aspects of the internal dynamics in different proteins can be profitably used to pinpoint key common aspects  that could be more elusive to structure-based analysis  <cit> . it appears natural to carry out a similar analysis also in the context of protein-protein complexes. in particular, it is envisaged that a systematic investigation and comparison of the salient dynamical properties across different types of protein assemblies could highlight traits that depend on fundamental properties of the complexed monomers or their binding interface. an ideal context for undertaking such investigation is offered by the database of representative protein interfaces recently assembled by keskin et al.  <cit> . this study considered all the interfaces between pairs of protein chains in available pdb entries. after removal of sequence redundancy all complexes with structurally-similar interfaces were grouped in the same cluster. each cluster was assigned to one of three main types of interfaces  <cit> . type i gathers clusters whose members are structurally similar not only at the interface, but over the entire interacting units. type ii includes clusters whose members are only similar at the interface region ; the members of these groups have a different overall structural organization. finally, type iii groups are characterized by the fact that their members share only one side of the interface region . it was observed that parent proteins of members of the same type i cluster belong to the same functional family, while parent proteins of members of the same type ii or iii cluster may belong to different functional families  <cit> . the set contained both obligate and non-obligate complexes. in the former case the monomers taking part to the complex are not stable on their own; in the latter case they are stable also in the free form.

in the present computational/theoretical investigation, the above-mentioned classification scheme is used to understand whether the three main types of interfaces are characterized by different properties of their fluctuation dynamics in thermal equilibrium. the latter is computed by means of a phenomenological elastic network model   <cit> . enms are known to be capable of identifying reliably, at a negligible computational cost, the collective low-energy modes controlling the structural fluctuations around a given protein conformation. therefore they are well suited to the present context where  <dig> complexes are considered. the large number of instances make, in fact, impractical the use of other approaches based on atomistic interaction potentials such as molecular dynamics.

in our enm analysis we have evaluated the mobility of the amino acids in the proteins of our dataset, particularly of those taking part to the dimeric interfaces. the mobility of the semi-interfaces is examined both in the bound form  and in the unbound one, corresponding to the structurally-quenched monomer resulting from the "in silico" splitting of the complex. for non-obligate interfaces, the unbound form is generally a viable structural proxy for the free form, while this is not true for obligate-complexes due to the instability of the individual monomers. in consideration of this fact, the comparison of the properties of the bound and unbound forms cannot be used to shed light on the process of dimer formation. it is used, instead, to understand the extent to which the mobility at a dimeric interface reflects the intrinsic, innate, mobility of the two semi-interfaces, or results from their mutual structural-dynamical interplay.

the first element provided by our investigation is that the overall mobility at the bound semi-interface is lower than other surface regions. this fact is in accord with previous findings  <cit> . the comparison of bound and unbound forms further indicated that the degree to which the mobility of amino acids at a dimer semi-interface is affected by the bound partner monomer depends on the interface type. specifically, significant bound/unbound mobility differences are seen for obligate, large and/or structurally-specific interfaces, while non-appreciable differences are found for non-obligate, medium-sized and/or unspecific interfaces.

the results suggest that, depending on the interface types, partner semi-interfaces have a different impact on restraining and shaping the dimeric interfacial mobility. this, in turn, should reflect a different interplay of enthalpy and conformational entropy in the increase of free energy upon separation of the structurally-quenched monomers.

RESULTS
hereafter we shall provide a detailed characterization of the equilibrium fluctuation dynamics of a representative set of dimeric protein complexes. the section has three parts. the first illustrates the criteria used to select the representative protein-protein complexes. in the second part the salient structural traits of the complexes and their interfacial regions are discussed. finally we conclude with a detailed discussion of the fluctuation dynamics of the interfaces focusing on the differences across the three main classes.

selection of protein-protein complexes
the dataset, covering diverse dimeric interfaces was created starting from the comprehensive list of known protein-protein interfaces  <cit> . this set was obtained by  parsing the complete set of pairs of contacting protein chains contained in all pdb entries,  selecting the pairs of chains with a sizable binding region and  clustering their interfaces on the basis of structural similarity. each cluster was assigned to one of three main types of interfaces described in the introduction.

for the purpose of the present study, we need to select a set of representatives of the various interface clusters. the comprehensive dataset of keskin et al. was culled on the basis of two criteria. first, considerations are restricted to dimeric protein interfaces. next, we considered only dimers whose internal fluctuation dynamics is expected to be adequately captured by elastic network models . because these computationally-effective models are appropriate for characterizing the equilibrium fluctuation dynamics of compact globular proteins, we restricted our considerations to dimers without long exposed loops or termini as their diffusive motion would not be adequately captured by the elastic network approach . finally, to limit the structural redundancy, each cluster was represented by a single entry, the first one provided by the study of ref.  <cit> .

the application of these selection criteria resulted in the dataset of  <dig> dimers reported in table  <dig>  eight dimers have an interface classified as type i, six have an interface of type ii and eight have a type iii interface.

for each protein complex investigated in this work it is given: the pdb id; the chains that form the considered interface; the classification, according to prism http://prism.ccbb.ku.edu.tr/prism/; the number of amino acids for the first and second chain listed, and the total number; the size of the interface in Å <dig> and in number of amino acids involved; the number of interface amino acids in the first and second chain; the classification of the interface into biological obligate, biological non-obligate or non-biological, according to noxclass  <cit> .

this classification scheme is complemented by consideration of whether a given protein-protein complex has a genuine biological origin or if it is the artifactual result of crystal packing in the x-ray resolved structure. the obligatory or non-obligatory character of the biological complexes was further considered, see table  <dig>  overall there are: fourteen obligate interfaces ; six non-obligate interfaces ; and two non-biological interfaces . most dimers in table  <dig> are, therefore, obligate complexes. in general, the subunits of a dimer have different structures in the bound and in free forms. for non-obligate interfaces, the bound-free conformational rearrangements are typically modest and are mostly localized at the interface region  <cit> . for obligate complexes, however, the changes are expected to be dramatic  <cit> . obligate complexes often involve intrinsically disordered proteins, which are folded in the presence of the binding partner, but do not have a unique three dimensional structure in the isolated, free state. as anticipated in the introduction, to treat on an equal footing the cases of obligate and non-obligate interfaces we shall base our considerations exclusively on the bound and unbound monomeric forms.

structural properties of dimers and their interfaces
before considering the dynamical properties of the representative dimers, we discuss several  aspects.

 protein length: as readily seen in table  <dig>  the dataset covers a wide range of lengths, from  <dig>  to  <dig> amino acids for oxidoreductase . most of the largest complexes have type i interfaces. five of the seven complexes which have monomers comprising more than  <dig> residues are of type i, one is of type ii and one of type iii. this property is readily perceived in figure 1a, which provides a histogram of the sizes of the first chain in table  <dig> for each complex.

 interface area: the interface area was computed following the standard procedures described in the methods section. similar to the case of dimers length, the interface lengths span a wide range of values : from  <dig> amino acids  of the cell adhesion protein  to  <dig> amino acids  of chlorophyll biosynthesis . the largest interfaces are of type i. seven of the eight interfaces of type i are larger than 3000Å <dig>  by comparison, interfaces of type ii and iii are appreciably smaller, with areas in the 1400Å <dig> - 1900Å <dig> range, which is typical for medium size interfaces  <cit> .

inspection of table  <dig> indicates that the largest interfaces pertain to large complexes. while this may be expected, for medium-sized interfaces there is no simple correlation between dimer size and interface size. for instance the leucine zipper , which is a dimer of  <dig> amino acids, has an interface of 1565Å <dig>  which is larger than the interface of chemokine , a complex of  <dig> amino acids.

 secondary structure: the relative secondary content, subdivided according to the three types of interfaces are reported in figure  <dig>  more than 50% of the amino acids of dimers with type ii interfaces belong to helical secondary motifs, while the percentage decreases slightly to 40% for type i and iii cases. the fraction of amino acids in coils is close to 40% for the complexes of the three types, and the fraction of amino acids in strands is smaller than 20%. in the semi-interfaces, there is an increase of helical content; more than 70% of the amino acids are in helical conformation for type ii entries, while for type i and iii the percentage is about 50%, with a related decrease in coil and strand content. despite the reduced size of the representative set of dimeric entries, the overall secondary structure-content is compatible with the one found over the entire dataset of dimers considered in ref.  <cit> .

dynamical properties of the dimers and their interfaces
the overall fluctuation dynamics of the amino acids at the dimeric interfaces was investigated with a twofold aim. first, the mobility of amino acids at the dimeric interface was compared with the mobility of other amino acids at the protein surface. the dynamical properties of amino acids at the known dimeric interfaces were next analyzed to ascertain which salient features  impact the fluctuation dynamics of the interface region.

mobility of the interfacial amino acids
the mobility of the amino acids was studied using an elastic network model  <cit>  which relies on a quadratic approximation for the near-native free energy landscape. specifically, suitable quadratic  penalties are used for the displacement of amino acids from their positions in the reference crystallographic structure. the quadratic approximation of the free energy has been shown to be adequate for capturing the salient features of the internal dynamics of globular proteins  <cit> . the specific elastic network employed here  is the β-gaussian network model  <cit>  which adopts a two-centroid description for amino acid mobility  and that has been previously validated, for several globular proteins, against extensive molecular dynamics simulations  <cit> .

it is important to point out that the characterization of the mobility of amino acids in a protein implicitly depends on the prior subtraction of the underlying "rigid-body" motion  of the molecular system. almost invariably, the elimination of the rigid-body motion is carried out by minimizing the average mean-square displacement of all amino acids. in such a case, the center of mass of the entire protein  of interest remains fixed in space. for multimeric or multidomain proteins this choice is not necessarily appropriate, as an appreciable relative motion of the protein dynamical domains  <cit>  can lead to artifactual results  <cit> .

in the present context, where protein dimers are considered, there are two possible natural choices for how to remove the rigid-body motion, according to whether one is interested in characterizing the fluctuation dynamics of the entire complex, or of only one subunit . the former choice corresponds to the standard procedure of minimizing the mean-square displacements of the entire complex. in the second case the minimization is carried out over only one of the monomeric subunits.

the latter choice will be adopted hereafter  as it practically amounts to following the fluctuation dynamics of the subunit of interest in its "relative reference frame" through the removal of the overall rotations and translations of the cα trace of the subunit . the scheme is appropriate in view of the comparisons that will be carried out between the bound/unbound forms of the dimers. for subunits in the bound state, the amino acid mobility will be calculated by taking into account, through a thermodynamic averaging procedure , the interaction with the partner monomer.

because of the symmetry of the interfaces of type i and ii dimers, the choice of which of the two subunit is considered is immaterial. this is not the case for dimers with type iii interfaces, where only one side of the interface, by convention the one belonging to the first chain reported in table  <dig>  is shared by members of the same cluster. we will therefore systematically use the first chain reported in table  <dig> to define the "subunit frame of reference" for all our dimers.

we first compared the mobility of residues in the bound semi-interface of interest against the mobility of other surface residues. considering all proteins in our dataset, the total number of residues in the monomeric units is  <dig>  according to standard criteria based on solvent accessibility , ~21% of such amino acids are at the semi-interface while ~57% of them are surface but not interface residues. considering the solvent-exposed surface of the unbound forms most of the residues at the semi-interface  would be classified as surface amino acids. the normalized distribution of the root mean square fluctuations  of residues at the semi-interface and that of surface residues which are not at the semi-interfaces are shown in figure  <dig>  in the units of the elastic network model, the average rmsf values of the two distributions are  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, while the distributions spreads  are  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. consistently with intuitive expectations, the data indicate that residues at a semi-interface are, on average, less mobile than residues in non-interfacial surface regions. more quantitatively, the fraction of residues with rmsf lower than  <dig>  a value indicative of an intermediate mobility, is ~60% for semi-interface residues, and ~44% for surface  residues.

considering the rmsf distribution separately for dimers with interface types i, ii and iii  interface residues are, on average, appreciably less mobile than surface residues for types i and iii entries, but not for type ii ones. the distribution of the rmsf is sharper for obligate complexes than for non-obligate ones .

factors affecting the mobility of interfacial amino acids
a priori, the reduced mobility of amino acids at the bound semi-interfaces compared to other surface regions, could be ascribed to two main factors:  the intrinsic structural architecture of the individual monomeric unit  and/or  the contact interactions with the partner monomer, which acts as a mobility-limiting constraint for the semi-interface.

the interplay of these two factors was considered earlier with regard to the mobility of free and bound forms of monomeric units  <cit> . as noted above, the bound form can be appropriately taken as a proxy for the free form for non-obligate interfaces. several of the interfaces considered here are, however, obligate, implying that a well-structured free form of the monomer may not necessarily exist. nonetheless, even without reference to the free form, several key aspects of the interplay between  and  can be elucidated based on considerations of only bound and unbound forms.

considerable insight can be gained by using an elastic network model to study the fluctuation dynamics of the monomer of interest and comparing the behavior when the partner monomer is present and when it is absent. if a realistic force-field were employed to study the dynamics of obligate dimers, the removal of the partner monomer would lead to a loss of structural organization of the subunit of interest; this is because the isolated monomer would not correspond to a minimum of the free energy. instead, by resorting to an elastic network model , it is possible to study the "intrinsic" fluctuation dynamics of the subunit of interest because the enm approach amounts to introducing a model free energy that, by construction, has a minimum in the input reference, unbound, structure.

in brief, the relative role of factors  and  can be ascertained by an enm calculation of the fluctuation dynamics of the monomer of interest either in the absence of the partner monomer or in its presence. in the latter case, a suitable thermodynamic integration of the degrees of freedom of the partner monomer needs to be carried out . in can be anticipated that three possible scenarios can emerge from the comparison:  the fluctuations of the semi-interface residues are small both in the bound and in the unbound forms;  the fluctuations of the semi-interface residues are small in the bound form and large in the unbound one;  the fluctuations of the semi-interface residues are large both for the bound and the unbound forms. since the partner monomer acts as a constraint for the mobility of the monomeric semi-interface, the fourth case, where the semi-interface is more mobile in the bound than the unbound form cannot occur.

case  would indicate that factor , i.e. the structural architecture of the monomer, has the dominant influence on the mobility  of the residues. in contrast, in case  the main player would be factor , i.e. the constraints due to the interaction with the partner monomer. case  is subtler as it would indicate that neither factors  and  are responsible for the observed diminished mobility of the semi-interface residues, compared to other surface amino acids. it would be particularly interesting to observe that semi-interface fluctuations in the bound and unbound forms were similar, as this would indicate that the binding partner has an interface organized in a way that modestly interferes with the "innate", intrinsic, fluctuation dynamics of the monomer of interest.

the scatter plots in figure  <dig> illustrate the changes in mobility going from the unbound  to the bound form  for the residues at the first semi-interface of the studied complexes. residues of interfaces of type i, ii and iii are respectively colored in pink, green and blue in panel  of figure  <dig>  in panel b of the same figure, residues from obligate and non-obligate complexes are respectively colored in red and blue. in these graphs, amino acids of dimers for which scenario  is applicable would appear in proximity of the origin. for scenario  the entries would mostly distribute along the x axis while for scenario  they would occupy the region of space y <x. in the notable case where the partner does not inuence the intrinsic uctuations of the first monomer, the entries would be distributed along the line y = x.

finally, we consider the secondary-structure content of the semi-interfaces and its correlation with the three types of scenarios. to address this point, the data of figure  <dig> have been reproduced in figure  <dig> using a color scheme depending on the secondary structure to which each amino acid belongs. the plot for type i, see panel , indicates that the highest "unrestricted" fluctuation is for interface residues belonging to loops and beta strands. these amino acids experience the largest variation in the fluctuation due to the influence of the partner monomer. in the plot for type ii, see panel , the interface residues are mainly in alpha-helices . in the plot for type iii, see panel , most of the more fluctuating residues are alpha-helices.

discussion
the extent to which the mobility of interfacial amino acids changes from the unbound to the bound forms differs across the three main classes of interfaces  <cit> . for large interfaces of type i the interaction of the partner causes an appreciable loss of mobility compared to the unbound case. however, this intuitive result does not extend to the case of type ii interfaces of medium size. for the latter, interface residues remain mobile even in presence of the partner monomer. an attempt to rationalize these observations can be made by considering the interplay between enthalpic and entropic effects on the stability of protein dimers. it is known that entropy plays a fundamental role in the binding processes, and several studies have shown that the entropy associated with the structural fluctuations or vibrations makes a substantial contribution to the association free energy of a complex  <cit> . the precise calculation of this entropy is a challenging task even for non-obligate complexes, and therefore it is beyond the scope of the present study to attempt a quantitative estimate of this contribution to the formation or dissociation of the  complexes considered here. nevertheless, the following considerations can provide a heuristic interpretative framework for the obtained results. a decreased mobility of interface residues in the presence of the monomeric partner expectedly indicates that the partner unit provides a significant limitation to the conformational space of the semi-interface. this suggests that the dimer is likely stabilized by the formation of enthalpically-favorable inter-monomeric interactions. without such favorable interactions it would become entropically favorable for the monomers to separate as each semi-interface would acquire appreciable structural fluctuations.

this hypothesis is consistent with the different behavior observed for large versus small interfaces. in fact, a large interaction surface can more easily lead to a large enthalpy gain and can compensate for these entropic effects. instead, the absence of a significant loss of interface mobility between the bound and unbound forms suggests that a smaller enthalpic gain is required to stabilize the dimer. in accord with this and previous observations we notice that dimeric interfaces to which this applies are either small or at most medium-sized and, furthermore, include non-specific interfaces which are more versatile in binding different partners.

furthermore, if the residues at the semi-interface have an intrinsically-low mobility then binding will not appreciably modify the fluctuation amplitude of the semi-interface. in this case, the entropic change going from the bound to unbound forms would consequently be small and would not need to be compensated by a large enthalpic gain. this would explain why this specific behavior was found across the different interface types, including medium-sized and non-specific ones .

analogous considerations would then suggest that this hypothesis should hold for semi-interfaces whose mobility is largely unaffected by the presence of the partner monomer. this behavior could reflect a well-tuned steric and dynamical complementarity of the interacting semi-interfaces. this possibility is reinforced by the fact that this behavior is frequently observed for dimers with type ii interfaces, where both semi-interfaces are specific , and much less frequently for the less specific type iii entries, where only one side is conserved.

CONCLUSIONS
a dataset of  <dig> representative dimeric protein complexes, covering the three known main types of interfaces  <cit> , was characterized to highlight and compare the salient structural and dynamical properties of the dimers.

in particular, an elastic network model was used to characterize the intrinsic fluctuation dynamics of the dimers and their constitutive monomeric units. the analysis of the degree of mobility of the amino acids for the bound monomer indicated that the regions taking part in dimeric semi-interfaces have, on average, a reduced dynamical mobility compared to other regions at the surface, consistently with previous studies  <cit> . this result poses the question of whether the limited mobility reflects an intrinsic property of the semi-interface mobility or if it is due to the presence of the partner semi-interface.

to address this point we proceeded according to a two-tier scheme, where the fluctuation dynamics was computed for unbound monomers, thereby highlighting dynamical features that exclusively depend on the individual monomeric unit, and for the bound forms. by comparing the change in interfacial mobility going from bound to unbound forms, major differences were observed across the three known main types of interfaces. in particular, interface residues of obligate dimers and of complexes with type i interfaces  display the largest decrease in mobility of the semi-interface regions when the partner monomer is present. on the basis of the obtained results it can be hypothesized that the above-mentioned complexes are stabilized by more favorable enthalpic contributions compared to non-obligate and type ii or iii instances.

indeed, for several complexes with type ii interfaces , the mobility of amino acids at the complex semi-interface is mostly unchanged going from the unbound to bound forms. it is indicative that the chemical and structural complementarity  <cit>  of the two-semi-interfaces is accompanied by a well-tuned mobility and dynamical complementarity  <cit> .

the results provide a valuable starting point for a future, more extensive characterization of the interplay of enthalpy and configurational entropy in the stabilization of dimeric complexes in dependence of their size and obligate/non-obligate nature. in addition, the discriminant mobility criteria identified in this study ought to be useful for the a priori characterization and classification of novel types of dimeric complexes.

