BACKGROUND
cardiac and skeletal muscles are both striated muscles composed of repeated units called sarcomeres, crossed with a regular pattern of fine red and white lines giving the muscles their distinctive striated appearance and their name. the cells are rich in mitochondria and contain to a large extent myosin and actin proteins, signifying different regions of the sarcomeres. while skeletal muscle consists of parallel linear fibers, the cardiac muscle cells  are arranged in fibers exhibiting cross-striations formed by alternating segments of thick and thin protein filaments. for rhythmical and synchronized contraction, cardiomyocytes form a functional syncytium via intercalated discs, where the membranes of adjacent cells are situated closely together. intercalated discs are unique for the heart and visible as clearly distinguishable bands between cardiomyocytes. in addition to muscle fibers and vasculature, the heart also includes streaks of connective tissue and cuffs of adipose tissue surrounding the smaller vessels. skeletal muscles consist of large multinucleated myocytes called syncytia, formed during development via fusion of myotubes. there are two main muscle fiber types  depending on the dominant type of myosin present. skeletal muscles are attached to bone and contract voluntarily  as opposed to cardiac muscle and smooth muscle. in addition to the muscle fibers, skeletal muscle samples also contain streaks of adipose tissue and connective tissue with fibroblasts. skeletal muscle is highly vascularized with a fine network of capillary endothelial cells running in between the fibers.

detailed knowledge of the molecular constituents of striated muscles under normal conditions is essential to understand the cellular interactions in health and disease. thus far, several transcriptomics signatures on diseased hearts have been performed, primarily using animal models or human serum . these studies have provided important insights into disease pathogenesis and drug development, however, until date, no detailed characterization of the transcriptome and proteome in normal human striated muscle tissues has been performed using a genome-wide analysis of both the transcripts and the corresponding protein profiles. in addition, no comprehensive study has yet been performed to compare the cardiac and skeletal muscle to identify both unique and shared proteins involved in muscle biology.

here, we generated next generation sequencing  data for skeletal muscle tissue and performed an extended analysis based on the rna-seq data of  <dig> different tissues involving  <dig> samples, including four and five individual samples from cardiac and skeletal muscle, respectively. this approach has been used for identifying a comprehensive list of several hundred genes elevated in striated muscles as compared to other analyzed tissues, representing all major organs in the human body. subsequently, an antibody-based approach using tissue microarrays and immunohistochemistry was used to localize the elevated proteins to different subcompartments of heart and skeletal muscle on a single cell level.

RESULTS
the transcriptomic analysis
a transcriptomic analysis was performed using deep sequencing  on five skeletal muscle samples. these were compared with our previously reported transcriptomic analysis on  <dig> fresh frozen tissue types including four heart muscle samples  <cit> . this resulted in altogether  <dig> samples corresponding to  <dig> tissue types. the normalized mrna abundance was calculated as fpkm-values with a cutoff of fpkm =  <dig>  roughly corresponding to one mrna molecule per average cell in the sample  <cit> . the most abundant genes in muscle tissues were mitochondrial genes expressed in all tissue types, with the highest mrna abundance  observed by the mitochondrial gene mt-co <dig> in cardiac muscle. an analysis of the global expression profiles using hierarchical clustering and a correlation heat map from all the  <dig> tissue samples are displayed in fig.  <dig>  the heat map shows pairwise correlations between the  <dig> tissue types based on mrna expression levels of all  <dig>  genes. testis and brain were identified as outliers, while a clear connectivity and similarities in global expression was observed between samples from the gi-tract, the hematopoietic tissues, as well as the two striated muscle tissues, respectively. cardiac and skeletal muscle showed highest correlations with one another as compared to other tissue types.fig.  <dig> hierarchical clustering of human tissues. the relationship between the  <dig> tissue samples corresponding to  <dig> different tissues, based on pairwise spearman correlations



the variance between muscle samples from different individuals was analyzed by pairwise correlations of the expression level of all protein coding genes . a spearman correlation of  <dig>  was observed between cardiac muscle samples from two different individuals , while corresponding correlation for the skeletal muscle samples was also  <dig>  . the correlation between average values from the two striated muscles was somewhat lower , but still at a high value . low inter-individual variations in the genome-wide expression patterns across muscle samples indicate both high technical reproducibility and low biological variance. pairwise comparisons between muscle tissues and other tissue types showed, as expected, higher variance. the lowest correlation was found between skeletal muscle and testis , while a somewhat surprisingly high correlation  was observed between heart muscle and adipose tissue , as well as skeletal muscle and adipose tissue . the similarity of global expression between adipose tissue and the striated muscle is interesting and should be explored further.fig.  <dig> sample correlations and classification of all human protein coding genes. scatter plots of fpkm values for all detected genes in a two cardiac muscle samples, b two skeletal muscle samples, c cardiac muscle and skeletal muscle d and cardiac muscle and adipose tissue. e pie chart showing the classification of all genes in cardiac muscle, based on transcript abundance and number of tissues with expression. f pie chart showing the distribution of the expressed mrna molecules in cardiac muscle. g pie chart showing the classification of all genes in skeletal muscle. h pie chart showing the distribution of expressed mrna molecules in skeletal muscle



the cardiac muscle transcriptome
data from the transcriptomics analysis across  <dig> tissue types was used for categorization of all the protein-coding genes  into various classes of tissue-specific expression. figure 2e shows the classification for heart muscle. altogether 64 % of the genes were expressed in the heart, with the largest class of genes  representing “housekeeping genes” expressed in all tissues, out of which  <dig> genes encoded mitochondrial proteins. only  <dig> genes were defined as elevated in heart as compared to the other tissues , including genes enriched in a group of tissues. the  <dig> genes elevated in heart were classified into three subcategories as defined in table  <dig>  with  <dig> tissue enriched genes,  <dig> group enriched genes and  <dig> tissue enhanced genes. a go-analysis of these genes indicated an over-representation of genes related to contraction , ion transport , regulation of membrane potential  and actomyosin structure organization .table  <dig> the genes with elevated expression in cardiac and/or skeletal muscle



of the  <dig> genes elevated in cardiac muscle,  <dig> genes were differentially expressed between the two auricular samples and the two ventricle samples , based on mean values and a threshold of at least a five-fold difference in fpkm values. twenty-one genes showed a higher average expression in the ventricle samples as compared to the auricle samples, while  <dig> genes were higher expressed in the auricle samples as compared to the ventricle samples. a majority of the differentially expressed genes encode proteins associated with developmental processes or regulatory functions such as control of blood volume, blood pressure, heart rate and response to cardiac overload. the list also includes several genes with unknown or only partly characterized functions in cardiac muscle.

an analysis of the expression levels of each gene made it possible to calculate the relative mrna pool in heart for each category. the analysis  showed that 32 % of the mrna molecules present in heart correspond to mitochondrial proteins and only 14 % of the mrna pool represents genes elevated in heart. thus, a large fraction of the transcriptional activity in the heart relates to generation of energy with almost one third of the transcripts encoding proteins implicated in energy metabolism.

the skeletal muscle transcriptome
figure 2g shows the classification for skeletal muscle. altogether 55 % of the genes were expressed in skeletal muscle, with  <dig> “housekeeping genes”. only  <dig> genes  were defined as elevated in skeletal muscle as compared to other tissues, including  <dig> tissue enriched genes,  <dig> group enriched genes and  <dig> tissue enhanced genes. a go-analysis of these genes indicated an over-representation of genes involved in contraction , actin filament-based processes , muscle organ development  and muscle filament sliding .

analysis of the relative mrna pool in skeletal muscle  showed that 28 % correspond to mitochondrial proteins and 28 % represent genes elevated in skeletal muscle. thus, most of the transcriptional activity in the skeletal muscle also relates to energy generation, but with a higher fraction of mrna molecules encoding genes classified as tissue elevated as compared to heart. together the two striated muscles have by far the highest fraction of transcripts encoding mitochondrial proteins of all analyzed tissues .

genes with shared enriched expression in cardiac and skeletal muscle
a network plot of the tissue and group enriched genes in heart and skeletal muscle, respectively, was generated in order to illustrate genes commonly expressed between different tissue types . the two tissues had  <dig> simultaneously enriched genes, suggesting common functions. go-analysis of these genes showed an overrepresentation of genes associated with contraction , actin filament-based processes , actomyosin structure organization  and muscle filament sliding . several genes were also shared between striated muscles and cerebral cortex, and these genes are dominated by genes for which the corresponding proteins are involved in ion transport. moreover, a number of genes were simultaneously enriched in striated muscles, adipose tissue and/or liver, mainly represented by genes implicated in metabolic processes and enzymatic activities.fig.  <dig> network plot of the cardiac and skeletal muscle enriched and group enriched genes. red circle nodes represent a group of expressed genes and are connected to the respective enriched tissues . the size of each red node is related to the square root of the number of genes enriched in a particular combination of tissues



proteins with elevated expression in cardiac muscle
the proteins elevated in heart or skeletal muscle identified by the transcriptomics analysis were further studied by antibody-based profiling using the publicly available resource of tma data within the human protein atlas  portal cross-referenced with the cardiac organellar protein atlas knowledge base   <cit>  in order to determine heart and skeletal muscle specificity and spatial and cellular distribution of the expression. in total,  <dig> of the  <dig> genes elevated in cardiac muscle, and  <dig> of the  <dig> genes elevated in skeletal muscle had available antibodies as part of the human protein atlas project and were studied with antibody-based profiling using immunohistochemistry. immunohistochemistry was performed on tma cores from  <dig> different normal tissues, including heart and skeletal muscle samples from three different individuals, respectively. the analyzed proteins were divided into categories based on specificity of the expression, such as proteins selectively expressed in either heart or skeletal muscle, or proteins found to be expressed in both heart and skeletal muscle. examples of proteins with various functions and expression patterns in striated muscles are described below.

an interesting analysis is to investigate proteins elevated in heart, particularly in relation to skeletal muscle. examples of eight proteins related to contraction and with highest expression in heart muscle are displayed in fig. 4a. the primary structural proteins in the cardiomyocytes are myosin and actin filaments, related to contraction and forming a striated pattern observed in electron microscopy. examples of members of the myosin and actin families mainly expressed in heart muscle include myh <dig>  myl <dig>  myl <dig> and actc <dig>  another protein family related to muscular contraction is the troponin family, regulating the binding of myosin to actin via conformation differences dependent on calcium ion concentration in the cells  <cit> . two troponin family members solely expressed in heart are tnni <dig> and tnnt <dig>  other examples include the myosin binding protein mybpc <dig>  influencing contraction by cross-bridging in the sarcomere, and the calcium channel protein cacna1c, regulating contraction via mediation of calcium ion entry into excitable cells.fig.  <dig> immunohistochemical staining of proteins elevated in cardiac muscle. a examples of eight proteins related to muscle contraction . cacna1c was distinctly stained in sarcolemma and endothelial cells. b examples of four proteins related to homeostasis and regeneration/repair, with nppa displaying granular cytoplasmic expression, akap <dig> observed in nuclear membranes of cardiomyocytes, nes restricted to endothelial cells and bves distinctly stained in sarcolemma. c examples of eight proteins specific for intercalated discs . d examples of two proteins with unknown function in cardiac muscle 



a large number of proteins identified as highly expressed in heart were implicated in homeostasis and regeneration/repair, and some of these are displayed in fig. 4b. in order to retain balanced levels of various substances in the body, heart plays an important role in homeostasis. one such example is the atrial natriuretic peptide nppa, controlling extracellular fluid volume and electrolyte homeostasis. mutations in nppa are thought to be responsible for the development of atrial fibrillation   <cit> . another example is akap <dig>  involved in controlling energy homeostasis and glycolysis. heart regeneration and repair have been extensively studied as cardiomyocyte deficiency is the underlying cause of most heart failures, and it is still debated as to what extent cardiomyocytes are replaced in adult hearts  <cit> . examples of proteins expressed in heart suggested to play a role in regeneration and repair include the stem cell protein nes and the cell adhesion molecule bves. nes is involved in brain and eye development and has been suggested to be involved in reparative vascularization and differentiation of cardiac stem cells into striated cells following myocardial infarction  <cit> . nes displayed distinct positivity in endothelial cells of both heart and other tissue types. bves is involved in formation and regulation of tight junction permeability and limited literature suggests involvement in muscle regeneration  <cit> .

intercalated discs are defined as the connections between two adjacent cardiomyocytes, aiding in contraction of multiple cardiomyocytes simultaneously as a unit, which is necessary for proper heart function. examples of eight proteins distinctly expressed in intercalated discs are displayed in fig. 4c. four of these  are well characterized in literature and involved in functions related to plasma membrane ion exchange, cell adhesion, cell junctions and desmosomes, respectively. for the remaining four proteins  no or only limited literature exists on function in heart. art <dig> has been suggested as an arginine-specific protein with function in testis  <cit> , distinctly stained also in the present investigation, however, the additional high expression in intercalated discs has previously not been described. filip <dig>  with evidence only at transcript level, is suggested to play a role in neuronal development and showed highest expression in heart and brain, but the exact function is unknown  <cit> . the transmembrane protein popdc <dig> has in few studies on mice and zebrafish been suggested to play a role in proper sinus node function  <cit> , but no previous studies suggest expression in intercalated discs. rab9b has limited literature on membrane trafficking, but no data on expression in heart.

interestingly, two proteins previously not characterized in heart  were at the mrna level selectively expressed in both samples from the atrium and not in the ventricular wall or in any of the other analyzed tissues. immunohistochemically stained images of sbk <dig> and shd are displayed in fig. 4d. sbk <dig> has evidence of existence only inferred from homology, while shd is suggested to be an adapter protein with previous evidence only at transcript level.

proteins with elevated expression in skeletal muscle
similar to heart muscle, the main function of skeletal muscle is contraction. four proteins related to contraction with exclusive expression in skeletal muscle are displayed in fig. 5a. two of those  are members of the myosin and troponin families. other examples include the myosin binding protein mybpc <dig> and the actin cross-linking protein myot, involved in myofibril stability and assembly. myh <dig> was expressed in fast  fibers  <cit>  and tnnt <dig> in slow  fibers  <cit> , while expression of myot was concentrated to z-lines of the muscle fibers.fig.  <dig> immunohistochemical staining of proteins elevated in skeletal muscle. a examples of four proteins related to muscle contraction . myh <dig> and tnnt <dig> were differentially expressed between type i and type ii muscle fibers, while myot concentrated to z-lines of the muscle fibers. b examples of four proteins related to calcium function   examples of four proteins related to enzymatic activity . ampd <dig> and pygm revealed heterogeneous cytoplasmic expression and eno <dig> was differentially expressed between type i and type ii muscle fibers. d examples of four proteins with unknown function in skeletal muscle . both or10ab1p and phkg <dig> being differentially expressed between type i and type ii muscle fibers



in both heart and skeletal muscle, contraction is dependent on the level of intracellular calcium. however, in contrast to cardiomyocytes, where calcium release is regulated via binding of external calcium ions to voltage gated calcium channels, skeletal myocytes store calcium in the sarcoplasmic reticulum until a neuronal impulse triggers calcium influx along the myofilaments. in fig. 5b, four proteins related to calcium function with selective expression in skeletal muscle are displayed. two of the main proteins responsible for this function are ryr <dig>  the ryanodine receptor acting as the calcium release channel, and casq <dig>  essential for calcium storage in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. capn <dig> is an intracellular protease regulated by changes in calcium levels and plays a role in skeletal muscle degradation and sarcomeric remodeling, with defects resulting in muscular dystrophy  <cit> . another protein involved in calcium function is jph <dig>  aiding in the functional cross-talk between cell surface and intracellular calcium release channels.

contraction is an energy demanding process and it is acknowledged that skeletal muscle is a tissue with high metabolic activity. skeletal muscle is one of the body’s major sites for glucose disposal and is implicated in metabolic diseases such as type ii diabetes. thus, enzymatic activity is an important function in skeletal muscle, relating to various processes such as glucose metabolism, glycogen storage and regeneration. indeed, a large number  of the elevated proteins in skeletal muscle are related to different metabolic processes, i.e. present in the hmr <dig>  metabolic reaction library  <cit> . genes from several enzymatic pathways were elevated in skeletal muscle, including membrane transport, protein modification and purine metabolism. the skeletal muscle specific transport reactions involved calcium transport  and glucose transport . additional examples of proteins implicated in enzymatic activities with selective expression in skeletal muscle are displayed in fig. 5c. these examples include  ampd <dig>  an enzyme involved in the purine nucleotide cycle,  pygm, an enzyme essential for carbohydrate metabolism and glycogenolysis,  ca <dig>  a metalloenzyme catalyzing hydration of carbon dioxide, and  eno <dig>  an isoenzyme suggested to play a role in muscle development and regeneration, with mutations associated with glycogen storage disease  <cit> . at the protein level, eno <dig> was highly expressed in type ii fibers  <cit> .

four examples of proteins selectively expressed, but with unknown function in skeletal muscle are displayed in fig. 5d. the putative protein fam166b showed additional positivity in adrenal gland and ciliated cells in the present investigation. klhl <dig> is suggested to be required for skeletal muscle development  <cit> ; however, the exact function is unknown. another example is or10ab1p, with evidence of existence only at the transcript level according to uniprot. despite low fpkm values, or10ab1p was selectively expressed in striated muscles as compared to other tissues, with strongest immunoreactivity observed in skeletal muscle. phkg <dig> is the catalytic subunit of the phosphorylase b kinase , which is responsible for hormonal regulation of glycogen breakdown  <cit> ; however, phkg <dig> only has evidence of existence at the transcript level according to uniprot and the exact function is unknown. fam166b, or10ab1p and phkg <dig> displayed a heterogeneous expression pattern possibly representing type i or type ii muscle fibers.

proteins with elevated expression in both cardiac and skeletal muscle
although heart and skeletal muscles differ in arrangement of cells and response to signals, the two muscle types have many similarities. several proteins related to contraction are shared between the two organs, as displayed in fig. 6a. some of these are members of the myosin and troponin families, such as myh <dig>  myl <dig> and tnnc <dig>  another example is tpm <dig>  a member of the tropomyosin family essential for contraction. tpm <dig> binds to actin and is associated with the troponin complex. in skeletal muscle, all four proteins were higher expressed in type i muscle fibers.fig.  <dig> immunohistochemical staining of proteins elevated in both cardiac and skeletal muscle. a examples of four proteins related to muscular contraction , in skeletal muscle higher expressed in type i muscle fibers. b examples of four proteins related to calcium transport and storage . c examples of four proteins related to metabolism and myofibrillar organization . ldb <dig> was restricted to z-lines of cardiac muscle fibers while more homogeneous in skeletal muscle. murc showed distinct expression of sarcolemma in both cardiac and skeletal muscle. d examples of four proteins with unknown function in cardiac and skeletal muscle, with adssl <dig> showing distinct nuclear staining, hhatl and c1orf <dig> displaying cytoplasmic positivity, and sptb revealing distinct immunoreactivity in sarcolemma, accompanied with positivity in erythrocytes



in fig. 6b, four proteins involved in calcium transport and storage expressed in both heart and skeletal muscle are shown. camk2b is involved in synapse formation and regulation of sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium transport  <cit> . additional strong staining of camk2b was observed in the cns. other examples include casq <dig>  responsible for the internal calcium store in muscle  <cit> , hrc, implicated in regulation of calcium sequestration and release  <cit> , and the calcium transport regulating protein srl, with evidence of existence only at the transcript level according to uniprot.

examples of proteins involved in metabolism and myofibrillar organization with expression shared between heart and skeletal muscle are displayed in fig. 6c. ckm is a creatine kinase involved in energy transduction, and is also an important serum marker for myocardial infarction  <cit> . another enzyme is pgam <dig>  related to glycolytic pathways, with mutations causing glycogen storage disease  <cit> . ldb <dig> is involved in sarcomere organization, with mutations associated with myopathy  <cit> . murc aids in myofibrillar organization and has also been shown to induce nppa transcription  <cit> .

four proteins with selective expression but unknown function in heart and skeletal muscle are displayed in fig. 6d. the nuclear protein adssl <dig> has limited data suggesting contribution to glycolysis, while vague literature on hhatl mentions heart specificity  <cit> , however, the exact function is unknown and neither adssl <dig> nor hhatl has previously been characterized on the protein level. another protein only characterized on the transcript level is c1orf <dig>  which regulates the expression of target genes associated with energy transfer and contractile function  <cit> . sptb is known to be involved in cytoskeletal structure of erythrocyte plasma membrane  <cit> , and erythrocytes were distinctly stained also in the present investigation, however, the clear membranous expression in striated muscle cells has previously not been described.

discussion
to our knowledge, this is the first study utilizing an integrative omics approach comparing heart and skeletal muscle specific gene expression providing a detailed genome-wide transcriptomics overview characterizing normal striated muscles in relation to a broad range of other tissues. the tissue specific rna levels were compared to corresponding in situ protein expression, by thorough visual examination of the immunohistochemical images provided by an antibody-based profiling approach. in this way, the muscle specific genes could be further stratified into different subcompartments present within the striated muscles. this allowed us to identify proteins with previously unknown patterns of expression, such as filip <dig> and popdc <dig> distinctly expressed in intercalated discs of cardiac muscle. using this approach, we were also able to identify novel proteins specifically expressed in myocytes and not present in other cell types in the samples, such as adipocytes, fibroblasts or endothelial cells, which suggests a role of these proteins in striated muscle physiology and function.

the immunohistochemistry-based profiling was performed within the infrastructure of the human protein atlas program, a multidisciplinary research initiative which systematically generates and validates representative antibodies towards all non-redundant human proteins  <cit> . in addition to performing immunohistochemistry on tissues with a well-established protocol, the antibodies are thoroughly tested in various other platforms such as protein arrays, western blotting and cell lines, suggesting a high quality of the generated data. data and high-resolution images from all approved antibodies together with the rna-seq data for each gene are comprehensively published online at www.proteinatlas.org, which allows for further interpretation and analysis of the genes and proteins presented here.

the analysis of the heart muscle elevated proteins is well in line with the function of the heart. the list includes well-known proteins of the myosin, actin and troponin families, as well as the natriuretic peptides a and b, extensively studied as markers for heart failure  <cit> . in addition, several proteins previously not described in the context of heart were identified, such as the putative proteins sbk <dig> and shd, selectively expressed in the atrium and not in the ventricle or in any of the other analyzed tissues. other identified examples of proteins with yet unknown function include proteins expressed in intercalated discs, such as art <dig>  filip <dig>  popdc <dig> and rab9b. the exact functions of these proteins remain to be elucidated, but given the selective expression in heart muscle at both the mrna and protein level, an implication in heart physiology can be anticipated. similarly, the analysis of skeletal muscle elevated proteins identified a large number of proteins with well-known function related to contraction, calcium storage and enzymatic activity, but also several proteins previously not characterized in skeletal muscle. as expected, a significant number of proteins were expressed in both heart and skeletal muscle, but our lists also included proteins unique for one of the organs. an interesting observation is the high correlation between striated muscles and adipose tissue, which may partly be explained by presence of adipocytes in the heart and skeletal muscle samples, but it possibly also has a functional relevance related to metabolic activities. another interesting observation is that more than 30 % of the transcripts in heart and 28 % of the transcripts in skeletal muscle correspond to genes encoding mitochondrial proteins, which demonstrates the extreme specialization of both the heart and skeletal muscle to provide energy for the contraction. these two striated muscle tissues consequently have a higher fraction of mitochondrial transcripts than any of the other analyzed tissues. mitochondrial genes were among the most abundant genes in striated muscles, and often showed fpkm values >  <dig> . the natriuretic peptides a and b  and several genes associated with contraction were also relatively highly expressed. interestingly, the lists of genes elevated in striated muscles included several genes with low mrna abundance that were shown to be selectively expressed in cardiac or skeletal muscle also at the protein level, suggesting that these genes may have a regulatory function. two such examples are bves and rab9b, distinctly expressed in membranes of cardiomyocytes and intercalated discs, respectively, both with fpkm values around  <dig> 

it is important to point out that the heart samples used in the present investigation are taken from patients with various cardiovascular diseases and that the sample size is rather small. although it cannot be ruled out that an underlying disease alters transcription of individual genes, the global expression profiles were shown to be highly similar between samples despite different disease background of the patients. given that a large number of the genes identified as most abundant in heart represented genes associated with a well-known function and no overrepresentation of genes associated with other pathological conditions was observed, a good estimate of a normal mrna profile can be anticipated.

from a medical point of view, the identification of the molecular constituents of the cardiac and skeletal muscle is important. despite the high prevalence of myocardial infarction, the diagnosis remains a challenge as routine signs and symptoms have low specificity and sensitivity. myocardial infarction may occur without symptoms, stressing the need for other diagnostic methods such as cardiac imaging or biomarker alterations. research on serum-based biomarkers has identified several proteins that may serve as markers of cardiomyocyte injury, such as troponins, ckmb and myl <dig>  <cit> . moreover, the natriuretic peptides nppa and nppb have been extensively studied as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in acute heart failure patients, showing promising results  <cit> . however, although alterations in these biomarkers may reflect myocardial necrosis or cardiac overload, more biomarkers are needed in order to identify and stratify high-risk individuals and further understand the underlying mechanisms. the data presented here can serve as a starting point for further biomarker discovery, since the gene expression repository can be used for identifying muscle specific biomarkers that are unique or common for different types of muscles.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our work presents a comprehensive resource of proteins elevated in cardiac and skeletal muscle that have been identified and localized to specific muscle segments. this resource can be used for further molecular studies on striated muscle biology as well as for research studies comparing normal and pathological tissues.

