BACKGROUND
one of the most fascinating problems in developmental biology is how embryonic cells work together to produce highly organized multicellular organisms. although embryonic tissues may ultimately be shaped in a species-specific manner, there are basic remodeling events that are shared, even among distantly related species. epithelial folding is one of these common morphogenetic processes and is involved in metazoan developmental stages including gastrulation, neurulation and organogenesis. epithelia are composed of closely arranged epithelial cells that adhere together at intercellular junctions that give the epithelial sheet mechanical strength. this adherence of the cells is thought to be the key for the transmission of forces between neighboring cells through the links between the actomyosin cytoskeleton and the adherens junctions  <cit> . in metazoan development, folding or bending of the cell sheet is achieved by cells at the bend points that change from a cuboidal to a wedge shape. this cell wedging is observed in several invaginations, including blastopore groove formation and neurulation in amphibians and the formation of the primitive groove in birds  <cit> . it also exists in other cases, such as gastrulation in some echinoderms  <cit> , but is less obvious in these cases, likely because mechanisms other than cell wedging are involved  <cit> . the bending and folding of a sheet of cells is fundamentally a biomechanical, supercellular process involving coordinated changes in the shapes of many neighboring cells that interact; however, the biological and biomechanical processes that underlie such three-dimensional  morphogenetic events in metazoans are usually complex and difficult to investigate  <cit> .

in the simple multicellular green algae volvox, a morphogenetic process known as inversion occurs during embryogenesis. volvox inversion bears significant similarity to metazoan gastrulation and has been suggested as a model system for studying the curling of an epithelium  <cit> . the similarities between the morphogenetic process of inversion in volvox carteri and epithelial folding events in metazoans include cell adherence, cell shape changes, cell movements, transmission of forces between neighboring cells and the involvement of cytoskeletal elements  <cit> . however, embryonic volvox cells have no adherens junctions; instead, they adhere together through a network of numerous and quite robust cytoplasmic bridges  that are the result of incomplete cytokinesis  <cit>  and allow for force transmission. as in metazoans, folding or bending of the embryonic cell sheet in v. carteri is achieved by cells at the bend points, which undergo a distinct transition in cell shape  <cit> . moreover, concerted movements of cells with respect to the cb system are crucial for the process of inversion in v. carteri  <cit> .

most previous research on inversion was performed in v. carteri  <cit> ; however, this process also occurs, but has been studied in much less detail, in other species of the genus volvox such as v. tertius  <cit> , v. obversus  <cit> , v. aureus  <cit> , v. globator  <cit> , v. rousseletii  <cit>  and v. capensis  <cit> . inversion also exists in more basal volvocine relatives of volvox  <cit> , such as pleodorina californica  <cit> , eudorina elegans  <cit> , e. indica  <cit> , pandorina morum  <cit> , platydorina caudata  <cit>  and gonium pectorale  <cit> , even if the process is less distinct in these species.

inversion is the solution to the awkward inside-out situation of the embryo in multicellular volvocine algae. after completion of embryonic cleavage divisions, the embryo contains all of the cells that will be present in the adult alga, but the flagellar ends of all of the cells point toward the interior, rather than the exterior, where they need to be to function during locomotion. moreover, in more advanced species, which already exhibit large reproductive cells before inversion , the reproductive cells point outward. this inside-out orientation is corrected as the embryo turns itself right-side out during inversion.

the process of inversion was discovered in v. carteri f. weismannia approximately  <dig> years ago, but it was initially misinterpreted as a pathological phenomenon  <cit> . the correct interpretation of inversion was provided by kuschakewitsch approximately a decade later  <cit> . subsequent work revealed that inversion in volvox involves two cellular events: dramatic changes in cell shapes and coordinated movements of cells relative to the cbs  <cit> . however, there are two fundamentally different sequences through which embryos of the genus volvox turn right-side out: type a and type b   <cit> . in type a inversion, which occurs in v. carteri and species such as v. obversus, v. africanus, v. gigas and v. tertius, an opening, called the phialopore, appears at the anterior pole; the anterior hemisphere inverts through the phialopore; the posterior hemisphere then inverts; and finally, the phialopore closes   <cit> .  in type b inversion , as observed in species such as v. globator, v. capensis, v. dissipatrix, v. rousseletii and v. barberi, the posterior hemisphere inverts before the phialopore opens, followed by inversion of the anterior hemisphere; finally, the phialopore closes  <cit> . thus, in type b inversion, the opening of the phialopore does not indicate the beginning of inversion, and the hemispheres invert in reverse order compared to type a inversion.

in terms of evolution, inversion must have arisen quite recently because phylogenetic analyses indicate that multicellularity evolved in volvocine green algae 'only' approximately  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , which is much more recently than in any other group, and inversion must have evolved in parallel with the transition to multicellularity or even later. phylogenetic analyses have also indicated a polyphyletic origin of the genus volvox  <cit>   suggesting that it is not a true genus. a few species of this genus, including v. globator, form a small but robust monophyletic group that is referred to as the section volvox  <cit> . all volvox species within the section volvox exhibit type b inversion . the other species of the genus volvox and the genera eudorina and pleodorina constitute another, much larger, monophyletic group, the eudorina group  <cit> . the volvox species within the eudorina group include both type a and type b inverters .

the type a inversion of v. carteri has been analyzed previously in great detail   <cit> . inversion in v. carteri begins about  <dig> h after the end of embryonic cleavages with the appearance of a swastika-shaped phialopore at the anterior pole of the embryo . at this opening, the four lips of the cell monolayer curl outward and backward over the simultaneously contracting posterior hemisphere . during inversion, the circular region of maximum cell-sheet curvature moves progressively along the anterior-posterior axis. finally, the phialopore closes, and the embryo regains its spherical phenotype . the flagellar ends of the somatic cells now point outward, and the reproductive cells  point inward. the entire inversion process lasts approximately  <dig> min  <cit> . analyses of the cytological changes that occur during this epithelial folding using light microscopy , transmission electron microscopy  and scanning electron microscopy  have led to the development of a model that describes inversion in v. carteri based on cell shape changes and active movements of cells relative to the cbs connecting them  <cit> . at the beginning of inversion in a v. carteri embryo, all cells are spindle shaped and are joined at their widest points by cbs  <cit> . the cells surrounding the phialopore first develop long, microtubule-reinforced stalks. in v. carteri, a motor protein, the kinesin inva, is thought to generate the force that drives the movement of the cells relative to the cbs until they are linked at their narrowest, outermost tips  <cit> . these combined actions cause the phialopore lips in v. carteri to bend outward. all cells gradually undergo these changes in cell shape, and a ring of maximum curvature, known as the bend region, moves from the anterior to the posterior pole until inversion is completed . after passing the region of maximum curvature, the cells, which are linked by their inner ends, develop a columnar shape.

in contrast to the type a inversion of v. carteri, type b inversion has only been studied by lm and, therefore, only basic information about the sequence and mechanism of inversion in type b inverters is available  <cit> . although the subcellular mechanisms underlying inversion might be similar in type a and type b inverters, there must be significant differences between the two types of inversion to explain the different inversion sequences observed.

therefore, in the present study, we provide a detailed description of the cellular mechanism of type b embryonic inversion in volvox globator, compare type a inversion  and type b inversion  in terms of the key similarities and differences in the cellular events that are involved, deal with the pathways by which these two types of inversion may have evolved and discuss a hypothesis that integrates our results and biomechanical implications about the involved tensile and compressive forces into a global mechanistic scenario that predicts epithelial folding in v. globator.

RESULTS
epithelial folding of the typical type b inverter v. globator  was investigated in detail, focusing on major movement patterns of the cellular monolayer, region and stage-specific changes in cell shape and changes in the localization of cbs. to describe the major aspects of inversion separately but in ontogenetic order of appearance, we go through the inversion process several times by calling attention to the relevant panels of figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 5; each of these figures shows an image series of inversion in ontogenetic order made with four different techniques: lm time-lapse in vivo imaging , sem , lm of mechanical, midsagittal sections  and optical sections by confocal laser scanning microscopy  .

major movement patterns of the cellular monolayer
pre-inversion stage
at the stage immediately  before the beginning of inversion, a v. globator embryo is fully cleaved. the embryo completed  <dig> to  <dig> rounds of cell division and has  <dig>  to  <dig>  cells arranged in a spherical cellular monolayer with a diameter of approximately  <dig> μm  . at this time, the spheroidal embryo exhibits sporadic movements of the cell monolayer, and several dents quickly appear and disappear . this phenomenon was also observed in v. carteri, v. aureus and v. rousseletii embryos and is known as 'denting'  <cit> . denting ends once the process of inversion starts.

early inversion stage
the inversion process begins with the contraction of the posterior hemisphere of the embryo . during the first approximately  <dig> min of inversion, contraction proceeds and accompanies movement of the posterior hemisphere in the direction of the anterior pole; thus, the posterior hemisphere moves into the anterior hemisphere . this ring-shaped invagination of the cell sheet generates the bend region . in midsagittal cross-sections of embryos at this stage, the bend region forms more or less a half circle with a radius of approximately  <dig> μm .

mid-inversion stage
the mid-inversion stage spans from approximately  <dig> min to approximately  <dig> min after the beginning of inversion. approximately  <dig> min to  <dig> min after the initiation of inversion, the posterior hemisphere lies completely within the anterior hemisphere and moves further yet toward the anterior pole . during this movement of the posterior hemisphere, the radius of the curvature in the bend region increases considerably from  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm up to  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm within approximately  <dig> min . approximately  <dig> min to  <dig> min after the beginning of inversion, a circular opening, the phialopore, appears at the anterior pole . the phialopore widens continuously while the anterior hemisphere moves over the already almost completely inverted posterior hemisphere . the inner diameter of the opening increases until it is somewhat greater than the outer diameter of the inverted posterior hemisphere .

late inversion stage
during the late stage of inversion,  <dig> min to  <dig> min after its onset, the last third of the anterior hemisphere moves over the already inverted cell monolayer . during this last part of inversion, the diameter of the opening decreases continuously . approximately  <dig> min after it started, inversion ends with the closure of the phialopore .

early and late post-inversion stage
immediately after inversion, the embryo has a diameter of only approximately  <dig> μm  , which is approximately  <dig> μm less than at the initiation of inversion . not only before  but even shortly after the completion of inversion, we observed sporadic movements of the cell monolayer causing dents that quickly appear and disappear . to our knowledge, this denting after inversion has never been observed in any other volvox species. approximately  <dig> h after the completion of inversion, denting is no longer observed , and the juveniles remain spheroidal.

region and stage-specific changes in cell shape
pre-inversion stage
during cleavage, all cells are roughly spherical or, particularly immediately before each cleavage division, somewhat elongated . the cells exhibit a length of  <dig>  μm to  <dig>  μm and a width of  <dig>  μm to  <dig> μm. between the end of cleavage and the beginning of inversion, all cells within the spherical cellular monolayer develop into what we refer to as teardrop-shaped cells . each of these approximately radially symmetrical cells is cone-shaped at the cell end that faces the interior ; we refer to the cone-shaped  end of the cell as the flagellar end because the flagella will develop on this side of the cell. the opposite end of the teardrop-shaped cells, facing the exterior, shows a roughly hexagonal cross-section ; we call this end of the cell the chloroplast end because the single chloroplast largely localizes on this side of the cell. teardrop-shaped cells have a length of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm and a maximal width of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm.

for all optical sections of embryos, we used phalloidin-tetramethylrhodamine b isothiocyanate  as a cytoplasmic stain because it stains filamentous actin  in embryonic cells  <cit> , and f-actin was more or less uniformly distributed in the cytoplasm . however, there was one exception: in teardrop-shaped cells, f-actin was mainly localized at the flagellar  ends of the cells .

early inversion stage
at the beginning of inversion, the cells of the anterior hemisphere remain teardrop shaped , but the cells of the posterior hemisphere become elongated along their chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axis. the latter cells attain a length of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm with more or less pointed ends on both sides; therefore, these cells are referred to as spindle-shaped cells . at the cell's equator, which is the broadest point, the spindle-shaped cells have a diameter of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm and exhibit a hexagonal cross-section .

the conversion of teardrop-shaped cells into spindle-shaped cells in the posterior hemisphere occurs in conjunction with the formation of the bend region somewhat below the equator of the embryo . in the emerging bend region, the shapes of the just developed spindle cells changes again and increasingly reflects the maximum curvature of the cell sheet in this area. the elongated cells of this region stay pointed and radially symmetrical only at their flagellar ends, whereas they become increasingly wedge-shaped at their chloroplast ends; we refer to these cells as paddle-shaped cells. in a cross-section of the embryo, the cells of the bend region are arranged in the form of a spread fan , exhibit a length of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm and are approximately  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm in diameter at the broadest point . at the outermost chloroplast ends, the major axis of the cell's cross-section is  <dig>  μm to  <dig> μm, while the minor axis is only approximately  <dig>  μm ; that is, there is a difference in length by a factor of three to four between the two axes. the bases of the cells at the chloroplast ends frequently appear as elongated hexagons. the major axis of these elongated hexagons at the outermost chloroplast ends of paddle-shaped cells is oriented along a circular line described by the ring-shaped invagination of the posterior hemisphere; this circular line shows only minor curvature due to its relatively large radius of approximately  <dig> μm. the minor axis of the outermost chloroplast end of paddle-shaped cells is perpendicular to the circular line around the embryo and is oriented along a line that more or less forms a half circle in the bend region when a midsagittal cross-section of an embryo is observed .

while invagination of the posterior hemisphere proceeds and the transition from spindle to paddle shapes progresses from the equator toward the posterior pole, the teardrop-shaped cells of the anterior hemisphere become increasingly elongated flat cells that partially overlap each other. the conversion from teardrop-shaped to elongated progresses from the rim of the anterior cap of the embryo toward its anterior pole. we refer to the elongated flat cells as disc shaped  and 7g). however, these cells are not uniformly shaped, and quite a few are buckled. disc-shaped cells are elongated in the anterior-posterior direction of the embryo and frequently have a length of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm, a width of  <dig> μm to  <dig>  μm and a height of  <dig>  μm to  <dig> μm.

mid-inversion stage
at the beginning of the mid-inversion stage, the cells in the bend region still have the appearance of paddles that are flattened at one end  and are arranged in the form of a spread fan  but at this stage, these cells have a length of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm and, thus, are longer than the corresponding cells in the early inversion stage. the bases of the paddle-shaped cells at the chloroplast ends still have the appearance of elongated hexagons .

in the mid-inversion stage, the transition from the remaining spindle to paddle cells seems to progress from the equator of the embryo toward its posterior pole and, as mentioned above, the radius of the curvature in the bend region increases considerably. the greater that the radius of the curvature in the bend region is, the thicker the chloroplast ends are on their narrow side . with a further increase of this radius, the paddle-shaped cells change into cells that are radially symmetrical throughout their length ; these cells still have pointed flagellar ends but the bases of the cells at the flattened chloroplast ends appear as elongated hexagons , and we refer to these cells as pencil shaped. pencil-shaped cells have a length of  <dig>  μm to  <dig>  μm and a diameter of  <dig>  μm to  <dig> μm .

during most of the mid-inversion stage, cells close to the not yet inverted posterior pole are still spindle-shaped . when these cells have their turn in inversion, the radius of the curvature in the bend region reaches its maximum. these spindle-shaped cells do not seem to become paddle shaped but directly change into the pencil shape .

before inversion of the posterior hemisphere is complete, disc-shaped cells at the rim of the anterior cap become increasingly pencil shaped  and, at the same time, seem to move over the rim of the anterior cap toward the posterior pole . this process appears to be the initiation of inversion of the anterior hemisphere. shortly after the beginning of the change from disc to pencil shape at the rim of the anterior cap, the phialopore appears at the anterior pole and the opening widens continuously. the transition from disc to pencil shape seems to progress toward the phialopore. disc-shaped cells around the phialopore alone become increasingly elongated along a circular line described by the edge of the opening . cells in the not yet inverted part of the anterior hemisphere are still disc shaped .

late inversion stage
during this last stage of inversion, the remaining disc-shaped cells of the not yet inverted portion of the anterior hemisphere become pencil-shaped  and simultaneously seem to move over the rim of the remaining portion of the anterior cap. in the late inversion stage, pencil-shaped cells have a length of  <dig>  μm to  <dig>  μm, are  <dig>  μm to  <dig> μm in diameter, have a more or less hexagonal base at their chloroplast ends  and show pointed flagellar ends . once all cells changed into pencil shape, the phialopore closes and inversion is completed.

early and late post-inversion stage
right after inversion is complete, the cells of the embryo change their shape again, but this time all cells do it concertedly. the pencil-shaped cells become shorter and end up at a length of  <dig>  μm to  <dig>  μm and as a result the diameter increases to  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm . we refer to these cells as column shaped. the column-shaped cells present a hexagonal cross-section along their entire length, except for at the slightly rounded flagellar ends, while the chloroplast ends are flattened .

approximately  <dig> h after the completion of inversion, the cell shapes change for the last time: all the column-shaped cells gradually develop into what we refer to as gemstone-shaped cells . at the flagellar end, these cells exhibit shapes similar to flat, radially symmetrical cones but have more or less hexagonal bases at their chloroplast ends. the cells with the final gemstone shape have a diameter of  <dig>  μm to  <dig> μm and a height of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm.

region- and stage-specific changes in the locations of cbs
pre-inversion stage
at the pre-inversion stage, the cb system connects all teardrop-shaped cells at their chloroplast ends ; there are no cbs at the flagellar ends .

early inversion stage
in early inversion, the teardrop-shaped cells of the anterior hemisphere are still connected at their chloroplast ends, but the cells of the posterior hemisphere with the just developed spindle shape have their cbs in the equatorial region of the cells . at the same time that the bend region forms between the two hemispheres, the spindle-shaped cells in the equatorial region of the embryo seem to move concertedly relative to the cb system until the cbs localize at their chloroplast ends; this transition seems to progress from the equator of the embryo toward its posterior pole. cells in the bend region with the just developed paddle shape exhibit cbs only at their outermost chloroplast ends , which allows for the smallest possible radius of the curvature of the cell monolayer. in disc-shaped cells, which result from the conversion of teardrop-shaped cells in the anterior hemisphere, the cytoplasmic connections to other cells are found at the edges of the discs  and 7g).

despite beginning the inversion process, the v. globator embryo is still connected with the parent spheroid . in the v. globator embryo, a ring of cells at the anterior pole maintain cbs to the somatic cells of its parent .

mid-inversion stage
inversion progresses during the mid-inversion stage, and the cbs localize in spindle-, paddle- and disc-shaped cells just as described for the early inversion stage. the cbs of the just developed pencil-shaped cells of the already inverted posterior hemisphere localize at their outermost chloroplast ends , just as in paddle-shaped cells.

when the phialopore opens in the mid-inversion stage, the cbs between cells at the anterior pole of the embryo and somatic cells of its parent break off mechanically. while the phialopore widens continuously, the cbs around the phialopore become elongated along a circular line described by the edge of the opening . these elongated cbs reach a length of up to  <dig> μm.

late inversion and post-inversion stage
during the last part of the inversion process, the cbs localize in disc- and pencil-shaped cells  just as described above. after inversion, cbs connect the just developed column-shaped cells  at the chloroplast ends . all cells remain interconnected by cbs after inversion and throughout their lifetime .

changes in shapes of nuclei, growth of flagella and biosynthesis of extracellular matrix
before inversion, the nuclei of all teardrop-shaped cells are either spherical or somewhat conical and are localized at the flagellar ends of the cells; the nuclei have a diameter of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm . during inversion of a v. globator embryo, the shapes of the nuclei undergo major changes , but the shapes always reflect the shapes of the corresponding cells . nuclei of spindle-, disc-, paddle-, pencil- and column-shaped cells are elongated along the chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axis and have a length of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm and a width of  <dig> μm to  <dig>  μm . the nuclei of gemstone-shaped cells are spherical with a diameter of  <dig> μm to <dig>  μm .

the outgrowth of the flagella starts around the beginning of embryonic inversion. in the early inversion stage, cells of the embryo show short flagellar stubs, approximately  <dig> μm in length, at their flagellar ends . during inversion, the flagella of a v. globator embryo grow continuously , from approximately  <dig> μm to around  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm at the stage immediately after inversion . in adult spheroids, the flagella reach a length of  <dig> μm to  <dig> μm; thus, immediately after inversion, the flagella have reached two-thirds of their final length. however, these growing flagella have already begun to beat; therefore, the juveniles rotate  within the parent spheroid.

the synthesis of extracellular matrix  begins at approximately the end of inversion. the main zones and subzones of the ecm are detectable even in this early stage of ecm synthesis   <cit> . in particular, the characteristic ecm subzone cellular zone  <dig>  becomes apparent; cz <dig> consists of coherent fibrous material that creates honeycomb-like chambers at a significant distance around individual cells . after inversion, the juveniles continuously grow in size by depositing increasing amounts of ecm. the rapid growth of juveniles after inversion is only affected by the secretion of ecm material, which causes each cell to move away from its neighbors .

modeling of cell shapes, cb locations and illustration of the entire inversion process
to model cell shapes, the locations and dimensions of numerous cells on lm, clsm, sem and tem images of intact and sectioned embryos were determined before, during and after inversion . based on these results, we developed 3d models with consensus cell shapes for the teardrop-, spindle-, disc-, paddle-, pencil-, column- and gemstone-shaped cells . moreover, we determined the locations of cbs for each cell shape, particularly in relation to the chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axis , and we established consensus curvatures of the cell monolayer throughout all stages of inversion using lm, clsm and sem images.

based on all of our findings, we developed a summary model for the complete process of embryonic type b inversion in v. globator, which is presented in figure  <dig>  the model includes the localization of the observed cell shapes; the directions of cell layer movements; the relative position of the cb system; the length of flagella; and the localization and shapes of nuclei during the pre-, early, mid-, late and post-inversion stages. the summary model is discussed below.

discussion
comparison of the type a and type b inversions
when the type b inversion of v. globator is compared to the type a inversion of v. carteri, both similarities and differences are apparent . the sequence of the major movement patterns of the cellular monolayer is quite different in both species. in v. carteri embryos, the phialopore opens; the anterior hemisphere inverts; the posterior hemisphere contracts; the posterior hemisphere inverts; and finally, the phialopore closes  <cit>  . in v. globator embryos, the posterior hemisphere contracts; the posterior hemisphere inverts; the phialopore opens; the anterior hemisphere inverts; and the phialopore closes  <cit>  .

the anterior hemisphere inverts;
the posterior hemisphere contracts;
the posterior hemisphere inverts;
the posterior hemisphere inverts;
the phialopore opens;
the anterior hemisphere inverts;
the phialopore closes
cells in the posterior hemisphere: teardrop → spindle → paddle  → pencil → column;
the presence of cbs between the cells of the embryo's cell monolayer and the coordinated movements of cells relative to the cb system appear to be essential for inversion in both v. carteri  <cit>  and v. globator. likewise, cell shapes and the order of coordinated cell shape changes are important for a successful inversion of embryos in both species. however, the order of the coordinated shape changes is different between the species, and the shapes also show differences. in v. carteri embryos, all cells are spindle shaped immediately before inversion  <cit> . v. globator embryos exhibit spindle-shaped cells only in the contracted posterior hemisphere, whereas cells in the anterior hemisphere are teardrop-shaped . the presence of flask-shaped cells in the bend region during inversion is characteristic of v. carteri embryos  <cit> . the long 'bottlenecks' of these cells, which localize at the chloroplast ends of the cells, are radially symmetrical. the paddle-shaped cells in the bend region of inverting v. globator embryos  resemble the flask-shaped cells in the bend region of v. carteri embryos, in particular because both are arranged in the form of a spread fan. however, paddle-shaped cells are not radially symmetrical at their chloroplast ends but instead are wedge shaped , and they present no bottlenecks or stalks. cells that have passed the bend region in v. carteri embryos are column shaped  <cit> . v. globator cells at the same developmental stage are pencil shaped , which means that these cells are more elongated along the chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axis than the corresponding cells in v. carteri. in v. carteri embryos, all  cells undergo the same consecutive cell shape changes from spindle to flask to column shaped  <cit> . in v. globator embryos, the posterior and anterior hemispheres invert associated with different cell shapes and a different order of shape changes. in the posterior hemisphere, embryonic cells change from teardrop to spindle to paddle  to pencil and then to column shaped. in contrast, cells from the anterior hemisphere change from teardrop to disc to pencil and then to column shaped .

in v. globator, cells appear to change their total volume during inversion, but it is unknown how this change occurs. changes in volume might be achieved by emptying or filling contractile vacuoles; alternatively, cells might change their volume by exporting or importing cytoplasm to or from their neighbor cells through the cb system. in contrast, the cell volume is constant throughout inversion in v. carteri  <cit> .

in a v. carteri embryo, inversion begins at a defined point at the anterior pole of the spheroid; the phialopore opens, and from this opening dramatic changes in cell shapes and coordinated movements of cells with respect to the cb system proceed from the anterior pole to the posterior pole  <cit>  . in contrast, a v. globator embryo shows a ring-shaped initiation of inversion somewhat below the equator of the spheroid. changes in cell shape and coordinated movements of cells relative to the cbs start somewhat below the equator and proceed to the posterior pole; then a second process with changes in cell shape and coordinated movements of cells relative to the cbs begins at the former equator and proceeds to the anterior pole. in contrast to the v. carteri embryo, which starts inversion by opening the cellular monolayer, the v. globator embryo begins folding the cell layer without having a cell sheet with a free edge.

the phialopores in v. carteri and v. globator open in different ways. in v. carteri, a swastika-shaped opening appears, and the four lips of the cell monolayer curl outward and backward  <cit> . in v. globator, the opening is circular, and there is no curling of the cell layer. in contrast, the opening widens, while the anterior hemisphere moves over the posterior hemisphere .

in v. carteri , the sporadic movements of the cell monolayer, referred to as denting, have only been observed immediately before inversion  <cit> , while v. globator shows denting both shortly before and shortly after completion of inversion . denting may be caused by non-simultaneous cell shape changes of individual cells or a patch of a few cells.

in summary, the comparison of type a and type b inverters suggests that both species follow the same basic principle: concerted, spatially and temporally coordinated changes in cellular shapes and concerted migration of cells relative to the cbs connecting them. however, differences exist in almost all details of the inversion process.

evolution of inversion
when the a and b types of inversion are mapped on the evolutionary tree of volvocine algae   <cit> , type b inversion seems to have been the earlier form of volvox inversion because it appears on a deeper branch than type a inversion. however, if this hypothesis is true, type a inversion must have evolved independently in four different lineages from a type b ancestor  <cit> . if type a evolved before type b, it would mean that type b inversion evolved independently in three different lineages from a type a ancestor: in the section volvox lineage, including v. globator, v. rousseletii and v. barberi, and in the lineages leading to v. aureus and to v. dissipatrix. even if the repeated, independent evolution of type b from type a  is possible, the number of differences observed between type a and type b inverters makes it more reasonable that type a and type b inversion evolved in parallel. however, the true course of evolutionary events remains unclear. the different types of inversion and other differences observed during inversion described above substantiate a polyphyletic origin of the genus volvox; this conclusion was also reached in earlier studies based on phylogenetic analyses of internal transcribed spacer sequences  <cit> , sequences of five chloroplast genes  <cit>  and comparison of flagellar beating patterns  <cit> . thus, reclassification of this genus is required. a few species of this genus, including v. globator, form a small but robust monophyletic group, the section volvox. the developmental and morphological differences of the species within the section volvox compared to other volvox species outside this section support the creation of a new genus for the species of the section volvox.

biomechanical possibilities and implications about the involved tensile and compressive forces: a global mechanistic scenario
epithelial folding during inversion is basically a biomechanical process whereby individual cells and cohorts of cells produce and respond to forces to generate the complex form of a developing multicellular organism  <cit> . based on our results, which are summarized in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  and due to biomechanical possibilities and implications about the involved tensile and compressive forces, we developed the following global mechanistic scenario that predicts how a spherical cellular monolayer can turn itself inside out.

before inversion in the spheroidal v. globator embryo begins, all cells are teardrop shaped . this shape suggests that anisotropic cytoskeletal events along their chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axes formed these cells . the trigger for the beginning of the inversion process seems to be a so-far unknown signaling molecule or morphogen that does not appear to be uniformly distributed throughout the pre-inversion embryo  but appears to be localized only, or at least mainly, in the posterior hemisphere of the embryo. therefore, this putative trigger seems to operate only on the teardrop-shaped cells of the posterior hemisphere, which become increasingly spindle shaped , while the cells of the anterior hemisphere remain teardrop shaped .

the cross-section of spindle-shaped cells is smaller than the cross-section of teardrop-shaped cells , which may explain the contraction of the posterior hemisphere of the embryo . this contraction occurs in conjunction with the formation of the bend region somewhat below the equator of the embryo . thus, the spherical embryo begins epithelial folding without having a cell sheet with a free edge . in the bend region , the spindle-shaped cells  change more and more into paddle-shaped cells . simultaneously, these cells seem to move relative to the cbs so that the cbs of paddle-shaped cells eventually are at their chloroplast ends, which face the inner side of the curve . the network of cbs appears to be the substrate upon which the coordinated cell shape changes operate to deform the cell sheet. the cell shape conversions together with the movements of cells relative to the cbs seem to progress from the equator of the embryo toward its posterior pole , and appear to drive inversion of the posterior hemisphere and its simultaneous movement into the anterior hemisphere .

however, how is the signal to change shape and cb positions forwarded to neighboring cells, and how is it coordinated? once epithelial folding is initiated in the  bend region, a radially symmetrical wave of a trigger molecule or simply of a mechanical force transmission might perpetuate and forward the folding command from cells in the bend region of the embryo toward the posterior pole of the embryo by inducing cell shape changes and movements of cells relative to the cbs in neighboring cells.

what shapes the paddle cells of the bend region? fundamentally, the paddle-shaped cells  in the bend region seem to be shaped by anisotropic cytoskeletal events along the chloroplast-end-to-flagellar-end axis , which produce strongly elongated cells that get thinner toward the chloroplast end . basically, these cells seem to be radially symmetrical throughout the length of the cell; thus, the cytoskeletal forces in radial directions of the cell seem to be isotropic. however, due to the increasing curvature of the bend region , the chloroplast ends of the cells come very close together, and a lack of space seems to arise at these ends of the cells. finally, the cells appear to get compressed at the chloroplast end; thus, the minor axes of the cross-sections at these ends are only one-third or one-fourth the length of the major axes . the smaller the radius of the bend region, the stronger the compression of the chloroplast end of the paddle-shaped cells appears to be. therefore, the shape of the paddle cells at the chloroplast end  seems to reflect an isotropic cytoskeletal activity in radial directions in the context of an anisotropic mechanical environment.

once inversion of the posterior hemisphere is well advanced and the radius of the curvature in the bend region increases , the paddle-shaped cells  change into pencil-shaped cells . the remaining spindle-shaped cells  close to the not yet inverted posterior pole never become paddle shaped but directly change into the pencil shape .

the invagination of the posterior cell sheet seems to generate circumferential tension along the rim of the anterior cap . therefore, the teardrop-shaped cells  at the rim of the anterior cap  become increasingly disc shaped .

what shapes the disc cells? basically, the disc-shaped cells  might show a more or less isotropic cytoskeletal activity but, due to tensions on the cell sheet in the anterior-posterior direction of the embryo in response to pulling at the site of bending , the cells get elongated and flattened . thus, disc-shaped cells seem to be shaped by an anisotropic mechanical environment. this anisotropic mechanical environment has a second consequence: the disc-shaped cells appear to begin to move over the rim of the anterior cap , which seems to be the beginning of the inversion of the anterior hemisphere. the conversion of teardrop-shaped into elongated cells appears to progress in a radially symmetrical wave from the rim of the anterior cap of the embryo toward its anterior pole . eventually, tension in the anterior-posterior direction of the embryo produces thinning and elongation of the whole anterior cell layer . it remains unclear whether the movement of the cbs to opposite ends of the disc-shaped cells  is a passive response to pulling at the site of bending or whether there is an active remodeling of the cytoskeleton including active movement of the cbs; the latter seems more likely because embryonic cells can actively move the cbs  <cit> .

disc-shaped cells  that moved over the rim of the anterior cap  appear to condense into a smaller area beyond the rim, compared to the area they occupied before they rolled over the rim, that is, they reduce their cross-sections at the chloroplast ends and become pencil-shaped cells; simultaneously, these cells also seem to move relative to the cbs so that the cbs eventually are at their chloroplast ends . again, the network of cbs appears to be the substrate upon which the coordinated cell shape changes operate to act on the cell sheet. the conversions from disc to pencil shapes together with the concerted movements of the cells with respect to the cb system seems to maintain the circumferential tension on the rim of the remaining portion of the anterior cap and, as a consequence, on the not yet inverted cell sheet of the anterior hemisphere.

because more and more disc-shaped cells  move over the rim, the circumferential tension on the cell sheet of the anterior hemisphere increases continuously. when the remaining disc-shaped cells of the anterior hemisphere and their cbs are stretched to their maximum length, further tension on the anterior hemisphere results in the opening of the phialopore .

the appearance of a circular opening means that the dominant tensions on the anterior hemisphere are likely to be circumferential. while the phialopore widens , both the cells and the cbs around the phialopore as well as submarginal cells in the sheet and their cbs appear to become passively stretched along a circular line described by the edge of the opening . however, the phialopore widens dramatically until the diameter of the opening is even greater than the outer diameter of the inverted posterior hemisphere . this expansion of the phialopore cannot be explained only by stretching of the cell sheet; there also seems to be a rearrangement of cells at the phialopore.

the movement of disc-shaped cells  over the rim of the remaining anterior cap and the conversion of disc-shaped cells into pencil-shaped cells  continues; thus, the remaining anterior hemisphere appears to glide over the already inverted posterior hemisphere until the anterior cap is completely inverted . this in-turning of the cell sheet over the surface of the outer layer is comparable to involution, one of the major morphogenetic movements that occur during gastrulation; involution can be observed, for example, in mesoderm migration in the amphibian gastrula  <cit> . at the end of inversion, the phialopore gets smaller and smaller . relaxation of the previous circumferential tension that occurred during opening of the phialopore might be one reason but is probably not the only reason for this process, there also seems to be a rearrangement of cells at the opening. finally, the phialopore closes without leaving any visible trace of the previous opening behind .

right after the completion of inversion, all cells of the embryo change concertedly from pencil  to column shapes . somewhat later, they develop gradually into gemstone-shaped cells . following inversion, the juvenile organism resembles a miniature adult; it will increase in size  by depositing large quantities of ecm.

CONCLUSIONS
both type a and type b inverters must solve the same developmental problem: they begin their lives inside out and must turn their spherical cell monolayer outside in to achieve their adult configuration. inverters of both types follow the same basic principle: concerted, spatially and temporally coordinated changes in cellular shapes act together with concerted migration of the cells relative to the cb system. however, differences exist in almost all details of the inversion process, suggesting analogous inversion processes that arose through parallel evolution.

based on our results showing the cellular mechanisms of type b embryonic inversion in v. globator and due to biomechanical possibilities and implications about the involved tensile and compressive forces, we developed a global mechanistic scenario that predicts how a spherical cellular monolayer can turn itself inside out in v. globator. this mechanistic scenario might lay the groundwork for some interesting opportunities to learn how the cell biology, the biomechanical mechanisms of force generation, the dynamic regulation in space and time and the underlying signaling events are integrated such that they produce the global mechanical consequences driving epithelial folding.

