BACKGROUND
synapses are complex structures that regulate neuronal communication and mediate virtually all functions of the nervous system. they are highly polarised structures because of the asymmetric distribution of cytosolic and membrane proteins, such as ion channels and signaling molecules. such a polarized organization is essential for the vectorial transport of conventional neurotransmitter molecules and other types of messenger molecules. the presynaptic compartment or presynaptic bouton contains synaptic vesicles and all other components of the fusion machinery involved in vesicular exo- endo-cytosis and its regulation . synaptic vesicles greatly increase the total amount of lipid bilayer contained in the presynaptic bouton and proportionally the number of membrane associated molecules. in the postsynaptic compartment membrane clusters of neurotransmitter receptors are highly enriched and in excitatory terminals these are embedded in a characteristic electron-dense structure called the postsynaptic density. in this area neurotrasmitter receptors are tightly associated directly or indirectly with other proteins subserving as scaffolding elements, regulators of signalling and of exo-endocytosis .

it is well established that neuronal activity produces a multiplicity of "molecular "changes in pre- and post-synaptic compartments to sustain a continuum of structural and functional synaptic modifications. among the activity-dependent synaptic changes the most well known example is represented by nmda- dependent long-term potentiation   <cit> . ltp includes both short-term changes in synaptic strength, within minutes and hours, and long-term modifications, taking place over the course of days. beyond three hours, ltp seems critically dependent on protein and mrna synthesis as suggested by its suppression with translational and transcriptional inhibitors . these and other results suggest that potentiated synapses must differ in some key molecular component from control or unpotentiated terminals. these molecular components should be either synthesized at the neuronal soma and then specifically recruited by immature or potentiated synapses  or made in situ from locally stored mrna molecules . the question that immediately comes to mind is how can we follow the time-dependent protein changes occurring at potentiated synapses in an efficient way? knowing the exact temporal profile of these changes would be important not only to reveal mechanistic relations among different groups of synaptic molecules but also to define the exact temporal order of known plasticity processes. unfortunately at the present time no simple method is available for a global comparison of protein profiles which are characteristic of synapses in different functional states. the availability of detailed 2de maps of synapses would facilitate this task, an approach that was pioneered by bliss laboratory  <cit> .

in the last few years several proteomic analyses of brain synapses, aimed at the identification of either novel synaptic components or interacting protein complexes  or their post-translational modifications  <cit>  have been published. unfortunately in most of these studies, synaptic samples purified from various brain areas were used  <cit> . the variability and complexity of these 2d protein maps indicates that it would be important to obtain a more simplified and homogeneous synaptic material to be able to use this information to estimate protein expression changes at synapses. for example, subcellular extracts of synapses  from brain always contain variable degrees of contamination with spurious material originating from glial cell membranes, myelin vesicles and other non neuronal sources. also, even when a reliable reference map enriched with proteins associated with synaptic function could be obtained, it would be essential to obtain in parallel maps from the other subcellular compartments. because many proteins do shuttle back and forward from the cell soma or from the dendrites to the post-synaptic apparatus , to understand who is migrating and in which direction protein pedigrees should be available for both synaptosomes and cytosol. importantly proteomic maps of synapses should be available for those systems where synaptic plasticity can be easily and homogeneously induced and analysed with the modern tools of molecular and cellular biology. in this context, cultured neurons, and in particular cultured ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal neurons from neonatal rat brain would represent a very feasible system. these neuronal cells form synapses in vitro with well-developed spines and display various forms of synaptic plasticity including nmda receptor-dependent ltp  <cit>  and synaptic scaling or synaptic adaptation  <cit> . because many observations about synaptic plasticity were made in hippocampal cultures, and because they allow precise manipulation and monitoring of synaptic function, they are now a widely used system for studies of the molecular mechanisms of synaptic plasticity. the purification of pure synaptic fractions from dissociated ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal cultures, obtained from neonatal rat brain, would be facilitated because these cultures contain few glial cells and almost no other non neuronal material. at least in principle, these cultures would be the ideal target for a detailed proteomic analysis of neurons and synapses but the paucity of the protein material that can be extracted represents an obstacle. thus, the optimization of solubilization and purification procedures for these protein mixtures would be required.

here we present the generation of 2de maps from cultured ca3-ca <dig> synapses and neuronal cytosol. our results show that synapses can indeed be purified from cultures with a greater level of purity than when brain hippocampal tissue is used. the 2d maps that we obtained provided reproducible fingerprints of these subcellular structures, hence we foresee that our work could provide the basis for future studies in hippocampal cultures aimed at the molecular understanding of synaptic plasticity.

RESULTS
generation of 2d electrophoresis maps of synaptosomes from ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal cultures
we have previously employed a classical fractionation approach for the purification of synaptic membranes and cytosol from ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal synapses  <cit> . the starting material was obtained from dissociated cultures, which were prepared from neonatal rat brain  after microdissection of the ca3-ca <dig> region. in the present study the same source of synaptic material was used to obtain pure synaptosomes and generate 2de maps of this subpopulation of hippocampal synapses. to evaluate the extent of enrichment in synaptic proteins and the degree of contamination with glia and myelin proteins, subcellular fractions were analyzed by standard electron microscopy  and by western blotting . these two methods showed that the degree of sample pureness was indeed much greater in protein extracts from cultures than in extracts from ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal tissue .

in figure  <dig> is presented the 2d reference map of synaptosomes purified from ca3-ca <dig> cultured neurons. around  <dig> spots were detected in the size range 15– <dig> kda with isoelectric point  values comprised between  <dig> and  <dig>  the general appearance of these 2d maps, the molecular weight  and pi distributions, the number and the relative intensity of individual protein spots were all reproducible in different experiments 

identification of individual reference spots in synaptosomal 2d maps
to obtain a set of reference points to efficiently put in frame and compare different gels, we selected individual protein spots and subjected them to trypsin digestion and maldi-tof ms analysis. these spots were chosen among those that apparently gave the most characteristic features of synaptosomes maps so that the whole map area was well represented . the list of reference proteins here used is presented in table  <dig>  a number of specialized pre-synaptic molecules, ion channels and transporters, adhesion and cytoskeletal elements molecules, components of various metabolic pathways, mitochondria components, chaperones, proteosomal subunits, receptors and signaling molecules could be identified among these reference points . in parallel experiments, 2d gels were blotted and immunolabelled with specific antibodies to localize additional references based on well known synaptic markers . despite the finding that sometime 2d gels could present slightly distorted migration pattern, with variation in the spatial distribution of protein spots and mw – pi markers, the reference spots could always be recognized and allowed a straightforward comparison of gels from different cell culture preparations . based on this reproducibility we can then conclude that 2d maps of synaptosomes from cultures can be reliably obtained.

s: synaptosome; c: crude cytosol; cul: culture; tis: tissue; 2de-ms: two-dimensional electrophoresis and maldi-tof mass spectrometry; wb: western blot; * swiss-prot database; spot numbers correspond to the spot numbers indicated in fig.  <dig> and  <dig> 

comparing maps of synaptosomes from cultures with those from hippocampal tissue
to evaluate differences between cultured synapses and those that can be purified from mature brain tissue we obtained 2d protein profiles of ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal tissue synaptomes . to allow a more straightforward comparison of both set of maps, the same reference spots selected for cultured synapses were searched in tissue maps and subjected to maldi-tof analysis. we could recognize and sequence  <dig> of the original reference points while  <dig> additional reference points were added for a total of  <dig> reference points for the tissue map . using common reference spots we could compare the two sets of maps. both the macroscopic appearance and the number of spots were found to be reasonably conserved  . this is somehow expected based on the common origin of these samples and on the equivalent developmental age and degree of maturation of synapses . despite this general similarity, when these 2d maps were compared in greater details, some clear differences in protein profiles and in relative protein abundances emerged, with only ~50% of spots that were found to have similar expression levels in both sets of gels. the latter finding cannot be accounted by neither a difference in total protein content  nor by a decreased in the signal to noise ratio in gels of cultured synapses. the distribution of spot intensities and gel background were indeed always well separated from each other and the results were found to similar in both groups . this excludes a simple detection problem as a source of discrepancy. in figure  <dig>  are presented some magnified regions of these 2d maps to illustrate some cases of proteins whose expression differed between cultures and tissue up to exemplars well below the threshold for detection in either one of the two data sets. some of the proteins listed in table  <dig> are likely to be protein contaminants from non neuronal sources. based on their volumes in 2d maps, these protein contaminants were clearly more prominent in extracts from brain tissue, an expected finding according to the abundance of non synaptic structures seen in tissue synaptosomes preparations by em analysis .

generation of 2d map from neuronal crude cytosol: comparative analysis with the synaptic proteome
in parallel experiments we obtained two-dimensional gel electrophoresis maps of crude cytosolic extracts from ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal cultures. because of the very low density of glial cells and because of the very large extent of neuronal dendrites in these cultures, most of this material is likely to derive from cytosol and endoplasmic reticulum of dendrites. across different experiments the general appearance and the number and the distribution of protein spots from cytosolic extracts was found to be reproducible . in figure  <dig>  two exemplar maps of cytosolic and synaptic extracts of ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal cultures are compared. already at the visual level, clear differences in the spatial distribution of spots can be appreciated, indicating that we are dealing with two largely different protein sets. to better compare the spatial distribution of protein spots in these two maps, the detected protein spots were color coded and spatially superimposed . the digital superimposition shows the enrichment in low pi proteins for synaptosomes and in low mw proteins for cytosolic fractions. as indicated in figure  <dig> , these results cannot be attributed to different signal to noise ratios because in the two sets of gels distributions of spot intensities were similar and well separated from background noise.

sequencing of individual reference spots from cytosolic 2d maps
when comparing synaptic and crude cytosolic maps of ca3-ca <dig> cultures, we searched for the same protein spots used as markers of the synaptosomal maps. we could recognize and identify by maldi-tof ms  <dig> of the original reference points while  <dig> novel additional reference points, more easily appreciated in cytosolic maps, were sequenced for a total of  <dig> reference points  . the identified proteins belong to different functional groups including: soluble components of synapses , metabolic and mithocondria components, chaperones, elements of the ubiquitin-proteosomal system, cytoskeletal elements, signaling or regulatory molecules . as expected very few trans-membrane proteins were present except for some components of the endoplasmic reticulum and of the endosomal compartment. several proteins listed in table  <dig> were present in both synaptic and cytosolic fractions. on the contrary, many cases of proteins, with clear differences in relative expression levels, including some which were selectively absent in either one set of maps were clearly identified . in particular proteins belonging to metabolism and protein fate  functional groups were specifically expressed or the expression level was increased in the crude cytosolic fraction . on the contrary, synaptic components were mostly detected only in the synaptosomal fraction . these results suggest that many of these elements might be steadily required in one or both cellular districts or might shuttle between cytosol and synapses.

discussion
hippocampal synapses are very dynamic structures whose size, overall morphology and activity are reflections of previous activation history. since bliss and lomo pioneering work  <cit>  most studies on synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus have been performed either in- vivo or on the hippocampal slice preparation. more recently, dissociated cultures from either the whole hippocampus  <cit>  or from the ca3-ca <dig> region  <cit>  have become an increasingly popular system for synaptic plasticity studies. by rigorously purifying synaptic fractions from ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal mature cultures, we provide here reference 2d maps for their synaptic components. although a map of whole rat hippocampal neuronal cells has been previously reported  <cit> , at the present time, the 2d maps presented here are the only available comprehensive proteomic overviews of the synaptosomal and cytosolic fractions of cultured rat hippocampal neurons. therefore, we believe that this information could be very useful for future comparative studies of protein expression changes at neurons and synapses in different physiological and pathological conditions where protein expression is modulated either by synthesis/degradation or translocation between different cellular compartments. in this study we set up the optimal strategy for protein solubilization to capture more of the insoluble proteins which are usually excluded from detection. the fact that only some of the well known elements of synapses were detected in the present analysis relates to the choice of limiting sequencing just to the most visible spots, i.e. the most highly abundant proteins. our goal was to establish 2d fingerprints of synapses and cytosol to direct future identification of areas where following synaptic plasticity protein expression or migration is altered more than to provide a complete proteomic analysis of all synaptic components. therefore the protein spots we selected could only be the most abundant components otherwise these maps would not be useful as references to screen from 2d gels of standard experiments where, because of the few culture dishes involved, the amount of proteins available is very low.

if the purpose is to evaluate the biological significance of protein changes either expression changes, post-translational modifications or subcellular delocalizations, then experiments on dissociated neuronal cultures clearly offer several advantages. the most important is the possibility to obtain neuronal protein material almost uncontaminated from glial cells, myelin and brain blood vessels components, which are common contaminants of tissue subcellular fractions. this is indicated by the degree of enrichment with synaptic and glial cell markers in culture synaptosomes  <cit>  which was higher than in tissue synaptosomes. this was also confirmed by ultrastructural imaging of culture and tissue synaptic fraction at the em level . our 2d maps from cultures and tissue confirmed this view. then the observed divergence between in-vitro and in-vivo 2d maps of synaptic proteins presumably reflects the expected larger degree of enrichment in neuronal material when fractions are purified from hippocampal cultures. part of this difference might also arise from the more heterogeneous population of synapses found in the brain tissue where multiple neurochemical phenotypes are present. it cannot be excluded that some of these differences depend on the reduced expression of those synaptic proteins which are induced by the in-situ interactions between glial and neuronal cells, a process whose extent must be greatly diminished in culture dishes. because the animal sacrifice is known to induce intense synaptic activation, some of the discrepancies found might at least in theory arise from fast protein changes, either post-translational modifications or protein translocation, which could take place in those few minutes that follow animal decapitation and cessation of blood flow. in this respect, it is clear that experiments run on neuronal cultures permit a more controlled acquisition of the resting proteome of synapses.

CONCLUSIONS
the availability of 2d maps for ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal cultures, a very popular model system for synaptic plasticity studies, with identified landmark proteins for both the neuronal cytosol and synapse, will certainly help quantifying protein expression changes occurring in both cellular compartments in different physiological states. in the present paper we also present maps of the crude cytosol of cultured neurons, gathered with the idea of screening for proteins localized both in the cytosol and in the endoplasmic reticulum. at least in theory the availability of these fingerprints should permit revealing those changes arising from massive translocations of specific proteins between the cytosol and er of cell somato/dendrites to the synapse. we hope that the generation of these detailed fingerprints might represent a useful reference for uncovering some aspects of activity-dependent synaptic modifications at ca3-ca <dig> hippocampal synapses

