BACKGROUND
comparative genome sequence analysis, often termed phylogenetic footprinting, has proven successful for the identification of cis-regulatory regions <cit> . recent computational and experimental studies have identified a small number of large, highly conserved enhancers, or 'global control regions', associated with the regulation of important developmental genes such as dach  <cit> , sox <dig>  <cit> , dlx bigene  <cit> , and hox-d  <cit>  clusters. these regulatory regions can act at distances of several hundred kilobases from their target genes, while at the same time conferring an equivalent expression pattern to reporter genes over much shorter distances . a recent computational analysis proves that such highly conserved elements ) are occurring far more often than expected  <cit> . in the study by bejerano et al., ucrs are defined as regions perfectly conserved between human and mouse longer than  <dig> base pairs . the study reports a significant association of a non-transcribed subset of those elements with dna-binding proteins; an equivalent observation has been made independently by boffeli et al. <cit>  for a limited number of most highly conserved elements between human and pufferfish. the stringent criteria for conservation applied in the two studies miss many known enhancer elements that are shorter than  <dig> bp, and highly conserved across all vertebrates. for instance, in a recently published study, sabarinadh et al.  <cit>  described a number of non-transcribed regions flanking the genes of hoxd gene cluster that are highly conserved across vertebrate genomes.

in this paper, we define a set of ucrs using high-resolution criteria that detect segments conserved between the human, mouse and pufferfish genomes. analysis of this set provides insights into a previously unrealized organizational structure of ucrs in vertebrate genomes. we conclusively show that clusters of ucrs are globally associated with many of the genes that act as master regulators during vertebrate development. the clustered distribution of these regions along chromosomes and, importantly, around their presumptive target genes suggests that gene regulation involves the coordinated action of numerous, widely dispersed elements.

RESULTS
definition and genomic environment of ultra-conserved non-coding regions 
we initiated this study by applying comparative genomics to identify putative regulatory regions for a number of evolutionary conserved homeodomain transcription factors that control neural cell fate determination  <cit> . when we examined the genomic landscapes surrounding homeodomain gene loci, we consistently found non-coding regions that exhibited a striking degree of sequence conservation between human and mouse over a minimum of  <dig> bp. many of these regions are at least partially conserved over extended periods of evolution. the observed nucleotide identities between human and mouse sequences exceed even those of exon sequences encoding identical proteins. such striking sequence conservation has previously been anecdotally associated with long-range enhancers for several developmental genes  <cit> .

to test whether the association of ucrs with regulatory genes reflected a global genomic trend, we identified a comprehensive set of human/mouse/pufferfish ucrs for detailed analysis. we defined minimum requirements for a ucr  and performed a genome-scale computational analysis that retrieved  <dig> human/mouse/pufferfish ucrs. since one of the requirements is that the ucrs are not overlapping actively transcribed genomic regions, they would belong to type ii ucrs defined by bejerano et al.  <cit> .

the median ucr length was  <dig> bp, but extreme lengths  were observed. qualitative assessment of "genescapes", the gene structures, surrounding ucrs revealed them to be present either in introns, in dense clusters around a group of genes or in 'gene deserts' . there appeared to be a strong association between locations of our set of ucrs and genes encoding transcription factors – even stronger than that reported by bejerano et al. <cit>  . this observation will be proven in the subsequent analysis.

ucrs are strongly associated with dna-binding proteins
to quantitatively assess the characteristics of genes proximal to ucrs, we analyzed the over-representation of gene annotations. we retrieved the interpro  <cit>  domain annotation for all genes adjacent to or containing ucrs. a statistical assessment  of the observed domain biases for these genes was performed to assess the probability that the domain distributions were the same for the ucr genes as compared to the set of all genes. even with a conservative  correction for multiple testing  <cit> , structural domains of transcription factors are significantly over-represented  within the gene annotations  . in order to obtain robust results, we chose the four domains from table  <dig> present in the highest number of proteins . we examined the extent to which all known genes containing each of these four transcription factor domains co-localize with ucrs . we found that a high proportion of these genes  are in genomic neighborhoods  of ucrs: more than 30% of all homeodomain-encoding genes have an ucr within  <dig> kbp , and more than 55% have one within  <dig> kb . the ucr association rates  for genes encoding forkhead , nuclear steroid receptor  or zinc finger domains  were noted as significant as well. these data provide strong evidence that the ucrs are spatially associated with genes encoding regulatory proteins.

ucrs clusters encompass the entire gene loci of key developmental genes
in order to visualize the distribution of ucr locations across the human genome, we generated a ucr density map for each chromosome . figure 2a shows such a map for chromosome  <dig>  visual inspection reveals an obvious qualitative tendency of ucrs to occur in large clusters, which was validated by a quantitative comparison of the distributions of nearest-neighbor distances between ucrs and a neutral background model . there is no observed correlation between regions of high gene density and ucrs, consistent with previously reported observations that larger conserved regions can be located in gene deserts  <cit> . as previously noted, many of the ucrs are adjacent to homeobox protein-encoding genes . it is interesting to note that the over-representation of ucrs near homeobox genes extends up to  <dig> kbp away from the transcription start site . this is consistent with numerous observations that control regions need not be proximal to targeted genes, but can be located hundreds of kilobases from the transcription start site  <cit> . a similar trend is observed for ucrs near c2h <dig> zinc finger genes, with over-representation of ucrs extending up to  <dig> kbp away . large clusters of ucrs can span regions of several hundred kilobases around inferred target genes. for the  <dig> largest ucr clusters we generated comprehensive views of the chromosomal neighborhood . we find that  <dig> of the  <dig> clusters span one or more genes known to be expressed in embryonal development, including fundamental master regulator genes  . to provide access to the entire set of ucrs, we have implemented a basic ucr browser  with links to the ucsc genome browser  <cit> .

rare duplications of ucrs across evolution
we performed a global pairwise comparison of all ucrs, in order to determine if ucr duplication was common across evolution. we discovered only five sets of duplicated ucrs, all of which are adjacent to corresponding duplicated genes. for example, duplicated ucrs are present in the introns of sox <dig>  and sox <dig> , two highly similar genes involved in chondrocyte differentiation  <cit> . of special interest is the conservation of ucrs in the iroquois  gene clusters. irx genes are situated in two clusters of three genes each, present on human chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . similarly positioned arrays of ucrs are present in each of the four intergenic regions between the irx genes . the great majority of ucrs, while conserved across vertebrate evolution, show no similarity between the clusters within the species. an intriguing exception is the set of four ucrs that are highly similar in both cluster position and nucleotide sequence.

discussion
the human genome contains numerous ultra-conserved regulatory sequences that are shared broadly across vertebrates. these ucrs occur in arrays of highly conserved regulatory elements spanning large chromosomal regions. the clusters are co-localized with genes encoding key proteins for the regulation of development, with a particular correlation with genes encoding transcription factors. the strength of association between ucrs and diverse classes of dna binding transcription factors validates that a relatively simple definition of ucrs captures a biologically meaningful set of functional sequences. the presence of non-coding ucrs is predictive for the presence of genes implicated in development, differentiation and malignancies. the list presented in  hints at potentially crucial roles of currently uncharacterized transcription factor genes, while the collection of reported ucrs provides a wealth of regulatory locations for further study.

exceptional mechanisms are brought to bear to retain ucrs over hundreds of millions of years of parallel evolution. ucrs are more strongly conserved than sequences encoding identical proteins, and exhibit sequence identity exceeding essentially all known cis-regulatory sequences. the retention properties suggest that ucrs have important functions in the vertebrate genome.

the observed ucrs could fall into multiple functional categories, including enhancers of transcription, regulators of chromatin structure and unknown genes for non-coding transcripts. a small subset of ucrs have been identified previously as enhancers of transcription  <cit> .

the high conservation and length of ucrs compared to binding sites for single transcription factors suggests that the mode of regulation must involve more than the binding of small number of transcription factors. homeotypic clusters of binding sites, as seen in developmental genes in drosophila melanogaster  <cit> , represent one regulatory mechanism that could explain the occurrence of long, conserved non-coding regions. however, as transcription factors tolerate considerable variation between functional binding sites, a homeotypic cluster of binding sites as such cannot warrant the extreme level of conservation observed in ucrs. alternatively, the recent emergence of the role of micrornas in regulation suggests that there could be additional non-coding genes in the human genome, perhaps at the sites of ultra-conservation.

the clustering of ucrs suggests that ucr-mediated transcriptional regulation may involve molecular events on a greater scale, possibly involving chromatin structure. this potential link to chromatin structure is suggested by the striking pattern of ucrs in the irx gene clusters. most of the ucrs have no similarity between the two clusters, with the exception of a set of four ucrs that have retained both mutual sequence similarity and spatial position . it is tempting to assume that the retention of their mutual similarity is a consequence of irx cluster co-regulation, the mechanism of which remains unknown.

based on the preservation of nearly identical sequences over ~ <dig> million years of vertebrate evolution, it is reasonable to postulate the influence of exceptional biochemical mechanisms. numerous hypotheses could account for the observed data, broadly falling into two categories – active mechanism resulting in the decrease of mutational frequency in ucrs, or negative pressure consistent with evolutionary selection against such mutations. given the breadth of possibilities, we leave postulation until further data emerges.

CONCLUSIONS
since bejerano et al. <cit>  focused on larger regions  of perfect nucleotide identity compared to our more permissive settings , the genomic arrangement of ucr-containing regions with respect to their presumptive target genes was not fully realized. our findings include critical new information about ucr clusters, particularly with regards to patterns of conservation, their genomic organization, and the insights they provide into potential chromatin regulating mechanisms. these mysterious regions retained over hundreds of millions of years of evolution appear to contribute to a novel mechanism of developmental regulation. detailed studies of ucrs that will ensue from the discoveries reported here promise to advance our understanding of vertebrate development.

