BACKGROUND
hybridization is increasingly recognized as an important evolutionary process that can have diverse outcomes with respect to biodiversity. for example, gene introgression can act to increase diversity by rapidly generating novel genetic variation upon which selection can act, potentially leading to speciation  <cit> . in contrast, hybridization caused by human habitat disturbance may reduce biodiversity through the genetic fusion of species  or the genetic dilution of a rare taxon by a more abundant one  <cit> .

in snakes, there are increased observations of hybridization between species in phylogenetically-distinct groups . hybridization has been widely documented for european vipers from the genus vipera in both nature and captivity, and may be especially common in the subgenus pelias, a monophyletic group that consists of approximately  <dig> species of small venomous snakes found in the temperate zone of eurasia  <cit> . hybrids within pelias have been reported in a number of studies including those based on karyotype, osteological, and molecular methods . ancient introgression has also been proposed as a factor influencing the evolution of some viper species ), but as yet no direct evidence beyond similarities in external morphology has been provided  <cit> .

v. renardi  and v. kaznakovi are two widely accepted complexes of viper species that have distributions that meet along the northern slope of the caucasus . snakes of the v. kaznakovi complex are endemic to the caucasian region and are found in two different habitat types: forests of the northwestern and southern slopes of the caucasus and high altitude open meadows of alpine zones. snakes of the v. renardi complex consist of several taxa living in lowland or dry mountain grasslands which have expanded their range in northern caucasus through natural or artificial corridors resulting in a zone of contact between these two groups.

v. orlovi tuniyev et ostrovskikh,  <dig> and v. magnifica tuniyev et ostrovskikh,  <dig> were recently described on the basis of morphological differences and are considered part of the v. kaznakovi group  <cit> . both species have features such as intermediate geographic location, habitat, and morphology that suggest they could be hybrid lineages that originated due to historical and/or ongoing hybridization between v. kaznakovi and v. renardi. in addition, mitochondrial dna haplotypes from v. magnifica and v. orlovi are shared with v. kaznakovi  <cit> , further pointing toward hybridization.

understanding the evolutionary origin of these species would help to understand the role that interspecific gene flow may play in the process of radiation and local adaptation in vipers. in addition, since both species are included on the iucn list of threatened species and are locally protected , clarification of their evolutionary and taxonomic status is needed to accurately identify targets for conservation efforts.

genetic markers traditionally used to assess hybridization between species  assay variation at few positions in the genome, can show limited levels of informative variation, and may require de novo development for use in non-model species . the recent availability of next generation sequencing technologies has opened a door for rapidly genotyping many individuals at thousands of potentially informative loci throughout the genomes of non-model organisms  <cit> . this has led to the availability of more comprehensive datasets for studies of hybridization and genetic introgression. restriction site associated dna sequencing  is one specific method that takes advantage of these sequencing technologies to generate data from a large number of unlinked independent loci dispersed across genome, while reducing the need for a reference genome to identify orthologs  <cit> . this type of genetic information is increasingly being applied for population genetic and evolutionary analyses in a wide range of organisms .

along with advances in methodologies for generating data have come novel analytical techniques that take advantage of genomic-scale datasets. these have great potential for studies of introgression because they provide the ability to distinguish between introgression and ancestral polymorphism, which is a significant issue when evaluating potential hybridization between closely related taxa. one example is patterson’s d-statistic, which was first developed and applied to detect hybridization between different hominid lineages based on genomic data  <cit> . this approach has recently been used with radseq data to detect gene flow and identify introgressing loci in several non-model systems  <cit> .

in this paper, we use the modification of radseq data – ddrad  to investigate the evolutionary origin of the purported hybrid taxa v. magnifica and v. orlovi. we assess these questions by 1) evaluating patterns of genetic structure among these groups using genetic clustering methods, and 2) testing for patterns of genetic introgression among the groups using abba/baba tests and associated patterson d-statistics. our results support the hypothesis that these two groups arose through hybridization between the steppe viper v. renardi and the caucasian viper v. kaznakovi. we discuss the results as they relate to the evolutionary history of these snakes and also in the context of their relevance to the conservation of these species.

RESULTS
identification of loci
approximately  <dig>  x  <dig> reads were obtained for the  <dig> individuals sequenced. analyses with and without the outgroup samples resulted in the identification of  <dig> and  <dig> polymorphic loci, respectively. of the  <dig> polymorphic loci obtained when outgroup samples were included,  <dig> were genotyped in all of the samples, and were used for analyses.

genetic variation
the four taxa of vipers analysed in this study show slightly different patterns of genetic variation at rad loci . v. renardi is characterized by the lowest allelic richness but the highest number of private alleles. at the same time, it is the only group with observed overall heterozygosity that is lower than expected. both v. magnifica and v. orlovi have relatively low numbers of private alleles, but observed heterozygosity that is higher than expected when compared to v. kaznakovi and v. renardi. finally both observed heterozygosity and allelic richness are highest in v. orlovi.table  <dig> average number of alleles k, allelic richness ar, number of private alleles  and observed and expected heterozygosity  in samples of four species of vipers


v. kaznakovi

v. magnifica

v. orlovi

v. renardi
values are given as means ± sd



fst values were significantly greater then zero for all pair-wise comparisons of taxa . pairs which included v. kaznakovi, v. magnifica and v. orlovi are equally distinct from each other with fst values close to  <dig> , whereas v. renardi is much more distinct from all three of the other taxa .table  <dig> pairwise fst values calculated in arlequin  <cit>  for two parental species, v. kaznakovi and v. renardi, and two purported hybrid groups, v. magnifica and v. orlovi


v. kaznakovi
v. magnifica
v. orlovi
v. renardi

v. kaznakovi

v. magnifica

v. orlovi

v. renardi
all values were significantly greater than zero based on a permutation test 



a restricted dataset of  <dig> biallelic loci fixed between samples of v. kaznakovi and v. renardi showed that the equivalent of genome average ancestry q  <cit>  was lower in v. magnifica  and higher in v. orlovi . values of inter-source population ancestry q <dig>  <cit> , which in this case is equivalent to observed heterozygosity, were lower than expected for cases of randomly mating populations or early-generation backcrosses .fig.  <dig> scatterplot showing the relationship between global genetic ancestry q estimated using  <dig> biallelic loci fixed for different alleles in parental species v. kaznakovi and v. renardi and the inter-source population ancestry for these loci q <dig>  <cit> . symbols correspond to individuals. lines indicate the maximum level of inter-source population ancestry given global genetic ancestry q  and the expected levels of q <dig> if the hybrid population is in hardy-weinberg equilibrium . these results provide no evidence for ongoing gene flow from the parental groups v. kaznakovi and v. renardi to the proposed hybrid groups v. magnifica and v. orlovi




phylogenetic relationships
when we analysed phylogenetic relationships using maximum likelihood, the best supported tree showed that individuals were grouped in two main clades, with v. berus  and v. seoanei lataste,  <dig> placed in the outgroup position . this is similar to relationships found in previous phylogenetic analyses  <cit> . v. orlovi and v. magnifica form a well supported clade with v. kaznakovi. v. orlovi appears paraphyletic, with some samples basal to the rest of the clade, whereas v. magnifica was nested within a subclade comprised of samples of v. kaznakovi. all samples of v. renardi s. l. belong to a second large and highly supported clade, with v. lotievi from dagestan in a basal position, similar to the pattern in a recent phylogenetic reconstruction based on mitochondrial dna  <cit> .fig.  <dig> maximum likelihood tree  obtained from the analysis of concatenated sequence of rad loci. bootstrap supports above 90 % are reported at nodes



genetic cluster analyses
bayesian clustering
structure identified k =  <dig> as the best description of genetic clusters in the data based on the maximum delta k values in structure harvester. most v. kaznakovi and v. renardi samples were assigned with nearly 100 % probability to one of the two clusters . in contrast, the putative hybrid samples  showed evidence of relatively small but significant admixture of v. renardi genes into a genetic background largely characteristic of v. kaznakovi. specifically, the proportion of genes characteristic of v. renardi in v. orlovi and v. magnifica ranged from  <dig> – <dig> , and the 95 % credible regions for the proportion of v. renardi-type genes did not overlap zero in nine out of twelve v. orlovi samples .fig.  <dig> structure plot showing assignment probabilities for each sample at k =  <dig>  purported hybrid taxa v. magnifica and v. orlovi are presented between the potential parental species v. kaznakovi and v. renardi




interestingly, six out of seven v. renardi samples from territories adjacent to the northwestern caucasus also exhibited a low proportion  of v. kaznakovi genes, but the 95 % confidence interval for admixture overlapped zero in all but one of these samples. in contrast, no v. renardi samples from the populations from elbrus mountain in central caucasus or crimea had any traces of admixture.

multivariate analysis
discriminant analysis of principal components  analysis was performed on the first eleven principal components, which accounted for 69 % of the total genetic variation. bayesian information criteria  suggested that these data are best partitioned into three clusters which consisted of i) v. renardi, ii) v. kaznakovi + v. magnifica and iii) v. orlovi. v. orlovi was positioned close to the v. kaznakovi + v. magnifica group along the first two discriminant functions , but was shifted towards v. renardi along the axis of the first df . if we measure the distance between centroids along the first-axis in percents, taking kaznakovi-renardi as 100 %, v. orlovi specimens had values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  %  of this distance. the distance between v. orlovi and v. kaznakovi along the axis of the second df demonstrates the presence of differentiation between these two groups. however the much lower eigenvalues of the second df  shows that magnitude of this differentiation is much lower.fig.  <dig> discriminant analysis of principal components  results for all ingroup samples. each sample is plotted based on the first two discriminant functions. associated clustering analyses identified three groups as the optimal solution, consisting of v. renardi, v. orlovi, and a third group containing v. kaznakovi and v. magnifica




in summary, results from both clustering algorithms are consistent with v. kaznakovi and v. renardi representing pure parental taxa, but these analyses did not recognize differentiation of v. magnifica and v. orlovi at a comparable level. both of these putative hybrid groups appear to be genetically most similar to v. kaznakovi, but also exhibit patterns consistent with introgression of genes from v. renardi.

d-statistics
individual-based tests for introgression show mean d-statistics equal to  <dig>  for v. magnifica and  <dig>  for v. orlovi, supporting the hypothesis of introgression for each taxon . associated admixture proportions  were  <dig>  and  <dig>  % for v. magnifica and v. orlovi, respectively , and averages for each individual varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  % in v. magnifica and between  <dig>  and  <dig>  % in v. orlovi . as expected, control test replicates representing zero gene flow  produced d-statistic values close to zero on average , while those representing maximal gene flow , produced high mean d-statistic values . d-statistics calculated with the population-based method were similar to those in the individual based tests , and the range of d-statistics from resampled datasets did not include zero for either group .table  <dig> results of patterson’s d-statistic test for taxa of putative hybrid origin 


v. magnifica

v. orlovi
statistics for individual-based tests are reported as the mean ± sd and range calculated across all individuals evaluated as the p <dig> taxon. for these tests, the p <dig> taxon is always represented by v. kaznakovi, and the p <dig> taxon is always represented by v. renardi. values reported for the population-based analyses represent the point estimate of d, and the range of d obtained from  <dig> resampled datasets

fig.  <dig> d-statistics  and admixture proportions, f,  estimated for each taxon included as the p <dig> group in abba/baba tests. nonzero d-statistics and admixture proportions indicate a history of introgression between the p <dig> group and v. renardi, which was assigned as the donor p <dig> group in each test. plotted values represent means and associated 95 % confidence intervals



effects of variability in p <dig>  p <dig> and outgroup samples on d-statistics
to evaluate the effect that variation among samples representing the p <dig>  p <dig>  and the outgroup taxa may have on d-statistics, we tested for bias in d-statistics associated with including individual samples in p <dig>  p <dig>  and the outgroup taxa. specifically, we obtained d-statistics for all runs that contained a given sample in one of these groups. we then tested whether any of the samples representing p <dig>  p <dig>  or the outgroup samples were associated with biased d-statistics. the choice of individual in each reference group  had a significant effect on d , though the overall magnitude of the mean differences was generally low and did not exceed  <dig>  for the outgroup specimens, and  <dig>  and  <dig>  for p <dig> and p <dig> samples, respectively. however, two notable outliers were v. kaznakovi individuals kaz <dig> and kaz <dig> in the p <dig> group, which increase this difference to  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, demonstrating that specimen choice can have substantial effects on the signal of introgression.

discussion
evaluation of introgression in caucasus vipers
analyses of rad loci using both clustering methods, explicit tests for introgression based on patterson’s d-statistic and direct calculation of genome average ancestry using loci fixed for different snp  alleles between the two parental species all support the hypothesis that genetic introgression has influenced the evolution of the currently-described viper species v. orlovi and v. magnifica. the variation in terms of patterns of heterozygosity and fst values are also consistent with introgression leading to the emergence of hybrid populations of these two taxa.

previous studies have demonstrated how clustering methods and more direct approaches such as abba/baba tests can complement each other in testing for historical introgression . for example, clustering methods have the advantage of allowing an exploration of the data without requiring any a priori assignment of samples to groups. however, confidently inferring introgression directly from these clustering methods can be difficult, as any patterns of genetic admixture produced from these methods can also arise from incomplete lineage sorting. abba/baba tests provide an explicit way to distinguish between incomplete lineage sorting and introgression, but require a priori hypotheses about patterns of hybridization.

one drawback to abba/baba tests is that nucleotide site patterns useful for this test are uncommon in the genome, and even with genomic-scale snp data, the number of abba/baba sites for a test can be limited. in these cases, statistical power for inferring historical introgression on a sample-by-sample basis can be low . in previous studies, when the number of sites was sufficient, the authors did not include sites which were heterozygous  <cit> . in contrast we used both alleles at such sites so as not to lose any information, ran all possible combinations of the test, and summarized the results by averaging them. this approach both increased the number of informative loci, and allowed for an evaluation of the impact of variation among samples on d-statistic results.

patterson’s d-statistic is calculated for four individual sequences at a time. when many individuals from each of the four groups are sequenced, and there is variation in both parental populations due to potential presence of admixed individuals, the explicit calculations of d-statistics for all possible combinations of sequences is the only way to avoid bias. our analysis showed that for tests in which two specific v. kaznakovi samples were included as the p <dig> taxon, the average d-statistics over all p <dig> samples analyzed were biased as compared to all of the remaining p <dig>  p <dig>  and the outgroup sample combinations. the specific reason for this bias is not clear, but it could be due to the use of introgressed specimens or geographically isolated subpopulations of v. kaznakovi themselves. for example, sample kaz <dig>  when tested as a possible hybrid  has a mean d higher than v. magnifica  . this result suggests that when possible, d-statistic tests should be evaluated with multiple samples representing each taxon in order to account for any important variability introduced with different samples representing the p <dig>  p <dig>  and the outgroup categories. while population-based calculations of d-statistics are less susceptible to stochasticity when a low number of informative sites are available, they have the disadvantage of potentially overlooking introgressed individuals assigned to p <dig> and p <dig> populations.

durand et al.  <cit>  and eriksson and manica  <cit>  point to ancient subdivision as a possible source of inflated d-statistics. we feel this is not an issue with our data set: other analyses do not support presence of long-lasting subdivisions of viper populations in caucasus: v. orlovi and v. magnifica do not form separate clusters  or monophyletic clades  which would be expected if they had been isolated from v. kaznakovi for considerable time. in addition, due to its northern position and the pleistocene climatic fluctuations in this part of the caucasus region, it seems unlikely that stable long term environmental barriers could exist leading to subdivided populations.

both proposed hybrid taxa have similar magnitudes of fst values when compared to each of the presumed parental species: low when compared to v. kaznakovi and high in comparisons with v. renardi. according to fst values, v. magnifica is more similar to v. kaznakovi then v. orlovi . at the same time they both have a low number of private alleles, . higher values of overall ho in these two groups is expected under a scenario of hybridization. however, ho is lower than he in v. renardi, which indicates possible inbreeding in this group.

biology and ecology of viper hybridization
most species of small vipers have allopatric distributions, and species complexes are ecologically linked to different habitat types, which together with geographic isolation lead to the development of reproductive barriers between species  <cit> . there are only a few documented cases in which two or more genetically and ecologically distinct species live in sympatry, isolated by habitat preferences and altitude. these include v. berus and v. ursinii  in southern europe  <cit> , v. berus s. l. and v. renardi in eastern europe , v. dinniki and v. lotievi nilson et al.  <dig> in northern caucasus  <cit> , v. darevskii and v. eriwanensis in transcaucasia  <cit> , and v. ammodytes , v. aspis  and v. berus in slovenia  <cit> . the contact and possible coexistence of species in an ecotone has been documented between the closely related viper species v. aspis, v. latasteiboscá,  <dig>  and the more distantly related v. seoanei in spain  <cit> , where transition areas between different habitat types are associated with random hybridization between the vipers inhabiting them. the ecological differentiation and microhabitat segregation in this case prevents high levels of gene flow  <cit> .

though the area occupied by v. orlovi covers a considerable geographic range, no migrants representing pure parental species were found in sympatry with the hybrids, and are unlikely to be present due to the size of the range of v. orlovi compared to the activity range of individual snakes in vipers. in addition to this, several lines of genetic evidence argue against the occurrence of ongoing gene flow. for example, there was no pronounced clinal variation in the admixture proportion across v. orlovi localities, and also no evidence of a hybrid swarm in either v. orlovi or v. magnifica . instead, there are rather uniform admixture proportions within both v. orlovi and v. magnifica samples, indicating little or no current hybridization with parental species . in addition, low means of an inter-source population ancestry q <dig> in v. magnifica or v. orlovi indicates that in our dataset none of individuals represented backcrosses where at least one of the parents was pure individual of v. kaznakovi or v. renardi.

in contrast to ongoing hybridization, these data broadly point to historical hybridization and introgression as factors in the evolution of v. orlovi and v. magnifica. paleogeographic reconstructions  <cit>  indicate a complex history involving numerous fluctuations between open and forest habitat type in the northwestern caucasus throughout the quaternary. this ecological instability, coupled with the proximity of northwestern caucasus forests to the steppes of cis-caucasia, may have facilitated contact between the two species complexes , resulting in hybridization, and/or may have established novel niches where hybrid specimens are more fit compared to parental individuals  <cit> .

though it appears to have happened in the past, the specific timescale for the hybridization is not clear from the data presented here. the earliest time at which hybridization likely could have occurred coincides with the time when steppe vipers first colonized the northern caucasus region, which was recently estimated at approximately  <dig>  ybp  <cit> . nevertheless, more recent hybridization is also a possibility, potentially coinciding with anthropogenic effects that have influenced habitat and reduced the effectiveness of ecological reproductive barriers. hybridization may have resulted from a range expansion by v. renardi that was associated with increases in secondary open grasslands  after anthropogenic deforestation of edge territories along the range of v. kaznakovi. consequently, after the displacement and expulsion of local circassians  by the russian empire in  <dig>  <cit> , forests started to recover and open grasslands had eventually declined  <cit> , which may have resulted in the current distributions and lack of ongoing gene flow between v. renardi and v. kaznakovi. indeed, the habitat occupied by v. orlovi and v. magnifica in the northwestern caucasus is a mosaic of drier sub-mediterranean xerophyte forests, meadows, and mountain steppes that has experienced significant anthropogenic impacts, and has undergone succession after a change in the prevailing type of human activity over the past two centuries  <cit> . tendency towards ho excess over he, higher allelic richness, and lower numbers of private alleles  could be viewed as evidence consistent with more recent admixture, but without knowing baseline of these values under different historical scenarios involving hybridization we cannot draw any conclusions about the timing of admixture. further analyses such as historical demographic modelling may help to better assess the timescale of these hybridization events.

in summary, we propose that human mediated habitat transformation in the contact zone between distant species of vipers may have resulted in novel habitats differing from those of the parental species that were colonized by a stabilized hybrid population. this population of v. orlovi which has originated through hybridization may possess a specific combination of parental genetic features that make it more fit in the particular environmental conditions. if this assumption is confirmed by additional ecological data and evidence of non-random introgression and fixation of adaptive alleles , v. orlovi may serve as an example of recent hybrid speciation initiated by habitat disturbance.

taxonomic and conservation issues
v. orlovi is a critically endangered species according to the iucn classification  <cit>  and v. magnifica is listed as an endangered species  <cit> , with both showing evidence of declining populations in nature. however, our results indicate that both have hybrid ancestry and are not distinct monophyletic lineages, and therefore cannot be described as taxa according to the international code of zoological nomenclature  <cit> . in turn, because they are not species or subspecies, they should be excluded from the iucn red list. instead both v. orlovi and v. magnifica may be listed as regional populations within v. kaznakovi, with which they share the most genetic material and contain a considerable part of the genetic diversity of this species  <cit> . at the same time, the hybrid populations between distinct lineages of small vipers that occupy habitats unique from the parental species are important for our understanding of evolution and speciation and should be conserved as a unique natural phenomenon and treated as distinct evolutionary entities deserving conservation attention  <cit> . if we further assume that hybrid speciation may have occurred in this particular case of v. orlovi, it should be protected; this would mean that it may be recognized as a taxon of hybrid origin and that the official recommendations of the international code of zoological nomenclature regarding hybrids must be changed, as well as the more general view of species as monophyletic groups in animals. however, v. magnifica has a more restricted distribution, a marginal signal of admixture, and non-distinct habitat differences, making this taxon equivalent to isolated v. kaznakovi populations, and so we believe it therefore should be synonymised with the latter.

CONCLUSIONS
according to our results, a hybridization event between v. kaznakovi and v. renardi contributed to genetic diversity that currently characterizes v. orlovi, which occurs in an intermediate habitat type relative to the two parental species. contact zones between grasslands, which are typical habitats of v. renardi, and humid forest, which are typical habitats of v. kaznakovi, and/or human-mediated environmental disturbance, may have facilitated the formation of this hybrid group. relative to v. orlovi, a smaller amount of introgression was detected in v. magnifica. given this result, and an absence of ecological specialization associated with v. magnifica, we suggest that from both a taxonomic and conservation perspective it may best be treated as a marginal population of v. kaznakovi.

