BACKGROUND
within the last decade, mass spectrometry has been widely used for identifying and characterising proteins within complex mixtures. this is mainly due to its high sensitivity, specificity, mass accuracy and good dynamic range. some of the identified proteins can be characterised as unique to the organism thus qualifying them as potential biomarkers. such biomarkers can be used to monitor the pathological changes within cells and lead to a better understanding of disease processes while improving diagnostics. furthermore, they can also be used to detect biological agents thus providing a fast and accurate identification system  <cit> 

in a typical bottom up mass spectrometry proteomic approach, a complex protein mixture is first digested with a proteolytic enzyme such as trypsin. the resulting peptides are separated by liquid chromatography and subjected to analysis by mass spectrometry. the peptides are then ionized  and selected ions are further fragmented . the resulting ms/ms spectra displaying the ion fragments derived from the selected peptide ions are submitted to search algorithms for peptide identification  <cit> . the most efficient method to identify the amino acid sequence from the ms/ms spectra is based on searching the spectra against a protein sequence database. this is done using various algorithms such as sequest  <cit> , mascot  <cit>  and x!tandem  <cit> . generally, all the algorithms follow the same principle: since peptide fragmentation can be predicted, the algorithms compare an observed ms/ms fragmentation pattern with theoretical  fragmentation patterns from peptides  contained in the selected protein database. the output will be a list of peptide sequences that have the closest match to the observed spectrum.

database search algorithms apply various constrained search parameters when implementing comparisons. these include the mass tolerance, proteolytic enzyme constraints , number of missed cleavage sites and amino acid modifications. however, algorithms differ in their implementation of the scoring system when comparing the fragment ion spectrum against the theoretical fragmentation patterns in the database. this score, which can be more than one for a single algorithm, ultimately differentiates between the true and false peptide identifications . typically those peptides that have a score higher than the threshold  are accepted and presented.

the popular sequest algorithm applies the spectral correlation functions scoring system where it calculates the cross correlation score  for each fragment ion spectrum for all the candidate peptides searched in the database. mascot on the other hand applies a probability-based score instead of a score reporting the number of matched peaks. finally, x!tandem uses a statistical scoring system for its peptide assignment as it converts the database search score into an expectation value which provides an estimate of whether or not the observed match is random.

discovering biomarkers in proteomics has been done using database search algorithms  <cit>  mass spectral peak finding  <cit>  and binning  <cit> . in this study we go beyond that and evaluate the peptides identified by the database search algorithms using intensive bioinformatics validation methods. to achieve this we have implemented a pipeline that identifies peptide biomarkers based on mass spectrometry and in silico data analysis . the in silico approaches involve selecting candidate markers from blast  <cit> , verifying the candidates by comparison with a control, and further validating the markers by using a consensus approach of database search algorithms. studies have shown that accuracy in protein identification increases by using a concordance of database search algorithm scores  <cit> . together with increasing peptide coverage and thus biomarker coverage, there are two other reasons for applying this approach in our pipeline. first, as the algorithm scores differ between each algorithm, the number of peptides identified by each algorithm will be different. therefore if one was to consider the results from a single algorithm, the likeliness of selecting the 'correct' biomarker will be minimal. second, as the search databases are often incomplete and the correct match may not be available, the ms/ms spectrum may be matched to an incorrect peptide sequence thus resulting in false positive identification. two search engines can provide very different results from the same ms/ms spectrum  <cit> .

the model bacterium used in this study was clostridium botulinum, a lethal pathogen that causes a rare form of food poisoning known as botulism. it can be used as a potential bioterrorism agent because of its high lethality and mode of transmission.

a crucial step in any study that focuses on the discovery of species specific biomarkers is to eliminate markers that are also present in other species. this ensures that any biomarkers discovered are only unique to those strains of interest. c. botulinum consists of a collection of phenotypically diverse strains that do not cluster within a single phylogenetically coherent group  <cit> . due to these properties, a panel of species that belong to the genus were selected so that the specificity of any potential peptide biomarker can be tested. this pipeline may provide a standard for biomarker discovery using mass spectrometry and provide a useful tool for microbial identification and disease diagnosis. the pipeline is described in detail in figure  <dig> 

RESULTS
proteomic analysis provides tools for examining gene products and their features such as protein-protein interactions, post-translational modifications, protein isoforms and subcellular localization. as proteins are the functional component of cells, the rapid and sensitive identification of proteins is essential for organism identification and disease diagnosis. this can be achieved by discovering robust protein markers through the use of tandem mass spectrometry based proteomics which is characterised by its high sensitivity, specificity, mass accuracy and good dynamic range.

various database search algorithms have been used to identify peptides by searching the ms/ms spectra against a protein sequence database. each algorithm adapts a particular scoring system for peptide identification. to generate a biomarker discovery system therefore, there is a need to outline a comprehensive workflow of mass spectrometry data analysis that includes intensive validated steps in achieving a robust biomarker list. here, we have developed such a pipeline. six clostridium botulinum strains and an additional eight clostridium species that range from species that are phylogenetically closely related to c. botulinum  to species that are distantly related  were used to identify robust biomarkers that can delineate clostridium botulinum from any other pathogen.

peptide identification
from each algorithm, the number of peptides identified for each replicate ranged between ±  <dig>  this variation between biological replicates is expected and allows for the comparison between the replicates in the later phase of the pipeline. as shown in table  <dig>  more peptides were identified by sequest followed by x!tandem and mascot. these results agree with kapp et al  <cit>  who performed a comparison of the algorithms using blood specimen data. it is interesting, however, to note the large difference between mascot and the other two algorithms. sequest identified about double the number of peptides identified by mascot while x!tandem identified around  <dig> more peptides than mascot. one reason for this could be the fairly stringent mascot scores applied .

∩ indicates the overlap between the algorithms specified.

measuring the performance of algorithms
one consequence of the scoring system used by database search algorithms is the possibility for false positive peptide identifications. the peptides returned by each algorithm are not necessarily the result of a perfect match in the database but may be due to coincidental similarity in ms/ms fragmentation patterns  <cit> . this can lead to a very large number of incorrect peptide sequence assignments in large scale proteomics experiments. one way to measure the portion of incorrect peptide assignments is to apply a target-decoy search strategy  <cit> . this is done by reversing the target proteins of the search database to generate a decoy database. after the algorithm has identified the peptides, the correct  and incorrect  hits are counted and the false discovery rate  is calculated by fp/.

mascot uses the target-decoy strategy and calculates the fdr for each raw spectral file . there, the performance was satisfactory as the overall fdr was around 3%. for sequest, the fdr had to be calculated manually by concatenating the decoy with the target database  <cit> . results show the expected number of incorrectly identified peptides were  <dig>  while the total number of peptides identified was  <dig>  thus fp =  <dig>  tp =  <dig> and fdr = 988/ <dig> =  <dig> %.

unique peptide identification
using wu blast  <cit>  and in-house scripts, unique peptides from each replicate of clostridium botulinum were identified. uniqueness was measured by selecting the peptides that had an exact match with an amino acid sequence in the ncbi non redundant database . the selected peptides equate to 5% of the overall peptides identified by x!tandem and mascot and 4% for sequest. the lists of peptides from each replicate for every algorithm were compared to eliminate the non-conserved peptides amongst the three replicates. for x!tandem, 43% of the peptides were conserved in all the three replicates, followed by 38% and 30% for mascot and sequest respectively.

comparison with other clostridia species
peptides were identified from eight non-botulinum clostridial species searched against the swiss-prot protein database  <cit> . for all eight species, we see a similar trend with the c. botulinum strains where sequest identified  <dig> peptides followed by x!tandem with  <dig> and finally mascot with  <dig> peptides . this could be because of mascot's fairly strict score statistic that limits the algorithm for identifying peptides. the non-clostridium botulinum peptides were compared with peptides identified from clostridium botulinum to ensure the peptides identified are only present in c. botulinum and not any other clostridium species. peptides identified by mascot were refined by 25%, x!tandem 25% and sequest 20% which highlight the importance of experimental controls.

to examine whether the unique peptides selected are conserved amongst all c. botulinum strains, a comparison of these peptides across all c. botulinum strains was performed. for x!tandem,  <dig> peptides were present in at least one of c. botulinum strains and  <dig> were conserved across all strains. as for mascot,  <dig> unique peptides were conserved from a possible  <dig> and  <dig> from a possible  <dig> were conserved for sequest.

conserved unique peptides
to add further statistical significance to the peptides of interest, we decided to select the peptides that are conserved across the list of unique peptides in all c. botulinum strains. this is important for the identification of microorganisms as the biomarkers selected in this study must be present in all c. botulinum strains for the detection of the pathogen in an unknown sample. however, this should not be the case for all studies involved in biomarker discovery. in some cases, unique peptides that are present in at least one but not all strains can also qualify as potential biomarkers as it could be specific to certain strains only. it is therefore important to study whether non-conserved peptides should be dismissed prior to the implementation of the pipeline.

concordance between database search algorithms
one possible way of validating the performance of a database search algorithm and to maximise peptide coverage is to have other algorithms corroborate the results from a single algorithm. here, the refined list of unique peptides from each algorithm were collected and compared to achieve a final list of candidate biomarkers that have been recognised by all algorithms . some overlap of the result is evident when comparing two algorithms. for example, x!tandem and mascot overlap by  <dig> peptides while sequest only overlaps by  <dig> peptides with x!tandem and none with mascot. however, the level of overlap seems to increase when a third algorithm is introduced. this achieves a final list of  <dig> candidate biomarkers that are identified as a consensus of the three algorithms, which ultimately gives higher confidence to each of the peptides identified by all algorithms.

there are three reasons for this. first, each algorithm implements a different scoring system that identifies the peptides according to a particular score. by utilizing the complementary score strength of each algorithm, we can maximise biomarker coverage and achieve higher confidence in the identification. second, by combining the results from different search engines, we expect a reduction in the noise level obtained from the ms/ms spectra. this is important because the discriminatory effectiveness of the algorithm is reduced by the presence of noise or low quality ms/ms spectra. thirdly, the search databases are often incomplete which can result in incorrect peptide identification. this is the case as the algorithm will return a match for all the spectra, regardless of whether the correct peptide/protein is present in the database  <cit> . therefore, to increase the chances of selecting a robust biomarker, it is good practice to apply a union of multiple algorithms that can reduce the number of incorrect peptide identifications and provide more robust markers.

for these reasons, we have assigned a confidence scale for biomarker identification with algorithm intersection. table  <dig> shows the confidence assignment of the candidate biomarkers discovered after the implementation of the pipeline using c. botulinum ms/ms data. highest to lowest confidence  was assigned respectively to the unique peptides that were identified by all three algorithms followed by peptides identified by two algorithms and finally peptides that were exclusively identified by a single algorithm. the need for this confidence scale provides the researcher or the clinician with three sets of candidate biomarkers that can be given priorities for further experimental validation. from this, we avoid discarding peptides that can potentially be important signatures in species identification and clinical diagnosis.

x = x!tandem, m = mascot, s = sequest and ∩ = intersection. the first column indicates the rank of the biomarkers. rank  <dig> markers have higher confidence than the other markers due to the concordance of the search algorithms in their identification. the second column shows the amino acid sequence of the candidate biomarker. column  <dig> shows the algorithm used to identify the candidate biomarker. where there is no algorithm intersection, the candidate biomarker was exclusively identified by the single algorithm. the final column indicates the functional classification of the proteins  obtained from kegg  <cit> . the biomarkers fall into  <dig> different categories: metabolism, genetic information processing , enviromental information processing  and unknown.

candidate biomarker functions
candidate biomarkers were classified into functional categories using the kegg automatic annotation server  <cit> . proteins assigned to these categories belong to ancient conserved domains and six broad functional categories exist. the results show that candidate biomarkers fall into  <dig> different broad functional categories . this highlights that the peptides identified belong to a diverse range of proteins and the pipeline is not bias towards any specific functional group. peptide candidate biomarkers were mainly found to belong to the metabolism and genetic information processing categories. the genetic information-processing category includes genes such as ribosomal proteins, initiation factors and elongation factors. this category contains many genes that encode for proteins that have housekeeping functions essential for the living cell. one such example is a candidate peptide present within the prolyl-trna synthetase. this protein is essential in bacteria and expressed when a microbial cell is actively growing. biomarkers derived from such proteins are crucial in the development of diagnostic assays as they represent markers from proteins that are constitutively expressed independent of growth phase. the method described in this paper relies on the detection of peptides from organisms grown under standardised condition but the discovery of biomarkers that originate from essential proteins allows for less stringent growth conditions to be applied and also allows for the detection of biomarkers directly from environmental and clinical samples.

CONCLUSIONS
there is has been a lack of a comprehensive and sensitive pipeline to discover novel biomarkers for microorganism identification and disease diagnosis. proteomics methods based on mass spectrometry hold special value for the detection of biomarkers due to their high sensitivity and specificity. in this study, we have designed and implemented a proteomic pipeline that uses mass spectral data together with intensive bioinformatics approaches for biomarker discovery. as the peptides are refined in the pipeline, we show that the robustness of the unique peptides increases with every stage of the pipeline. we conclude that  <dig> c. botulinum candidate biomarkers have been selected with high confidence and  <dig> others selected with less confidence for species identification. further optimisation of the pipeline can be implemented by the verification of the biomarkers at the dna level. this is important as the proteomic approach applied here is dependent on protein expression and the genomic validation of these biomarkers at the dna level ensures specificity in strains where genome data is not available. we envisage the marriage of proteomics and genomics and how this will develop to be a valuable tool for biomarker discovery.

