BACKGROUND
color-coded representations of differences between omics datasets provide an intuitive and global comparative view of the data  <cit> . such visualizations further facilitate the use of human pattern recognition abilities to complement the automated approaches to pinpoint subtle differences  <cit> . currently, most visualizations are limited to pairwise comparisons where differences of interest between two corresponding datapoints are mapped onto color gradients for positive or negative ranges. in addition, results of statistical tests  performed across multiple datasets can be visualized to highlight sets of corresponding datapoints containing a difference  <cit> . these results, however, do not provide information about the actual distribution of the corresponding datapoints – which of them are similar or different. often, three  omics datasets are compared to gain insight into biological function  <cit> . intuitive three-way comparisons can further be useful for specific applications such as in drug discovery where therapeutic equivalence studies may include a control and two different treatments, namely the tested and accepted drug and a new compound under development.

here, we propose a novel color-coding approach for the visualization of three-way comparisons. the approach is based on the hsb  color model  <cit> . the hue component of the hsb color model provides a convenient way to perform smooth color transitions making it a popular choice for density plot  visualizations. we also employ another feature of the hue component, namely its circular nature, to perform mappings of possible distributions of three compared values onto the color space. the proposed color-coding approach facilitates intuitive overall visualization of three-way comparisons of large datasets.

RESULTS
the basic color scheme, based on the hsb model, is shown in figure  <dig> together with color representations for three-way comparisons of selected sets of values. the color representations were calculated according to the proposed procedure described in the methods section. when the three compared values are identical, the resulting color is white . if two of the values are identical and one of them is different, the resulting color corresponds to the hue characteristic of the differing value. for example, if a is the different value, the resulting color is red ; if b is the different value, the resulting color is green ; and if c is the different value, the resulting color is blue .

when all three values to be compared are different, the color representing their three-way comparison is selected from the color gradient running between the characteristic hues of the two most distant values . the exact color depends on the relative position of the remaining value between the two most distant values. if a and b are the most distant values and c lies half way between them, the resulting color is yellow . if c lies closer to b, the color becomes orange  and if c lies closer to a, the color becomes yellow-green . similarly, if a and c are the most distant and b lies half-way between them, the resulting color is pink . if b and c are the most distant and a lies half-way between them, the resulting color is cyan .

the saturation of the colors indicates the extent of differences between the values. when two of the compared values are identical and one is different, the saturation value corresponds to the distance between the two identical values and the unique value . if all three values are different, the saturation corresponds to the distance between the two most distant values .

to contrast other color schemes with our proposed color-coding method, figure  <dig> also shows colors which result from direct substitutions of the compared values into rgb  and cmyk  color models. identical values lead to colors from white to black  gradient for both color models . distributions, in which two compared values are identical and one is different  can each be represented by one of two colors with varying brightness. if a ≠ b = c, direct rgb coding leads to red if a > b = c  or cyan if a <b = c . for both rgb and cmyk direct coding, using two colors per distribution group  may provide additional distinguishing features for individual distributions, but also lead to undesirable ambiguities. for example, the rgb colors for rows 18– <dig> corresponding to a ≠ b ≠ c and b lies half-way between a and c are very similar to cyan, corresponding to a ≠ b = c  and blue corresponding to a = b ≠ c . other similar sources of ambiguity can be found in both rgb and cmyk columns of figure  <dig>  moreover, the brightness of the colors given by direct rgb or cmyk coding cannot be interpreted easily. for rgb direct coding, in some cases smaller absolute differences lead to darker colors  while in other cases identical absolute differences lead to different brightness of the color . for all these reasons the proposed color-coding approach appears superior for intuitive visualization of three-way comparisons. 

to illustrate how the visualization method can be used to analyze experimental data, we applied the proposed color-coding method to direct three-way comparisons of metabolite profiles. three groups of replicate quantitative metabolite profiles  derived from capillary electrophoresis time-of-flight mass spectrometry  analysis of mouse liver samples were used for the comparison. the datasets originate from our previous work  <cit> . replicate datasets from each group were normalized and averaged into single datasets which are visualized as density plots in figure  <dig>  in this case the data is represented in three dimensions as a map of signals in time , molecular mass , and intensity . an additional filter dataset was generated by calculating the f ratio  for the groups of all corresponding signal intensities from the original replicate datasets. a moving average smoothing filter  was applied to all electropherograms in the filter dataset. the averaged datasets  were used for the generation of an initial three-way comparison result . this preliminary comparison was then processed to remove signals for which the corresponding f ratio value in the filter dataset was below a threshold value of  <dig>  . the final filtered three-way comparison result is shown if figure 3a.

parts of the data corresponding to the vicinity of the most significant differences according to the three-way comparison results  in the normalized replicate datasets are shown in figure  <dig> in the form of overlaid extracted electropherograms. these represent the mass electropherograms of metabolite profiles obtained from ce-tofms and are used here to confirm visually that the signals are genuine and not due to noise or other artifacts.

multiple types of possible distributions of compared values, as discussed above, are visible in figure 3a. distributions in which one specific value is different and the remaining two compared values are similar are shown as red , green , or blue . distributions in which all three of the compared values are different and one value lies approximately half-way between the remaining two are shown as yellow , pink , or cyan .

as described in the methods section, the brightness value of the hsb color model is not used in the proposed color-coding method but can be used to encode additional information about the three-way comparison. for example, figure 3b shows an overlay of one of the compared averaged datasets  onto the filtered three-way comparison result  via the brightness value. this results in a darkening in the color of the spots that is proportional to the size of the corresponding peaks in the overlaid dataset. peaks, which do not differ significantly among the three compared averaged datasets, lead to no signals on the filtered three-way comparison result , but appear as gray spots in figure 3b  providing both a global overview of total sample composition and instant visualization of specific differences.

discussion
visualizations using the proposed color-coding approach provide intuitive overall views for three-way comparisons of large datasets. these visualizations further allow identification of signals different specifically in one of the three datasets or signals different for all three compared datasets.

one limitation of the proposed color-coding is that distributions such as a > b = c and a <b = c produce the same result. in other words, if red, green, and blue are the characteristic hues for the three compared values, a red coloration only indicates that b and c are identical and that a is different. it does not specify whether a is greater than or smaller than the other two. similarly, a yellow coloration indicates that a and b are the most distant values while c lies half-way between them. it does not specify which of a or b is greater than c. however, in most cases, simply knowing which of the three values are similar or different is the main objective and may be sufficient initially. the exact distribution can be confirmed subsequently  or undesirable distributions can be filtered out from the three-way comparison results.

alternative color-coding approaches for three-way comparisons are also possible. for example, normalizing the three compared values and using these directly as specifiers for the rgb  color model provides a unique color-coding. however, the resulting colors do not represent the three-way differences as intuitively as the colors generated by the proposed approach.

CONCLUSIONS
the proposed color-coding approach allows intuitive overall visualizations of three-way comparisons of large datasets. the approach was demonstrated with metabolomic datasets but it can equally be applied to extend the visualizations of pairwise comparisons of gene expression data  <cit>  or pathway-based visualizations  <cit>  to three-way comparisons. beyond omics data visualization in biological research, the generic nature of the color-coding approach is likely to extend its applicability to an even wider array of data analysis fields where a visual comparison of any three signals is desirable.

