BACKGROUND
natural hybridization is ubiquitous in plants and has several evolutionary consequences including the origin and/or transfer of genetic adaptations, the origin of new ecotypes or species, and the reinforcement or break-down of reproductive barriers . for closely related species with sympatric distribution, the formation and maintenance of reproductive isolating barriers is an important issue in speciation . in such cases, species boundaries could be maintained by the elimination of intermediate hybrids due to low f <dig> fertility or hybrid breakdown  <cit> , or by f <dig> dominated hybrid zones, in which f1s exhibit apparent habitat-mediated superiority over other hybrid classes  <cit> . the latter is an extreme case scenario, and even a small number of hybrids beyond the f <dig> generation might be enough to provide a genetic bridge enabling introgression  <cit> .

buddleja crispa benth. and b. officinalis maxim are two species in the family scrophulariaceae, both having the habit of shrubs or, in the case of b. officinalis, rarely small trees, reaching a height of about 3 m. b. crispa grows mostly at altitudes of above 2000 m, and prefers exposed rocky habitats and dry river valleys  <cit> ; this species has a distribution ranging from afghanistan into the eastern himalayas, where it reaches into the higher parts of the himalayan foothills of south-west china in yunnan and sichuan. the distribution of b. officinalis is restricted to comparably lower altitudes in south to south-west china, but it has a large overlap with b. crispa in the foothills, where both altitudinal ranges meet at an approximate altitude of  <dig> – 2500 m; b. officinalis prefers forest edges on mountains, and thickets on riverbanks. both species are predominantly outcrossing, though partial self-fertility and autogamy were occasionally observed in b. crispa  <cit> . both species are diploid with chromosome numbers  <dig> n =  <dig>  and have an intra-specifically variable morphology, including flower color, leaf size and shape, and indumentum thickness. furthermore, both species flower in early spring . although no hybrids between the species have been reported, numerous intermediate individuals have been discovered at the south-eastern most range limit of b. crispa, namely xishan mountain near kunming city in yunnan .

geological records suggest profound climatic changes in the region over the last  <dig>  years leading to three major changes in floral composition, with the last having occurred  <dig>  years ago  <cit> . additionally, temperature changes led to significant forest range changes, and changes in species abundance up to about  <dig> to 1500 years ago  <cit> . it is likely, that these environmental changes will also have resulted in range contraction and expansion of b. crispa and b. officinalis. the geographical location of the potential hybrid zone is especially interesting, as it allows investigating questions about reproductive isolation between species at the extremes of their distribution range. in the present study, our main aims are to test the hybridization hypothesis, and to investigate reproductive isolation barriers in this special location at the distribution margin of one of the two species. the specific questions we want to ask are:  are these morphologically intermediate individuals really hybrids between b. crispa and b. officinalis?  what is the composition of the hybrid zone on xishan mountain? is there any introgression between the two species? and  is there any evidence for reproductive barriers between these two species?

RESULTS
morphological analysis for b. officinalis, b. crispa and their putative hybrid
at all sampling sites, b. officinalis and b. crispa could easily be distinguished using the four morphological characters: leaf shape, leaf margin, leaf base including petiole, and indumentum on the adaxial leaf surface . putative hybrid individuals had morphological characters intermediate between b. crispa and b. officinalis, although leaves are often distinct in shape from both of the parents, as the widest part of the leaf lamina is more central, and hence conforming to an elliptic shape. the welch statistic calculated for the three buddleja taxa we examined indicated significant differences for the leaf width . the leaf width of b. officinalis was smaller than that of both b. crispa and the putative hybrids ; however, there was no significant difference between b. crispa and the putative hybrid  .fig.  <dig> habitats , leaf  and flower characteristics  of b. officinalis, b. crispa and the putative hybrids

b. officinalis
b. crispa



l/w
mean ± standard deviation are shown for the three traits


l leaf length, w leaf width, l/w ratio of leaf length to leaf width


a, b, c:the means with different superscripts are significantly different from each other at the  <dig>  level and based on tamhane’s t <dig> test



while the leaf length was not significantly different between the three taxa , ratios of leaf length to leaf width were significantly different between all three taxa . b. officinalis and b. crispa had the greatest and smallest ratios of leaf length to leaf width, respectively, with the putative hybrid being intermediate .

pollen viability test and hand pollination experiments
in total  <dig> pollen grains of b. crispa and  <dig> pollen grains of b. officinalis were examined for viability. based on staining with mtt, the percentage of viable pollen grains in just dehisced anthers was 50 ± 4 % for b. crispa, and 81 ± 2 % for b. officinalis. this difference is highly significant .

cross-pollination treatments showed a wide range of fruit set, ranging from 6 %  to 84 %  . however, the number of seeds per fruit was one order of magnitude higher for the intraspecific crosses b. officinalis  × b. officinalis  and b. crispa  × b. crispa  , resulting in many more viable seeds for these crosses, even with lower fruit set. in interspecific crosses there was a marked difference between the two species with regards to success as pollen donor and pollen recipient. while crosses with b. crispa as maternal parent always produced at least some viable seed, no viable seeds were produced in any heterospecific cross with b. crispa as paternal parent. b. officinalis on the other hand was always a successful pollen donor .table  <dig> fruit set, seed number, seed viability and number of viable seeds per fruit for nine pollination combinations among b. officinalis, b. crispa and their putative hybrid


b. crispa
b. crispa
b. officinalis

b. officinalis
b. crispa
b. officinalis
b. crispa
b. officinalis

aviable seeds per fruit = mean seed number × seed viablility



sequence analysis of four low-copy nuclear genes and nrets
gapc1
the alignment of gapc <dig> spanned 608 bp, including only one 1-bp indel, which distinguished b. officinalis alleles from b. crispa alleles. haplotype network analysis identified two highly divergent clusters separated by  <dig> nucleotide substitutions . only one haplotype was present in b. officinalis individuals, which represents one of the clusters, while haplotypes present in b. crispa generally conform to the other; the only exception to this pattern are three individuals of b. crispa  which had the haplotype found in b. officinalis. with regards to the putative hybrid individuals, all but two  had two divergent haplotypes, each originating from one of the diverged clusters. the two individuals  were homozygous at this locus, with p <dig> having the same sequence as b. officinalis and p <dig> possessing a unique haplotype nested within the b. crispa cluster.fig.  <dig> haplotype networks for gapc <dig> , gapc <dig> , defa , fl <dig>  and nrets . pink, blue and green circles represent haplotypes of b. officinalis, b. crispa and their putative hybrid. small red circles represent hypothetical or unsampled haplotypes. the number of mutations separating two haplotypes is indicated by the length of the connecting lines unless the number was shown on the line



gapc2
the alignment of gapc <dig> spanned 596 bp including one 1-bp indel distinguishing b. officinalis alleles from b. crispa alleles. haplotype network analysis identified two major clusters separated by  <dig> nucleotide substitutions . one cluster comprised  <dig> out of  <dig> haplotypes of b. officinalis, the other <dig> out of  <dig> haplotypes of b. crispa. additionally, two haplotypes from seven individuals of b. crispa  were nested within the b. officinalis cluster, and one haplotype from one individual of b. officinalis  was nested within the b. crispa cluster.

of the putative hybrid individuals, all but three  had two divergent haplotypes, one nested within each of the two divergent clusters. two individuals  were homozygous at this locus, having haplotypes from the b. officinalis and b. crispa clusters, respectively. individual p <dig> had two haplotypes found in the b. crispa cluster.

defa
the length of the sequenced fragment of defa was 349 bp for all individuals. haplotype network analysis identified two clusters separated by four nucleotide substitutions . all  <dig> haplotypes of b. officinalis belonged to one of these clusters, while the other cluster contained  <dig> of the  <dig> haplotypes found in b. crispa. the remaining haplotype found in one individual of b. crispa  was identical to the major haplotype of b. officinalis. of the putative hybrid individuals all but one  had two divergent haplotypes, one from each of the two clusters. individual p <dig> was homozygous at this locus for a b. officinalis haplotype.

fl1
the alignment of fl <dig> spanned 270 bp including one 3-bp indel distinguishing b. officinalis and b. crispa alleles. as in the cases above the two clusters identified employing haplotype network analysis corresponded largely to haplotypes found in b. officinalis and b. crispa, respectively. the clusters were separated by  <dig> nucleotide substitutions , and b. officinalis haplotypes grouped exclusively in one cluster. while  <dig> of  <dig> haplotypes of b. crispa were in the other cluster,  <dig> haplotypes from six individuals of b. crispa  clustered with b. officinalis haplotypes. with the exception of p <dig>  all of the putative hybrid individuals had two divergent haplotypes, one from each of the two clusters; individual p <dig> was homozygous for a b. crispa haplotype at this locus.

nrets
the length of the sequenced fragment of the nrets region was 337 bp in all individuals. haplotype network analysis identified two clusters separated by  <dig> nucleotide substitutions . all four haplotypes of b. officinalis were grouped in one cluster, and  <dig> of  <dig> haplotypes of b. crispa were grouped in the other cluster. interestingly,  <dig> haplotypes from three individuals of b. crispa  clustered with b. officinalis. the putative hybrid individuals showed the same pattern as before, all but one individual  having two divergent haplotypes, one from each of the two clusters; individual p <dig> was homozygous for a b. officinalis haplotype.

newhybrids analysis
posterior probabilities for the assignment of individuals to certain genotype classes  were obtained with the program newhybrids. individuals previously identified as b. officinalis based on morphological characters, were all assigned to b. officinalis with high posterior probabilities . of the  <dig> individuals morphologically identified as b. crispa,  <dig> individuals were assigned to b. crispa with high posterior probabilities , but  <dig> individuals were assigned to the f <dig> class  and one to b. crispa with much lower probability . of the  <dig> individuals morphologically identified as putative hybrids,  <dig> individuals were assigned to the f <dig> class with high posterior probabilities ; two individuals, however, were classed as b. officinalis  and b. crispa , respectively .fig.  <dig> genotype class assignment by newhybrids  and clustering analysis by structure  for b. officinalis, b. crispa and putative hybrid individuals, based on sequence data of four low-copy nuclear genes and the nrets region



structure analysis
the most likely number of clusters  for the whole dataset, as determined by the highest Δk  <cit> , was chosen as the true value of k. the structure analysis for the three taxa yielded a highest Δk value for k =  <dig> , indicating that two genetic clusters were sufficient to explain structures observed in the three groups. when k =  <dig>  alleles of individuals morphologically identified as b. officinalis mostly originate from one cluster , whereas alleles from  <dig> of  <dig> individuals morphologically identified as b. crispa originate mostly from the other . therefore, the two clusters were interpreted as corresponding to b. officinalis and b. crispa, respectively. the same three individuals with b. crispa morphology that were classed as f1s by newhybrids had alleles derived from both clusters in about equal proportion .

nearly all of the putative hybrid individuals,  <dig> out of  <dig>  had alleles in equal proportion from both clusters . individuals p <dig> and p <dig> had a considerably higher proportion of alleles from one cluster than the other . lastly, one of the individuals with b. officinalis morphology  shows low admixture from the b. crispa cluster .

discussion
hybridization between b. officinalis and b. crispa on xishan mountain
both species investigated in this study have a variable phenotype with regards to many morphological characters. therefore, one major objective of this preliminary study is to ascertain that the apparent morphological intermediacy has indeed resulted from hybridization, rather than extraordinary variability of one of the species in this area, because morphological intermediacy is not invariably associated with hybrids  <cit> . as can be seen from the haplotype network analysis , the two species are considerably differentiated, with one of the loci showing as many as  <dig> substitutions between alleles found in the two species . this large differentiation between the species makes the genetic identification of hybrids less ambiguous, and therefore, the heterozygote state of all morphologically intermediate plants at most loci gives strong evidence that these individuals are indeed hybrids of b. crispa and b. officinalis.

that these two species can successfully form hybrids is additionally supported by the pollination experiments. while b. crispa was not successful as a pollen donor for b. officinalis, viable seeds produced by b. crispa when receiving pollen from b. officinalis were as much as 24 % of conspecific viable seed set , indicating that sufficient hybrid seeds can be produced in the wild to allow the establishment of hybrids under suitable conditions. furthermore, b. crispa produces an exceptionally low percentage of viable seeds from conspecific pollinations when compared to conspecific pollination in b. officinalis . one explanation for the low seed production could be that the pollination experiments were carried out on transplanted plants, introduced to kbg, and that conditions at kbg are reflecting the ecological requirements of b. officinalis much better than those of b. crispa, hence b. crispa plants might have suffered substantial stress against the seed production. it would therefore have been desirable to perform the pollination experiments in the wild population at xishan. however, this was not possible due to lack of permission from the local authorities, and the interference of the frequenting public. another explanation could be the significantly different pollen viabilities of the two species . however, it would be expected that insufficient viable pollen would foremost affect the number of seeds produced, not the viability of produced seeds. as the number of successfully fertilized flowers  and seeds per fruit  is nearly equal for both species, it seems unlikely that pollen viability had a significant effect.

hybrid zone composition and introgression
despite the relatively low number of fertile hybrid seeds, as compared to seeds resulting from conspecific pollination , hybrids are frequent in the investigated area. most of these hybrids are most likely to be f1s as identified by the newhybrids analysis, and supported by their heterozygous state, always one allele each from each species, for all investigated loci. hybrid zones which comprise prevalently f <dig> individuals have been reported before  <cit> , and it has been hypothesized that a high frequency of f <dig> individuals can under certain circumstances impede interspecific gene flow effectively. for example in rhododendron and encelia, f <dig> individuals effectively outcompete all other hybrid classes, thereby impeding backcrossing and thus introgression  <cit> . under such circumstances the reproductive barrier seems to be mostly ecological as the parental species interbreed freely, and the f <dig> hybrids are highly fertile. the pollination experiments, however, point to a larger role of intrinsic incompatibilities, as opposed to ecological selection against hybrids, as the viable seed set for interspecific pollinations is lower than for intraspecific pollinations . furthermore, although most hybrids are f1s, some later generation hybrids were identified in the hybrid zone indicative of at least some successful backcrossing; two individuals of the morphologically intermediate individuals showed admixture with much higher contribution from one of the two species than would be expected for first generation hybrids . additionally, several of the b. crispa individuals showed a low fraction of alleles derived from b. officinalis . this relatively high number of b. officinalis alleles in a b. crispa background hints towards asymmetric introgression into this species. due to factors such as phenology, gametopytic-sporophytic interactions during fertilization or organelle-nuclear gene interactions, asymmetric barriers in plants are quite common  <cit> , however, to elucidate which factors are most important for the present case requires further research.

judging from the pollination experiments, a low number of backcrosses is expected due to the fact that the number of viable seeds produced for those crosses is relatively low . additionally, pure b. officinalis and pure b. crispa individuals are more abundant in the population, making intraspecific pollinations, and interspecific pollinations between the parents, resulting in f <dig> offspring, more likely. hence the occurrence of only few backcrosses can be expected, and their presence indicates that ecological selection is not strong enough to completely impede gene flow between the two species. furthermore, from the individuals comprising the population at xishan, one exhibiting pure b. officinalis morphology had a b. crispa allele at the gapc <dig> locus , and four individuals with b. crispa morphology  showed different levels of admixture , suggesting occasional backcrossing, and thus the possibility of introgression. interestingly the data from the pollination experiments suggests that theoretically, assuming conditions only taking the production of viable seeds into account, more backcrosses towards b. officinalis could be expected. generally seed set was low when a hybrid individual was used as one parent, but crosses with b. officinalis produced some viable seeds in each direction, while crosses with b. crispa were only successful with the hybrid as pollen donor , suggesting that more backcross seed involving b. officinalis should be produced. due to the small sample size it is possible that this is an artifact, but it is also possible that certain other factors favor backcrossing to b. crispa in the wild. it is widely accepted that many types of pre- and post- zygotic barriers can act together to prevent hybridization and introgression . artificial pollination experiments only cover a small subset of these barriers. for instance temporally variable barriers such as flowering period, pollinator preference and seedling establishment of hybrids in nature are very difficult to assess, and might have lead to a higher occurrence of backcrosses towards b. crispa. however, at least during the seedling stage ecological selection is likely to affect successful establishment, and with the present data adaptively favored introgression, mostly benefiting individuals with b. crispa background can not yet be ruled out.

because hybrids had never before been reported for this species pair, and additionally during extensive fieldwork throughout the distribution range of b. crispa, hybrids had never been observed, the reference population for b. crispa was sampled relatively close to xishan mountain, as we intended to avoid large allelic differences due to distance between sampled populations. the reference site, yimen, was therefore also situated at the southern extreme of the distribution of b. crispa. the structure analysis indicated that several b. crispa individuals in this population show admixture from b. officinalis , giving evidence that hybridization is not restricted to xishan mountain, and that introgression also occurred in this population. due to the distinctiveness of the b. crispa and b. officinalis alleles it is unlikely that this pattern could have been caused by ancient shared alleles, and a more in-depth search around the sample site revealed several morphologically intermediate individuals. as the population was assumed to be pure, examination during the first collection was not thorough, and likely the genetically admixed individuals would have been identifiable by means of morphology.

some of the admixed individuals were morphologically not distinguishable from pure individuals of one or the other of the parental species. therefore, a more comprehensive sampling approach will be needed in future studies to investigate potential past admixture in areas where the species distributions overlap. we are not aware of other publications demonstrating hybridization between the two species, and previous observations made during fieldwork, covering a wide range of the overlap of the two species  <cit>  , did not hint towards hybridization at other localities, hence the present data suggest a difference in reproductive isolation between the two species at the southern edge of the distribution of b. crispa as opposed to the rest of the distribution range. if b. crispa is advancing its range southwards, this might be expected, as according to theory introgression of local genes will often accompany a range expansion  <cit> . if some of the introgressed alleles are, however, adaptive remains unclear.

CONCLUSIONS
the occurrence of morphologically intermediate individuals between b. crispa and b. officinalis at xishan mountain is unequivocally linked to hybridization. morphologically intermediate individuals were almost all f1s, but some individuals which were classed as one of the parental species seem to be backcrosses, or show introgression. the two species can produce viable hybrid seed under controlled conditions, and backcrossing in both directions is theoretically possible. later generation backcrosses and introgression were detected at both b. crispa sample sites, and the data suggests gene flow in both directions, as one individual identified as b. officinalis showed low amounts of admixture originating from the b. crispa cluster. furthermore, at least at xishan mountain there is evidence that this introgression is mostly asymmetric, as a substantially higher proportion of b. officinalis alleles was detected in b. crispa than b. crispa alleles in b. officinalis.

