BACKGROUND
gene expression is a fundamental cellular process by which proteins are synthesized based on the information coded in the genes. understanding gene expression, and specifically how this process is encoded in the coding regions and utrs and thus affects transcript evolution, has been the topic of dozens of papers in recent years  <cit> . the two major steps of gene expression are the transcription of the gene to mrna molecules and the translation of mrna molecules to proteins by the ribosome  <cit> . the protein abundance of a gene is related to its transcription rate/mrna levels, its translation rate, and the degradation rate of the corresponding mrna molecules and proteins. specifically, if we assume constant mrna levels, the translation rate should have a positive effect on the protein abundance, while the degradation rate should have a negative effect  <cit> . expressly, it was suggested that protein abundance is correlated with adaptation to the trna pool  <cit> , mrna folding at the beginning of the orf  <cit> , orf length  <cit> , gc content  <cit> , and various ancillary features of the 5'utr  <cit> . in addition, it was found that highly expressed genes tend to evolve at a slower rate  <cit> , and to have more protein-protein interactions  <cit> .

in most of the biomedical studies, the protein levels of a gene are a far more important variable than its mrna levels. however, today it is relatively easy to measure mrna levels of genes  <cit> , while for technical reasons the technologies for performing large scale measurements of protein abundance lag behind. for example, the geo database includes hundreds of thousands of large scale measurements of mrna levels, whilst there are only a few such large scale measurements of protein abundance  <cit> . therefore, researchers from various fields are forced to use mrna levels, the rather rough proxy of protein abundance, instead of the protein abundance itself. thus, in recent years most of the studies in the field are aimed at predicting gene protein levels as opposed to mrna levels. concurrently, technologies to measure translation of mrnas into proteins are now rapidly emerging, transforming our understanding of the proteome  <cit> .

previous studies aimed at predicting gene protein and mrna levels are based on two major approaches, the machine learning approach and the biophysical approach. the biophysical approach is usually based on predictive simulations that are inspired by biophysical understanding of the studied processes. the machine learning approach, on the other hand, is based on statistical predictive inference of relations between sequence features and gene expression aspects, and it does not necessarily requires prior knowledge of the biophysical gene expression mechanisms.

specifically, the first and more traditional machine learning approach includes, for example, codon composition features such as the codon adaptation index , which is a simple effective measure of synonymous codon usage bias. the index uses a reference set of highly expressed genes from a species to assess the relative merits of each codon, and a score for a gene is calculated from the frequency of use of all codons in that gene. the index assesses the extent to which selection has been effective in modulating the pattern of codon usage. other 'non biophysical' approaches include regressors and various machine learning techniques that are based on a combination of transcript sequence features and various large scale measurements related to gene expression  <cit> .

the biophysical approach is based on physical understanding of the gene expression process, and includes computational biophysical models aimed at simulating the translation process and other stages of gene expression. though theoretical physical models and simulations related to translation have been suggested over thirty years ago  <cit> , only recently have such approaches been implemented on real large-scale genomic data. biohysical models aim at considering the dynamics and physical nature of the process. the most basic features are the flow of ribosomes and the interactions between them  <cit> . these features can be modeled in a deterministic  <cit> , or stochastic manner  <cit>  in which the translation time of each codon is a random variable .

in this study we implemented, for the first time, a combined approach which employs the machine learning approach atop the biophysical one; in addition to the regular transcript features, various features and predictions that are outputs of the biophysical models are exploited and analyzed. we demonstrate the advantages of this approach over the previous ones.

the major aims of this study are as follows : 1) design accurate predictors of the protein levels, mrna levels, proteins per mrna molecule , ribosomal load , and ribosomal densities of s. cerevisiae endogenous genes based only on features of its transcripts. 2) report and understand the features with the highest contribution to these predictors. 3) compare the contribution of the features in different parts of the transcript  to the expression levels of the gene, via the quality of the predictors based on each of these sets of features separately. 4) all the predictors inferred here are based solely on features of the transcript; in the strictest manner we ensured that no transcript feature is directly or indirectly based on gene expression measurements; this enables us to infer relations between properties of the transcripts and their expression aspects.

methods
all the details of the methods appear in the additional file  <dig> .

RESULTS
to understand the effect of transcript features shaped by evolution on different stages of gene expression, we compare the contribution of each part of the transcript to protein abundance , ribosomal density, mrna levels, proteins per mrna molecule  and the ribosomal load , by building regression predictors for each segment, and for all the segments together. focusing on the model organism s. cerevisiae, that has relatively ample and diverse large scale genome-wide data.

the evolutionary systems biology approach suggested in this study is novel for four main reasons. first, we generate for the first time a very large number of  <dig>  transcript features related to computational biophysical modeling of the gene expression process; many of these features have been suggested and studied for the first time. second, we propose and analyze here, for the first time, a combination of features related to the biophysical aspects of gene translation  via a machine learning approach. third, we demonstrate how our approach can help to better predict variables related to gene expression, to rank different features, and to improve the understanding of the biophysics and evolution of gene expression. finally, as aforementioned all the transcript features analyzed here are not based directly or indirectly on gene expression measurements, enabling accurate estimation of the fraction of gene expression variance that can be explained by the transcript, and the way it was shaped by evolution.

an illustration of the approach appears in figure  <dig> 

exploiting  <dig> transcriptional features
the long list of features we extracted and analyzed, followed with explanations of their rationale appear in the additional files  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  briefly, we took into account amongst other features of the transcript, the lengths of the different segments, the ratios between the lengths of the utrs and coding sequences and utrs, number of atgs, gc content, the predicted  and measured  folding energy in different parts of the transcript , the nucleotide context of the start codon  <cit> . in addition, it was shown that atg codons near the beginning of the orf may promote alternative translation initiation and thus should be under selection for elimination in highly expressed genes  <cit> ; thus, we generated several features related to this phenomenon, such as the distance of the first alternative atg from the main start codon, number of uorfs which are additional open reading frames in the utrs, what we termed sorfs which are shifted open reading frames beginning at alternative atgs downstream in the orf from the main start codon, and the atg context score  <cit>  . to study the adaptation of codons to the trna pool we also considered the tai  <cit>  and the cai, to estimate adaptations of the codons of highly expressed genes to various cellular resources  <cit> ; to consider the effect of codon order and interactions between ribosomes on translation rates we consider the totally asymmetric simple exclusion process  translation rate prediction  <cit> . in addition, we considered the number of base pairs in the two dimensional folding of the mrna in different parts of the transcript, measures of codon bias and amino acid bias  .

features whose traditional estimation relies on expression levels were calculated in a novel manner independent of the expression levels, so that they are solely derived from the transcript .

inferring families of predictors based on a robust jackknifing procedure
we built linear and non linear predictors for the three parts of the transcript, the 5'utr, orf, and 3'utr separately, and also combining the three together, in the following manner. the data was divided into terciles: a train, test and validation set, performing this sampling  <dig> times, thus resulting with  <dig> predictors per segment/entire transcript. the split between train and test helps avoiding over-fitting while repeating the procedure enables estimating the robustness of the inferred features. in addition, our approach shows that there is overlapping between the different features; hence, many predictors with similar performances exist. our approach is similar but not identical to the random forest approach .

additionally, this enabled us to perform statistical analyses of the prevalence, and thus significance of features. we implemented a greedy feature selection process, by which in each iteration every feature is added respectively to the growing regressor, and the feature contributing to the highest correlation is selected . at the end of each stage, the current predicted regressor coefficients of the selected features are assessed on the test set. the selected regressor is then evaluated on the validation set, in order to avoid overfitting.

the train set was utilized in-order to estimate features whose calculation relies on expression levels, instead of the highly expressed genes traditionally used for their estimation. these features include for example the cai, tai, tasep and atg context score . in order to deduce the contribution of expression levels via the optimization of such features to our regressor scheme's predictive power, we also compared the attained results to the ones obtained based on features that were estimated according to expression level measurements.

to model non-linear relations we used multivariate adaptive regression splines , which is a form of regression analysis introduced in  <cit> . it is a non-parametric regression technique, and can be seen as an extension of linear models that automatically models non-linearities and interactions. see additional file  <dig>  section for a detailed description of our predictors' methodology. the results of the non-linear predictors are similar to those of the linear predictors, providing an additional validation that the reported results are robust and are not specific to the  model we chose to use here.

in each case mentioned above , we compute  <dig> predictors and report the performances of the median predictor  in terms of correlation with the real gene expression measurements; the features are ranked based on the number of times they appear in the different predictors .

throughout the figure legends the following acronyms are used: × aa: × amino acid ; xxx cod: xxx codon ; bp: base pairs; atg dist: the distance of the first atg in the relevant transcript segment  from the main start atg; best/mean rel atg cs: the best or mean relative atg context score , if rel is omitted then it refers to the absolute context score; 30c: first/last   <dig> codons of the relevant segment; f <dig>  f <dig>  f2: we considered three reading frames, frame  <dig> is identical to the reading frame of the gene orf, frames  <dig> and  <dig> represent a frame shift of  <dig> or  <dig> nucleotides relative to the main frame; fe: predicted folding energy ; parallel analysis of rna structure : measured folding energy; exppars: the exponent of the pars score .

predictors of gene expression variables based solely on features of the transcript
at the first stage we investigated how well measures of gene expression can be predicted based on all the features of the transcript. to this end as aforementioned, for all the gene expression variables we repeatedly sampled a tercile of the data , inferred greedily a predictor based on the transcript features, terminating its construction based on the second tercile , and implemented it on the remainder of the data . figure 2a-c includes the dot plot and correlation of the predicted vs. real protein levels , ribosomal densities , mrna levels, and figure 3a-b includes the dot plot and correlation of the predicted vs. estimated ribosomal load , and proteins per mrna molecule , respectively, for the median linear and non-linear predictors . as can be seen in figures  <dig>   <dig> for the linear/non-linear regressors, all the correlations are significantly high -- a correlation of  <dig> / <dig>  with protein levels ,  <dig> / <dig>  with ribosomal density ,  <dig> / <dig>  with mrna levels ,  <dig> / <dig>  with ribosomal load , and  <dig> / <dig>  with proteins per mrna molecule , , with all the predictors based on less than  <dig> features on average. these results are significantly higher than those previously reported for biophysical based models  <cit>  or machine learning based models  <cit>  alone . specifically, the results demonstrate that variables related to the expression levels can be predicted with very high accuracy based on the transcript alone .

one prominent feature is the tai, which is based on the adaptation of codons to the trna pool of the organism  <cit> ; as can be seen, tai is a top feature in the case of mrna, pa, and rl predictions. it was suggested that tai, a measure of the adaption to the trna pool is higher in highly expressed genes due to stronger such selection in these genes  <cit> . specifically the adaptation to the trna pool affects the translation elongation speed and thus improves the translation rate, hence effecting pa in a causal way  <cit>  ; in addition, it is known that there is a contrapositive relation between ribosomal speed and density  <cit> ; thus, high translation elongation speed should decrease ribosomal density and therefore decrease the cost of protein expression in a non-causal way  <cit> ; this relation is more important in genes with high mrna levels and/or high ribosomal density that potentially consume more ribosomes .

the strength of the folding along the different parts of the rna transcript is also known to contribute to the efficiency of various gene expression steps, including translation initiation  <cit>  and translation elongation  <cit> . folding was also suggested to be under stronger selection  in highly expressed genes possibly to prevent aggregation of mrna molecules  <cit> . indeed, we see in all predictors  variables related to the folding of the mrna and its gc content in different parts of the transcript.

another important feature that appears in the cases of rd and ppr prediction is the length of the orf or transcript, supporting the conclusion that highly translated genes in yeast are under selection to be more compact   <cit> .

interestingly an important feature related to rd is the folding at the beginning of the 5'utr, which is known to be related to the efficiency of translation initiation . in the case of mrna levels, the folding and nucleotide composition of the 3'utr are important features that may be related to the mrna degradation rate  <cit> .

finally, a long list of codons and amino acids appears in the different predictors.

among others, the frequency of the codons ggt and ctc appear in the mrna predictor and tend to have negative coefficients, while codon ccc tends to have a positive coefficient. these codons can be related to mrna levels in a causal way; for example, by increasing/decreasing transcription efficiency or effecting degradation rate. these codons may be related to mrna levels in a non-causal way by having positive/negative effect on translation and since pa and mrna levels tend to correlate.

codons features tend to appear also in other predictors, for example, the codons cga and ata appear in the rd predictor and tend to have positive coefficients; the codons gcc and atc tend to appear in the pa predictor with positive coefficients; the codons ata and gcc tend to appear in the ppr predictor with positive coefficients; codons cga and ccc tend appear in the rl predictor with negative coefficients.

as mentioned, the predictors also include features such as tai that correspond to codon elongation rates; thus, this fact may suggest that these codons are not represented accurately in the current elongation rate measures .

predictors based on the 5'utr, orf, and 3'utr features separately
at the next stage, we aimed at understanding the quality of prediction that can be gained when using features of each of the main parts of the transcript  separately. such an analysis can help us understand the relative contribution of each stage of translation  to the overall translation efficiency. in addition, we aimed at better understanding the relevant gene expression features of each of these three parts as shaped by evolution. furthermore, as there is much redundancy among the different features, such that certain features may mask other important ones in the combined regressor, we inferred the five aforementioned predictors  on the basis of the transcript's three main parts separately. a summary of the results appears in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> 

as can be seen, the correlations obtained for the linear and non-linear predictors respectively based on the features of the orf alone  are very similar to the ones obtained when considering the entire transcript , correlations of  <dig> / <dig>  with pa ,  <dig> / <dig>  with rd ,  <dig> / <dig>  with mrna ,  <dig> / <dig>  with rl , and  <dig> / <dig>  with ppr  respectively , suggesting that for inferring a good predictor of endogenous gene expression, the information in the utrs is redundant. this result supports the conjecture that though some of the gene expression regulation mechanisms are known to be encoded mainly in the utrs , evolution shaped orfs in such a way that gene expression measurements can be inferred accurately based on the orf alone.

the correlations of the linear and non-linear predictors respectively that are based on the utrs were markedly lower: correlations of  <dig> / <dig>  with pa ,  <dig> / <dig>  with rd ,  <dig> / <dig>  with mrna ,  <dig> / <dig>  with rl , and  <dig> / <dig>  with ppr  respectively in the case of the 5'utr features based predictors ; correlations of  <dig> / <dig>  with pa ,  <dig> / <dig>  with rd ,  <dig> / <dig>  with mrna ,  <dig> / <dig>  with rl , and  <dig> / <dig>  with ppr  respectively in the case of the 3'utr features based predictor .

the relevant features in the case of the 5'utr  in all the gene expression measurements include the folding strength  at the end of the 5'utr, which is related to translation initiation efficiency via ribosomal binding efficacy  <cit> . an additional feature is the length of the 5'utr which is shorter for highly expressed genes . finally, many features are related to alternative translation initiation from the 5'utr and include the number of alternative atgs, their distance from the beginning of the orf, and the optimality of the nucleotide context of the alternative atgs to translation initiation  <cit> . these features may affect the rate and efficiency of translation initiation of the major orf in the transcript and thus effect in a casual way the pa, rd, ppr, and rl; the mrna is probably related to these variable in a non direct/causal way: highly expressed genes  are selected for efficient translation initiation and are also selected for higher mrna levels.

the relevant features in the case of the orf  are generally similar to the ones obtained for the entire transcript . specifically, they include the tai, features related to mrna folding, and orf length.

in addition, also in this case, the predictors included features related to the frequency of codons and amino acids; for example:

the frequency of the codons ccc, ttg, and ggt appear in the orf based mrna predictor and tend to have negative coefficients; the codons agg and ata tend to appear in the orf based rd predictor with negative and positive coefficients respectively; the codons cga and gcc tend to appear in the orf based pa predictor with positive coefficients; the codons gcc and acc tend to appears in the orf based ppr predictor with positive coefficients; and the codons ccc and cga tend to appear in the orf based rl predictor with negative coefficients respectively. these results support the conjecture that the frequency of the different codons affect various aspects of gene expression in a way not modeled via conventional measures such as tai, cai, tasep, etc.

interestingly, the most relevant features in the case of the 3'utr  are similar to the ones obtained for the 5'utr. the top features include the 3'utr length and aspects of its mrna folding. additional features are related to possible alternative translation initiation from the 3'utr, and include the number of alternative atgs, their distance from the end of the orf, and the optimality of the nucleotide context of the alternative atgs to translation initiation. this is possibly related to the fact that during the eukaryotic translation initiation there is interaction between the 3' end  of the transcript and the initiation complex at the 5' end  of the transcript  <cit> ; the pre-initiation complexes scanning the 5'end of the transcript may diffuse to its 3'end with high probability and perform undesired initiation event that are selected against in highly expressed genes.

predictors including features of the transcript optimized via mrna levels
in this section, we briefly report the results obtained based on transcript features, of which some , include parameters that were optimized/inferred based on mrna levels measurements. for example, the tai includes weights corresponding to codon-trna interaction efficiency which were inferred based on the correlation between the tai and mrna levels in s. cerevisiae  <cit> .

first, it is not clear if such an optimization can improve the predictions. second, it is interesting to see the predictions of variables such as pa and ppr based on the mrna dependent features .

in the current analyses, the set of transcript features includes  <dig> features . all the detailed results appear in the additional file  <dig> ; here we only report the highlights.

first, we investigated how well measures of gene expression can be predicted based on all the features of the transcript, when optimizing the relevant features via mrna levels. figure s1a-c in additional file  <dig> includes the dot plot and correlation of the predicted vs. real protein levels , ribosomal densities , mrna levels, and figure s2a-b in additional file  <dig> includes the dot plot and correlation of the predicted vs. estimated ribosomal load , and proteins per mrna molecule , respectively, for the median linear predictors . as can be seen in additional file 1: figures s1-s <dig> all the correlations are significantly high -- a correlation of  <dig>  with protein levels ,  <dig>  with ribosomal density ,  <dig>  with ribosomal load , and  <dig>  with proteins per mrna molecule , .

from the results we learn that the prediction of post-transcriptional aspects of gene expression  cannot be improved significantly when adding mrna levels information indirectly, i.e. features derived from it. in addition, the results demonstrate that combining the machine learning and biophysical approach can yield improved correlation with pa than the one obtained before for each of the approaches separately  <cit> . one central feature that appears in almost all the entire transcript based predictors  is the totally asymmetric exclusion process ; as mentioned this feature is based on a biophysical simulation of gene translation and considers the adaptation of codons to the trna pool but also  the order of codons. thus, this result supports the conjecture that the order of codons and not only their content/average value has important contribution to various gene expression aspects, and evolution shapes the codon order in endogenous genes to optimize the different stages of the gene expression process  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we report a new strategy for predicting and analyzing gene expression that is based on exploiting features of the transcript, performing feature selection, and merging them via a regression model. the study connects features of the transcript shaped by its evolution and measurements of various steps of gene expression.

the results gained in this study are numerous and are founded on deep biophysical analyses and modeling of this process. amongst others, we show that different stages of the gene expression process can be predicted with very high accuracy  based on only around 10- <dig> features , which are based solely on transcript nucleotide/codon composition. we show that ppr predictors based on orf features are significantly more qualitative  than predictors based on the utrs alone; this result supports the hypothesis that translation elongation  is also a rate limiting stage of gene translation, and affects translation in a causal or non-causal way; thus, aspects of this process are encoded in the orf, and evolution shapes orfs' content based on the proteins they encode, but also based on their gene expression regulation.

it is important to understand that the causal relations reported in this study, based on endogenous genes, are not always clear; this is related to the fact that often highly expressed genes are under evolutionary selection for various features that do not improve translation in a direct way. thus, these features may have significant correlations with genes' protein levels, which are not causal, nor do they affect their translation efficiency. for example, the frequency of an amino acid in a gene can have high correlation with its protein levels due to the specific functionality of the highly expressed proteins, and not due to the fact that this amino acid indeed improves the translation rate.

one interesting result reported here is the significant correlations between the transcript based predictors of mrna levels and the actual mrna levels . this is surprising since it is assumed that transcription is mainly regulated via the promoter , while translation is regulated via patterns that appear in the transcript. this result supports the conjecture that aspects of the mrna elongation and degradation steps  are also partially encoded in the transcript and thus may affect its evolution.

the reported results suggest several interesting future directions:

first, in this study we decided to concentrate on s. cerevisiae as this organism has the most high quality large scale measurements of gene expression. it will be interesting to generalize the reported results to other organisms, including multi-cellular organisms, when such data is available.

second, as aforementioned, one interesting conclusion reported in this study is the predictors based on the orf are significantly better than those based on the utrs; and that the information encoded in the utrs is redundant as it does not significantly improve the orf prediction. it will be challenging to show that this conclusion is not due to the fact that the orf simply tends to be longer than the utrs . this is not a trivial task as there is no simple mathematical model that describes the way regulatory information is encoded in the transcript considering the interaction of the transcript with other cellular properties, and the overlapping of different types of information encoded in it .

third, the features inferred here can teach us about transcript evolution and the way its expression aspect constraints its evolution. we show that various expression aspects of genes can be predicted solely based on their transcript; specifically, that highly expressed genes tend to have specific codons, shorter utrs, improved tai and cai, weak/strong folding in different parts of the transcript, and more. these features probably tend to optimize expression in various ways; thus, the results reported here support the conjecture that 'synonymous' mutations  influencing these features should affect the fitness of the organism, and thus should not be treated as synonymous. various such mutations have been previously reported  <cit> ; the long list of features reported here may provide additional such cases, which can be considered when estimating non-neutral/neutral evolution  <cit> . more generally, the results reported in the current study suggest that the orf and utrs of a gene are shaped by the different stages of their expression levels, thus we need to consider gene expression when developing models for studying genome evolution.

finally, we believe that the lists of new relevant features reported in the current study, which are based on the way evolution shapes the expression of endogenous genes, can teach us about novel mechanisms related to gene expression regulation and modeling. specifically, we report a set of codons and codon pairs that have significant effect on the prediction quality given traditional measures of codon bias and elongation efficiency. these features may affect expression levels via various mechanisms including: 1) regulation of trna levels not accurately modeled in current codon bias and translation elongation features/indexes  <cit> ; 2) translation frame shifts  <cit> ; 3) transcription elongation efficiency  <cit> ; 4) and trna recycling  <cit> . to better understand the biophysical rules of these features and to infer causality, we suggest to explore them via experiments that include introducing them into a reporter gene and measuring the effect of these features on changes in its expression levels measurements, and/or by multi-organism studies of their evolutionary patterns.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors' contributions
hz and tt conceived the research, analyzed the data, and wrote the paper.

supplementary material
additional file 1
contains the supplementary methods and some additional results.

click here for file

 additional file 2
main scheme regression features. a short description of all the features utilized in the study, in the main regressor scheme.

click here for file

 additional file 3
expression dependant scheme regression features. a short description of all the features utilized in the expression dependant scheme.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this study was supported in part by a fellowship from the edmond j. safra bioinformatics program at tel-aviv university. tt is partially supported by minerva arches award.

declarations
publication of this article was funded by tel-aviv university.

this article has been published as part of bmc bioinformatics volume  <dig> supplement  <dig>  2013: proceedings from the eleventh annual research in computational molecular biology  satellite workshop on comparative genomics. the full contents of the supplement are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/bmcbioinformatics/supplements/14/s <dig> 
