BACKGROUND
the parabasalian flagellate trichomonas vaginalis is a unique human parasite causing trichomoniasis, the most common sexually transmitted disease 
 <cit> . the anaerobic protist possesses the ability to rapidly shift between an amoeboid and flagellated phenotype
 <cit> , and was once considered to represent an early-branching eukaryotic lineage
 <cit> . at least  <dig>  genes, and potentially up to  <dig> , are encoded on six chromosomes, representing one of the highest coding capacities known
 <cit> . exhaustive coding capacity analyses in trichomonas are generally hampered through the extensive presence of repeats and transposable elements that are thought to make up 45% of the genome
 <cit> . the expansion of the genome appears recent
 <cit>  and might coincide with the colonization of new host habitats. the genome enlargement of this eukaryote was further fueled by a high amount of lateral gene transfer events
 <cit>  and the massive expansion of some gene families
 <cit> . it has been suggested that the frequency of pseudogenes in t. vaginalis is at least 5% and that unstable gene families that underwent many gene duplication events, thereby producing pseudogenes on the way, further contributed to the large genome of t. vaginalis
 <cit> .

the transcriptome of t. vaginalis and its many known strains is not well characterized, but some classes of non-coding rnas  have been described. genome annotations of t. vaginalis include  <dig> ribosomal rnas  genes of three types and  <dig> transfer rnas  genes of  <dig> types
 <cit> . rna subunits of the ribonucleoproteins rnase p and mrp were also identified
 <cit> . furthermore, small regulatory rnas  have been discovered including potential micrornas 
, small nuclear rnas 
 <cit>  and small nucleolar rnas 
 <cit> . genes of the argonaute  and dicer-like family are encoded by trichomonas and hence suggest the existence of functional rna interference mechanisms
 <cit> , although other studies question the functionality of identified mirnas in this parasite
 <cit> . regulatory rnas are mostly small , but recent reports of longer regulatory rnas are accumulating
. recent deep-sequencing of the parasite’s transcriptome has shed light on the expression potential of the genome and provided evidence for the expression of about  <dig>  genes and a correlated co-expression of gene families induced by different stimuli
 <cit> .

long non-coding rnas  are often defined as transcribed but not translated rna segments larger than srnas 
 <cit> . lncrnas affect chromosomal dynamics, the telomeres and structural organization
 <cit> . their expression can be regulated and restricted to certain developmental stages and tissues
 <cit> . some are recognized by canonical transcription factors
 <cit>  and their promoters can show evidence of purifying selection
 <cit> . however, the functionality of the majority of lncrnas is unknown, and many are thought to represent “junk” rna or transcriptional noise attributable to the promiscuity of rna polymerase ii
 <cit> . it has been proposed that every euchromatic nucleotide in the human genome could be transcribed
 <cit> , albeit this does obviously not necessarily translate into every expressed nucleotide having a biological function
 <cit> . most lncrna studies focus on metazoan organisms with yeasts representing a rare exception
. although several thousand lncrnas have been predicted to be functional
 <cit> , the number of experimentally validated functional lncrna  remains low
 <cit> . most lncrnas contain only short open reading frames
 <cit> , but for yeast it has been demonstrated that more than a thousand short open reading frames are translated
 <cit> . they were shown to be conserved between organisms and to fulfil biological functions
.

pseudogenes, like lncrnas, do not encode functional proteins but can be identified through their sequence similarity to protein-coding genes from which they evolved. some are expressed and translated, but most resemble non-processed genetic remnants
. there are  <dig> annotated pseudogenes in t. vaginalis , but based on gene family analysis it was estimated that a minimum of 5% of the protein-coding genes may represent pseudogenes and half of the trichomonas transmembrane cyclase family appears to represent pseudogenes
 <cit> . expressed pseudogenes are essentially a sub-group of lncrna, and for some a biological function has been identified
 <cit> . antisense pseudogene transcripts can be processed into small regulatory rnas
 <cit>  or to complementarily bind to their functional counterparts and influence their expression
 <cit> . one of the best-studied functional lncrnas that participates in x chromosome inactivation in mammals is the xist rna. it is a lncrna that originates from the pseudogenization of a protein-coding gene
 <cit> .

here we identified and characterized lncrnas of the parabasalian parasite t. vaginalis by screening available transcriptional data and  <dig> million novel rna-seq reads we generated. we found that almost one fifth of the transcripts originate from intergenic regions of the parasite. we have characterized these transcripts in terms of their potential coding capacity, flanking genomic regions and similarity to annotated genes, in order to elucidate their origin and determine what drives their expression.

RESULTS
general transcript mapping and homology
we used  <dig>  expressed sequence tags  downloaded from trichdb
 <cit>  and combined those with  <dig>  million raw reads from our own rna-seq data. after assembling and merging the two data sets, we mapped in total  <dig>  unique transcript contigs onto the genome of trichomonas vaginalis in total. from those,  <dig>   mapped onto regions encoding annotated genes and  <dig>   did not. we refer to these datasets as cdsp and cdsn, respectively . the cdsp set overlapped with  <dig>  protein-coding genes, representing only 42% of annotated genes and less than half of what was found for other protists
. yet, these transcripts represent 93% of the gene families identified in trichomonas
 <cit> , indicating that  sequencing depth appears to be sufficient and that the numbers are not likely to change much with more sequencing data becoming available, and that  most of the functional proteome the genome encodes is expressed, but not all members of a gene family.figure  <dig> 
schematic workflow of the data management. sequenced reads and expressed sequence tags  of trichomonas vaginalis were mapped onto the genome as shown and sorted into the categories presented according to their best blast hits.



the homology of cdsn transcripts to annotated genes was examined next. about half  had no significant similarity to any annotated genes, hence representing lncrnas of non-recognizable origin. the remainders of the cdsn transcripts  were found to be significantly similar to annotated genes and were thus classified as expressed pseudogenes with functional homologous genes. these were additionally filtered to exclude contigs that mapped to the very proximal regions of genomic scaffolds and those with bad sequencing resolution, that is stretches of ‘n’.  <dig> such contigs were identified. we termed the remaining identified set pseudo, and those loci without significant homologies lncrna .

the repetitive nature of this parasite’s genome is extensive. using repeatmasker
 <cit>  we screened the genome for repetitive elements and subsequently for overlaps with associated genomic regions. about 30% of the pseudo and cdsp loci  were associated with repeat regions, while for the lncrna loci this was the case for only  <dig> %. comparable to pseudo and cdsp, a dataset consisting of all t. vaginalis gene annotations showed an association with repeat elements for  <dig> %. therefore, these loci seem to be preferably embedded into the repeat structure of the genome, but do not show any specific links. lncrna loci varied more and this might be connected to specific sequence selection to form functional rna structures.

data for the human genome suggests that half of the transcriptome consists of lncrnas
 <cit>  and in mouse  <dig>  ncrnas were identified
 <cit> . for t. vaginalis only 17% of the transcripts did not map to any annotated genes. with more data for the parasite becoming available one will be able to determine whether this difference is due to sequencing depth or biological differences. considering studies on other protists, which were able to cover most of the annotated genes with less sequencing depth, the former seems unlikely
. in any case, most will resemble transcriptional noise
 <cit>  and random expression caused for instance by sequences mimicking transcriptional promoters , with only a few representing expressed and functional lncrnas. we experimentally validated the expression of a random set of lncrnas in the most frequently used laboratory strain t <dig>  and the virulent t <dig> and highly virulent fmv <dig> strains. for all six cases we could verify expression in all the three t. vaginalis strains tested , which demonstrates lncrna expression to generally be conserved across the different strains tested.figure  <dig> 
expression of lncrnas is conserved among different
t. vaginalis
strains. reverse transcriptase pcr was performed on complementary dna  generated from rna of t. vaginalis strains t <dig>  t <dig> and fmv <dig> in the presence  or, as control, absence of the reverse transcriptase enzyme . all six randomly chosen lncrnas candidates were found expressed in the three different strains analysed.



characterization of transcribed pseudogenes
the pseudo set includes 7% of all transcripts analysed. it represents a lower bound on the pseudogene content of t. vaginalis, as this set does not include non-expressed pseudogenes, unitary pseudogenes, or pseudogenes erroneously annotated as functional genes. it has previously been estimated that at least 5% of the annotated genes of t. vaginalis could represent mis-annotated pseudogenes, and for one large gene family it has been shown that about half of its members could qualify as pseudogenes
 <cit> . for the human genome it is estimated that  <dig> to 20% of all pseudogenes are expressed
 <cit> . if that is also true for trichomonas, the parasite could potentially harbour between  <dig>  and  <dig>  pseudogenes. in order to estimate the number of non-expressed pseudogenes in t. vaginalis we performed blastn searches  with annotated proteins to intergenic regions lacking expression evidence. this revealed approximately  <dig>  intergenic loci, for which no expression evidence exists, but with a significant homology to annotated  genes. although the absolute number is much higher, the value is comparable to that from human, where the amount of pseudogenes  almost reaches that for the coding genes
 <cit> . high abundances of pseudogenes are generally known for mammals, but their number in less complex organisms is usually smaller
 <cit> . this would support a recent hypothesis that the trichomonas genome  faces constantly emerging and disappearing paralogs, and is in a steady state of changing
 <cit> .

large gene families contain high a number of genes, where each one can pseudogenize or duplicate. we examined our transcribed and non-transcribed intergenic pseudogenes for a correlation between the number of pseudogenes and sizes of corresponding gene families. although we observed a moderate pearson correlation for non-transcribed pseudogenes , the correlation for transcribed pseudogenes  was rather low , indicating a potential connection. but at least for the transcription of pseudogenes this factor seems less important. functional categories of pseudogene datasets were analysed using eukaryotic orthologous groups  and it revealed similar distributions of categories for non-transcribed pseudogenes, transcribed pseudogenes  and annotated transcripts . a clear difference occurred according to the frequency of genes, which were associated with kog categories. while for cdsp 64% of loci remained unclassified, for the untranscribed pseudogenes and pseudo loci they accounted for 83% and 92%, respectively. 4% of unclassified loci in pseudo, which is low compared to 37% for non-transcribed pseudogenes, represented repetitive gene models described in carlton et al.
 <cit> . these findings indicate that these pseudogenes, which are still transcribed, predominantly are based on recent trichomonas-specific functions.

in order to compare homologies of pseudo, cdsp and intergenic regions  we examined the distributions of the best blastn hit e values . all compared sets differed significantly , with the intg behaving similarly to the cdsn set. the blastn hits of the pseudo set revealed higher e values compared to those of the cdsp set, suggesting these homologies are less conserved and to only partially map onto the annotated gene sequences. the several cases of pseudogenes that retrieved hits with small e values – indicating full sequence hits – most likely represent novel pseudogenes that represent more recent gene duplications events and not falsely annotated genes.figure  <dig> 
comparison of potential coding capacities for the different sets of transcripts identified.  shows proportions of blastn hits with a given e value to annotated genes of trichomonas vaginalis. relative frequencies of cdsp were calculated excluding those e values lower 10− <dig> .  distribution of the gc-contents in per cent, showing that cdsp behaves nearly identical to tvag .  distribution of the sequence lengths of the longest orfs relative to the corresponding full-length sequence. the orfs of cdsp distribute very differently in comparison to the remaining datasets, while the intergenic regions behave similar to the pseudo and lncrna sets.  distribution of stop codons over the relative positions in the full sequence of the reading frame showing the lowest number of stop codons. counts were normalized according to total codons per bin.



transcript coding capacity of cdsn
the pseudo, lncrna and cdsp sets were compared in regard to their potential protein-coding capacities. three control sets were used: the first represents the intergenic loci  mentioned above, the second was based on randomized cdsn sequences  and the third simply comprised all annotated t. vaginalis genes that included also those lacking expression evidence . we found that the pseudo and lncrna sets behaved similarly and were placed in between the protein-coding cdsp and the randomized cdsn sets. differences between all datasets, except pseudo and lncrna in figure 
3d, were statistically supported , where the p values suggested that cdsp differs the most. as expected for cdsp, this set’s gc-content was found to be very similar to the gc-content described for annotated genes , while the gc-content of cdsn  was more similar to that of the non-expressed intergenic sequences . pseudo and lncrna subsets of cdsn alone differ only slightly from the total cdsn set, with the pseudo set showing a marginal tendency towards protein-coding gene sequences . this suggests that the pseudo set does not contain many, if any, genes that are not yet annotated.table  <dig> 
protein coding sequence features of the various sets analysed



number

median longest orf length

mean longest orf length

median relative longest orf

longest orf ≥ <dig> aa

proportion of stop codons


gc-content

annotated protein-coding genes.


intergenic regions without expression evidence randomly selected in size of cdsn.


order of nucleotides randomized per sequence.


in reading frame with lowest number of stop codons.



the relatively high amount of lncrnas with longer open reading frames  is noteworthy. similarities of lncrnas to protein-coding genes have been described before and a high density of orfs among lncrna noticed
 <cit> . we found a median orf length of  <dig> nucleotides among the cdsn set, which is lower than the median of  <dig> nucleotides reported for mammalian lncrnas
 <cit> . as expected the pseudo and lncrna sets showed a significantly lower coding capacity when compared to the cdsp set. it demonstrates that cdsn does not just represent erroneous protein-coding gene annotations, but largely non-coding transcripts similar to the non-expressed intergenic regions.

cui and colleagues
 <cit>  suggested stop codon read-through could explain the high number of pseudogenes in t. vaginalis, and which are nearly identical to their evolutionary predecessors and functional counterparts. in consequence, a massive number of genes could have been missed during genome annotation. for a single candidate of the abc transporter family, tentative evidence exists for stop codon suppression to occur in trichomonas
 <cit> . however, western blot evidence for the translation of the full-length protein including its hemagglutinin -tag was not shown and the authors concluded: “…further experimental work would be required to substantiate this”. in the current t. vaginalis genome annotation we found  <dig>  cases, in which two annotated genes on the same strand are separated by a maximum of up to  <dig> codons . for  <dig> of the  <dig>  cases we found expression evidence existing across their combined length. these could represent misannotations, expressed pseudogenes, or cases of stop codon suppression leading to non-interrupted translation.figure  <dig> 
no evidence for stop codon suppression in
trichomonas vaginalis
.  bar diagram of the frequency of annotated gene pairs and their distances in base triplets . dark grey bars indicate the gene pairs, for which expression evidence exists. note that the most abundant distances originate from highly conserved and large gene families.  illustration of four selected candidates, in which two adjacent genes share the same reading frame and in combination match to a single blast hit.  rt-pcr demonstrates the full-length transcription of the gene pairs including the c-terminal ha-tag. rna was isolated from transfected trichomonads, transcribed into complementary dna and served as template for the pcr using specific forward and ha-reverse primers . rna served as a negative control .  multiplex western blot analysis of the same candidates demonstrates only candidate # <dig> is translated. 50 μg of protein extract loaded, anti-ha in blue, anti-scs  in pink as a loading control, and tvag_337240::ha served as a positive control. for scs the double bands are routinely observed  <cit> , and the two additional bands migrating below the 44 kda tvag_337240::ha fusion protein likely represent degradation products.



we selected four candidate loci  and fused the two adjacent genes to a c-terminal ha-tag and checked for the transcription and translation of the fusion constructs in transfected cells. for one case  the mrna reads we obtained and mapped, and our pcr amplification product, suggested an error in the genome assembly and an incorrect annotation , as the stop codon annotated between the two genes could not be verified. this construct served as an additional control next to the expression of tvag_386160::ha. in all cases tested we found evidence for the expression of the full-length constructs, but not for their translation . only the control and the tvag_354100::tvag_ <dig> construct were translated and detectable through the c-terminal ha-tag. alternative start codons do not appear to be used by the parasite either  and although the taa stop codon is the most frequently encoded , the other two, as expected, are functional . hence, in summary, our results confirm a conservative codon usage by the parasite and that should stop codon suppression exist, it must be very rare and has yet to be experimentally verified.

distribution of cdsn relative to flanking genes
for yeast it has been reported that the expression of lncrnas is associated with the expression of functional genes encoded in flanking regions
 <cit> . we analysed the expression of the pseudo and lncrna sets of trichomonas vaginalis depending on the four possible orientations to neighbouring genes: divergent , convergent , co-oriented  and anti-oriented . distances and distributions of the orientations between pseudo and lncrna did show differences . the distance between pseudo loci and flanking genes was found to be larger compared to the lncrna set, while the lncrna loci were found in divergent orientations more frequently than a convergent one. expression of pseudo and lncrna together with flanking genes in close proximity could indicate co-expression or even the expression as one rna molecule. to statistically test the association of co-expression with upstream or downstream gens, we performed yates’ chi-squared tests . all of the orientations tested, both for pseudo and lncrna, did not pass the false discovery rate , demonstrating that no statistically significant correlation regarding the expression of these sets together with their flanking genes.table  <dig> 
pseudo and lncrna sets are expressed with no statistic significance in correspondence to flanking genes



pseudo





lncrna






the mean intergenic distance between annotated genes in t. vaginalis was found to be  <dig>  nucleotides
 <cit> . the mean distances to neighbouring genes for pseudo and lncrna range between  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides , being quite similar to that of the annotated genes. overall the cdsn, pseudo and lncrna sets behaved “autonomously” and appear independently scattered when compared to flanking, annotated gene orientation and distance. taken together this indicates that these transcripts are expressed independently from their neighbouring functional genes.

pseudo and lncrna are transcribed, but lack obvious translation start motifs
several promoter motifs including the dna initiator motif  have been identified in t. vaginalis
 <cit> , and some are linked to the expression of gene subsets induced through changing environmental conditions
 <cit> . in order to identify known, as well as new, promoter sequences, the upstream regions of the expressed intergenic loci were screened for overrepresented motifs . a motif similar to the inr motif of the cdsp  was well represented among upstream sequences of all expressed loci . with  <dig> % for lncrna and  <dig> % for pseudo, the frequency of the most prominent inr motif was comparable to the  <dig> % of the cdsp set . among all loci we identified one non-functional pattern recently described as the m <dig> motif 
 <cit> , but only among the cdsp set the translation-associated m <dig> motif  was identified together with other translation start motifs containing atg start codons . pseudo and lncrna display approximately the same amount of known transcription-associated motifs, while lacking any evidence for translation-associated motifs. intg sequences, for which we found no expression evidence, do not encode any of the previously described motifs, except m <dig>  but with very low frequency.figure  <dig> 
promoter sequence distribution. shown are pictograms and scores for the five best motifs  of the pseudo, lncrna, cdsp and intg sets. background colour gradient indicates the frequency with which the motifs were identified. note that the inr motif of the cdsp set misses the initial ‘t’; manual inspection revealed that 64% did however encode it. translation initiation motifs containing an ‘atg’ are only found among the cdsp set.



taken together this demonstrates that lncrnas and pseudogenes in the parabasalian parasite are not expressed as by-products and in dependence to neighbouring genes as found for other model organisms
 <cit> , but because of their own transcriptional initiator motifs. as suggested by carvunis and colleagues
 <cit> , and supported by our data, it is possible that the lncrna loci only represent an intermediate and transient form of genetic elements with characteristics from both functional proteins and intergenic regions. in either case, they would not simply represent transcriptional noise, but could serve as a sequence pool for the development of novel functional genes. this would further explain the high number of orfs identified among the loci and the presence of fully functional promoter motifs. however, it is too early to tell whether any of these fulfil an actual biological function.

CONCLUSIONS
the vast majority of information available on lncrna stems from mammals
 <cit> . no analysis dedicated to the characterization of lncrna or pseudogene expression in protists apart from yeast
 <cit>  is currently available. our results provide insight into the expression of lncrnas of a representative of the not well-studied eukaryotic kingdom of excavates. the expression of lncrnas and pseudogenes in the parabasalian parasite trichomonas vaginalis is extensive. almost one-fifth of the transcripts mapped onto non-coding genomic loci, and of which half showed no sequence similarity to annotated genes of the protist. these loci do not encode for canonical proteins, but are clearly distinct from the random sequences that were simultaneously analysed as controls. intriguingly, and in contrast to yeast
 <cit> , the expression of intergenic dna is not associated with annotated neighbouring genes, but driven by transcription start signals mimicking those of coding genes. the fact that half of the lncrnas expressed are pseudogenes reflects the dynamic nature of the trichomonas genome that is characterized by an unknown amount of duplications of at least parts of the genome and large gene families that are unusually frequent.

