BACKGROUND
the information in the human genome is sometimes so crucial that simple changes can lead to severe inheritable or chronic diseases. genes related to causing diseases are called disease genes  <cit>  and their protein products are disease proteins. traditional biological and medical methods to study those genes may require expensive and laborious experiments. thus there is a great need to develop alternative  methods to understand them.

there is massive research on discovering disease genes with various methods and data sources. early works on disease genes were based on either annotations  or sequence analysis . generally, these methods considered disease genes separately, as if they were independent. however, we increasingly recognize that biological processes are typically driven by the interplay of complex interaction networks of various molecules . not surprisingly, many human diseases can be traced to aberrant protein-protein interactions, either through the loss of an essential interaction or through the formation of a protein complex at an inappropriate time or location  <cit> . therefore, it is encouraging and promising to study disease genes in the context of the complete protein interaction network.

research on protein-protein interaction networks  and diseases has been much appealing in recent years . also, there are several work that concentrated on studying disease genes for only one specific disease  using heuristic score functions  <cit> . key reviews on computational methods for disease genes are provided by kann  <cit>  and ideker and sharan  <cit> .

in previous work, the direct associations of disease proteins were brought into focus to predict disease proteins. however, in complex diseases such as the ones studied here, the rules that underlie the pathogenesis are not only mutations in a single protein, but result from complex interplay among them in the whole network and genome-environment interactions. consequently, the association among proteins causing disease is much more intricate. they may not directly affect each other to cause disease, but indirectly, through a mediator or a group of mediators.

as bioinformatics and systems biology offers large databases and novel computational tools for better understanding complex systems, we approach the disease-gene problem in a different way. even if now it is possible to quantify complexity and take a quantitative, holistic approach, it is not yet easy to really understand the indirect determination of biological processes. here graph theory and network analysis can be helpful. network analysis provides information about the local  and global  properties of the system. for example, the degree distribution of a complex network is a property that is global but based on local, limited information on the positions of nodes . however, there are a number of more sophisticated network analytical tools to explicitly measure indirect relationships .

in this paper, we propose a new network analytical method to quantify indirect effects among proteins in their interaction network by using network indices  <cit>  and illustrate its use for studying ppi networks. in particular, our aim is to quantify the indirect relationships among proteins involved in five diseases, and to characterize the proteins mediating these indirect effects. the five diseases are cancer , diabetes , obesity , heart diseases  and autism . the first four ones belong to the major threats and mostly studied disorders. autism, on the contrary, is a relatively minor disease. the autism genes were studied in this work, since it seemed to be an interesting question how a systems-based approach can or cannot reveal direct and/or indirect effects between seemingly independent diseases  <cit> . in addition, based on the number of scientific publications, there is a fastest-growing interest in autism and discovering possible cross-links can only be a matter of time and effort. as it was earlier suggested that functionally more important proteins are hubs and disease proteins are peripheral ones in protein networks  <cit> , our interest is focused on whether the hubs are mostly responsible for connecting these disease proteins to each other. we concentrated on identifying the key "mediator proteins" defined as non-disease proteins that are interactive partners  of disease proteins in the ppi network. we note here that a mediator protein may well be considered a hypothetical disease protein which is promisingly validated in wet-lab.

RESULTS
identity of mediator proteins among h proteins causing heart diseases  and o proteins causing obesity . most of the mediators are ip proteins, there is a single disease protein connecting the other two sets of disease proteins .

the relative strength of two-step-long indirect interactions  mediated by mediators among heart disease and obesity. column sums would give which h protein is mostly influenced by o proteins , while row sums would give which o protein is mostly influenced by h proteins . the largest value  indicates the strongest indirect effect between the two diseases .

the same analysis for the mediators between the h and d sets of disease proteins  shows that there are eight shared mediators appearing in both links  but typically these shared mediators are less important in both systems  being among the most important mediators in both h-o and h-d pathways, marked by red in additional file 3). here, p <dig> was again the only non-ip mediator, the most influenced h protein was p <dig>  again and the most influenced d protein was p <dig> . the strongest indirect effect was mediated by p <dig>  subunit alpha).

we have determined the contribution of the other four sets of disease proteins c, d, o, and a to influencing the set of h proteins. by network analysis, it is possible to determine where the largest indirect effects can be expected from. for example, in case of the p <dig> h protein, although there are more than twice as much o proteins than d proteins in this database, the indirect effects reaching h proteins from d proteins are stronger  than the ones originating at o proteins . based on the sheer number of proteins, we would expect the contrary. also, even if proteins linked to autism  are apparently independent of the rest of diseases, the strength of their topological relationship is comparable to other diseases . cancer proteins, even if there are a lot of them, contribute only to 30% of influence on p <dig> 

additional file  <dig> shows the hubs in the ppi and ip networks . additional file  <dig> shows the most important mediators between h and o as well as h and d disease proteins in the dpip network . some proteins are always of key importance, like p <dig>  that is a hub and a key mediator. others, like q9y4k <dig>  are hubs in the ppi network  and highly central nodes in the ip network , but even so, they are not mediating indirect effects between the studied diseases.

we suggest that it can be of interest to study the relationship between network position and functionality of proteins in the protein interaction network, even if our work indeed did not intend to predict causing-disease genes. table  <dig> shows the statistics of enriched terms for the information of interest. the relationship between the m <dig> index and the average p-value calculated for go terms of the mediators is demonstrated for both the h-o  and the h-d  pathways. all of the p-value of go terms for the top mediators are below  <dig>   and p <dig> ): it means that these mediators associate to rich go terms. the pearson correlation  and the spearman rank order correlation  show that there is a relatively strong positive relationship between m <dig> and p-value of go terms of the h-o mediators. for the h-d mediators, the relationship is negative and not very strong . the relationship between important mediator function  and functional importance  is stronger in the case of diabetes .

statistics of data/terms regarding the go terms, pathway, tissue, and domain information on the most important mediator proteins in the heart-obesity  and heart-diabetes  pathways.

discussion
apart of structural network analysis, understanding the relationship between network position and biological function is of key importance. for mediators between heart diseases and obesity, we have found several enriched pathway terms related to diseases such as 'insulin signaling pathway', 'aspirin blocks signaling pathway involved in platelet activation' and 'natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity'. 'kidney normal epithelium 3rd' is an example for associated tissues for h-o mediator proteins. the domains contained in these proteins, such as s-tck, sh <dig> and sh <dig>  are important domains in performing protein functions and are known to be involved in different pathogenic mechanisms  <cit> .

the same procedure was used to explore functional information on h-d mediators. there are three enriched terms concerning pathways . among these, 'chemokine families' are considered mostly pro-inflammatory: they can be induced during immune response to promote immune cells to the infection site, while others are considered homeostatic and are involved in controlling cell migration during normal tissue development. h-d mediators are mostly located in tissues 'adrenal tumor disease 3rd', 'pancreatic tumor disease 3rd' and contain domains like 'small inducible chemokine c/cc types' and 'small inducible cytokine a <dig> type'. the above analyses reveal generally pathogenic roles of h-o and h-d mediators. the following sections discuss some specific proteins of interest in order to demonstrate the potential use of our approach in systems biology and systems-based medicine.

we have found that the strongest indirect effect was mediated by p <dig>  this protein is the second ranked mediator for both h-o and h-d by m <dig> index. this finding is in quite a concert with the spectrum of crucial functions of p <dig> in the cell. p <dig> is indeed an adapter protein implicated in the regulation of a large spectrum of both general and specialized signaling pathways. as a result, it binds to a large number of partners, usually by recognizing phosphoserine or phosphothreonine motifs. its binding generally results in the modulation of the activity of the partners  <cit> .

another interesting mediator is c protein p <dig>  which mediate both h-o and h-d pathways. since p <dig> is involved in colorectal cancer  <cit> , its centrality  is not surprising. p <dig>  is the proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase src, belonging the protein kinase superfamily, tyr protein kinase family and src subfamily. p <dig> contains one protein kinase domain, one sh <dig> domain and one sh <dig> domain. this tyrosine-protein kinase plays its role in various signal transduction pathways in the cell, such as signaling by ngf, homeostasis, signaling in the immune system, signaling by egfr as well as in the "gap junction trafficking and regulation" process.

p <dig> mediates two types of disease proteins , p <dig> , p <dig>  and p <dig> ). looking at the functionality of p <dig> , p <dig> , p <dig>  and p <dig> , we see that these proteins all have receptor functions. therefore, indirect effects of disorders may be performed by p <dig> in cell signaling.

in addition, we have studied the most influenced proteins of heart diseases, obesity, and diabetes. the most influenced heart disease protein, p <dig>  was found to synergistically influence the ejection fraction response to beta-blocker therapy of heart failure patients  <cit> . p <dig> is an alpha- <dig> adrenergic receptor, mediating the catecholamine-induced inhibition of adenylate cyclase through the action of g proteins, belonging to the g-protein coupled receptor  <dig> family. p <dig> relates to the activation of mapk activity and cell-cell signaling. alpha-2-adrenergic receptors have a critical role in regulating neurotransmitter release from sympathetic nerves and from adrenergic neurons in the central nervous system.

the most influenced diabetes protein was p <dig> , c-c chemokine receptor type  <dig>  a receptor for a number of inflammatory cc-chemokines including mip-1-alpha, mip-1-beta and rantes. its signal transduction is based on increasing the intracellular calcium ion level. the genetic variation in ccr <dig> is associated with susceptibility to insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus type  <dig> . iddm is caused by the body's own immune system which destroys the insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas. classical features are polydipsia, polyphagia and polyuria, due to hyperglycemia-induced osmotic diuresis. like p <dig>  p <dig> is involved in the interaction between the host cell's macromolecular machinery and viral proteins.

the most influenced o protein is p <dig> , beta- <dig> adrenergic receptor. beta-adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine-induced activation of adenylate cyclase through the action of g proteins. p <dig> belongs to the group of disulfide bond, glycoprotein, lipoprotein, palmitate and phosphoprotein. the findings of large et al.  <cit>  suggested that genetic variation in the adrb <dig> gene might be of major importance for obesity, energy expenditure, and lipolytic adrb <dig> function in adipose tissue, at least in women  <cit> . tsai et al.  <cit>  reported a significant association between a -47c-t polymorphism  in the beta-upstream peptide of the adrb <dig> gene and bronchodilator drug response among  <dig> african american children with asthma  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we illustrate that understanding the role and importance of individual genes highly depends on how to define the network of study: proteins appearing as hubs in the ppi network may be of lower topological importance in mediating indirect effects among groups of disease proteins . by quantitatively identifying, the most important mediator genes are seemingly unimportant but play key roles in maintaining communication between disease genes and these mediators are not hubs in ppi. we suggest that the central proteins in the ip network can be even more important in systems-based medicine and drug design than either the hubs or the disease proteins themselves. the proteins mediating indirect interactions among the studied disease proteins were found to be generally of high functional importance in the cell . even if obesity and diabetes-related proteins are not directly linked to heart-disease proteins, rich indirect linkages can be realized through, for example, the insulin signaling pathway or the p <dig> proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase src. we propose that our results should call for experimental studies on the relevance of this approach.

