BACKGROUND
the notion that therapeutic effects of herbal medicines were due to the presence of a distillable “quintessence” popularized by paracelsus and fellow alchemists some  <dig> years ago  <cit> , morphed over time into the scientific hypothesis that pharmacological effects of herbal medicines are due to their content of plant-derived chemical compounds   <cit> . research based on this hypothesis conducted over the last two centuries has led to the isolation and structural elucidation of some of the best-known drugs and has led to the creation of modern pharmacology and pharmacological therapy  <cit> . herbal medicine, which can therefore rightfully be considered a progenitor of modern pharmacotherapy, has along the way been relegated to the sidelines and its continued popularity with the general public is viewed by many orthodox medical professionals at best as a useless but harmless anachronism that can be harnessed for its placebo effects or at worst as a harmful superstition with potentially lethal adverse effects that needs to be discouraged  <cit> . herbal medicine will not regain a foothold in modern science-based medicine without clear evidence of therapeutic efficacy  <cit> . such evidence has to come from testing in randomized, double blind clinical trials, which are considered as the “gold standard” of clinical medicine. in addition, successful demonstration of clinical effectiveness has to be complemented by an appropriate theoretical framework i.e. pre-clinical research providing a “mechanistic” basis for the observed clinical effects. the biological “target” of the drug and its function in the pathophysiology of the disease should be known  <cit> . a good drug is thought to act like paul ehrlich’s “magical bullet” that finds its target and in the process “destroys” the disease process  <cit> .

while the immense success of modern pharmacotherapy is patently obvious, the recent shift to a preponderance of “chronic” rather “acute” diseases and the threat of empty drug “pipelines” has led to calls for a re-evaluation of the current practice of drug treatment and development. combination therapy and so-called network and systems-based approaches to drug discovery are being advocated  <cit> . instead of magic bullets for single targets, the future is thought to lie in the use of both single drugs or combinations of drugs with multi-target effects  <cit> . the wheel appears to have turned full circle. what has been regarded as its biggest problem, namely that herbal medicines contain a myriad of chemical components with potentially synergistic effects is now hailed as the basis of their purported therapeutic effectiveness in conditions, which have so far been refractory to single drug therapy  <cit> . elucidation of the molecular effects and specificity of single ingredients in herbal extracts can be difficult, but the determination of the action of every single chemical component in phytochemically complex extracts has been essentially elusive.

pattern-oriented chemical profiling  is being increasingly used to gain a more comprehensive summary of herbal medicine quality  <cit> . in comparison, component-oriented single-marker based approaches  do not account for the complex assortment of metabolites generally present in herbal medicine  <cit> . the pattern-oriented approach considers all detectable constituents of a given herbal material to establish a characteristic chemical profile without necessarily characterizing all chemical constituents or their precise biological effects. ideally, a biological fingerprint should complement the chemical fingerprint  <cit> . preferably, fingerprints of their biological effects should be obtained in the very organism that will be treated with the herbal extracts. for ethical and practical reasons, however, it is not possible to test each herbal extract in laboratory animals or humans. what is needed then, is a test system consisting of an organism with relevant biology but less complexity that can serve as a surrogate system.

the species of yeast known as saccharomyces cerevisiae  is arguably the best-understood eukaryotic organism. it is inexpensive to maintain, easy to grow and it is classified as a “generally recognized as safe” microorganism . s. cerevisiae was at the very beginning of the “omics” revolution because it was both the first eukaryotic organism for which the whole genome sequence was completed  <cit>  and the first organism that was studied at the whole transcriptome level. the nature and time course of the transcriptional response of s. cerevisiae to a large number of environmental changes have been characterized both qualitatively and quantitatively  <cit> . in addition, scientists have generated a collection of molecular-barcoded s. cerevisiae strains in which every single gene has been selectively deleted  <cit> . approximately 45% of the s. cerevisiae genes are homologous to mammalian genes and hundreds of genes that have been linked to diseases in humans have orthologs in yeast  <cit> .

in this study, we wanted to test the hypothesis that the s. cerevisiae transcriptome might be used as an indicator of phytochemical variation of closely-related yet distinctly different extracts prepared from a single species of a phytogeographically widely distributed medicinal plant. we chose the medicinal plant equisetum arvense commonly known as “horsetail” as model herb and the single celled fungus s. cerevisiae as model organism for our experiments. e. arvense is distributed worldwide over the northern hemisphere  <cit> . equisetum species and hybrids are well understood to possess extensive morphological, morphometric and chemotypical variation  <cit> . e. arvense is used in traditional medicine as diuretic, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antidiabetic, vasorelaxant and hemostatic  <cit> . it is also used in dozens of manufactured products claimed to promote general wellbeing and improve the health of hair, nails, skin, and bone. the main constituents found within e. arvense include alkaloids, flavonoids, phenylcarboxylic acids, sterols, styrylpyrones, and silica  <cit> , which are thought to mediate the beneficial effects of this herbal medicine. veit and co-workers distinguished two distinct chemotypes  of equisetum based on their phenolic chemistry  <cit>  but there is no information on variation of the biological and clinical effects due to these regional variants.

here we report that the gene expression in s. cerevisiae exposed to globally sourced extracts of e. arvense reflected variation in their phytochemical composition. we have made the microarray data obtained in this study publicly available in the gene expression omnibus  database of the national center for biotechnology information of the usa .

RESULTS
phytochemical fingerprinting
we used  <dig> standard chromatography-based separation and detection techniques of increasing complexity to characterize the phytochemical composition of aqueous extracts of e. arvense that were obtained from sources in the usa , china , europe  and india . the flavonoid and phenyl carboxylic acid high performance thin-layer chromatography  profile resolved on average  <dig> ±  <dig> peaks, but only a single peak was detected in the india sample . the hptlc profile clearly indicated a general quantitative difference in phenyl carboxylic acid and flavonoid concentration between the american and the european and chinese samples.

chromatograms generated using high performance liquid chromatography  and detection using a photodiode array  set at  <dig> nm contained  <dig> ±  <dig> peaks, triple the number of constituents contained in the hptlc profile . the general trend in the variation of in phenyl carboxylic acid and flavonoid concentration along phytogeographical lines was similar to that obtained by hptlc. the chromatograms furthermore exhibited clear qualitative differences between the samples, especially in regards to the indian sample, which were detectable due to the increased sensitivity of the hplc-pda technique over hptlc.

next, we combined hplc with mass spectrometry  to analyze the samples. hplc-ms detected on average  <dig> ±  <dig> peaks and revealed both qualitative and quantitative differences between the extracts as presented .

comparison of the different profiling techniques clearly illustrates that the discoverable complexity of the chemical composition of herbal extracts depends on the analytical technique used .

the uv-vis and mass spectra of peaks present in the lc-pda and lc-ms chromatograms respectively were compared to the work by veit et al  <cit>  for tentative identification of some of the major chromatogram peaks .

a representative example of how we elucidated the structure of dicaffeoyltartaric acid and a genkwanin acetylglucoside are presented in additional file 1: figure s <dig> 

inspection of the hptlc and hplc chromatograms shown in figure  <dig> appeared to suggest that the fingerprints obtained from the equisetum extracts grouped largely according to their phytogeographical origin. the samples from europe and china were more closely similar to each other then to the fingerprints of the indian and american samples. american samples, in turn, appeared to be more closely related to each other then to the european and chinese samples. in order to see whether the existence of subgroups within the data could be verified statistically, we used the multivariate statistical techniques of principal component analysis  and k-nearest neighbor  clustering analysis to quantitatively characterize differences and similarities between the hplc-ms fingerprints of the e. arvense extracts .

pca essentially replaces the natural, albeit potentially subjective pattern recognition ability of the human brain by reducing the highly complex chromatogram data into a reduced data set, where each chromatogram is represented by a single point, which is then plotted in the so-called scores plot in relation to the first  <dig> principal components of the entire data set. we used k-nn to colorize the pca, by highlighting samples that were classified into the  <dig> groups. pca not only greatly reduces the complexity of the data it can also be used to determine which peaks and therefore phytochemicals underlie the observed differentiation into groups.

figure 2a illustrates how the pca  combined with k-nn clustering analysis  grouped the chromatograms of the extracts along the lines of their phytochemical origin  with the sole exception of the european extract # <dig>  which was grouped with the american extracts. based on the similar proximity of chromatographic peaks in the loadings plot  to the sample groups in the scores plot, we were able to determine the peaks generally responsible for group differentiation. three representative peaks have been highlighted in the same colors as the sample groups. for example, pca identified dicaffeoyltartaric  acid, which is highlighted in figure 2a , as a differentiating factor for the indian sample. the corresponding peak was indeed only detected in the indian sample .

based on the work by tilton et al  <cit>  and their phytomics similarity index , we also conducted pca based not on the intensities of the chromatographic peaks but on the ratio of each chromatographic peak intensity to each other within the same sample. that is n peak intensity values produce nn− <dig> unique ratio values. as illustrated in figure 2b, pca based on the intensity ratios combined with k-nn clustering analysis grouped extract # <dig> with the other european extracts and thus grouped all extracts according to their phytogeographical origin.

radical scavenging capacity assays
chemometric profiling of the e. arvense extracts demonstrated high variability in the flavonoid and phenyl carboxylic acid content. as flavonoids and phenolic acids have been reported to be effective free radical scavengers and antioxidants  <cit> , we wondered to what degree the observed variation would be reflected in the radical scavenging capacity of the extracts  <cit> . the two main methods by which a compound can function as an antioxidant are hydrogen atom transfer  and electron transfer   <cit> . we therefore assessed the radical scavenging capacity of the e. arvense extracts using both hat and et mechanisms.

hat reactions such as the oxygen radical absorbance capacity assay  are kinetic based methods, whereby fluorescein and the antioxidant being measured compete for peroxyl radicals generated by the thermal decomposition of  <dig> ’-azobis hydrochloride   <cit> . therefore, competition by more potent antioxidant activity corresponds to slower fluorescein oxidation/degradation.

et reactions such as those using  <dig> -di-1-picrylhydrazyl  involve a redox reaction between the dpph  and the antioxidant compound being measured . dpph is well suited for a rapid and simple antioxidant assay as it is commercially available and forms stable nitrogen radicals. in its oxidised form the dpph has an intense purple color  and when it is reduced it becomes yellow , the color change being proportional to the antioxidant concentration.

both the orac and dpph methods use gallic acid as a reference for antioxidant capacity. that is, these assays measure how much better  the e. arvense extracts are at being antioxidants than gallic acid.

as illustrated in figure 3a, the chinese and european extracts contained approximately  <dig> strongly antioxidant compounds. peaks at  <dig> nm  that have a dpph radical scavenging capacity are identified by the corresponding decrease in dpph absorbance measured at  <dig> nm . overall, the orac and dpph results were comparable, indicating that the flavonoids and phenyl carboxylic acids functioned in both the hat and et mechanisms. the china # <dig> and usa # <dig> samples showed the highest antioxidant capacity of the extracts . this was unexpected and contrary to what was predicted by the phytochemical profiling, which indicated that the china and european extracts were similar to each other and distinct from the american extracts.

transcriptomic fingerprinting
the main goal of this study was to test the hypothesis that the s. cerevisiae transcriptome might be developed as an indicator of phytochemical variation of closely-related yet distinctly different extracts prepared from a single species of a phytogeographically widely distributed medicinal plant. we therefore exposed exponentially growing yeast cultures to representative extracts from each of the three groups identified by chemometric analysis  and the vehicle only . we then harvested the yeast cells to extract total rna for analysis using affymetrix genechip® yeast genome  <dig>  arrays. figure  <dig> shows a raster plot  of the averaged robust multi-array average -corrected expression values of  <dig> genes  on  <dig> microarrays . genes and arrays were hierarchically clustered using distances calculated from their pearson and spearman correlation as indicated by the dendrograms on the left and top of the heatmap, respectively.

the clustering results indicate that the gene expression data not only distinguish the control samples from the extract treated samples, but also further differentiate between subgroups of the extract treated samples. we next performed pca and k-nn clustering analysis of the gene expression data . again, the analysis separated the samples into distinct clusters largely along phytogeographical origin and phytochemical variation, with the exception of usa sample # <dig>  which was grouped with control samples . averaging of the expression values from each set of arrays  before pca increased the signal to noise ratio of the data and therefore the diagnostic resolution .

in the analysis of the gene expression data , we used pca and k-nn clustering as “diagnostic” tools with the goal to reduce the complexity of the data and to classify extracts into groups. pca was performed by singular value decomposition  of the centered and scaled transpose of the data matrix  <cit> . svd decomposes the data matrix  into three matrices commonly termed u, d and v. the columns of v  are referred to as the principal components of x  <cit> . using terms more evocative for biologists, alter and colleagues have referred to the rows of vt as the eigengenes and the columns of u as eigenarrays  <cit> . the results of svd of the data matrix without mean centering and scaling are illustrated in figure  <dig>  inspection of the heatmap  depicting the expression of the eigengenes  in each array  reveals that the expression of the first eigengene shows little variation between the arrays. this eigengene describes the contribution of gene expression that remains essentially constant. in contrast, the expression levels of the remaining eigengenes show clear differences both between the control and extract treated samples as well as differences between the extracts of different origin. figure 6b illustrates the expression levels of eigengenes  <dig> to  <dig>  each bar represents the expression level of the respective eigengene in the arrays  <dig> to  <dig>  it can be clearly seen that the second eigengene mainly represents the differences in gene expression between control  and treatment arrays . the eigengenes  <dig> to  <dig> highlight extract specific differences. the relative contribution of the eigengene  <dig> to  <dig> to the total variation in gene expression after eigengene  <dig> was filtered out is shown in figure 6c.

we further analyzed the microarray data using the default linear model included with the bioconductor “limma” package  <cit> . as robust linear modeling of microarray results generally requires  <dig> or more replicates per sample  <cit> , we first contrasted all treatment arrays  against the control arrays  to generate a table of differential expression values ranked according to their bonferroni-corrected p-values . in order to simulate results using a fully automated process, the  <dig> arrays obtained upon exposure of yeast to sample usa # <dig> were not included in this analysis because usa # <dig> was grouped with the control samples in the pca . figure 7a shows a heatmap of  <dig> genes with significant changes in their expression levels compared to control in all  <dig> phytogeographical e. arvense groups that were identified by pca. the e. arvense extracts elicited changes in the expression of genes involved in mrna translation, drug transport, metabolism of energy reserves, phospholipid metabolism, and the cellular stress response.

pathway analysis revealed that the pathways producing the major yeast phospholipids, phosphatidylserine , phosphatidylethanolamine , phosphatidylcholine  and phosphatidylinositol  were globally repressed upon exposure of yeast to e. arvense extracts independent of their phytochemical/phytogeographical grouping . all of these phospholipids are synthesized through biological pathways after the transportation of choline and inositol into the yeast cell. the genes that encode the transporters of choline  and inositol  were both downregulated in the presence of e. arvense extracts. once inside the cell, the proteins that convert choline into pc were downregulated . the genes that produce ps, pe and pc from cytidine triphosphate  and phosphatidic acid  were downregulated . in the inositol pathway, the gene responsible for the first step in the production of inositol from glucose- <dig> phosphate  was also downregulated. this global repression of the phospholipid synthetic genes was probably the result of the downregulation of the ino <dig> and ino <dig> genes . the proteins from these genes form a complex that has been shown to activate the expression of the ino <dig>  cho <dig>  cho <dig> and opi <dig> genes  <cit> . therefore, the absence of these proteins would result in decreased activation due to less binding to the conserved cis-acting uasino element contained in their promoters. repression of the opi <dig> gene is counter-intuitive to this theory since its role in the repression of the ino <dig> and ino <dig> genes would have thought it to be upregulated. however, white and colleagues  <cit>  have shown that this action by the opi <dig> protein is not brought about by the amount of protein but the activation of the protein itself.

the phospholipid precursors, inositol and choline have been shown to regulate the activity of a number of key enzymes within the yeast phospholipid biosynthetic pathway  <cit> . to investigate whether the e. arvense extracts contained inositol and choline, extracts from each area were analysed. a significant amount of inositol and choline was found to be present in all the e. arvense extract samples. for all samples the choline concentrations were similar, whereas, there was a large difference between the inositol concentrations . even though this difference was over 250-fold, the value of the lowest concentration of inositol was still higher than the concentration reported by hirsch and henry  <cit>  that had an effect on yeast gene expression. these authors found that  <dig> μm  of inositol completely repressed the expression of the phospholipid synthesizing genes ino <dig>  cho <dig>  cho <dig> and opi <dig>  the lowest concentration of inositol in our samples was  <dig> μm . thus, it is likely that the observed repression of genes in the phospholipid pathways in our experiments may have been due to the presence of high levels of inositol in the e. arvense extracts.

to begin to identify extract specific changes in gene expression, we investigated which probes were selectively affected by the usa extracts. to this end, we performed an analysis using a linear model contrasting the control vs. usa and control vs. european/china samples. this analysis generated  <dig> data sets containing  <dig> probes in the control-usa contrast, and  <dig> probes in the control vs. europe/china . we then selected the probes that were contained only in the usa list  and calculated the mean of their expression values in the control, china/europe, india and usa sets of microarrays. figure  <dig> shows the heatmap and hierarchal clustering of the results of this analysis. the map reveals the group specific differences between the samples. preliminary pathway analysis of the data indicated that several of the identified genes are involved in amino acid metabolism and metabolism of nitrogen containing compounds but the group also contains several genes with as yet unidentified function. a detailed analysis along the lines illustrated by this example is in progress.

discussion
using simple and hyphenated chromatography techniques we characterized extracts of e. arvense originating from america, china, europe and india and found that they exhibited qualitative and quantitative differences in their phytochemical composition but similar antioxidant capacity. pca combined with k-nn of the chromatographic data indicated that the phytochemical differences divided the extracts into three groups correlated with their phytogeographical origin from america, china/europe or india. supporting our hypothesis, analysis of whole genome microarray data with pca and k-nn showed that the observed phytochemical grouping of the extracts was reflected in changes in gene expression in yeast exposed to the extracts, i.e. the s. cerevisiae transcriptome mirrored the phytochemical data. importantly, pca of the chromatographic and gene expression data is an unsupervised classification method that did not require the setting of more or less arbitrary thresholds  and does not discriminate between data points. in addition, the loadings plot can be used to pinpoint phytochemical peaks and genes that contributed to the differences between the groups. k-nn clustering analysis can be used to confirm quantitatively grouping of the extracts.

statistical analysis of the gene expression data using a linear model revealed that the expression of  <dig> genes changed significantly upon exposure of s. cerevisiae to e. arvense extracts. performing pathway analysis with these genes showed that the pathways producing the major s. cerevisiae phospholipids were globally repressed by all tested extracts independent of their phytochemical/phytogeographical grouping. this observation prompted us to quantify the inositol and choline content of the extracts, two essential components of the major yeast phospholipids. the data revealed that all extracts contained saturating amounts of these two essential nutrients.

inositol and choline containing phospholipids play an important role in a large number of cellular processes in health and disease. inositol is necessary for the synthesis of phosphoinositides, which function as lipid second messengers implicated in signal transduction and membrane trafficking  <cit> . inositol has also been reported to be critical for the growth of keratinocytes  <cit>  consistent with the use of e. arvense for the health of skin, hair and nails. dietary administration of inositol has been claimed to have chemopreventive effects in rats  <cit> . choline is not only required for the synthesis of phosphatidylcholine, lysophosphatidylcholine, choline plasmalogen, and sphingomyelin, which are essential components for all membranes, it is also a major dietary source of methyl groups  for methylation reactions that play major roles in lipid biosynthesis, the regulation of metabolic pathways, and detoxification  <cit> . while humans can produce inositol, choline is an essential nutrient. yet the mean intake of choline for most people is far below the adequate intake  <cit> . the high choline content of the e. arvense extracts  is thus significant and supplementation of the diet with e. arvense might provide some general health benefits.

it is interesting to note that previous phytochemical studies of equisetum mostly focused their general antioxidant properties and on phenolic compounds, sterols and the silica content of the herb  <cit> . to the best of our knowledge, the role of inositol and choline in relation to the beneficial effects of e. arvense has not been investigated previously. our results immediately suggest further experiments. for example, it will be interesting to investigate whether exposure of yeast to saturating concentrations of choline and inositol alone will elicit similar changes in the expression of genes in the phospholipid synthesis pathway as observed in the present study. exposure of yeast to the e. arvense extract fraction without inositol and choline will be an interesting complementary experiment.

transcriptomic studies have previously been conducted both for the discovery of molecular effects of herbal medicines as well as quality control purposes  <cit> . in two previous studies, investigators combined phytochemical characterization of complex extracts from multiple herbs and microarray studies for what they called “bio-response fingerprinting”  <cit> . the purpose of the present study was diametrically opposite to that of the previous work. for example, tilton and colleagues combined chemical fingerprinting, differential cellular gene expression and animal pharmacology studies followed by statistical pattern comparison to determine the similarity of the chemical and bio-response fingerprints among different manufactured batches of a multi herb preparation. these authors used the cellular assay as a “biological detector and the resulting genomic differential display profile after exposure to the botanical extract …  a sensitive and global biological metric … validate batch similarity …”  <cit>  . our aim, in contrast, was to test the hypothesis that the s. cerevisiae transcriptome might be used as an indicator of phytochemical variation of herbal extracts. our data demonstrate that changes in the s. cerevisiae transcriptome reflected the phytochemical variation in complex extracts made from a single plant species. thus, the yeast transcriptome can be used as a diagnostic tool for the classification of complex extracts even so the overwhelming majority of the genes did not show significant changes. while the diagnostic signals were relatively weak, they were picked out clearly by the pca and cluster analyses. the functional significance of the observed changes for yeast remains to be established in future work.

CONCLUSIONS
together, the results of our study serve as a proof  of principle and encourage further development of transcriptomic assays for the characterization of the biological effects of phytochemical variation of complex herbal extracts. yeast transcriptomics may also be useful for testing of mixtures of conventional drugs  to discover novel antagonistic or synergistic effects of those drug combinations. furthermore, it will be interesting whether or not observed changes in the transcriptome will be reflected at the proteome, interactome and metabolome  <cit> . yeast is uniquely well positioned to serve as a model system for all types of “omics” studies.

we believe that the data presented here justify further exploration of this and similar  systems of increasing yet manageable complexity useful for the development and testing of network and systems-based pharmacological therapies. in particular, the availability of yeast deletion and overexpression libraries offers the opportunity to study systematically the interaction between complex mixtures of small molecules and different genomes. the unparalleled progress in our understanding of the molecular basis of life especially in the second half of the 20th century was driven by reductionism. there is an increasing number of scientists, however, who feel that complex systems may never be completely understood from the bottom up alone, especially in biological systems, and therefore advocate holism  <cit> . obviously, single celled organisms such as s. cerevisiae cannot replace studies in multicellular organism but they can be used to discover molecular markers for monitoring in animal and human studies and are thus a first  step towards holism in pharmacological studies of complex mixtures of chemical compounds.

