BACKGROUND
a major focus of research in molecular biology is to determine the function of the gene products encoded in an organism's genome. genes that code for protein are heavily studied by experimental methods, but these approaches may take years to provide a detailed understanding of a single gene's function within the context of the organism and its life-cycle. as a consequence, even though the complete genome sequences of more than  <dig> eukaryotes,  <dig> archaea, and  <dig> bacteria are currently known  <cit> , and the location of protein-coding genes can be determined with reasonable accuracy  <cit> , only a few thousand proteins have been functionally characterised with a high degree of confidence. accordingly, computational methods to predict the function of a protein given its amino acid sequence play a major role in guiding the experimental characterisation of a newly sequenced genome. the majority of methods aim to classify protein sequences by function, and apply a range of techniques from pair-wise sequence searching to profile-profile hmms  <cit>  to identify similarities to well-characterised proteins annotated by the gene ontology  <cit> . although assigning a protein to a broad functional class  may be achieved with a reasonable degree of confidence by these methods, reliably predicting which residues are involved in conferring specificity for a particular substrate remains a major challenge. the present work is concerned with identifying "functional residues" that might be associated either with core function  or specificity .

the most common approach for predicting functional residues from the amino acid sequence has been to exploit the evolutionary information present in an accurate multiple protein sequence alignment. providing the sequences are sufficiently diverse, the location of positions in the alignment with invariant, or highly "conserved" amino acids may suggest structural or functional importance. a number of different scoring functions have been developed to quantify conservation of protein sequence alignment positions as reviewed in  <cit> . in recent work by capra and singh  <cit> , important positions in a sequence alignment are located by differentiating amino acid distributions at positions under evolutionary pressure from those of positions that are not. all these techniques will identify columns 1– <dig> of the multiple alignment fragment shown in figure  <dig> as conserved, but will not discriminate between columns  <dig> and  <dig>  since in a multiple sequence alignment the sequences are grouped by overall similarity, column  <dig> suggests that the position is important to all sequences, but conservation of lys in one subfamily and glu in the other indicates that the position may have a role in defining the structural or functional specificity within the protein family. a number of algorithms seek explicitly to identify such specificity defining  positions and so discriminate between columns  <dig> and  <dig>  for example, the amas algorithm  <cit>  identifies sd positions that have conserved physicochemical properties within pre-defined sub-families of proteins , yet exhibit different properties between the sub-families . in the 'evolutionary trace'  technique  <cit>  alignments are first sub-grouped by the use of partitions on a phylogenetic tree, and predictions are interpreted by mapping onto protein structures. et originally required the tree partition to be chosen manually, but subsequent developments have attempted to address this issue  <cit> . in contrast to amas, and et, the 'sequence space' algorithm  <cit>  which represents sequences of an alignment as vectors in high dimensional space, does not require pre-grouping of the sequences. in sequence space, principal components analysis is employed to derive both the principal sequence subgroupings, and the sd positions characteristic of each group. more recently, marttinen  <cit>  applied a bayesian statistical approach in an analogous manner, again deriving both the optimal subgrouping and functionally relevant positions of an alignment.

the sd methods discussed thus far assume a single underlying subgrouping. in contrast, the consurf method  <cit>  infers a phylogenetic tree to normalise an entropy score over all columns in an alignment. the method incorporates a model of substitution rates along branches of the tree and in the most recent version this is performed within a bayesian framework  <cit> . alignment positions are classified based on the normalised entropy score, and colour-coded classes mapped to the surface of an example structure. a different approach was taken in the miner algorithm, where a phylogentic tree is derived for windows of a given size at each position in the alignment. the degree to which these trees correlate with the tree derived from the whole alignment is determined by counting topological differences. the highest correlating regions, referred to as 'phylogenetic motifs', are proposed as functionally significant  <cit> . the miner and consurf approaches are attractive since no artificial divisions of the alignment are necessary. however, while multiple valid phylogenetic trees are possible given a single alignment-derived distance matrix, both these techniques derive only one. if phylogeny estimation is not the objective of the investigation, assuming a single phylogenetic tree unnecessarily removes information. this problem is not intractable, and probabilistic models  <cit>  can facilitate representation of multiple possible trees. however this level of complexity may not be necessary, since the phylogentic structure of alignment columns may be compared to that of the whole by use of distance matrices without first inferring a tree.

pazos and valencia  <cit>  demonstrated that distance matrices derived from single columns of protein family alignments can be effective in the prediction of protein-protein interactions. a 'mutational behavior' method was also demonstrated, showing that distance matrices generated at single alignment positions that correlate with a matrix from the whole alignment can be indicative of functional sites  <cit> . however, the mutational behaviour method is limited to single alignment columns which may render it susceptible to noise. the alternative explored in the smerfs algorithm  <cit>  introduced in this paper is to work directly from distance matrices and to consider the local neighbourhood of each position in the alignment. the output of smerfs is somewhat similar to the similarity deviation score produced by the three-dimensional cluster analysis method of landgraf and coworkers  <cit> . however unlike the method of landgraf, smerfs considers neighbours in sequence, not structure, and therefore functions in the absence of an available structure. in this paper the smerfs algorithm is systematically evaluated alongside other methods on a new large collection of protein-protein and protein-small molecule interface examples derived from the snappi-db database  <cit> .

RESULTS
comparison of smerfs with miner
smerfs was compared to the tree-based method, miner  <cit>  for prediction on the snappi-db set. table  <dig> shows the roc <dig>  scores for predictions of domain-small molecule, domain-domain and the combined interacting residue sets. both methods were applied with their respective optimal parameter sets as determined by roc <dig>  score over  <dig> training sets.

smerfs performed better than miner in the prediction of domain-domain interactions, with the methods scoring  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, the converse was true in prediction of small molecule contacts. however, none of the differences were significant at the  <dig>  confidence level. this result suggests that the additional complexity in construction of phylogenetic trees in miner does not help improve accuracy.

conservation measures
optimal parameters were determined for each method on the snappi-db training set as described in methods. table  <dig> shows results for  <dig> conservation measures on the snappi-db blind test set. results are shown both for normalised single-column scores  and for optimal combinations of multi-position smoothing and gapped position removal . the smerfs results from table  <dig> are included for comparison, and in these rows the 'standard' result was derived from the matrices of single alignment positions, while 'optimised' indicates multi-column matrices.

performance results for optimised measures in table  <dig> do not always match or exceed those of the standard form. this is because optimised parameters for all measures were derived on the snappi-db training set, which is distinct from the blind test set. for prediction of domain contacts, all methods are improved on parameter optimisation with the exception of mirny. in the case of small molecule contacts however, only  <dig> of  <dig> conservation measures perform better in optimised than the standard form. for example, kabat scored  <dig>  in its standard form compared to  <dig>  optimised. thompson  <cit>  and lancet in contrast were improved by optimisation- thompson was improved from  <dig>  to  <dig>  by removal of the most highly gapped positions, though the optimised 'window' size was  <dig> as in the standard form. the lack of universal improvement in results from parameter optimisation in the small molecule validation set may reflect a reduced level of dependency of small-molecule binding positions with their neighbours, compared to protein-binding positions.

all methods predicted small molecule contacts better than inter-domain contacts, as judged by roc <dig>  score, reflecting the increased difficulty in prediction of domain-domain contacts. ranking of the different measures was largely conserved between domain-domain and domain-small molecule standard sets, with only minor re-ordering.

all measures achieved better scores than random, with the exception of lancet  <cit>  in domain-domain contact prediction, which scores  <dig> , compared to a random score of  <dig> .

the best performing measure for both domain-domain  and domain-small molecule  contact prediction was williamson  <cit> , a relative entropy measure incorporating physicochemical property scores as shown in equation 1:

  williamson=∑ikpiln⁡ 

where k =  <dig>  for  <dig> physicochemical residue sets used, and pi is fi/n where fi is the frequency of residue set i in a column and n is the number of sequences. p¯i is the mean value of pi over all alignment columns. interestingly, the next best score, in both domain-domain and domain-small molecule contact prediction tasks was given by the simple kabat measure  <cit>  illustrated in equation 2:

  kabat=kn1×n 

where k is the number of amino acid types present in the alignment column, ni is the the number of times the most commonly occurring amino acid occurs in the column, and n is the number of sequences in the alignment. the difference in score between williamson and kabat was not significant at the p =  <dig>  confidence level. the measure jores  <cit>  is only slightly more complex than kabat, employing a consideration of residue pairs present at a given position. however, the results in table  <dig> shows that this addition has not improved performance, and kabat consistently outperformed jores with p-values from mcnemar's test of  <dig>  × 10- <dig>   <dig>  × 10- <dig> and  <dig>  × 10- <dig> in prediction of domain, small-molecule and combined interacting positions, respectively. it may be that the extreme simplicity of kabat is it's strength, rendering it robust to noise compared to other measures, and this feature is lost in jores. alternatively the alignments in the data set may contain too few sequences for the relative benefits of more complex measures to be fully demonstrated.

other measures which gave consistently high scores in prediction of both types of interface were the mutation data score karlin  <cit> , the weighted sum-of-pairs score valdar  <cit> , and the stereochemical property score, taylor  <cit> , all of which incorporate amino acid properties into their function.

  mirny=∑ikpiln⁡pi 

notation is as equation  <dig>  except k =  <dig>  unlike williamson, equation  <dig> does not normalise scores according to the frequencies of residue types in the alignment.

the worst performing measure in the domain-domain interaction prediction task, lancet  <cit>  is defined by equation 4:

  lancet=∑ak∑bkpapbm 

where pa is the fractional frequency of amino acid a in the aligned column, k represents the alphabet of amino acids, and m is a substitution matrix such as blosum <dig>  lancet was noted in  <cit>  to suffer from idiosyncrasies related to placement of m as a denominator, it may be that this is at the root of its poor performance here.

the equivalent gerstein  <cit>  and schneider  <cit>  measures also performed badly. similarly to williamson they are based on entropy in a column of the alignment, but unlike williamson and valdar, they do not incorporate any consideration of physicochemical properties.

in summary, the best performing conservation measures tend to incorporate terms to normalise for the character of the alignment in question, as well as the relationships between residues according to their physicochemical properties. in williamson  <cit>  normalisation is in terms of the characteristic residue type frequencies of an alignment, in valdar  <cit>  it is the degree of sequence redundancy present. poorly performing measures lack one or more of these features. kabat is an anomaly in these results, lacking most of the features present in other successful measures. this may be a consequence of simplicity, endowing the measure with a strong resistance to noise that outweighs some of its shortcomings, but may also be an artefact of the dataset.

since williamson gave the best performance, it is used in the remainder of this paper as representative of conservation measures in comparison with other techniques.

recently, capra and singh have published a related study  <cit>  of conservation as a method of predicting functional residues. the authors employed a set of active site residues as standards; since such residues are not employed in the current study, direct comparisons cannot be made. however two other categories are used by the authors: 'ligand distance' and 'homolog protein interface', which are roughly equivalent to the 'small molecule' and 'domain' interacting residues of the current study.

two measures are shared by the present study and that of capra and singh: the mirny property entropy score and the karlin sum-of-pairs score. comparison based on these measures shows that roc <dig>  scores for un-optimised measures are higher in the current study, as shown in table  <dig>  in capra and singh's work, karlin scores  <dig>  and  <dig>  for small molecule and domain interactions, respectively, while mirny scores  <dig>  and  <dig> . this is likely to reflect differences in the origins of the validation data used; the validation sets here may be more complete in annotation, being derived from snappi-db. capra and singh did not examine the williamson entropy of properties score  <cit> , which this study has shown to be superior to mirny. had they done so, the indications from this study are that a performance closer to their best-performing 'jensen-shannon divergence' may have been produced.

comparison of conservation measures and smerfs
characterisation of the difference between smerfs and williamson conservation
as outlined in the introduction and in figure  <dig>  conservation and phylogeny based techniques such as smerfs aim to identify different types of functional residues. accordingly, the predictions by williamson and smerfs were examined by considering the number of predictions in common between the methods, by breaking down results by complex type on the bw <dig> set and by classifying the predictions into accessibility classes. finally, a qualitative comparison of the methods was performed for the amino transferases.

comparison of true positive sets
the overlap of true positive sets from smerfs and the best performing conservation measure was assessed on the snappi-db data set. true positive sets were created by applying a threshold to the 0– <dig> position scores generated by each method chosen to coincide with a false positive rate of  <dig> .

despite the superior results produced by williamson when considering roc areas in the snappi-db dataset, choosing the threshold for both methods via fixed false positive rate cost produced similar performance in terms of absolute true positives . higher roc areas indicate a higher mean true positive rate, defined as tp/. given a similar number of true positives, this indicates an elevated number of false negatives for smerfs compared to conservation. this was presumably due to smerfs failing to detect the most highly conserved regions since they lack any pair-wise similarity pattern.

construction of a hybrid classifier
since predictions from smerfs and williamson appear complementary, a predictor was developed that combined the two approaches within a bayesian framework. classifiers were trained in a cross-validation scheme, recording the probability of an interacting position conditional on combinations of scores from smerfs and williamson. however, validation of these classifiers did not give a consistent improvement on the best-performing of either smerfs or williamson.

results in the bw <dig> data set: different types of interface require different approaches
the snappi-db set is an extensive set of interacting positions that were produced automatically from structural data. the bw <dig> data set  <cit>  contains complexes of manually verified biological significance, separated into  <dig> subsets of different character. figure  <dig> illustrates the performance of smerfs relative to other measures in the most stringent portion of the roc curve to a false positive rate of  <dig> . the significance of the difference was assessed at a false positive rate of  <dig>  by mcnemar's test and displayed in table  <dig>  comparison with table  <dig> reveals an improved performance for both smerfs and williamson on the bw <dig> dataset. for example, the lowest smerfs score is found in the hetero-obligate subset in table  <dig> with a roc <dig>  of  <dig> ; the comparable domain-domain value in table  <dig> is  <dig> . as a more refined dataset than snappi-db, this set posseses a lower proportion of interacting positions, but those that are present are reliable. this may mean that a greater proportion of negatives assigned by good prediction measures are likely to be assigned as true negatives , reducing false positive rates , and thereby increasing roc <dig>  scores.

surface accessibility of predicted positions
since the definition of 'functional residue' employed here is a residue that mediates contact with other molecules, the most successful measures may be expected to predict accessible positions preferentially. surface accessibility was compared between the predicted residue sets of different methods in the bw <dig> set. relative surface accessibilities for residues were calculated with the program naccess , and their distributions compared between methods. all other structural entities except the domain of interest were removed from the pdb file prior to this analysis, so that otherwise accessible positions were not obscured by interacting entities.

case study: aminotransferases
the relative strengths and weaknesses of conservation vs phylogeny based approaches is illustrated for pfam family pf <dig>  'amino transferase class i and ii', taken from the homo-obligate subset of the bw <dig> data. this family was selected as an example due to its single domain structure, and the presence of a large amount of information on both protein-protein and protein-small molecule interactions. family members function as dimers and bind a pyridoxal phosphate cofactor, as shown in an example structure from trypanosoma cruzi .

other important positions around the cofactor binding site were predicted by smerfs and not williamson. tyr <dig> and thr <dig> are known to stabilise asp <dig> by hydrogen bonding, and tyrosine  <dig> hydrogen bonds to the cofactor. however these positions vary across the family as a whole, since hydrogen bonds can be supplied by a large variety of residues. as a consequence, these positions do not display sufficient conservation to be ranked highly by conservation.

the main advantage of smerfs over williamson evident in this example is the ability to predict a larger number of the protein-protein contacts. this can be seen by comparing the predicted positions shown in figure  <dig> with the chain-chain contacts highlighted for comparison in figure  <dig>  of  <dig> protein-protein contacting positions annotated to the pf <dig> alignment from the bw <dig> data set, smerfs predicts  <dig>  compared to just  <dig> from williamson. these positions, while exhibiting patterns in the pair-wise sequence relationships that are detectable by smerfs, are not detected as easily by conservation.

a number of positions were predicted successfully by both methods. tyr  <dig> binds with asn <dig> to plp's phenolic oxygen. tyr <dig> is known to stabilise asn <dig> and tyr <dig>  a stacking interaction provided by phe <dig> and a contact with ile <dig> form other important plp interactions, and were predicted by both methods. these positions are not invariant in the alignment, but conserve properties, for example of aromaticity or aliphaticity; this supplies both subfamily structure detectable by smerfs and property conservation detectable by williamson. interestingly, arg <dig>  a crucial and absolutely conserved position in the substrate-binding region is also predicted by smerfs. despite the lack of family structure displayed at this position, smerfs assigns it as positive due to patterns present in the surrounding positions. the successful and exclusive prediction by smerfs of many of the positions comprising the hydrogen bonding network at a ligand binding site illustrates its utility. performance in protein-protein interaction prediction is also much better for smerfs than williamson, and while not generalisable beyond this example, this shows that algorithms such as smerfs that detect specificity defining positions can sometimes succeed where conservation cannot.

the aminotransferase class i and ii sequence family has features that make it particularly amenable to analyses of this type. the sequences are single-domain, without the more complex evolutionary history present in multi-domain proteins. the sequences are sufficiently divergent for a subfamily structure to develop, without being so diverse as to introduce a large number of gaps. additionally, the associated 3d structures for the family are well annotated, with large numbers of both domain-domain and domain-small molecule interacting positions known. this reduces the number of times a correctly predicted position is not recognised as such, a problem in larger, less well annotated sequence families.

CONCLUSIONS
the work presented here has shown that smerfs produces sets of putative functional positions in multiple sequence alignments fundamentally different from those of conservation measures. for this reason conservation measures and phylogeny-aware methods such as smerfs should be considered as complementary tools. the data suggest that if alignment positions involved in the core function of a protein, for example catalysis, are the target of a study, relatively simple conservations measures remain the most useful tool. if less critical positions, perhaps responsible for defining sequence subfamiliy specificity, are the target, then methods such as smerfs may be of use. finally, smerfs has been shown to predict many more surface positions than conservation, reducing the possibility of confusing signals from positions of core structural rather than functional significance.

the complementary nature of conservation measures and those that seek specificity-defining positions are strongly suggestive of a combined approach. however, attempts made as part of this study to produce a hybrid classifier based on a rigorous probabilistic approach have failed. this may be because the relative importance of specificity-defining positions is different for differing complex types. for this reason a potentially useful approach would be to construct different combined classifiers for complexes of different types. the bw <dig> set contains too little data to produce accurate probabilities of sites for given score pairs based on observations, but a larger set of this type available in future might produce improved results. if method combination is not feasible, a simpler approach would be to determine those characteristics that make an alignment more amenable to one type of analysis or another, and select measures accordingly. despite the work described here and elsewhere in prediction of functional residues, it remains true that the accuracy of functional residue prediction techniques falls short of that necessary for true utility in the laboratory. there are multiple likely causes of this, and therefore multiple potential solutions.

the first is the definition of 'functional residue' employed by studies such as this. protein residues may be closely implicated in the hydrogen bonding networks that stabilise an interacting site without being directly involved in the interaction. this was demonstrated in the aminotransferase case study above, but only direct interactions formed part of the validation data sets. perceived performance of prediction methods might improve if residues peripheral to interacting sites are included in analyses, though such information is harder to derive automatically from structural data alone.

from a pure sequence-based perspective, difficulties result from the variable level of divergence present in protein sequence families. families with either insufficient sequences, or too little divergence between homologues confound analysis since too little evolutionary history is evident to discern true conservation. too many sequences or too much divergence, and patterns may be lost in noise or obscured by gaps. it may be possible to tackle this issue by careful choice of sequences for analysis, and estimation of likely accuracy given the sequence data available.

another key factor in an analysis like this is the fact that the meaning of 'functional position' is dependent on the protein family in question. this study has shown that the performance of methods is variable depending on the type of interaction under consideration. a study that sub-divided interactions into a larger number of classes would be likely to reveal further differences between methods.

