BACKGROUND
patterns of species diversity have been shaped by both speciation and extinction throughout the history of life, and one of the key questions in evolutionary biology is to understand the temporal and spatial dynamics of these processes  <cit> . in addition to the fossil record, molecular phylogenetic data of extant lineages can provide valuable information on the process of diversification in form of branch length and the distribution of divergence times throughout the evolutionary history of a clade. despite the omission of extinct lineages, it has been shown that differential patterns of speciation and extinction can leave a discernible signature on phylogenetic trees of extant taxa  <cit> . methodological advances  <cit>  as well as the growing number of well sampled, dated molecular phylogenies have generated considerable interest in unraveling the temporal dynamics of species diversification. indeed, diversification rates have been assessed for a wide range of taxa from the tree of life to address questions concerning rapid radiations  <cit> , mass extinction events  <cit> , and differences among lineages  <cit>  and geographic regions  <cit> . in particular, the identification of potential correlates of speciation and/or extinction rates, either extrinsic  and/or intrinsic , has received increased attention by relating rate shifts to external conditions or the evolution of species' traits.

nee at al.  <cit>  first applied the generalized birth-death process  <cit>  to molecular phylogenies of extant lineages to extract information on the evolutionary process and proposed a likelihood approach to estimate both speciation and extinction rates . given the need to distinguish different modes of diversification , further approaches have been developed to incorporate rate variation through time  <cit>  and across clades  <cit> . in addition, the original birth-death process was modified to correct rate estimates in case of incomplete taxon sampling  <cit> .

while bayesian markov chain monte carlo  methods are now commonly employed in phylogenetics to accommodate for uncertainties in model parameters, the temporal uncertainty of node age estimates is usually not taken into account when studying the dynamics of species diversification, resulting in an erroneous impression of precision. here, we present a novel mcmc approach to estimate rates of speciation and extinction over the posterior distribution of trees generated in bayesian molecular clock analyses. several models of diversification have been implemented, including the constant rate birth-death and pure-birth processes modified to account for incomplete taxon sampling  <cit> , a birth-death process with continuously varying rates  <cit> , and a pure-birth process with rate shifts  <cit> , for which the posterior distribution of λ and the temporal position of each rate shift are jointly estimated. within the bayesian framework, we describe a meta-analysis approach that aims at evaluating general patterns of species diversification across different taxonomic groups. in addition to the estimation of rate parameters, the approach presented here can also be used to distinguish between different modes of diversification, and test explicit hypotheses of rate variation through time and between clades using bayes factors. we assess the power of the mcmc and of the bayes factor test using simulated data sets, and demonstrate the application on empirical data sets: rate variation through time in the diversification of mediterranean cyprinid genus chondrostoma, geographic patterns in the radiation of the genus lupinus, and a meta-analysis of four clades from the cape flora of south africa.

RESULTS
bayesian rate estimation across phylogenies
the birth-death process was implemented in a markov chain monte carlo framework to estimate the parameters of species diversification  while accounting for phylogenetic uncertainty. several modifications of the birth-death process originally described by nee et al.  <cit>  were implemented in the mcmc algorithm to describe different patterns of diversification and allow model selection and hypothesis testing. we included a modification of the birth-death process that accounts for incomplete taxon sampling based on yang and rannala  <cit>  and stadler  <cit>  in which the fraction of the sampled species out of the total diversity  is used to correct the estimate of the diversification parameters. although the missing species are assumed to be randomly distributed within the phylogeny, unlike in other models , we incorporate an option to assign different sampling fractions to predefined clades . in addition, rabosky and lovette's  <cit>  spvar model was implemented to analyze the commonly observed pattern of "explosive-early" radiations, in which clades show an initial burst of diversification followed by a gradually declining speciation rate. another model that accounts for rate variation through time is a pure-birth process in which a fixed number of shifts in diversification rate is assumed  <cit> . in contrast to the continuously varying birth-death process, the rate is assumed to vary only at specific times and otherwise remain constant. for a given number of rate shifts, the mcmc estimates their temporal position and the respective rates. finally, our approach can be used to assign independent rates to predefined clades and is especially intended for hypothesis testing, complementing other approaches in which the rate constancy across-clades is relaxed  <cit> , or in which the number and position of the rate shifts on the tree are estimated  <cit> . the data set is partitioned a priori by defining clades of interest, based for example on morphology or biogeography, and independent rates, models, and sampling proportions can be assigned to each clade.

f-model: a meta-analysis approach
we develop a new method to investigate the strength and significance of general patterns of species diversification across different taxonomic groups through time or between clades in a meta-analysis framework. within a collection of n data sets d <dig>  d <dig>  ..., dn , each data set di is partitioned a priori into two time frames or clades di and di. the definition of these partitions can be based on criteria that are applicable to all phylogenies analyzed e.g. geologic events or geographic distribution. their respective speciation rates λi and λi are described as a function of a multiplier mi and a parameter f so that:

  λip=2mif1+f 

  λiq=2mi1+f 

where mi = 1/ <dig> + λi) represents a taxon specific mean rate that is assumed independent for each data set di, and f = λ/λ is constrained to be equal for all data sets and quantifies the overall magnitude of the rate difference between the two partitions. based on these definitions, the rates are equal when f =  <dig>  whereas λ > λ with f greater than  <dig>  and λ < λ with f smaller than  <dig>  we use mcmc sampling to obtain posterior estimates of the parameters m <dig>  m <dig>  ..., mn and f from the joint likelihood of all data sets ld

  ld= ∏i=1nldip;λipldiq;λiq 

proposals for the parameters m are sampled from normal distributions centered on their current values, whereas new values of the f parameter are obtained from a log-normal distribution to achieve a symmetric proposal distribution in log. reflection at the boundary was used to avoid proposals outside of the valid range . uniform priors are assigned to m in range  <cit>  and to log in range , which corresponds to an f value in range . the clade-specific f-model can be extended to a birth-death process by assigning the parameter m to the mean net diversification  and introducing a second parameter n for the mean extinction fraction . consequently, two parameters fr and fa are defined to measure the overall variation of r and a between clades of each data set. the significance of an overall rate difference across partitions is assessed via bayes factor between a model in which f is allowed to vary and a model with constrained f =  <dig> .

model selection using bayes factor
our analyses on simulated data sets show that the power of the bayes factor test  in finding the correct model is generally very high and not particularly affected by the model settings. bayes factors were calculated between the model used to simulate each data set and a range of possible alternative models  based on their respective marginal likelihoods  obtained through thermodynamic integration  <cit> . positive bayes factors  allow to correctly distinguish between diversification models in the majority of the simulations even in data sets with very low taxon sampling. only when the extinction fraction is low , the pure birth model obtains a slightly higher marginal likelihood than the birth-death. with variable rate pure-birth models, the number of rate shifts is correctly estimated when the magnitude of rate variation is moderate  or higher. the effect of extinction and an increase in speciation rate in absence of extinction, both resulting in a similar pattern of increasing net diversification through time, can be distinguished with intermediate to high extinction fraction  or a moderate  rate increase. furthermore, the power of bayes factors in model selection improves with the size of the phylogeny . for instance in case of a small  increase in the diversification rate, the correct model is found only on larger phylogenies .

bayes factors are calculated under birth-death , pure-birth , and pure-birth with rate shifts  based on thermodynamic integration. the bf values are calculated between the model applied in the simulation and the alternative models: positive values support the true model.

rate estimation on simulated phylogenies
analyses on simulated data sets indicate that the mcmc has a rather short burn-in phase and achieves a good chain mixing  with  <dig>   <dig> generations and a sampling frequency of  <dig>  the posterior estimates of the speciation rate under the different models of diversification are found to be accurate with a relative error generally below 10% . the relative error drops below 5% in data sets with  <dig> or more taxa, indicating that the size of the phylogeny has an impact on the accuracy of the parameter estimation. in addition the width of the rates' credibility intervals decreases with increasing size of the phylogeny: the hpds are on average 25% narrower with  <dig> taxa compared to  <dig>  and further reduce by another 50% with  <dig> tips . in addition, about one third of the width of the 95% hpd is due to accounting for phylogenetic uncertainty .

                              mean 
                              mean 
rates were inferred using the constant rate pure-birth or birth-death model, averaged over  <dig> phylogenies for each simulation. the taxon sampling  of incomplete phylogenies and relative errors are reported in parenthesis.

                              k
                              mean 
                              mean 
                              k
                           
                              mean 
estimates of speciation  and extinction  rates and the k parameter are inferred using the variable rate birth-death model , averaged over  <dig> phylogenies. relative errors are given in parenthesis.

                              s
                              mean 
                              s
                           
                              mode
speciation rates  and temporal position of rate shifts  are inferred under the variable rate pure-birth model, averaged over  <dig> phylogenies for each simulation. the marginal rates are estimated as the mean of their posterior distributions, positions of rate shifts are estimated as the modal values of their posterior distributions. relative errors are given in parenthesis if higher than  <dig> .

the constant rate birth-death model yields accurate posterior estimates of the speciation rate λ  and efficient measures of the extinction rate are obtained when the extinction fraction is high . the accuracy of the estimate, however, decreases substantially when the extinction is low . this is likely due to the mcmc sampling, which is constrained by the fact that μ cannot become negative  <cit> . this results in a strongly skewed posterior distribution for which the mean is a poor estimator; a more accurate estimate is in this case provided by the mode. the 95% credibility interval of the posterior rates is always wide for μ . while the sampling proportion does not significantly affect the accuracy in the estimation of λ and μ , it has a strong impact on the width of the credibility intervals. the size of the 95% hpd increases by  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> percent with ρ =  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively, compared to the complete data set .

the model with continuously decreasing diversification rates  yields accurate estimates of the parameter k . on the other hand, the estimated initial speciation rate λ <dig> tends to be overestimated when k is small , and underestimated for higher k values.

estimates of the speciation rates in data sets with rate-shifts were found to be accurate with a relative error on average lower than  <dig>  . the marginal rates estimated within  <dig> myr time frames, reflect the rate variation through time . for time frames in which a rate shift occurs, the marginal rate is often represented by a bimodal distribution, which reflects the uncertainty on the temporal placement of the shift and results in an intermediate rate estimate with a wider 95% credibility interval . this uncertainty is reflected in the frequency distribution of the rate shift in the posterior sample . a highly accurate estimate of the time of rate shift is provided by the modal value of its sampling frequency, with relative errors lower than  <dig>  .

contrasting times of rate shift: diversification of mediterranean cyprinids
the use of a pure-birth process with rate shift and its implementation in hypothesis testing are illustrated in an analysis of the cyprinid genus chondrostoma . a recently published molecular phylogeny of the genus  <cit>  places the origin of the present lineages in the mid-miocene around  <dig> mya. two alternative hypotheses on the diversification of chondrostoma have been proposed, placing its radiation in the mediterranean region either during the messinian salinity crisis  <cit>  or earlier in the miocene  <cit> . the comparison of different models of diversification using bayes factor tests led to the selection of a two-rate pure-birth process and estimated a fourfold decrease in speciation rates , and indicating a substantial slowdown during the miocene. we used alternative two-rate pure-birth models to specifically test the fit of a rate shift during the messinian  or earlier in the miocene . the rate shift was constrained in two separate analyses to lie within those periods, and the two models were compared by approximating a bayes factor. robalo et al.  <cit>  favored the latter hypothesis based on their molecular clock analysis, although without specifically testing it in a statistical framework. our analysis suggests that the messinian lago mare phase had no particular effect on the radiation of the genus chondrostoma , as a significant decrease in the speciation rate has to be placed before that period, thus supporting robalo et al.'s conclusion.

clade-specific analysis: geographic patterns in the radiation of lupinus 
we demonstrate the application of models in which the rates can vary between predefined clades by analyzing the geographic patterns of diversification in lupinus   <cit> . the phylogeny of the genus lupinus shows a strong geographic structure which we used to define four partitions: i) an early diverging old world clade, ii) a group of eastern new world taxa, iii) a clade occurring mainly in western north america and central america, and iv) a clade including most of the andean species . the latter displays a radiation from which around  <dig> species arose in the past  <dig>  million years. while the model with equal rates among clades was strongly rejected in favor of variable rate models , the highest marginal likelihood was assigned to a model with three different rates assigned to the clades i, ii+iii, and iv, respectively. the posterior distributions of the diversification rates are plotted as relative densities , showing a four-fold variation in speciation rate between the old world lupinus  and the non-andean new world lineages . the andean clade, as described by hughes and eastwood  <cit> , represents an explosive radiation with a posterior rate estimate of λiv =  <dig> .

                              m
the marginal likelihoods  of models with different partition settings are estimated via thermodynamic integration. log bayes factors  are calculated by comparing the best fitting model  against all the others.

a meta-analysis approach: diversification of the cape flora, south africa
the high and unique plant diversity of the cape floristic region  of south africa is the result of an extraordinary contribution of lineages, that radiated extensively in the cfr . the high diversity and endemism suggest that cape clades may have diversified at a faster rate within the cfr than elsewhere. valente et al.  <cit>  however recently showed that in the genus protea, diversification rates in the cape were, if anything, lower than in neighboring regions. to test for a general rate difference between cape and non-cape clades, we analyzed four data sets  <cit> , all containing clades distributed within and outside the cfr, representing in total  <dig> plant species. the posterior rates estimated for the cape/non-cape clades of each individual data set are: babiana  <dig> / <dig> , moraea  <dig> / <dig> , podalyrieae  <dig> / <dig> , and protea  <dig> / <dig>  . the f parameter is estimated as  <dig>  , indicating that diversification rates are overall slightly higher outside of the cape  region. however a bayes factor of  <dig>  between the constrained f-model with f =  <dig>  and the unconstrained model suggests that this difference is not significant and that equal rates should be preferred. these results indicate an overall rate uniformity between cape and non-cape clades based on the four data sets analyzed, suggesting that the great diversity in the cfr might not be the result of a faster diversification process. it should be noted however that, as pointed out by valente et al.  <cit> , species ranges in these regions are vastly different, indicating that the key to understanding the cape biodiversity hotspot instead lies in understanding why so many lineages have speciated and persisted in such a small area.

implementation
the method described has been implemented in a computer program called "bayesrate"  written in python  <cit>   and r  <cit> , integrating codes using the python module rpy <dig>  <cit> . the thermodynamic integration supports multi-core computation by simultaneously running individual markov chains on different processors. the log files can be examined with the program tracer  <cit>  to check for efficiency of the sampling , and convergence between independent runs.

discussion
we presented a new bayesian approach, which provides a powerful tool to estimate rates of speciation and extinction on dated phylogenies based on the likelihood functions of the pure-birth, and birth-death processes while accounting for phylogenetic uncertainty and incomplete taxon sampling. on empirical data, our rate estimation requires a two steps analysis: 1) sampling a posterior distribution of dated phylogenies using a bayesian molecular clock approach, and 2) estimating posterior diversification rates on these trees. available programs such as beast  <cit>  and mcmctree  <cit>  apply in their relaxed molecular clock implementation different birth-death processes as priors on the node ages  <cit> . when applied to phylogenies obtained under these assumptions, our approach therefore requires that priors on the diversification parameters are specified twice, while ideally divergence times and diversification rates should be estimated jointly. the majority of the diversification processes considered here are however currently not implemented in these programs, and thus need to be estimated independently. analyses on simulated data show that the default uniform priors on net diversification and extinction fraction in beast do not affect the subsequent rate estimates . alternatively, researchers could choose to run molecular clock analyses in which the prior on the node ages is not based on a birth-death process, but modeled using uniform or dirichlet distributions  <cit> , as implemented in e.g. multidivtime  <cit>  and phylobayes  <cit> .

the range of models implemented can be used to detect a number of different scenarios of rate variation, including specific events of rate increase or decrease, continuous rate variation through time, and clade-specific diversification rates, while simultaneously accounting for taxon sampling. in addition, the bayesian framework extends the use of the birth-death models beyond the simple rate estimation allowing the comparison of alternative scenarios of diversification for hypothesis testing.

the bayes factor test computed via thermodynamic integration has shown to represent a reliable and powerful approach to choose among different models of diversification. bf can be applied to compare non-nested models and does not require to be explicitly corrected for the number of model parameters. for these properties it is particularly suitable not only to select the best model in a bayesian framework, but also to compare specific hypotheses. the power of bayes factors to detect the correct number of rates predominantly depends on the magnitude of the rate shifts. similarly, different birth-death and pure-birth processes can generate diversification patterns that might be difficult to distinguish  <cit> . for instance, an increase in the net diversification rate can be the result of an increased speciation rate in the absence of extinction or a high extinction rate in a constant rate birth-death process. nevertheless, we found that the bayes factors test has the power to discern between most of such scenarios.

analyses on simulated data show that for both speciation and extinction rates the posterior estimates are accurate. however, the width of the 95% hpd intervals also highlights the sometimes considerable uncertainty in the parameter estimates, especially in case of small phylogenies. our simulations have shown that this uncertainty is most pronounced with a low relative extinction rate, in which case extinction tends to be overestimated , and estimates have a wide 95% credibility interval. this corroborates previous studies that pointed out that the estimation of extinction rates from molecular phylogenies with reasonable degrees of confidence is very problematic  <cit> . it should be noted, however, that the wide credibility intervals reflect not only the uncertainties of the parameter estimation, but also the uncertainty of the data . estimates of the speciation rate on the other hand appear to be more robust. in contrast to paradis  <cit> , we find that the posterior estimate of λ has a small relative error, even under high relative extinction rates, suggesting that the accuracy in the estimates of λ might be decoupled from the relative rate of extinction. the pure-birth and birth-death models with taxon sampling are found to provide accurate rate estimates, although a poor sampling yields substantially wider 95% hpds. finally, the pure-birth process with rate-shifts tends to slightly underestimate the true variation of λ, as a consequence of accounting for the uncertainty of the time of rate shift.

the approach provides a very flexible framework for customized analyses and hypothesis testing such as predefined times of rate shift or constrained parameter values. we have shown with the diversification of chondrostoma, that the pure-birth model with variable rates can be easily adapted to test for specific hypotheses, running the analysis on fixed time frames defined for example on the basis of geological events or climate changes. the implementation of clade-specific rate estimation further extends the range of options for hypothesis testing, and its application on the radiation of lupinus showed that it can be used to identify differential rates of diversification between clades. in particular, the option to account for clade-specific sampling biases provides an important feature, as complete taxon sampling is often difficult to achieve, especially for species-rich groups.

finally, with the f-model, we introduce a new approach to test hypotheses in a meta-analysis framework, and extend the focus from the taxon-specific rate of diversification to a parameter that might be linked to the difference between e.g. geologic periods or geographic regions. the current implementation allows to compare hypotheses with two rates, assigned to either fixed time frames or clades, while accounting for clade-specific taxon sampling. because the f parameter is constant across data sets, we assume that the magnitude of the rate variation in time or between clades is equal among all data sets. while this certainly represents a simplification of the diversification process, the f-model allows the analyses of potentially many data sets, limiting the number of parameters, and yielding an estimation of general trends across different taxonomic groups. moreover, even relatively small rate variations can be detected if supported by a sufficient number of data sets.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the approach presented here shows that temporal dynamics of species diversification resulting from biologically relevant events such as key innovations or the impact of environmental change should best be studied in a bayesian framework. the use of mcmc sampling provides an elegant way to estimate speciation and extinction rates while taking into account the often considerable uncertainty on divergence times. furthermore, the model with taxon sampling represents an important step towards a more realistic estimation of the diversification parameters, where a non-random distribution of missing taxa can be incorporated with clade-specific sampling proportions. in addition to the models implemented in this study, recently developed modifications of the birth-death process  <cit>  could also be integrated in the algorithm. with the possibility to run customized analyses specifically designed for hypothesis testing, this method provides a useful and flexible statistical framework to investigate diversification processes. a promising future development would be to relax the f-model to incorporate more than two rates, by assigning a specific multiplier to each time frame or group of clades.

