BACKGROUND
to ensure stable and efficient of metabolic processes in cells, highly coordinated molecular interactions of the involved enzymes and metabolites are necessary. the study of spatially organizing principles of metabolic pathways has long been a research focus of cellular and molecular biology. organelle compartmentalization and the organization of enzymatic pathways in so-called metabolons have been discussed as the main cellular-scale as well as molecular-scale organizational units to orchestrate the multiple metabolic processes inside cells and to separate as well as to integrate them in space and time. first introduced by srere, the term metabolon describes a non-covalent association of several sequential enzymes involved in a metabolic pathway  <cit> . similar to industrial assembly lines, intermediates are passed on from one enzyme to the next, referred to as metabolic channeling, leading to an optimized metabolic flux. the stability and structural integrity of metabolons varies greatly ranging from temporary associations and their dynamic formation in response to environmental changes to stable, permanent enzyme complexes  <cit> . furthermore, it was found that enzyme complexes are often associated with intra-cellular membrane systems  <cit>  demonstrating that the spatial organization of the metabolic network is not only limited to direct physical interaction of participating enzymes, but that it also involves passive – in the context of enzymatic pathways – mediating structural cellular components.

metabolic channeling provides several advantages such as an increase of catalytic efficiency by shorter transition times between the consecutive active sites  <cit> , local enrichment of substrates, protection from toxic intermediates by shielding them from the cellular environment, prevention of decomposition of unstable chemical compounds  <cit> , overcoming of thermodynamically unfavorable equilibria  <cit> , as well as avoidance of competitive pathways  <cit> . although the concept of metabolic channeling has been discussed controversially at times  <cit> , it is now supported by metabolic control analysis as well as experimental evidence  <cit> .

recently, huthmacher and co-workers analyzed the metabolic networks of yeast and escherichia coli in the context of direct protein interactions as observed in newly available, large-scale protein-protein interaction surveys allowing a systematic scan for direct protein interactions of consecutive metabolic pathway enzymes  <cit> . they found higher frequencies of physical interactions of enzymes sharing at least one common metabolite in the network. the chance for enzymes to physically interact was observed to be negatively correlated to the distance between enzymes in metabolic network in e. coli and, to a lesser degree, in yeast as well. in addition, they reported a higher probability of regulating enzymes to interact with other proteins, where regulating enzymes were defined either by a threshold of gibbs free energy change of the associated reaction or by their position within the network as being located at highly connecting branching points. furthermore, the analysis of high-throughput protein-protein interaction data yielded a number of novel candidates for metabolic channeling. thus, the functional significance of protein-protein interactions for the metabolic pathway organization has been established and is supported by many experimental observations.

here, we aim to expand the view on protein interactions in the context of metabolic pathways by treating both levels of molecular organization as network graphs and to investigate global as well as local network properties. the representation of complex biological networks as graphs and the study of their properties have contributed to an emerging system-wide approach towards studying the organizing principles of cellular and molecular processes. global topological graph properties such as the degree distribution have received particular attention and have been discussed in the context of network stability and information exchange within networks  <cit> .

the integrated analysis of different network types for different levels or domains of molecular organization has been applied to transfer evidence to support particular interactions from one network type to another. ge et al. showed that gene expression and protein interaction data are correlated  <cit> . kemmeren and co-workers as well as deane et al. used gene expression data to assess confidence levels for protein interaction networks  <cit> . goldberg and roth predicted genetic interactions by utilizing protein interaction data  <cit> , and kelly and ideker to predict the physical context of genes  <cit> . rhodes et al. used go-annotations, integrated interlogs and expression data as well as data of protein domains, known to interact to predict protein interactions  <cit> . the use of gene co-expression data to identify protein interactions has also been demonstrated recently  <cit> . finally, lee et al. integrated expression, gene-fusion, phylogenetic profile, literature co-citation as well as protein interaction data to predict functional associations  <cit> .

in this study, we expand on the study of huthmacher and co-workers by investigating the entire protein interaction network and its significance for metabolic networks and metabolic pathways. we extended enzymatic physical interactions to also include non-enzymatic proteins as metabolic relationships between enzymes may also be mediated by metabolically inactive interface proteins. specifically, we investigate whether large-scale topological equivalences of both the metabolomic and protein interaction network can be detected. furthermore, as the physical organization of metabolic pathways is likely to have been under evolutionary optimization to increase metabolic throughput, we are studying here whether available flux data can be correlated to the protein interaction data supporting this hypothesis. so far, protein interaction data have been analyzed primarily across all functional categories. here, we compare the general organization principles with those observed for the enzymatic protein subset, and report that, indeed, specific differences do exist. the significance of topological parameter distributions have largely been analyzed within the context of the examined network type itself, but not across different network types. for example, macdonald and co-workers discovered defined relationship between fluxes going through metabolic network edges and the degree product of the connected nodes  <cit> . here, we explore whether such relationships can be established across network types, in particular protein interaction and metabolic networks.

thus, our investigations aim to establish whether unifying principles shaping the evolution of both protein interactions as well as metabolic pathways can be detected.

RESULTS
topological properties of interaction networks
we start our investigations by first characterizing the global network properties of the various types of molecular networks examined in this study. besides the two main network types, the protein interaction network and the metabolic network, further filtering and different construction methodologies were applied to reveal organizational differences between raw networks including all interactions, and networks designed specifically to capture aspects of metabolism and to also safe-guard against possible artifacts resulting from a particular reconstruction scheme.

protein interaction networks 
the raw pin  derived from the merged databases of dip and biogrid comprises  <dig>  proteins involved in  <dig>  physical interactions. the network does not differentiate whether the interaction between two proteins is transient or permanent, or under which conditions the proteins were found to interact, or the functional relevance of the association. as the pins used in this study are represented as undirected graphs, the functionality of an interaction cannot be resolved. a kinase interacting with a protease may activate the protease or be degraded by it.

the connectivity distribution p of the rpin can be approximated by a power-law function with p ≈ k-γ, where γ – the scale-free exponent – is the slope of the linear regression line in the double-logarithmic diagrams . the value of γ was observed as  <dig>  for the rpin. the deviation from a straight line in the double-logarithmic suggests that a better fit may be obtained by introducing a mixture of power law and exponential degree distribution as was observed similarly for the drosophila protein interactome  <cit>  and other molecular networks  <cit> . as is typical for biological networks, the great majority of proteins show a small number of links whereas few proteins have up to  <dig> interactions. the rpin network graph is characterized by a relatively short characteristic length  of  <dig>  ±  <dig> . of the  <dig>  physical interactions,  <dig>  occurred in the cytosol,  <dig> between two membrane associated proteins, and  <dig> were interactions between a membrane associated protein and a soluble protein. the sub-cellular localization information of  <dig>  interactions was incomplete. go-cellular component annotations for  <dig>  interactions were inconsistent; i.e. participating proteins were reported in different compartments, and have thus been discarded from the analysis.

to analyze aspects of the protein interaction network that are specifically associated with metabolic functions, we identified proteins of rather non-metabolic functions and processes and their associated interactions. the rpin comprises  <dig>  proteins related to dna processing functions with  <dig>  associated interactions,  <dig> protein-degradation related proteins involved in  <dig>  interactions, and  <dig> kinase-phosphatase associated proteins with  <dig>  associations as well as  <dig>  other-non-metabolic rather unspecific proteins involved in  <dig>  interactions. all these interactions were partially overlapping as proteins form different groups were also reported to interact. after removing these interactions, the remaining nodes span a graph of  <dig>  proteins, which can be considered to be the key molecular components responsible for maintaining the metabolic machinery. we will refer to this graph as the filtered pin . of the  <dig>  proteins,  <dig> represent enzymes annotated with an ec-number. the fpin comprises  <dig>  links, with  <dig> interactions between enzyme pairs. one third of all nodes are included in the graphs giant component, the largest connected sub-graph. we left unconnected nodes in the graph as the absence of interactions of such proteins may also be significant. in comparison to the raw network, the number of enzymes  is lower, because in the fpin, non-metabolic enzymes such as protein kinases and protein phosphatases have been excluded.

further removal of proteins not assigned to at least one ec-number led to the enzyme-only-pin , a graph comprising only enzymes and the interactions between them. its giant component contains 19% of all nodes. thus, with applied filtering, the pin became progressively disintegrated.

as observed for the rpin, and even more convincingly, the connectivity distribution of both networks, the fpin and epin, follows a power law behavior with respective scale-free exponents of  <dig>  for the fpin, and  <dig>  for the epin . compared to the rpin and explained by the removal of many non-specific interactions, the fraction of highly-connected nodes is reduced in the fpin and epin with a simultaneous increase of unconnected nodes. the characteristic length  of the fpin is  <dig>  and for the epin  <dig> , which is approximately twice as long as the cl associated with rpin  suggesting that, in particular, highly connected nodes providing shortcuts have been removed in the fpin and epin compared to the rpin even though the networks as such are smaller as nodes have been deleted. note that impossible paths  have not been included in the calculation of cl.

the average cluster coefficient of the rpin was determined as  <dig> ,  <dig>  for the fpin, and  <dig>  for the epin indicating increased modularity of the two filtered pins compared to the raw protein interaction network. while the rpin shows a negative correlation of degrees associated with neighboring nodes, i.e. it is dissortative, the fpin and the epin revealed a positive correlation. the assortativity  was calculated as - <dig>  for the rpin,  <dig>  for the fpin, and  <dig>  for the epin. all correlations are significant with associated p-values of  <dig> e- <dig>   <dig> e- <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the negative correlations in the rpin can be explained by the high dissortativity of protein sub-networks that have been discarded in the filtered pins. the graph comprising relations between kinase-phosphatase associated proteins shows a dissortativity of - <dig> , dna-related proteins of - <dig> , protein-degradation - <dig>  and other-non-metabolic proteins of - <dig> . consistent with these findings, the distribution of the neighbors' connectivity increases with increasing connectivity of nodes for the fpin and epin, albeit moderately – yet significantly, and decreases for the rpin with increasing degree of nodes .

thus, the organizing principles governing protein interactions between proteins involved in metabolic functions appear to be different than for other functional categories. while pins generally are dissortative, protein interactions associated with metabolic functions appear to be assortative; i.e. enzymes preferentially interact with other enzymes of similar degree .

the metabolic interaction networks 
we analyzed three different realizations of metabolic interaction networks  each representing metabolic pathways from a different perspective. the first two representations of a metabolic interaction networks are the enzyme interaction networks  and the ein derived from kegg pathway maps , where the nodes of the graph are enzymes with assigned ec-numbers. in the ein, two enzymes are linked if they are associated by at least one product-substrate relationship. for constructing the mapein, we extracted relations from kegg pathway maps directly rather than scanning reaction lists for product-substrate relationships as done for the ein. while the ein comprises a large number of enzymes and their relations, the mapein may capture better the established biochemical knowledge of metabolic pathways. the compound  interaction network  represents a third representation of mins. in this graph, nodes are metabolites, and links are drawn between them if they are connected by at least one reaction.

the ein comprises  <dig>  nodes representing unique ec-numbers. the connectivity distributions, p, of the graph follows approximately a scale-free distribution with an estimated scale-free exponent γ of  <dig>  . as observed for the rpin, a deviation from a simple power law behavior is evident . however, the distribution follows a power law only if small ubiquitously occurring, so-called currency metabolites, such as h+, nh <dig>  h2o, co <dig>  and metal ions as well as co-enzymes and co-substrates, like coa, nadh+, fad, sam are excluded . including these compounds significantly increases the degree of the enzymes interacting with them resulting in a distribution p deviating from the power law distribution for high connectivity values . upon including currency metabolites, the total number of edges increases from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and characteristic length, cl, decreases from  <dig>  to  <dig> .

the mapein comprises  <dig>  nodes connected by  <dig>  relations. the scale-free exponent of the connectivity distribution, γ, was computed as  <dig>  with an increased probability of nodes to be less connected as compared to the ein, where many more relationships between enzymes are possible simply via their possible substrate-product relationships. the cl of the mapein network was determined as  <dig> .

the third representation, the cin, comprises  <dig>  metabolites connected by  <dig>  links. as done for the ein, the currency metabolites, co-enzymes and co-substrates have been removed prior to analysis. the connectivity distribution of the cin exhibits a scale-free exponent, γ, of  <dig>  and cl of  <dig>  .

all three min graphs are assortative with assortativity values, rd, of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  in the ein, mapein, and cin, respectively. correspondingly, an increasing neighbors connectivity, nc, was observed for increasing connectivity, k . the high assortativity value for the ein probably results from the construction procedure. the ein was constructed by scanning for product-substrate relationships. as reactions are generally treated as reversible, so that the lists of substrate and products are interchangeable, all enzymes sharing a metabolite may be linked through substrate-product relations and form a complete sub-graph. while the high assortativity of the ein may originate from the reconstruction method possibly resulting in too many connections, this may not be the case for the mapein as the interactions have been curated manually. however, many reactions in the kegg-maps are known to be performed by isoenzymes carrying different ec numbers. since reactions are treated as reversible, isoenzymes will be considered connected as the product of one isoenzyme can be the substrate of another, even though it is the same reaction they are catalyzing. thus, a set of isoenzymes will form a fully-connected sub-graph, also including the enzymes of the preceding or subsequent reaction step as each isoenzyme is connected to them. the reconstruction of the cin avoids this problem. this third representation of mins is closest to the biological and intuitive understanding of metabolic pathways. a pathway in this sense is the path from a first substrate to a final product. the difference in the respective construction methods is also reflected by the average clustering coefficient , where the cc for ein was  <dig> , ein from kegg-maps  <dig> , and  <dig>  for the cin, respectively.

a summary of global network properties for the pins and mins investigated in this study is provided in table  <dig> 

brackets indicate mean values. properties are explained in greater detail in the methods section.

correlation of protein interaction networks  and associated metabolic interaction networks 
nodes in the ein and mapein represent enzymes. it is therefore possible to link enzymes found in pins to the ein and mapein via their annotated ec-numbers. enzymes from pins can be linked to metabolites from the cin network via the enzyme -substrates and -product relationships. thus, it is possible to directly relate network distances of proteins  across both network types  allowing us to study, how metabolic network or pathway distances are reflected in protein interaction networks.

we evaluated the distribution of the shortest paths between distance pairs in the pins and mins, comparing the actually observed distribution to distributions generated by  <dig>  randomly constructed networks . the over- or under-representation of the distances were judged by the z-score of observed frequencies . we applied the analysis to all pins and related them to the ein, the mapein, and the cin.

a direct correspondence between the protein interaction networks and metabolic networks; i.e. the physical organization of enzyme interactions follows directly their reaction pathway network, would be reflected by red-colored squares – indicating increased occurrence compared to random expectation – along the diagonal in the pair-distance matrices shown in figure  <dig>  indeed, the distributions of the enrichments and depletions of the distance-pairs reveal an overall correlation of the shortest paths in pins and mins. all pins show a strong enrichment of direct interactions; i.e. distance  <dig>  in relation to the ein and mapein. furthermore, an overall correlation of distance pairs with increased numbers of observations relative to the random background  for all pin-min comparisons is evident, especially for the fpin . interestingly, enzymes appear more closely related  in the fpin in comparison to their distances derived from their metabolic network association , as the off-diagonal pattern of red-colored squares indicates a skewed distribution towards larger shortest paths between linked proteins in the min compared to their distances in pins. thus, it appears that enzymes catalyzing enzymatic steps of some medium distance, i.e. not directly subsequent to each other, are physically brought into contact via protein-protein interactions involving proteins that are not necessarily directly participating in the actual metabolic pathway. for the ein, above-diagonal enrichments were not observed when compared to the fpin and epin, possibly a consequence of the network reconstruction procedure that allows very many interactions leading to a highly connected metabolic network. as the fpin contains both enzymes and structural proteins, some proteins included in this network may function as connector or bridging proteins holding distant parts of metabolic pathways together. in the epin, such proteins have been filtered out leaving only enzymes in the pin. here, the enrichment pattern follows the main diagonal, but at weaker significance as the absolute numbers are smaller. a direct comparison of shortest paths between enzyme pairs connected via valid paths in both the fpin and the epin yielded a mean distances of  <dig>  for the fpin, and  <dig>  for the epin . thus, metabolic enzymes are brought into spatial proximity – by way of protein-protein interactions – via interactions mediated by non-metabolically active proteins.

the overall pearson correlation values, r, for distance-pairs  are listed in table  <dig>  all correlations are highly significant . thus, in all comparisons, a positive correlation of the organization of protein-protein relations was observed between their enzymatic pathway organization and their corresponding physical organization. the correlation is strongest when enzyme-only protein networks are compared to mins, in particular to kegg-map derived metabolic pathways . the pin-min correlations were observed to become more pronounced when more relevant  pins were considered and increase steadily from rpin to fpin, with greatest correlations observed for the epin. thus, it is no contradiction that the correlations for the rpin are low, but a result, because many unspecific interactions included in the rpin were eliminated in the other pins. the reported correlation coefficients  were computed over the entire range of network distances including distant pairs for which correlations can be expected to be low. correspondingly, correlation values increased significantly when remote pairs were discarded .

listed are the pearson correlation coefficients, r. all correlations were highly significant .

the correlation of metabolic fluxes carried by enzymes and their protein interaction network properties
on the basis of measured relative metabolite flux rates of yeast growing in a glucose medium, we evaluated the correlation of network cluster coefficients of the involved enzymes in pins to the flux rate carried by the enzymes. the flux rates were estimated by blank and colleagues based on a global metabolic network model of s. cerevisae  <cit>  and a flux balance analysis based on large-scale 13c-isotope tracer experiments  <cit> . our analysis revealed high pin clustering coefficients for high flux enzymes decreasing with the decrease of the relative flux rates . further analysis revealed that the connectivity as well as the betweenness centrality are also positively correlated with the flux rates carried by the associated enzymes . thus, highly connected and central enzymes  are enzymes carrying high fluxes. furthermore, enzymes preferentially interact with enzymes of similar flux rates. a strong positive correlation of flux rates of physically interacting proteins was observed  in the fpin and epin.

pearson correlation coefficient, r, and associated p-values between connectivity , centrality as judged by betweenness of enzymes  and the respective relative flux rates, as well as the correlation coefficient of the relative flux rates between neighboring  enzymes in the three pins examined in this study.

*correlation coefficient, r, differs in rpin from values obtained in fpin and epin, because enzyme pairs are included in the rpin that were filtered out in the other two pins because of inconsistent subcellular localization annotation. they are identical for the fpin and epin as the two networks contain the same set of enzymes.

physical interactions in high-throughput catabolic pathways and synthesis pathways of complex metabolites
to gain further insight, we studied the physical organization of enzymes carrying high fluxes in greater detail. the large-scale flux analysis in yeast by blank and co-workers  <cit>  comprised  <dig>  reactions  encoded by  <dig> genes of which  <dig> can be found in the rpin. of the distinct reactions, 28%  have reaction rates greater than  <dig> relative to a glucose uptake of  <dig>  and can be summarized in a global glucose utilization scheme . in this scheme,  <dig> reactions,  <dig> % of the  <dig>  reactions considered by blank, have flux rates greater than  <dig>  corresponding to  <dig> proteins found in the pin and were contained in all three pin variants studied here. the reactions include two transport reactions of the products of the fermentative glycolysis with no annotated gene assigned to these steps, the glucose uptake, and the reaction performed by the atpase complex. the remaining reactions are involved in the fermentative glycolysis as shown in figure 5b. glycolysis describes the utilization of glucose as an energy source upon its degradation to pyruvate. depending on the culture conditions, pyruvate may either be fully degraded to co <dig> by the enzymes of the tca-cycle within the aerobic glycolysis, where the pyruvate dehydrogenase  connects glycolysis with the tca-cycle enzymes, or to ethanol by pyruvate decarboxylase  and alcohol dehydrogenase  within the fermentative glycolysis, when o <dig> is limiting. the enzymes of the fermentative glycolysis are highly interconnected with each other with many physical interactions detected between the associated enzymes . an exception is the pyruvate kinase  which is not physically linked to any of the other enzymes of the pathway, as well as the 6-phosphofructokinase . instead, pyk interacts with pdh.

only a minor fraction of pyruvate  appears to be channeled to the tca-cycle, that is 3%  of the initial glucose influx is processed by the tca-cycle enzymes. the production of pre-stage substrates of amino acids rather than energy production is the main function of the tca-cycle. the flux rates decrease to  <dig> beyond the succinate dehydrogenase  reaction step. this path leads through the pyk <dig>  pdh and the following enzymes of the tca-cycle: citrate synthase , isocitrate deyhdrogenase , 2-oxoglutarate complex , succinlycoa synthetase  and sdh. the enzymes of the tca exhibit a relatively low number of physical interactions . the interactions are mainly pooled in enzyme complexes, sdh , the lsc  and kgd , performing the individual reactions steps of the tca-cycle. only the reactions of the malate dehydrogenase  and the cit are physically connected. however, taking the prior reactions of the pyk <dig> and pdh into account, the tca reactions reveal a more dense interaction cluster. the pdh interacts with kgd sharing the common subunit lipoamide dehydrogenase . the pyk <dig> interacts with pdh, kgd as well as idh .

the remaining reported direct physical interactions contained in the fpin between enzymes detected within metabolic pathways are distributed throughout anabolic pathways. most interactions are found in the biosynthesis of ergosterol, ubiquinone, sphingolipid and glucogen synthesis . single links between enzymes can be found in biosynthetic pathways of pyrimidine, leucine, isoleucine, and lysine. within the fatty acid synthesis pathway, the malic enzyme  interacts with the alpha subunit of fas and acetyl-coa carboxylase  

figures 5b, c and the additional file  <dig> provide a comprehensive account of all reported protein interactions mapped to canonical metabolic pathways from the sgd database; i.e. for pathways not included in this figure, no protein interaction was contained in the pin.

central proteins in the fpin
analyzing centrality as judged by the z-score of the change of the characteristic length of the graph after removal of a particular node identified enzymes with the most influence on the cohesion of the interactome. the ten most influencing proteins are listed in table  <dig>  atp <dig> exhibits the most influence on the characteristic length of the fpin. the h-chain of the atp synthase is one of  <dig> polypeptides building up the complex . while only interacting with a relatively low number of other subunits of its own complex, it interacts with the complex iv  of the respiratory chain, via cox5b and complex iii  via qcr <dig>  furthermore, it interacts with the fba <dig> from the glycolysis pathway, a central enzyme assembling the glycolytic cluster.

ten most central proteins in the fpin as judged by the z-score of the change of the characteristic length of the graph after removal of a particular protein, robustness centrality . for comparison to other centrality measures, the z-scores and respective rank  of the betweenness centrality  as well as degree centrality  were evaluated. the overall correlation between the centrality was rb~bn  <dig>  , rb~dc  <dig>   and bn~dc  <dig>  

cox <dig> and cox5b are two of  <dig> subunits of cytochrom b-c <dig> . while cox <dig> plays an essential role in the assembly of the complex, the role of cox5b is the interaction with atp synthase. the fba <dig> and gpm <dig> are part of the glycolytic cluster. taken together, the glycolysis pathway and the respiratory chain are tightly connected via physical interactions illustrated in figure 7a.

tsc <dig> and ifa <dig>  which are responsible for the elongation of very long fatty acids, connect enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of membrane lipids by interacting with enzymes from the biosynthesis of fatty acids, steroids and related metabolites, phosphatidyl -choline, -serine and -ethanol amine, suggesting that the pathways are brought into spatial proximity via protein-protein interactions .

for comparison, other centrality measures for the top  <dig> most influencing proteins are listed in table  <dig>  while an overall correlation between the centrality measures is evident , each centrality measure identifies particular aspects of centrality and does not correspond directly to the robustness measure used here.

discussion
our investigations integrated protein interaction networks with metabolic networks to study the extent to which metabolic pathways; i.e. functional processes, are pre-formed in the underlying structural interaction network, i.e. the "plumbing" of cellular components. the networks examined here were derived from different sources of information and provide different views on the metabolic as well as protein interaction systems.

we discovered that sub-systems of the entire protein-protein interaction network may follow specific organizing principles. while interactions associated with signaling and other regulatory processes  were found to be dissortative; i.e. proteins of high degree interact with proteins of low degree, interactions between metabolic enzymes were observed to be assortative such that enzymes frequently interact with other enzymes of similar degree . regulatory processes may often involve hierarchical one-to-many associations such as master regulators  and their respective individual target proteins. physical interactions between metabolic enzymes, on the other hand, appear to generally follow a more horizontal organization with enzymes participating in larger complexes or sequential one-to-one interaction chains. nonetheless, we identified interaction hub enzymes that are located at central positions integrating several metabolic systems and whose removal would severely impact the structural integrity of larger portions of the metabolism-focused metabolic network .

when dealing with characteristics of protein-protein interaction network, possible technological as well as biases introduced by targeted scientific interest always are a concern. to best avoid this problem, it would be ideal to use strictly unbiased datasets for analysis. however, such fully unbiased datasets are not available  as this would require nothing less than an identification of all true and relevant protein-protein interactions occurring inside cells. presently, we have to resort to the best available unbiased datasets generated by high-throughput screens. as the biogrid data contains information about the source of information, it is possible to evaluate the assortativity of the biggest subsets in the database that were obtained from high-throughput experiment, namely krogan et. al  <cit>  comprising  <dig>  nodes involved in  <dig>  interactions, and gavin et al.  <cit>  with  <dig> nodes involved in  <dig>  interactions. reducing the filtered pin to the these subsets yields two sub-fpins comprising  <dig> nodes involved in  <dig> interactions, and  <dig> nodes involved in  <dig> interactions, respectively. the reduced fpins exhibit an assortativity of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, confirming the results obtained for the whole fpin. correspondingly, for the rpin, a reduced assortativity was obtained for both datasets with  <dig>  for the gavin set  and - <dig>   for the krogan set. thus, given the available datasets, the increased positive assortativity of filtered/enzyme pins does not appear to be resulting from a bias towards well-studied enzymes.

we generated three different versions of the metabolic interaction network . the enzyme interaction network, ein, was introduced to capture all possible metabolic interactions between enzymes, whereas the mapein transformed the pathway knowledge available in kegg into a metabolic network. the compound interaction network, cin, was created as an alternative and focuses on main metabolites as network nodes rather than enzymes. with regard to our main research focus, the topological equivalence of protein interactions and metabolic pathways, all three versions yielded significant positive correlations between the respective shortest paths across both network types . thus, the reported results proved robust against details of the network reconstruction approach. all three min-versions were reported here with positive assortativity  while a negative assortativity of metabolic networks has been reported elsewhere . we note that this difference is caused by the elimination of ubiquitous  metabolites and the inclusion of only main metabolic substrates and products in this work. including all metabolites in the cin yielded a degree correlation coefficient, rd, of - <dig>  and an increased mean cluster coefficient of  <dig> . as currency metabolites such as atp follow a one-to-many network motif, thereby also introducing many more edges in the network, the dissortativity obtained when including them as well as the increased mean cluster coefficient can be rationalized.

the decision on the exact procedure to generate metabolic networks must remain operational and may dependent on the objective of the study at hand. defining metabolic networks based on carbon atomic traces in metabolic reactions resulted in different topological characteristics of metabolic networks than for the commonly used approaches  <cit> .

the interaction networks investigated in this study vary regarding their graph-parameters, such as characteristic length  values and scale-free exponents and also differ from some networks reconstructed. generally, biological networks tend to be scale-free with associated scale-free exponents reported below two, which was suggested to result form evolutionary mechanism driven by gene duplication  <cit> . however, larger exponents have been reported for the cin  <cit> . joang et al. analyzed compound interaction networks of  <dig> organisms. the average cl was observed as  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and the average scale-free exponent as  <dig>  ±  <dig> . while the scale-free exponent reported here  is in line with the reported average value, the cl reported here is much larger . the reasons for the difference can be attributed mainly to the different approaches taken to reconstruct the cin, and the filtering mechanisms applied to remove compounds that are not directly relevant for main biochemical pathway routes such as co-factors. here, we followed the concept of main metabolite relations introduced by kotera and co-workers and annotated accordingly in the kegg database  <cit> . by contrast, the networks of joang et al. comprised all relations between all substrates and products, including currency metabolites such as h2o or atp rendering the cl much smaller.

in their analysis of the e. coli metabolic pathway network, wagner and fell reported a mean cl of  <dig> . this value compares favorably with our value  for the yeast ein, which corresponds to the network analyzed by wagner and fell  <cit> . a similar value has also been reported by huthmacher et al.   <cit> . similarly, the scale-free exponents agree well . kotera et al.  <cit>  reported a cl of  <dig> for the equivalent of our cin. the larger value we obtained  is explained by the exclusion of currency metabolites in our analysis. the newly introduced mapein  is not directly comparable to previous studies. it was constructed to capture our accumulated knowledge of biochemical pathways represented in kegg and with nodes represented by enzymes, not compounds.

for the rpin, our reported values for graph properties such as cl and scale-free exponent agree well with previously reported data  <cit> . for the other pin types studied by us, no comparative data are available.

in their analysis of protein interaction data in the context of metabolic pathways, huthmacher and co-workers  <cit>  focused on direct interactions between enzymes catalyzing consecutive metabolic reaction steps. here, we expanded the scope of an integrative analysis by also showing that such correlation between metabolic and protein interaction data is discernable even at larger distances. of course, an increased probability for consecutive enzymes to interact naturally leads to correlations at larger distances as well, even though the significance can be expected to drop. we showed that such large-scale topological correspondence between both the pin and min indeed exists adding further evidence for the significance of physical interactions for the functioning of metabolic reactions. our analysis also revealed that shortest paths between two enzymes appear to be shorter in the pin compared to their distance when analyzed in the metabolic network , especially when the allowed physical interactions also include proteins not actively participating in enzymatic reactions . a direct comparison of shortest paths between enzyme pairs connected via valid paths in both the fpin and the epin yielded a mean distances of  <dig>  for the fpin, where non-metabolically active proteins are still included, compared to  <dig>  for the epin. thus, our analyses suggest that such metabolically passive proteins may function as interface components to spatially organize enzymatic pathways.

the functional significance of topological parameters of molecular networks has largely been analyzed within the context of the examined network type itself such as the reported relationship between fluxes passing through metabolic network edges  and the degree product of the connected nodes  <cit> , but not across different network types. here, we showed that such relationships can also be established across different network types such that topological parameters of enzymes within the context of protein interactions have relevance for their functional, metabolic context. in particular, we observed that metabolic flux rates are positively correlated with degree and centrality of enzymes in their pin . we interpret this observation as evidence for a co-evolutionary adaptation of both network types. high-flux enzymes are physically interacting with many other enzymes such that metabolic substrates and products can be passed on to subsequent enzymes quickly and efficiently.

on the technical side, it has to be borne in mind that our knowledge of protein interactions is certainly incomplete and may contain many false positive interactions  <cit>  and the employed technologies may skew the datasets towards particular interactions  <cit> . furthermore, since we used sub-cellular localization information to eliminate potential false positive protein associations, this information, too, is to some degree based on predictions alone and may contain erroneous assignments. however, the fact that we did observe significant correlations between protein interactions and metabolic pathways despite the noise in the data may suggest that the true topological correspondence may actually be even stronger than reported here.

CONCLUSIONS
our results reveal topological equivalences between the protein interaction network and the metabolic pathway network. evolved protein interactions may contribute significantly towards rendering metabolic processes more efficient by permitting increased metabolic fluxes. thus, our results shed further light on the unifying principles shaping the evolution of both the functional  as well as the physical interaction network.

