BACKGROUND
the reason why most marine life forms, including corals, display their peak of biodiversity in the so called 'coral triangle' in southeast asia remains mysterious and much debated  <cit> . the rare examples of sea creatures that do not conform to this general pattern may offer information crucial for our understanding of its root causes, provided that a solid taxonomic framework is available to interpret their present and past distribution . several such exceptions to the 'coral triangle' rule can be found in the scleractinian coral family pocilloporidae that comprises the three genera pocillopora, seriatopora and stylophora: although morphospecies of seriatopora are most diverse in the coral triangle and therefore seem to follow the rule, pocillopora "has what appears to be many regional endemics, especially in the central and far eastern pacific" and stylophora "has a higher diversity in the western indian ocean and red sea than in the central indo-pacific"  <cit> . however, ongoing genetic studies of species boundaries in pocillopora and seriatopora suggest that, even though morphological descriptions of pocilloporid corals appear well founded in some locations  <cit> , in others places current taxonomy is a poor predictor of the actual number of species  <cit> .

molecular studies of stylophora have focused so far on a single species, the "lab rat" stylophora pistillata , without delving into the delineation of interspecific boundaries  <cit> . s. pistillata was originally described "aus den ostindischen meeren"  <cit>   as characterized by short twisted dichotomous branches , and is considered to occur over the entire indo-pacific . the distinction between s. pistillata and stylophora mordax  has long been debated in the literature: s. mordax is considered by some authors as a junior synonym of s. pistillata  <cit>  and by others as a distinct species  <cit> . s. mordax was originally described from fiji as having "branches nearly simple, much compressed, not thinner at apex, scarcely flabellate, 1/ <dig> to  <dig> inch broad, and 1/ <dig> of an inch thick; polyps with a pale yellowish disk, and short tentacles of a bright green colour, deep brown at base. corallum with the cells strongly vaulted, and the surface, therefore, decidedly scabrous"   <cit> ; however, intermediary forms between s. mordax and s. pistillata are commonly found in the field, and the areas of distribution of these two morphotypes are nearly identical, further adding to the confusion.

another widespread species according to veron  <cit>  is stylophora subseriata , also found across the indo-pacific region, whereas the five other morphospecies of this genus are restricted to the red sea and the gulf of aden , to madagascar  or to both of these regions . hence, the pattern of occurrence of the various species of stylophora seems to contradict strongly the common "coral triangle" center of biodiversity model. however, recent reports of s. danae and s. kuehlmanni from the philippines  <cit>  have started to question this pattern, raising further concern that morphological species may not correspond to actual genetic entities .

experimental work has shown that s. pistillata is phenotypically plastic  <cit>  under the influence of environmental parameters such as gravity  <cit>  and water flow  <cit> . moreover, evidence of intergeneric hybridization between stylophora and pocillopora has been reported in the literature  <cit> , suggesting that hybridization may a fortiori occur among various stylophora species. finally, morphological stasis and phenotypic convergence, albeit not reported yet in the genus stylophora, may lead to further underestimation of the actual number of species in this genus by causing several genetically distinct species to be lumped under a single name. to find out whether phenotypic plasticity, interspecific hybridization, morphological stasis and phenotypic convergence obscure the taxonomy of stylophora, we conducted a genetic analysis of  <dig> corals of this genus collected in madagascar, okinawa, the philippines and new caledonia; published sequences of stylophora individuals from australia, malaysia, the south china sea, taiwan and okinawa were also scrutinized . as a first step towards a future taxonomic revision of this genus, we report here the result of our attempt to determine the true number of stylophora species occurring at these various locations and to test whether the unusual biogeographic pattern reported for this genus holds true.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis of mitochondrial sequences reveals the presence of two stylophora clades in madagascar vs. a single one in the pacific ocean
we successfully sequenced from all individuals sampled a portion of the mitochondrial orf and the putative control region , two markers that had previously been characterised as highly variable in the closely related genus pocillopora  <cit>  . since these markers gave results that were completely congruent, only the result of their combined analysis is presented here . the reciprocal monophyly of each pocilloporid genus received very strong bootstrap support , whereas three clades of stylophora emerged from the phylogenetic analysis: clade a comprised  <dig> individuals, all from madagascar, clade b comprised  <dig> individuals, also all from madagascar, whereas clade c comprised the remaining  <dig> individuals from new caledonia, okinawa and the philippines plus one previously published sequence . all three clades were very strongly supported .

haploweb analysis of nuclear its <dig> sequences shows that these three clades represent distinct species
we obtained nuclear internal transcribed spacer  <dig>  sequences from all individuals sampled, and analyzed them together with the single published stylophora its <dig> sequence available from genbank . despite its multiple-copy nature and its concerted mode of evolution  <cit> , the its <dig> behaved in the present study just like a "regular" single-copy nuclear marker, with each individual harboring either one or two sequence types. moreover, most its <dig> sequences types found co-occurring in some individuals were also observed occurring alone in other coral colonies, suggesting that these sequence types were allelic and segregated in a mendelian fashion: for this reason we decided to call "heterozygotes" all individuals found to possess two different its <dig> types, even though we could not be totally sure that all its <dig> sequences obtained were really allelic .

molecular phylogenetic analyses revealed many clades of sequences, several of which were very strongly supported . in order to determine which of these clades were conspecific and which ones belonged to different species, curves were added connecting sequences found co-occurring in heterozygous individuals, thereby converting the its <dig> tree into a haploweb  <cit> . this approach revealed three distinct pools of its <dig> sequences, corresponding to the three clades obtained from mitochondrial dna. the monophyly of clades a and b in our its <dig> dataset received very strong bootstrap support using all three methods, whereas the monophyly of clade c was only weakly supported using maximum likelihood  and not at all supported using neighbor-joining and parsimony. none of the  <dig> heterozygous individuals in our dataset contained its <dig> sequences from two different clades: therefore, clades a, b and c correspond to three distinct species according to the mutual allelic exclusivity criterion  <cit> .

phylogenetic analysis of nuclear its <dig> sequences reveals the existence of a fourth species of stylophora in the red sea
even though the its <dig> of scleractinian corals is generally easier to align and more informative than its <dig>  <cit>  and is therefore more commonly used, the vast majority of its sequences available to date for the genus stylophora are its <dig> sequences. in order to compare the results of our study with those previously published data, the its <dig> regions of  <dig> representative individuals from our molecularly defined species a, b and c were sequenced and aligned with sequences available in genbank. alignment was indeed markedly more uncertain for its <dig> than for its <dig>  and the resulting alignment was rather short ; nevertheless, the resulting phylogeny revealed interesting patterns and is therefore presented here .

the three species delimited from the mitochondrial and its <dig> datasets were recovered as distinct clades of its <dig> sequences: the monophyly of species b was very strongly supported , whereas the monophyly of species c received weaker bootstrap support and the monophyly of species a was very weakly supported. all previously published its <dig> sequences from australia, malaysia, the south china sea, taiwan and japan turned out to belong to species c, whereas all published stylophora sequences from the red sea fell in a well supported fourth clade d  that can be considered a distinct species following the criterion of reciprocal monophyly.

discussion
haplowebs are useful tools to delineate species
the present study confirms the usefulness of our recently proposed haploweb approach to deal with sequences of nuclear markers  <cit> . whereas the corresponding phylogenetic tree supported the delineation of clades a and b but revealed a large number of clades among our sequences from the pacific ocean, haploweb analysis  showed that these various pacific ocean clades are actually conspecific . the monophyly of species c was only very weakly supported in the maximum-likelihood phylogeny  and not at all supported using neighbor-joining and parsimony: therefore, this species would probably not have been detected in our its <dig> data if we had not taken into account the information provided by the co-occurrence of phylogenetically distant alleles in some individuals. in contrast, haploweb analysis delineated three groups of alleles among our its <dig> sequences, a result perfectly congruent with the mitochondrial phylogeny obtained from the same set of individuals.

unlike in our previous article  <cit> , the haploweb presented here was built on a tree rather than a network. indeed, tree-based haplowebs are more straightforward to draw than their network-based counterparts, and are also more informative since they display the genotype of each sequenced individual. however, precisely due to their larger information content, tree-based haplowebs tend to become messy when dealing with large datasets and/or non-monophyletic species: in such cases, network-based haplowebs often turn out to be faster to draw and easier to interpret than tree-based ones.

are molecularly delimited species of stylophora congruent with morphology?
most of the  <dig> individuals from species a displayed the characteristic morphology of s. madagascarensis : "colonies have thin , straight compact branches. corallites are crowded and uniformly spaced on branch sides and ends. they have a slight development of hoods towards branch ends. they have small style-like columellae and six primary septa which are fused with the columellae. the coenosteum is covered with fine spicules. tentacles are not extended during the day. colour: uniform tan, sometimes with pinkish branch bases."  <cit> . since veron's holotype was collected from the very same location in madagascar where we conducted our sampling , there is little doubt that species a and s. madagascarensis are conspecific. according to veron's description this species was "recorded only from shallow reef environments exposed to some wave action and, in south-west madagascar, in shallow sheltered lagoons"  <cit> . in contrast, we found this species down to a depth of  <dig> meters, where it displayed less compact and thicker branches compared with the typical s. madagacarensis morphology : hence, s. madagascarensis appears to be more ecologically widespread and morphologically variable than previously thought.

all  <dig> individuals of species b from madagascar had flattened stout branches . this corresponds unambiguously to the morphological description of s. mordax, but since s. mordax was originally described from fiji in the pacific ocean it is dubious whether this name may be assigned to species b.

species c gathered all individuals collected from locations in the pacific ocean. it is characterized by extensive morphological variation, comprising individuals attributable to s. pistillata and others attributable to s. mordax, as well as morphotypes somehow intermediary in shape . several colonies of this species collected in a very muddy location  displayed a peculiar phenotype characterized by extremely elongated thin branches . published sequences of s. pistillata from taiwan  and from okinawa, taiwan, the south china sea, malaysia and australia  grouped with our sequences from species c, further supporting its putative identification as s. pistillata.

finally, all published its <dig> sequences from the red sea fell in a distinct well-supported species d. the coral colonies sequenced were collected at depths of 2- <dig> meters in the gulf of aqaba and reported under the name s. pistillata  <cit> , but according to another study the main morphospecies of stylophora found in shallow waters in aqaba is actually s. mordax  <cit> : therefore, species d probably comprises a mixture of s. pistillata and s. mordax morphotypes. since the type localities of s. pistillata and s. mordax are both in the pacific ocean, another name will be required for species d .

what causes the discrepancy between morphological and molecular species delimitations in stylophora?
our study revealed extensive morphological variation within species a and c: a more detailed genetic investigation using a larger number of variable markers such as microsatellites will be required to find out whether these variations are due to phenotypic plasticity or to underlying intraspecific genetic differences. however, phenotypic plasticity is well documented in stylophora  <cit>  and is therefore likely to be responsible for at least part of the observed morphological variations.

the occurrence of the s. mordax morphotype in both species b and c can hardly be explained by intra-specific variation alone, but may rather result from phenotypic convergence  and/or morphological stasis . since the sister-species relationship between b and c was very strongly supported by all molecular markers analyzed, morphological stasis appears more likely than phenotypic convergence to explain the similar appearance of species b and of some morphs of species c.

even though the data available are not yet sufficient to pin down completely the causes of the interspecific morphological similarities and intraspecific phenotypic variations observed in stylophora, the observed congruence between nuclear and mitochondrial phylogenies allows us to reject the hypothesis that hybridization could be responsible for the discrepancy between morphological and genetic species boundaries in this genus. this contrasts with previous reports that hybridization may be rampant in corals ; instead, our results concur with two recent articles on the closely related genus pocillopora  <cit>  in suggesting that many such reports actually result from improper delineation of species boundaries and not from actual introgression between distinct genetic entities.

a new light on the biogeography and biodiversity of stylophora in the indo-pacific ocean
surprisingly, the incongruence between morphological species delimitations and genetic species boundaries revealed in our study does not seem to affect the general picture of the biogeographic distribution of stylophora species: with a least three species in the westernmost part of its area of occurrence versus a single one so far in the "coral triangle", stylophora stands confirmed as a blatant exception to the usual biodiversity pattern observed in tropical marine invertebrates. the mitochondrial and its <dig> phylogenies of stylophora comprise only species a, b and c and do not contradict the topology of the more complete  its <dig> phylogeny: the sister-group relationship of species b and c is strongly supported by all markers, whereas the root of the mitochondrial and its <dig> phylogenies fall between species a  and species b and c . even though the sister-group of species d could not be determined unambiguously due to the current lack of mitochondrial and its <dig> sequences for this species, the position of the root in our molecular phylogenies suggests that the center of origin of stylophora is located in the western indian ocean. this hypothesis will need to be confirmed by analyzing more samples from key locations in the red sea, the gulf of aden and the indian ocean, but would explain well the unusual concentration of the biodiversity of this genus in the westernmost part of his area of distribution.

while waiting for a global taxonomic revision of the genus stylophora, for the sake of taxonomic stability we recommend that the preliminary results presented here not be translated yet into nomenclature, but that each genetically delimited species be provisionally designated by a letter . it is only when a complete picture of the species boundaries of stylophora over its whole area of distribution becomes available that names will be reliably assigned to each species: for instance, even though the name s. madagascarensis appears suitable for species a given its morphological traits and the location where it was collected, this species may very well have been described first under another name in a different location, in which case s. madagascarensis would become a junior synonym of the actual name of this species.

CONCLUSIONS
genetic analysis of the coral genus stylophora reveals species boundaries that are not congruent with morphology. of the four hypotheses capable of explaining such discrepancy , the first two seem likely to play a role but the fourth one is rejected since mitochondrial and nuclear markers yield congruent species delimitations. the center of origin of stylophora appears to be located in the indian ocean, which probably explains why this genus presents a higher biodiversity in the westernmost part of its area of distribution than in the "coral triangle".

