BACKGROUND
in neurons, the transcription factor creb and its co-activator cbp are central players in synaptic activity-driven gene transcription that contributes to the process through which neurons convert signals from the environment into genomic responses required for long-lasting adaptations  <cit> . acquired neuroprotection is a well-studied adaptive response in which neurons that have undergone periods of synaptic activity are rendered more resistant to harmful conditions  <cit> . this built-up of a neuroprotective shield is initiated by calcium entry though synaptic nmda receptors and requires calcium transient invading the cell nucleus  <cit> . nuclear calcium acting principally via nuclear camkiv leads to phosphorylation of creb on its activator site serine  <dig>  allowing creb to form a complex with cbp  <cit> . the second regulatory step required for induction of creb/cbp-mediated transcription is the activation of cbp function by nuclear calcium-camkiv signaling  <cit> . transcriptome analyses have identified a set of neuroprotective genes that are induced by synaptic activity and controlled by nuclear calcium signaling  <cit> . several members of this group of genes, which were termed activity-regulated inhibitor of death  genes, are known or putative creb target genes  <cit> . in addition to the ability of creb to mediate the process that leads to ‘added-on’ survival activity upon synaptic stimulation, the presence of creb seems to be required for the health of the neurons even under conditions of basal synaptic activity. mice that lack creb  exhibit widespread cell death in the brain  <cit> , and the reduction of functional creb by means of expression of inhibitors of creb can severely compromise the well being of neuron  <cit> . given that physiological expression levels of functional creb appear to be required cell survival we reasoned that increasing the levels of creb in hippocampal neurons may enhance neuroprotection even under basal conditions. here we have tested this hypothesis and found that indeed overexpression of wild type creb, even without inducing synaptic activity, increases the expression of several aid genes and renders hippocampal neurons more resistant to cell death inducing conditions. consistent with the importance of having physiological levels of functional creb available at promoter regions for the maintenance of cell vitality, expression of mcreb increased cell death.

RESULTS
expression and serine  <dig> phosphorylation of wild type and mutant creb
to investigate the relationship between cellular creb levels and neuronal survival activity, we infected primary mouse hippocampal neurons with a recombinant adeno-associated virus containing an expression cassette for wild type rat creb, a mutant version of creb  containing a serine to alanine mutation at position amino acid  <dig>  or hrgfp . expression of all three proteins following infection of mouse hippocampal neurons with raav-creb, raav-mcreb, or raav-hrgfp was readily detectable immunocytochemically or gfp fluorescence in  <dig> to 95% of the viable cells . the correct size proteins were also detected in immunoblots .

analysis of the phosphorylation of creb on serine  <dig> in unstimulated hippocampal neurons using phosphocreb-specific antibodies revealed very weak signals for the endogenous creb protein in all samples analyzed . we detected much stronger phosphocreb immunoreactivity for the overexpressed creb protein, while, as expected, low levels of phosphocreb immunoreactivity were obtained for mcreb. the ratio of phosphocreb to creb immunoreactivity was similar for the endogenous creb and the overexpressed wild type creb, but, in contrast, was dramatically reduced for overexpressed mcreb . this suggests that the strong phosphocreb signal obtained using lysates from hippocampal neurons infected with raav-creb reflects the large amount of creb protein present in the cells, which compared to the endogenous creb appears to contain a similar fraction of the serine 133-phosphorylated form. however, we cannot rule out the possibility that the phosphocreb-specific antibody solution contains a small fraction of antibodies that bind to creb even when it is not phosphorylated on serine  <dig>  in this scenario, the phosphocreb immunoreactivity detected in samples from raav-creb infected neurons may not indicate the presence of a subset of serine133-phosphorylated creb molecules but it is merely the result of the binding to creb of the fraction of the antibody solution that can interact with the non-phosphorylated epitope. the observation that mcreb yielded a very weak signal with the phosphocreb-specific antibody solution does not argue against this possibility because the mutation of serine  <dig> not only abolished any possible phosphorylation event at amino acid  <dig> but may also alter the epitope thereby reducing the binding to creb of those antibodies creb-specific antibodies) that recognize creb not phosphorylated on serine  <dig>  the antibody used to detect total creb levels was generated using a recombinant n-terminal fragment of creb as an antigen.

elevated creb level protects against apoptosis and excitotoxicity
in order to investigate a possible neuroprotective effect of elevating intracellular creb levels, hippocampal neurons were infected with raav-mcreb, raav-creb, raav-hrgfp on day in vitro   <dig>  six days post-infection, the neurons were challenged using three different types of cell death-inducing conditions. we treated neurons with a low concentration of staurosporine and growth factor withdrawal to induce apoptosis, and bath application of 20 μm nmda to trigger excitotoxicity  <cit> . we found that in all three types of cell death assays, the stimulus-induced increase in the percentage of dead neurons was smaller in hippocampal cultures infected with raav-creb compared to the uninfected or raav-hrgfp infected control . this indicates that increasing the levels of creb in hippocampal neurons renders the cells more resistant to apoptosis and excitotoxicity. in contrast, overexpression of mcreb failed to provide neuroprotection and, instead, increased the basal death rates . because mcreb can bind to the cre  <cit> , it competes with endogenous creb for docking sites within gene regulatory regions. this may explain the cell death-promoting activity of mcreb, consistent with the hypothesis that a reduction below physiological levels of functional creb available at target gene promoters renders neurons more susceptible for harmful conditions.

nmda-induced creb phosphorylation, creb shut-off, and creb degradation
increasing the levels of creb expression in hippocampal neurons did not change the dynamics of creb phosphorylation on serine  <dig> after exposure to 20 μm nmda. we found that the ratio of phosphocreb immunoreactivity  to creb immunoreactivity increased very transiently after stimulation in uninfected hippocampal neurons and in neurons infected with raav-creb and raav-hrgfp . peak levels of the pcreb/creb immunoreactivities for both endogenously and exogenously expressed creb were observed at  <dig> min after stimulation, which is followed by a rapid shut-off of creb phosphorylation on serine  <dig> . because we observed significant degradation of creb at 60 min after nmda treatment , a meaningful ratio of pcreb to creb immunoreactivities cannot be determined for this time point. the degradation of creb protein after induction of excitotoxicity, which is already detectable 30 min after exposure to nmda, appears to start within the amino-terminus of creb because degradation products of exogenously expressed creb, flag-tagged at the carboxyl-terminus, are detected with antibodies to flag but not with antibodies to creb that recognize an amino-terminal epitope . it is tempting to speculate that creb degradation, which may be catalyzed by the calcium dependent protease, calpain, is causally involved in the cell death process. thus, excitotoxicity triggered by the stimulation of extrasynaptic nmda receptors leads in a first phase to a rapid creb shut-off  of creb)  <cit> , which is followed by the degradation of creb protein. overexpression of creb delays the excitotoxicity-associated depletion of creb from the neurons, which likely contributes to neuroprotection.

creb regulation of survival gene expression
in a previous study we have identified a set of synaptic activity- and nuclear calcium-regulated neuroprotective genes, which were termed activity-regulated inhibitor of death  genes  <cit>  several aid genes are known or putative creb target genes  <cit> . we therefore investigated the possibility that the observed neuroprotection following infection with raav-creb is associated with an increase in aid gene expression. compared to uninfected hippocampal neurons and neurons infected with raav-hrgfp or raav-mcreb, we detected a 2- to 3- fold increase in the expression of the aid genes, atf3btg2gadd45β, and gadd45γ after  <dig> and/or 6 days post infection  with raav-creb . we also observed a slight but significant increase in the bdnf expression 5 days after infection with raav-creb . these findings suggest that neuroprotection afforded by elevated creb levels may be the result of increased expression of neuroprotective genes.

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate that increasing cellular creb levels can enhance the ability of hippocampal neurons to survive neurotoxic stimuli. this form of creb-mediated neuroprotection is being built up under conditions of basal neuronal activity and is associated with an increase of several survival promoting genes.

