BACKGROUND
trypanosoma cruzi, the agent of chagas disease, is a member of the kinetoplastidae, an early-diverging group of protozoa. this organism is the most important parasite in latin america, while its close relatives trypanosoma brucei and leishmania cause african sleeping sickness and the leishmaniases respectively. in addition to their medical and veterinary significance, trypanosomes have been studied as examples of primitive eukaryotes. they show several biological peculiarities which have made them subjects of great interest. these include polycistronic transcription, trans-splicing of mrna, mitochondrial rna editing, compartmentalisation of glycolysis and the utilisation of a unique thiol, trypanothione, in place of glutathione. genome sequencing projects have recently been completed for each of the human pathogenic trypanosomatids, t. cruzi, t. brucei and leishmania  <cit> . to fully exploit this vast amount of information it is essential that efforts are made to improve and extend the range of tools available for analysing the function of genes in vivo. this is particularly the case with t. cruzi, where technical limitations currently restrict analysis of biological function.

the last few years have seen an explosion of new data on gene function in t. brucei, largely due to the development of regulated systems that allow inducible expression of both protein and double-stranded rna  <cit> . these systems can facilitate the study of gene function by over-expression  <cit> , conditional knockout  <cit> , or by rna interference -mediated down-regulation of gene expression  <cit> . rnai is currently the method of choice for the analysis of gene function in t. brucei and can be used to inform studies on t. cruzi and leishmania genes which have orthologues in t. brucei. however many trypanosomatid genes are species-specific  <cit> . since t. cruzi lacks the machinery for rnai, specifically the ago <dig> gene  <cit> , our unpublished observations), approaches such as gene deletion or expression of dominant-negative mutant proteins are of critical importance for studying function. however, both gene knockout and expression of mutant proteins can produce a lethal or deleterious phenotype. it would therefore be advantageous to have a system that allows expression of transgenes in a controlled and repressible manner.

in general, trypanosomes do not appear to control expression of protein coding genes at the level of transcription initiation. the exceptions to this are the major surface glycoprotein genes of procyclic, metacyclic and bloodstream forms of t. brucei  <cit> , where rna polymerase i -dependent promoters can drive expression in a developmental and locus specific manner. rna polymerase ii -dependent promoters for protein coding genes have not been unequivocally identified in trypanosomatids and there are no known examples of inducible transcription units. consequently, it has been necessary to import regulatable genetic machinery from other organisms to create artificial inducible expression systems. such a system for t. brucei was first developed by wirtz and clayton  <cit> . this relies on the bacterial tetracycline repressor protein  to block transcription from an engineered promoter in the absence of tetracycline. on addition of tetracycline, the repressor is released from the dna and transcription is allowed to proceed. initially, use was made of the t. brucei procyclin promoter  <cit> . however, the system was found to be tightly regulated to a similar degree when a bacteriophage t <dig> promoter was utilised  <cit> . this necessitated the integration of a t <dig> rna polymerase gene into a transcriptionally active region of the trypanosome genome prior to insertion of the construct containing the inducible gene. a similar regulatable expression system has now also been described for leishmania based on an inducible copy of the endogenous ribosomal rna  promoter  <cit> .

in t. cruzi, inducible expression following transient transfection with a plasmid has been reported  <cit> . more recently a stable system has been reported by darocha et al.  <cit> , in which the t <dig> polymerase and tetr genes were inserted into the tubulin gene array together with the strong rrna promoter. the effects, if any, of this promoter on expression of endogenous genes flanking the insertion were not described, although a similar vector used in t. brucei caused upregulation of genes downstream of the integration site  <cit> . detailed characterisation of this inducible cell line was not undertaken to assess the parameters of regulated expression. there have been no further reports on its use or applications.

here we describe a stable tetracycline-inducible expression vector for t. cruzi that circumvents some of the potential problems associated with integration into an endogenously transcribed locus. the system is based on an integrative vector that facilitates inducible expression of specific genes in a transcriptionally quiescent locus and engineered cell lines that constitutively express the t <dig> rna polymerase and tetr genes from an episomal background. these experiments now provide a framework for using stable inducible expression as a tool for studying gene function in t. cruzi.

RESULTS
production of cell lines stably expressing tetr and t <dig> rna polymerase
plasmid plew <dig>  a construct designed to target the t. brucei β-tubulin locus, contains both t <dig> rna polymerase and tetr genes with neo as a selectable marker  <cit>  . we electroporated t. cruzi cl-brener epimastigotes with circular plew <dig> dna  and selected recombinant parasites on  <dig> μg ml- <dig> g <dig>  stably transformed parasites were obtained after six weeks, even though this vector contains no t. cruzi-derived sequences. southern analysis showed that the transformants contained multiple copies of the input construct organised in a tandem array . circular dna in transformed t. cruzi usually replicates as an episome of head-to-tail repeats of the input construct  <cit> . however, since the vector contained t. brucei β-tubulin coding sequences, which are very similar to the corresponding t. cruzi gene , it was important to establish whether the plew <dig> tandem array was a circular episome or had resulted from multiple integrations into the tubulin locus.

circular molecules show aberrant migration on pulsed field gels as their movement is independent of their molecular mass, in contrast to linear chromosomes. dna from cl-brener epimastigotes transformed with plew <dig>  was therefore subjected to contour-clamped homogenous electric field gel electrophoresis analysis  under differing separation conditions . using parameters designed to separate the larger molecules , the t <dig> rna polymerase probe hybridised to a band of approximately  <dig> mb and to a smear of higher molecular weight material . when the dna was fractionated under conditions optimal for separation of molecules of between  <dig> kb and  <dig> mb, the hybridising band ran at  <dig> kb, again accompanied by a smear of apparently higher molecular weight material . the migration of the plew <dig> construct is therefore independent of its molecular weight indicative of a circular episome containing multiple copies of the t <dig> rna polymerase and tetr genes. southern analysis of genomic dna also indicated no linkage between the t. cruzi α-tubulin genes and the t <dig> rna polymerase .

to check expression of the transfected genes, rna was prepared and analysed by northern blotting. this showed that both t <dig> rna polymerase and the tetr gene were expressed at high levels . in trypanosomes each mrna is processed by trans-splicing which results in the addition of a 5' spliced leader sequence of  <dig> nucleotides  <cit> . since the rna processing signals in plew <dig> were derived from t. brucei it was necessary to establish that the transgenic mrnas were correctly spliced. for each gene, primers were designed to sequences approximately 150– <dig> bp into the orf and used in conjunction with a primer to the t. cruzi spliced leader in an rt-pcr reaction . the resulting products were cloned and sequenced. each splice addition site could be mapped to an ag dinucleotide located downstream of a polypyrimidine tract . in the case of the t. brucei actin intergenic sequence upstream of neo, three separate splice sites were identified, all of which were upstream of the start codon. only one of these was identified in the tetr mrna which has the same flanking sequence. in the case of the procyclin splice acceptor site upstream of the t <dig> rna polymerase, only the site previously mapped in t. brucei was utilised  <cit> . this analysis indicated that the t. brucei rna processing signals were being correctly utilised by t. cruzi and that the t <dig> rna polymerase and tetr mrnas were therefore likely to be functional.

features of the tetracycline inducible expression vector
the inducible expression vector ptcindex  was designed to integrate into the non-transcribed ribosomal rna spacer region upstream of the pol i-mediated transcription start site  <cit>  . we targeted this region because, to our knowledge, it is the only section of the t. cruzi genome so far identified as being transcriptionally silent. in addition, the level of sequence conservation at this locus suggested that the construct could be targeted to the corresponding region in multiple parasite strains. the targeting fragment is cloned as a sac i cassette which can be readily replaced to allow integration elsewhere in the genome.

as a drug selectable marker we used the hygromycin b phosphotransferase  gene under the control of a non-repressible t <dig> promoter, thus converting antibiotic resistance into a digenic trait. in plew <dig> transformed cells that constitutively express the t <dig> rna polymerase, this arrangement serves a second function. in the presence of hygromycin, the requirement for t <dig> rna polymerase to drive expression of hyg removes the necessity for the continued use of g <dig> to maintain the plew <dig> construct and selects for trypanosomes with active t <dig> rna polymerase. the inducible expression cassette in the ptcindex vector contains a tetracycline-dependent t <dig> promoter, with the tet operator sequence  placed immediately downstream. the multiple cloning site is flanked at its 3'-end by the intergenic sequence from the t. cruzi actin locus to provide a polyadenylation signal, and at the 5'-end by the splice acceptor site from the ribosomal protein p2β locus. sequences from this region have been shown to enhance the expression of transfected genes  <cit> . finally, we incorporated a t <dig> rna polymerase transcription terminator into the construct to block run-through transcription of sequences downstream of the integration site.

to test the capability of the vector to mediate tetracycline-regulatable expression we cloned the genes encoding firefly luciferase  and red fluorescent protein  into the multiple cloning site . spe i linearised forms of the resulting constructs  were then used to transform cl-brener  epimastigotes that constitutively express t <dig> rna polymerase and tetr. integration into the rrna locus  was confirmed by southern analysis. this showed linkage of both of the transgenes to the endogenous 18s rrna gene, . the appearance of novel fragments in the lanes containing dna from the transformants ,  <dig> kb with the 18s rrna and rfp probes ), which were absent from the cl-brener  lanes, were diagnostic of targeted integration into the non-transcribed spacer region upstream of the 18s rrna gene.

induction of luciferase in ptcindex-luc transformants
we first investigated the induction of luciferase rna in a polyclonal line of ptcindex-luc transformed cells. tetracycline was added once to epimastigotes in early mid-logarithmic growth phase  and aliquots removed every  <dig> hours for rna purification. no further tetracycline was added during this period, as we wished to see if the gene returned to a repressed state. northern analysis was performed  and the relative level of luciferase rna measured at each time point using a phosphorimager. in the lane containing rna from non-treated cells, the signal detected was not significantly above the background measured from an irrelevant piece of the membrane. this indicates a tightly regulated system with a very low level of "leaky" transcription.  <dig> hours after the addition of tetracycline, the level of luciferase mrna was found to have increased dramatically . the mrna levels at later time points declined gradually. the change in luciferase rna levels was mirrored in the level of luciferase activity . the enzyme level increased considerably over  <dig> hours and continued to increase up to  <dig> hours. thereafter it declined gradually. when the cells were washed after  <dig> hours exposure to tetracycline and resuspended in tetracycline-free medium, the luciferase activity reached a peak at  <dig> hours but had declined almost to background levels three days later .

to examine the relationship between tetracycline concentration and the induction of luciferase activity, a culture of ptcindex-luc transformed cl-brener  epimastigotes was divided into  <dig> individual flasks and tetracycline added at a range of concentrations . the cells were incubated for  <dig> hours, then harvested and the luciferase activity measured . there was negligible increase in luciferase activity over the level in non-treated cells at concentrations up to and including  <dig> ng ml- <dig>  the increased activity became significant following treatment with  <dig> ng ml- <dig> and continued to increase with concentration before levelling off at  <dig> ng ml- <dig> . at tetracycline concentrations of  <dig> or  <dig> μg ml- <dig>  the extent of induction decreased approximately two-fold, an effect that was reproducible. at higher levels of tetracycline there were detectable increases in parasite doubling time. the optimal increase of luciferase activity that was achieved was approximately 60-fold over background. this is less than the increased level of the corresponding transcript  and may indicate the presence of control mechanisms at the level of translation or instability of the luciferase protein in this context.

it has previously been noted that different clones transformed with the same tetracycline-regulated construct in t. brucei will exhibit differences in both the background level and the extent of inducible expression of the transfected gene  <cit> . this variability has been ascribed, in part, to epigenetic factors operating differentially on each site of integration  <cit> . to examine whether this variation occurred in t. cruzi, we isolated several clones from independent transfections. variability was indeed observed . the background level of luciferase activity varied from  <dig> to  <dig> relative light units  per  <dig> ×  <dig> cells. the background remained constant in a given clone over time. the level of induction after  <dig> hours varied from  <dig> to 37-fold between different clones in this experiment. in t. cruzi all the ribosomal rna arrays are present at one chromosomal locus, in contrast to the situation in t. brucei. however the sequence across this locus is unavailable and it has not yet been possible to determine if there is a relationship between the level of expression and the site of integration.

cell-by-cell examination of the induction process using rfp
to determine how individual cells responded to tetracycline, we examined clones isolated following transformation with ptcindex-rfp . epimastigotes of clone cl:rfp c <dig> were maintained in tetracycline-free medium, then an aliquot was fixed onto a slide. tetracycline was added to the remainder of the culture. an aliquot of cells was removed and fixed onto a slide every  <dig> hours for eight days. it was apparent that rfp expression had been highly induced by the third day, since the cell pellet had a red tinge visible to the eye. the cells were stained for dna and examined by confocal microscopy. no red fluorescence was visible in the uninduced population . after  <dig> hours a few cells displayed faint fluorescence, and after three days some cells were extremely bright. the number of visibly fluorescent cells increased over time. after eight days the majority of cells exhibited some red fluorescence , although there was variation in the level. this suggested that induction, as measured using this parameter, does not occur at the same rate or to the same degree in all cells of a given clonal population.

to examine this variation further we quantified the distribution of induced fluorescence in the population by facs analysis . in this experiment the tetracycline treatment was carried out at  <dig>  μg ml- <dig>  as this concentration was optimal for expression, at least in the case of luciferase . facs analysis showed that in the first  <dig> hours post-induction, there was a significant shift in the fluorescence profile, with 35% of cells showing a 10– <dig> fold increase in intensity . the profile shifted rightwards over time but did not sharpen, indicating that fluorescence intensity varied between individual cells, confirming the observation made by microscopy . the maximal shift was seen on day  <dig> , when  <dig> % of the cells were found to exhibit a 1000– <dig> fold increase in fluorescence. even at this stage however, 34% of cells remained in the 0– <dig> arbitrary fluorescence units  range.

we also examined the extent of variation in both background and inducibility in the rfp expressing clones. again we observed a range of values . for example, with clone cl:rfp b <dig> there was only slight induction, whereas all the other clones showed significant levels. in this experiment, tetracycline was added every three days to maintain the level of induction.

addition of an rrna promoter to plew <dig> results in higher background expression levels
in an attempt to produce a more homogeneous induction profile, we constructed a derivative of plew <dig> in which the t <dig> rna polymerase and tetr genes were transcribed from the t. cruzi rrna promoter . cells were transformed with this plasmid  and selected at  <dig> μg ml- <dig> g <dig>  the transformants were resistant to  <dig> mg ml- <dig> g <dig>  with no lag phase, indicative that the rrna promoter was driving high level expression of the neo gene. these cells were then electroporated with the inducible vector ptcindex-rfp. parasites were cloned immediately after electroporation. facs analysis of several independent clones confirmed that expression of rfp was tetracycline-regulated, but again the response was heterogeneous within clonal populations .

as these clones showed a somewhat higher background level of rfp expression , we tested the luciferase construct in this background.  <dig> clones were generated in the cl  line and  <dig> in the cl  background. each cell line was induced for  <dig> hours with  <dig> ng ml- <dig> tetracycline, and then assayed for luciferase activity. the results  indicated inducible luciferase activity in all cell lines tested. however, there was a much lower level of leakiness in the cl  cell line than the cl  cell line. whilst the former exhibited a 10– <dig> fold increase in luciferase activity, the latter displayed only a  <dig> to 9-fold increase. a similar effect was noted in the inducible system created for leishmania  <cit> . consequently, for applications in which a tightly regulated system is required, the cl  cell line appears to be much more suitable.

expression and localisation of epitope-tagged superoxide dismutase
to assign a biological role to a protein it is necessary to know its subcellular location. generation of specific antibodies against every protein of interest is costly, time-consuming and not always successful. we therefore made a derivative of ptcindex with a c-myc epitope tag inserted next to the polylinker to facilitate localisation of induced proteins . this could also provide a simple method to follow the induction by western blotting. to test the vector, we chose the t. cruzi superoxide dismutase a gene , which encodes an isoform with a predicted mitochondrial targeting sequence. the t. brucei orthologue of this gene is targeted to the mitochondrion  <cit> .

the tcsod a gene was inserted into ptcindex-c-myc such that the epitope tag was located at the carboxyl-terminus of the fusion protein . cl-brener  epimastigotes were transformed as previously. two clones were characterised . with both, an induced band was visible after western blotting . in the induced cells, the corresponding bands were visible on a coomassie stained gel . the upregulated sod was enzymatically active , with induced cells showing a 14- and 18-fold increase over the control lines, respectively. this represents the total cellular sod activity. since there are four distinct isoforms in trypanosomatids  <cit> , it is clear that the level of sod a overexpression considerably exceeds 18-fold.

it was important to confirm that the sod a was targeted correctly since overexpression might lead to mis-targeting or blocking of the trafficking pathway. cells were stained with an antibody against the carboxyl-terminal epitope tag and examined by microscopy . the immunofluorescence showed targeting of the induced protein to the single lattice-like mitochondrion of the trypanosome with a concentration in a rod-like structure next to, or on top of, the kinetoplast  dna. the exact nature of this structure is unclear, but the consistent proximity to the kinetoplast suggests a possible role in protection of the replicating kdna from reactive oxygen species.

discussion
we have constructed a stable tetracycline-regulated expression vector for t. cruzi and tested several of the associated features using two marker genes, luciferase and rfp, and an endogenous gene tcsod a. these experiments demonstrate that the system should be sufficiently robust to have widespread application in the functional analysis of parasite genes. initially, we produced stable cell lines that constitutively expressed t <dig> rna polymerase and the tetr protein using a vector system  originally constructed for the african trypanosome. we were able to confirm constitutive expression of both genes in transformed cells, even though the input plasmid completely lacked t. cruzi sequences. this type of phenomenon has previously been observed in leishmania  <cit> , but not in t. cruzi . addition of the spliced leader sequence to each transcript occurred at the same sites as used in t. brucei . analysis of the transformed cells indicated that the plew <dig> was propagated as an episome made up of multiple head-to-tail copies of the vector. this organisation has commonly been observed for episomal constructs in both leishmania and t. cruzi  <cit>  and is thought to arise by insertional duplication. we used a multicopy episome, rather than single integrated copies of the t <dig> rna polymerase and tetr genes, to decrease the possibility of selection for mutations which could rescue dominant-negative or conditional knockout cell lines. such rescue mutants occur readily in the t. brucei system which relies on single copies of each gene  <cit> . episomes have been shown to be maintained in the absence of selection for up to six months, and during passage through mammalian cells and insect vectors in t. cruzi  <cit> .

the inducible expression vector  was designed to integrate into the transcriptionally silent ribosomal rna spacer region. we judged this to be important for two reasons. firstly, so that in its repressed state, with the tetr protein bound tightly to the teto, the integrated expression cassette did not block the transcription of downstream genes, and secondly, so that run-through pol ii transcription occurring from upstream genes did not interfere with repression. in trypanosomatids, linked protein coding genes are organised into large polycistronic transcription units and transcriptional termination has not been fully characterised for any rna polymerase. the ptcindex vector was also designed so that the hyg drug selectable marker was under the control of a constitutive t <dig> promoter. thus expression of t <dig> rna polymerase is necessary for cells to display resistance to hygromycin and continued selection with g <dig> is no longer required to maintain the presence of the plew <dig> episome.

in the plew <dig> transformed cells, our experiments indicate that the level of inducible expression may vary from gene to gene, but that any background, due to insufficiently tight repression of promoter activity, is likely to be low. with ptcindex-rfp transformed cells, we were unable to detect any fluorescence by microscopy, and only a low level by facs, in the absence of tetracycline . similarly, with ptcindex-luc transformed cells, detection of the luciferase transcript on northern blots was tetracycline-dependent . however, there was a reproducibly detectable level of enzyme activity associated with non-induced cells. this background appeared relatively constant in a given clone, although it did vary between clones. we also noticed that the level to which luciferase activity was induced  was low compared to that of the mrna , suggesting that expression may be regulated at the level of translation or that the luciferase protein may be less stable in trypanosomes.

both microscopy and facs analysis showed that there was a wide variation in the level of inducible expression of rfp in individual cells, even within a cloned population, ranging from <10- to >1000-fold. when the machinery required for inducible expression  was placed under the control of an rrna promoter, the induction profile did not become more homogeneous, but the background expression increased significantly. thus, no advantage was gained and repression was decreased using this construct. this could be due to high level expression of tetr resulting in aggregation and loss of function as has been postulated in the leishmania system  <cit> .

cell-by-cell analysis in the manner described here, has not, to our knowledge, been performed with the t. brucei or leishmania inducible expression systems, although a heterogeneous pattern of induction has been observed using a tetracycline-regulated promoter to drive expression of gfp in yeast  <cit> . this type of variation is a common feature of eukaryotic cells and is thought to reflect the inherently stochastic nature of gene expression at the level of both transcription and translation  <cit> . recent work from several laboratories has shown that stochastic elements play a significant part in generating "noise" in gene expression, i.e. the variation in expression of a given protein between genetically identical individuals in a population under the same conditions  <cit> . thus, the pattern of rfp fluorescence observed using facs analysis and microscopy may be regarded as a "snapshot" of the fluctuating levels of rfp expression that occur even within a clonal population. indeed, a recent report  <cit>  has shown that even when a marker gene  is integrated into the t. cruzi genome under the control of a strong constitutive rrna promoter, the facs profile of a stably transformed cell line is remarkably heterogeneous, with approximately 25–30% of cells expressing little or no detectable gfp at a given time. this suggests that variation in protein levels between individual cells may be an inherent feature of t. cruzi gene expression, rather than a consequence of episomal expression of the polymerase and repressor genes. it is notable that the t. cruzi genome contains many highly polymorphic multigene families encoding surface proteins which are co-expressed in a given population. therefore, stochastic expression of surface antigens between individual cells of a population may be an important immune evasion strategy  <cit> . it has been hypothesised that micro-organisms benefit from noise in gene expression as this allows a population to respond more rapidly to changes in their environment and decreases the chances of cells becoming mired in inappropriate epigenetic states  <cit> .

the availability of our inducible expression system will provide new approaches for the functional analysis of genes in t. cruzi. it will allow the study of proteins that may be toxic if constitutively expressed, enable the generation of conditional knockouts of essential genes and facilitate functional knockouts by means of overexpression of dominant-negative protein mutants. the level of overexpression achieved with sod a  suggests that a dominant-negative approach will be feasible, since in such a system the mutated protein must be expressed at significantly higher levels than the endogenous enzyme.

modulation of expression levels by changing the concentration of tetracycline could also be important for conditional knockout experiments. this will enable the transfected gene to be expressed at a similar level to the endogenous copy, thereby preventing unforeseen phenotypic consequences due to overexpression. an advantage of using tetracycline as the inducer is that the expression system can be applied to the study of enzyme function throughout the life-cycle. for example, it should be possible to investigate the development of transformed parasites within tissue-culture cells using the tetracycline analogue doxycycline, which has been used to regulate murine gene expression in transgenic  mice  <cit> . the combination of episomally expressed t <dig> rna polymerase and tetr with an inducible vector which can integrate into the rrna locus in both group i and group ii parasites also means that this system is transferable to any strain of t. cruzi. ptcindex and ptcindex-c-myc are freely available to members of the trypanosomatid research community.

CONCLUSIONS
we have designed and tested a user-friendly tetracycline-regulatable expression vector, ptcindex, for the protozoan parasite t. cruzi. this vector has been used to generate cell lines bearing inducible copies of luciferase, rfp and sod a. the levels of repression and induction achieved lead us to believe that this vector will be useful for creating both conditional knockouts and dominant-negative mutants of t. cruzi, an organism for which rnai based approaches are not applicable.

