BACKGROUND
the degeneracy of the genetic code allows synthesis of identical proteins from mrnas with rather different primary structures. this bias in synonymous codon usage is linked to trna abundance, codon-pair context effects, genome g + c pressure, the strength of codon-anticodon interactions, and to other dna replication, transcription and mrna translation biases  <cit> . interestingly, codon-pair context fine tunes mrna decoding efficiency  <cit> . for example, in e. coli, 3'context alteration from g to u in the insertion sequence is <dig>  increases frameshifting from 10% to 60%  <cit> , while, intriguingly, the over-represented acg-cug codon-pair is translated slower than the under-represented synonymous codon-pair acc-cug  <cit> .

those context effects suggest that codon-pairs are important modulators of mrna translation accuracy and speed. however, codon-pairs cannot reflect the full bias imposed by the translational machinery on mrna primary structure since the ribosome has  <dig> rather than  <dig> decoding sites, namely a-, p- and e-sites  <cit> . the a- and p-sites are directly involved in aminoacyl-trna  selection and translocation and, for these reasons, it is not surprising that codon-pair context influences protein synthesis fidelity. from a structural perspective, the role of the e-site, which is occupied by deacylated trna during exit from the ribosome  <cit> , on mrna decoding speed and accuracy is not so clear. however, e-site occupation does influence decoding fidelity by changing allosterically the affinity of the a-site during selection of in-coming aa-trnas  <cit> . this allosteric interaction between the e- and a- sites, plus ribosome crystallography and cryo-em studies  <cit> , provide strong functional and structural evidence for a critical role of the  <dig> trnas accommodated in the ribosome in decoding efficiency. in other words, the e-site is more than just an exit site for deacylated trnas from the ribosome. hence, codon-triplets present in the ribosome a-, p- and e-sites are expected to play an important role in the accuracy and efficiency of mrna translation. if so, like codon-pair context, codon-triplet context should be biased. this hypothesis is supported by the observation that non-programmed translational frameshifting and programmed translational events involve more than two consecutive codons .

in a previous study, we have developed software and statistical methodologies for analysis of codon-pair contexts and have identified general rules that govern such context  <cit> . in here, we have extended those studies to the analyses of codon-triplets context, using several fungal orfeomes as model systems. this study produced very large data sets and posed significant computational challenges, which prompted the development of a dedicated database for data storage and tools for data mining. we show for the first time that context of codon-triplets is highly biased and species specific and we discuss the implications of trinucleotide repeats for codon-triplets context. we also explain how our approach can be used to identify non-standard mrna decoding events and alterations to the genetic code.

RESULTS
tools to study codon-triplets
we have implemented computational algorithms and data storage facilities for comparative genomics of codon-triplet analysis in fungal genomes . the algorithm developed simulates the ribosome during decoding by reading open reading frames , from the atg initiation codon, and moving the reading window three nucleotides at a time until a stop codon is encountered. while doing this, it memorizes all codon-triplets, which represent a-, p- and e-site codons during mrna decoding. in this study, triplet counting was performed on complete sets of orfs , which were initially filtered to eliminate aberrant orfs lacking atg initiation or tag/tga/taa stop codons, or containing premature stop codons or ambiguous bases . the first and last triplets of each orf were not considered to avoid translation initiation and termination context effects  <cit> .

since analysis of codon triplets generates a 3-dimensional  <dig> ×  <dig> ×  <dig> matrix for each orfeome, we have used a relational database to store the processed data . these large data sets were then analyzed using data mining tools  <cit>  and direct database queries. these studies aimed at identifying major differences in triplet-codon context between the fungal orfeomes stored in the main database . a similar methodology was used to count amino acid triplets generated from the same orfeome sequences. for this, codons were translated to the respective amino acids using standard genetic code rules or using non-standard decoding of the leucine-ctg codons as serine in candida albicans and debaryomyces hansenii  <cit> . finally, new algorithms were implemented to count codon and amino acid repetitions on an orfeome wide scale. all results obtained were compared with values expected for a random distribution of codons, which were calculated considering the frequencies of random distribution of individual codons or amino acids in the genomes.

 <dig> orfeome sequences were downloaded from the web sites indicated bellow between december  <dig> and february  <dig>  each orfeome was scanned for detection of invalid orfs , lacking atg-start and taa, tag and tga stop-codons. orfs containing permature stop codons or undefined nucleotides  were also discarded from the analysis.

codon-triplets in fungal genomes
the tools described above permitted carrying out a comparative analysis of codon-triplets in  <dig> fungal orfeomes . clear patterns of codon-triplets preferences and rejections were identified for each orfeome and, as for codon-pair contexts  <cit> , such patterns were specific of each orfeome . this first analysis also showed that the percentage of codon-triplets that vanished from the orfeomes was much higher than expected from random distribution of the triplets in these orfeomes . the percentage of vanished codon-triplets varied between  <dig> and 11% in most fungal orfeomes, but was significantly lower in aspergillus fumigatus , eremothecium gossypii  and saccharomyces mikatae . the human pathogen candida albicans had higher percentage of such triplets  and those vanished codon-triplets were reflected also at the amino acid level, since c. albicans was the only species where an amino acid triplet, namely trp-met-trp, was absent. conversely, analysis of the  <dig> most frequent codon-triplets  showed an even distribution in these fungal orfeomes with exception of c. albicans, where the percentage of these abundant triplets increased more than 2-fold . overall, in c. albicans there was a clear over-representation of a subset of codon-triplets, namely , ,  or   and strong repression of another subset, namely , ,  or  , indicating higher bias of codon-triplet usage in this human pathogen .

the complete set of codon-triplets present in the  <dig> fungal orfeomes studied were identified and the codon-triplets were ranked according to the difference between observed and expected values . the  <dig> most preferred codon-triplets indicate that the codon-triplets with highest positive bias are common in all fungal orfeomes. for example, the strongly biased gaa-gaa-gaa triplet was preferred in  <dig> out of  <dig> fungal orfeomes . also, codon-triplets containing identical codons were frequent . interestingly, the most common feature of these preferred codon-triplets was the presence of a guanosine  at position  <dig> and  <dig> of the triplet , a feature which was common to half of the codon-triplets indicated below.

the complete set of codon-triplets present in the  <dig> fungal orfeomes studied were identified and the codon-triplet contexts were ranked according to the difference between observed and expected values . this group of codon-triplets can be divided according to the presence or absence of runs of more than  <dig> consecutive adenosines . interestingly, the most common feature of these strongly repressed codon triplets was the presence of an adenosine  at position  <dig> and  <dig> of the triplet , a feature that appears in one third of the codon-triplets shown below.

since codon-triplet choice was an orfeome specific feature that could influence mrna decoding efficiency , the stronger bias found in c. albicans prompted the question of whether it could be linked to mrna translation. in order to shed new light into this question, codon usage bias and trna gene copy number, which provides direct indication of trna expression level, were determined at an orfeome scale for all orfeomes analyzed . in c. albicans, there were fewer trna genes , but the total number of codons was the second largest  of the orfeomes set. consequently, the relative trna abundance  per codon  was lower in c. albicans than in the other fungi . for example, the trnaasn gene had  <dig> copies in c. albicans and between  <dig> and  <dig> copies in the other species, but the total number of asn codons was highest in c. albicans  . in order to determine whether this relative decrease in trna gene copy number unbalanced trna abundance and codon usage, we have calculated the relative synonymous codon usage  values for the entire set of codons , and the relative trna isoacceptor usage  values. the later is equivalent to rscu values  <cit>  but, since it was calculated using trna gene copy number, it informed about trna abundance bias. that is, different riu values in a group of isoacceptors indicated differences in cellular levels of these trnas. by restricting the quotient rscu/riu to pairs of cognate-codons and cognate-trnas, we were able to calculate a decoding adaptation quotient  by averaging the quotients obtained for each codon/trna pair . daq values close to  <dig> indicated that codon usage and trna gene copy number  were well matched , as was the case for a. fumigatus, c. glabrata, e. gossypii, k. lactis, s. paradoxus or s. pombe . organisms with daq>> <dig> often used rare trnas to decode frequently used codons as was the case for d. hansenii, s. bayanus, s. cerevisiae or s. mikatae. interestingly, c. albicans originated the lowest daq value  of all fungi studied , indicating that this fungal pathogen prefers codons that are decoded by near-cognate rather than cognate trnas. the divergence of decoding preferences between c. albicans and the other fungi can be clearly exemplified for asn codons . all fungi analyzed decode both codons using a single trna  and usually prefer the cognate codon aac, however, c. albicans had a strong preference for aau codons  over aac , . that is, its most frequently used asn codon is decoded by a near-cognate trna . this near-cognate decoding preference was also observed for the codons corresponding to the amino acids his , asp , gly , tyr , cys  and phe , where the preferred codons in c. albicans  do not have cognate trnas .

complete genome sequences of the  <dig> fungal species studied were used to extract trna sequences using trnascan-se . the total number of different trna gene sequences retrieved was compared with the total number of codons. c. albicans  had the smallest set of trna genes, but was the second largest orfeome.

the relative low number of trna genes in c. albicans suggested that, either c. albicans regulates expression of certain trnas through yet unknown cis-acting elements and uses novel poliii transcriptional activators , or its mrna translation machinery works under trna limitation. in order to clarify these important points we have scanned the 5'-upstream sequences of the c. albicans trna genes and searched for conserved elements that could explain trna up-regulation by the poliii transcriptional machinery. however, we were unable to identify such putative conserved poliii enhancers . therefore, one is left with the intriguing possibility that trna limitation and generalized near-cognate decoding may yet be another unique feature of the c. albicans translational machinery. this may explain the strong bias of c. albicans codon-triplet usage since, unlike in other species, c. albicans maximizes the utilization of a small subset of trnas to decode strongly biased codons present in the triplets. this puzzling result requires experimental confirmation through in vivo trnas quantification to clarify whether trna limitation is a feature of the c. albicans translational machinery, and, more importantly, whether such putative limited trna availability increases decoding error  <cit> . we have discovered recently that ambiguous decoding of the reassigned cug codon  generates phenotypic diversity in this human pathogen  <cit>  and it will be most interesting to elucidate whether c. albicans uses generalized mistranslation as a strategy to expose hidden phenotypic diversity. finally, we cannot exclude that biases of codon-triplets arise from protein primary structure constraints. indeed, our study on a genetic code alteration in c. albicans supports this hypothesis . however, tri-peptide biases would only be relevant for this study if they were significantly different in c. albicans and this was not observed. rather, the main differences between c. albicans and the other species were related to a limited subset of contexts with repeated codons and amino acids in consecutive positions .

strings of repeated codons
the high frequency of repeated codons and amino acids in fungal orfeomes and the high percentage of triplets of identical codons and amino acids in c. albicans , prompted us to carry out a more detailed analysis of the codon composition of such repetitions. for this, the distribution of isolated codons, identical codon-pairs, identical codon-triplets and identical codon-strings were determined . isolated codons were underrepresented in all orfeomes, in particular in c. albicans . however, this effect was minimized in pairs of identical codons, where observed and expected  values were similar . in c. albicans, the strong under-representation of isolated codons was not visible in identical codon-pairs , and that bias was reversed and sharply increased for repetitions of identical codon-triplets and identical codon-strings . indeed, the distribution of the latter was remarkably different between c. albicans and the other orfeomes .

we then analyzed the amino acid composition of the repeated codon-triplets and again strong biases were observed . most repetitions involved the amino acids gln, asp, glu, asn and ser, confirming previous observations in s. cerevisiae and higher eukaryotes  <cit> . repetitions of the amino acids ala, pro, his, thr, gly, lys and arg had an intermediate representation, while those of val, phe ile and leu were often underrepresented and in certain orfeomes repetitions of tyr, cys, met and trp were absent or rarely used . of all amino acids, gln was more frequent and was also rarely present as an isolated amino acid across all orfeomes . once more, c. albicans showed stronger bias for amino acid repetitions since the number of gln, asp, glu, asn and ser repetitions was higher than in the other orfeomes, while repetitions of pro, his and thr, which were not frequent in the other genomes, were frequent in the c. albicans genome .

finally, the distribution of the above repetitions was analyzed for synonymous codons of each amino acid . of the most frequent amino acid repetitions, gln used caa codons mainly in all but a. fumigatus. strings of asn often used aac codons, but some orfeomes preferred aat codons . of the  <dig> serine codons, agt, tca and tct were the most commonly used, while thr repetitions used aca or act but rarely acc or acg codons. the few lys repetitions observed used aag codons almost exclusively and repressed aaa codons, an effect that may be linked to strong repression of homopolymeric strings, since repetitions of ccc, ggg and ttt codons were also strongly repressed .

composition of codon-triplets that vanished from orfeomes
the high proportion of triplets that vanished from fungal orfeomes  prompted us to investigate whether particular codon-context trends could be identified, which would explain repression of particular codon combinations. for this, the codon composition of triplets absent in each orfeome, at the  <dig> different codon positions , was determined. no significant differences could be detected between orfeomes or codon positions, and the results obtained with codons starting with any base  were redundant . to overcome this effect and highlight major effects only the data was averaged. a well defined pattern of preferences and rejections linked to the second and third bases of codons in absent codon-triplets  became apparent. this indicated that the first base of the codon, and the position of the codon in the triplet, did not contribute to triplet disappearance. conversely, codons ending with two adenosines  showed poor association with absent triplets, while ncc, ncg or ngn were strongly associated to repressed codon triplets .

as before, ctg reassignment in c. albicans and d. hansenii prompted us to investigate whether the unusual decoding of ctg codons forced the disappearance of codon-triplets. for this, absent triplets that contained ctn codons, i.e. cta, ctc, ctg or ctt were studied . each species had its preference pattern. the cta codon was absent mainly in triplets of a. fumigatus, ctc in c. glabrata and saccharomyces sp. and ctt in e. gossypii. significantly, ctg codons were the most frequent ctn codons in codon-triplets that vanished from c. albicans and d. hansenii orfeomes . moreover, in d. hansenii the number of codon-triplets that vanished only from that orfeome and lacked ctgs was two fold higher than in the other fungi, including c. albicans .

genetic code alteration signature
in c. albicans and d. hansenii leucine ctg codons are decoded as serine  <cit> . this genetic code alteration appeared approximately  <dig> ±  <dig> million years ago in the yeast ancestor and reprogrammed more than  <dig>  ctgs present in its genes  <cit> . such dramatic genetic event imposed negative pressure on ctg usage and eliminated most of these codons. interestingly, a high number of "old" leucine-ctgs were replaced by "new" serine-ctgs that evolved from mutation of serine rather than leucine codons  <cit> . in other words, the ctgs existent in the orfeomes of c. albicans and d. hansenii are new serine codons that appeared during the last  <dig> ±  <dig> million years. since serine codons are often present in codon repetitions while leucine codons are strongly repressed , we have taken advantage of this genetic code alteration to shed new light on the evolutionary dynamics of codon  repetitions in yeasts. furthermore, since leucine is hydrophobic and serine polar, we hypothesized that constraints imposed by protein structure would be visible as alterations in the context of ctg containing triplets.

contexts of the nnn-leu-nnn and nnn-ser-nnn types were identified in the orfeomes set and the values were displayed in such a way that upstream and downstream rejected and preferred codon neighbors could be highlighted . this was carried out by determining codon neighbor combinations  that were preferred in leucine- or serine-bearing triplets  and computing the number of times each signature appeared above the expected threshold, when the middle codon of the triplet was ctg . as expected, leucine and serine had clear neighborhood preferences, but this context signature was lost for ctgs in c. albicans and d. hansenii , which decode leucine-ctg codons as serine. in these species, ctgs had a signature that was not observed for leucine-cta or serine-tca codons, used as external controls .

discussion
context of codon-triplets
the close phylogenetic relationship of the fungi used in this study supports the hypothesis that, like codon-pair contexts, codon-triplet contexts are species specific. if codon-triplet contexts fine tune ribosome decoding efficiency, as we have hypothesized, then it is likely that the translation machinery of these fungal species imposes different pressure on codon-triplet context. this is in line with the finding that overexpression of genes in heterologous hosts is sometimes remarkably difficult to achieve due to differences in codon usage and other yet poorly understood translational constraints  <cit> . moreover, the fidelity of heterologous protein synthesis is often affected by codon-pair context  <cit> , which is also species specific  <cit> , and, since the ribosome has  <dig> trna binding sites, one would expect that codon-triplet context specificity is indeed required to fine tune mrna decoding efficiency.

despite the species specificity found, common trends of codon-triplet context were observed in fungal orfeomes. for example, cc- and cg-ending codons and codons containing guanosine in the middle position, i.e. ngn  were repressed in codon-triplets. conversely, codons ending with two adenosines, i.e. naa, were rare in codon-triplets that vanished from these fungal orfeomes . the position of each codon in the triplet and the nature of the nucleotide at the first codon position, which strongly influenced codon-pair context  <cit>  were not relevant in vanished codon-triplet contexts. conversely, the last and middle nucleotides of each codon influenced those codon-triplet contexts . variation in the last position of codons produced most codon usage biases because nucleotide changes at this position are often silent  <cit> , but changes in the middle position of codons frequently result in amino acid changes in protein sequences  <cit> . therefore, the apparent role of the third codon position on codon-triplet context may be linked to codon usage bias, while the role of the middle nucleotide of codons may be related to protein structure constraints. when the later constraint was removed from our data set by considering synonymous codons only , c + g pressure  and the c. albicans and d. hansenii genetic code alteration appeared as important modulators of codon-triplet context. indeed, g + c pressure seems to be the reason for the enrichment of vanished codon triplets in codons ending with a or t in a. fumigatus and in g or c in k. lactis , a result which is inline with the global gc% of both orfeomes . in c. albicans and d. hansenii repression of triplets containing ctg codons was clearly visible, indicating that the genetic code alteration increases discrimination of ctg-associated contexts. codon-triplets that were absent in d. hansenii only  contained twice the number of ctg-bearing codon-triplets, suggesting that non-standard decoding of ctg as serine had stronger impact in d. hansenii than in c. albicans orfeomes.

strings of repeated codons
apart from codon-triplet contexts, our software tools detected strings of repeated codons . tandem codon repeats are frequent in eukaryotic protein coding dna  <cit>  and result from slippage of the dna polymerase δ during genome replication  <cit> . such repetitions are also present in non-coding dna in the form of trinucleotide repeats and, therefore, are unrelated to codon decoding by the ribosome  <cit> . indeed, they are much more frequent in non-coding sequences, which contain greater variety of tandem repeats   <cit> . despite this, one was prompted to ask whether tandem codon repeats could have a negative impact on decoding fidelity. for example, could ribosome frameshifting and drop off increase at codon strings due to depletion of trnas during decoding of repeated codons? if so, translation of the very high number of codon-strings in the c. albicans genome  would be problematic. this hypothesis was supported by the low relative abundance of trnas necessary to decode such repeated codon-strings . indeed, of the  <dig> most preferred codon-triplets in c. albicans,  <dig> corresponded to contexts of repeated codons  whose decoding involves low abundance trnas , as, for example, the above mentioned asn codons, aac and aat.

the amino acids involved in formation of codon-strings in c. albicans and other organisms were identical, namely gln, asp, glu, asn and ser  <cit>  . however, in c. albicans pro, his and thr also formed repetitions that were not observed in other organisms. also, there was codon discrimination within amino acid repetitions . for example, in almost all orfeomes studied gln-caa was more frequent than expected while its synonymous gln-cag was repressed . in c. albicans, thr-aca and thr-act codons were frequently used in thr-strings, while the thr-acc and thr-acg codons were not . this preference for certain codons within amino acid runs, suggests bias in dna polymerase δ slippage or, alternatively, identical codon-repetitions produced during genome replication were later polished at the 3rd codon position by positive pressure arising from the translation process.

finally, in all orfeomes studied, acidic amino acids were present more often than basic amino acids in amino acid runs, the hydrophobic amino acids phe, ile or leu did not form repetitions  and runs of amino acids formed by homopolymeric codon strings, i.e. aaa, ccc, ggg or ttt  were also strongly repressed, as already observed in other eukaryotic genomes  <cit> . since the latter corresponded to frameshifting-prone contexts  <cit>  it is likely that their repression is related to translation fidelity. for example, the a aaa aag motif found in dnax and in many insertion sequences of the is <dig> family has been considered the most efficient heptameric - <dig> shift motif in e. coli  <cit> .

leucine vs serine context signatures
c. albicans and d. hansenii non-standard serine-ctg and standard leucine-ctg codons of the other fungal orfeomes had divergent triplet-context preferences . the ser-ctg codons of c. albicans and d. hansenii had codon neighbors typical of serines rather than leucines, indicating that these residues have clear neighbor preferences  and that the alteration of identity of the ctg codon from leucine to serine re-shaped the context of the codon-triplets containing ctgs. this implies that sense-to-sense genetic code alterations are accompanied by alteration in the context  of the codons that change identity to maintain amino acid triplet signatures . this may minimize the negative impact of genetic code alterations on protein structure and indicates that triplet amino acid context signatures are efficient tools to predict genetic code alterations.

CONCLUSIONS
our methodology to study codon-triplet context permitted carrying out large scale comparative analyses of triplets in  <dig> fungal genomes. like codon-pair context, codon-triplet context is biased and such bias is maximal in the main human pathogen c. albicans. the data unveiled the nature and extent of codon repetitions in fungal orfeomes and identified important differences in codon repetitions between fungal species. c. albicans showed the highest frequency and the longest codon repetitions and used codons in some repetitions that were not found in other fungi. interestingly, codon-triplet contexts had specific signatures that were not observed for the cug codon, which was reassigned from leucine to serine in c. albicans and d. hansenii. such signatures highlight genetic code alterations in newly sequenced genomes.

